Hyperplane Clustering via Dual Principal Component Pursuit

Manolis C. Tsakiris 1 René Vidal 1

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for clustering data
drawn from a union of subspaces are based on
sparse and low-rank representation theory and
convex optimization algorithms. Existing results guaranteeing the correctness of such methods require the dimension of the subspaces to be
small relative to the dimension of the ambient
space. When this assumption is violated, as is,
e.g., in the case of hyperplanes, existing methods are either computationally too intensive (e.g.,
algebraic methods) or lack sufficient theoretical
support (e.g., K-Hyperplanes or RANSAC). In
this paper we provide theoretical and algorithmic
contributions to the problem of clustering data
from a union of hyperplanes, by extending a recent subspace learning method called Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP) to the multihyperplane case. We give theoretical guarantees
under which, the non-convex `1 problem associated with DPCP admits a unique global minimizer equal to the normal vector of the most
dominant hyperplane. Inspired by this insight,
we propose sequential (RANSAC-style) and iterative (K-Hyperplanes-style) hyperplane learning DPCP algorithms, which, via experiments on
synthetic and real data, are shown to outperform
or be competitive to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
1.1. Hypeprlane clustering
Subspace clustering, the problem of clustering data drawn
from a union of linear subspaces, is an important problem
in machine learning, pattern recognition and computer vision (Vidal et al., 2016). A particular case of this problem is hyperplane clustering, which arises when the data
1

Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Manolis C. Tsakiris
<m.tsakiris@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

lie in a union of hyperplanes, as in, e.g., projective motion
segmentation (Vidal et al., 2006), 3D point cloud analysis
(Sampath & Shan, 2010) and hybrid system identification
(Vidal et al., 2003; Bako, 2011). Even though in some ways
hyperplane clustering is simpler than general subspace
clustering, since, e.g., the dimensions of the subspaces
are equal and known a priori, modern self-expressivenessbased methods (Liu et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2012; Elhamifar
& Vidal, 2013; Wang et al., 2013; You et al., 2016), in principle do not apply in this case, because they require small
relative subspace dimensions d/D, where d, D are the dimensions of the subspace and ambient space, respectively.
From a theoretical point of view, one of the most appropriate methods for hyperplane clustering is Algebraic Subspace Clustering (ASC) which gives closed-form solutions
by means of factorization or differentiation of polynomials (Vidal et al., 2005). However, the main drawback of
ASC is its exponential complexity1 , which makes it impractical in many settings. Another method that is theoretically justifiable for clustering hyperplanes is Spectral Curvature Clustering (SCC) (Chen & Lerman, 2009), which
computes a D-fold affinity between all D-tuples of points
in the dataset. As in the case of ASC, SCC has combinatorial complexity and becomes cumbersome for large D.
On the other hand, the intuitive classical method of KHyperplanes (KH) (Bradley & Mangasarian, 2000), which
alternates between assigning clusters and fitting a new normal vector to each cluster with PCA, is perhaps the most
practical method for hyperplane clustering, since it is simple to implement and it is robust to noise. However, KH
is sensitive to outliers and is guaranteed to converge only
to a local minimum; hence multiple restarts are in general required. Median K-Flats (MKF) (Zhang et al., 2009)
shares a similar objective function as KH, but uses the `1 norm instead of the `2 -norm, in an attempt to gain robustness to outliers. The minimization is done via a stochastic
gradient descent scheme, and searches directly for a basis of each subspace, which makes it slower to converge
for hyperplanes. Finally, any single robust subspace learning method suitable for high relative dimensions, such as
RANSAC (Fischler & Bolles, 1981) or REAPER (Lerman
et al., 2015), can be applied either i) in a sequential fashion
1

The issue of robustness to noise for ASC has been recently
addressed in Tsakiris & Vidal 2015b; 2017c.

