Bayesian Optimization with Tree-structured Dependencies

Rodolphe Jenatton 1 Cedric Archambeau 1 Javier Gonzalez 2 Matthias Seeger 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization has been successfully used
to optimize complex black-box functions whose
evaluations are expensive. In many applications,
like in deep learning and predictive analytics, the
optimization domain is itself complex and structured. In this work, we focus on use cases where
this domain exhibits a known dependency structure. The benefit of leveraging this structure is
twofold: we explore the search space more efficiently and posterior inference scales more favorably with the number of observations than Gaussian Process-based approaches published in the
literature. We introduce a novel surrogate model
for Bayesian optimization which combines independent Gaussian Processes with a linear model
that encodes a tree-based dependency structure
and can transfer information between overlapping
decision sequences. We also design a specialized
two-step acquisition function that explores the
search space more effectively. Our experiments
on synthetic tree-structured objectives and on the
tuning of feedforward neural networks show that
our method compares favorably with competing
approaches.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Bayesian optimization has gained a growing
attention from machine learning experts in, both, academia
and industry (Shahriari et al., 2016). It takes the widespread
application of machine learning to the next level of sophistication as it enables to automatically fine-tune hyperparameters (Snoek et al., 2012), whether they are parametrizing
data pre-processors, models or the learning algorithms. Finetuning is essential to obtain state-of-the-art performance
1

Amazon, Berlin, Germany. 2 Amazon, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. Correspondence to: Rodolphe Jenatton <jenatton@amazon.de>, Cedric Archambeau <cedrica@amazon.de>,
Javier Gonzalez <gojav@amazon.co.uk>, Matthias Seeger
<matthias@amazon.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

with complex machine learning models, such as deep neural
networks. Historically, this vital step has been done, either
manually, or via regular or random grid search, which can
consume vast amounts of human expert time and are wasteful of computing resources. Hence, one of the main benefits
of Bayesian optimization is that it removes this burden from
the shoulders of the practitioners, who can then focus their
attention on more rewarding value-adding tasks.
To set the stage, our goal is to solve a global optimization
problem:
min f (x),
x∈X

where X is the optimization domain and f is a black-box
function, typically continuous and multimodal. We further
assume that querying f is costly. For example, f may be the
outcome of a physical experiment or require a large amount
of computation. The latter arises when f corresponds to a
model selection score for a machine learning model trained
on a possibly large dataset.
The protocol for sequential Bayesian optimization proceeds
as follows (Mockus et al., 1978; Shahriari et al., 2016).
Given n noisy evaluations yi ≈ f (xi ), i ∈ {1, . . . , n},
a surrogate probabilistic model of f is maintained. Our
goal is to find a global optimum of f by querying it as few
times as possible. The location xn+1 is chosen by maximizing an acquisition function which performs an explorationexploitation trade-off. A common choice for the surrogate
model is a Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006). For a GP surrogate model, common acquisition functions can be tractably computed and optimized via gradientbased optimization algorithms. While existing Bayesian
optimization approaches mitigate the high evaluation cost of
f , they suffer from the curse of dimensionality when facing
a high-dimensional space X .
In this paper, we introduce a novel methodology able to
exploit a given tree-shaped dependency structure on X by
transferring information between overlapping paths. By
constructing a surrogate model tailored to the structure, we
can reduce the number of evaluations of commonly used
acquisition functions. The same structure also allows us to
take acquisition decisions more efficiently, thus speeding up
the search of candidates.
Tree-based dependencies occur often in practice. For exam-

