A Closer Look at Memorization in Deep Networks

Devansh Arpit * 1 2 Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski * 3 Nicolas Ballas * 1 2 David Krueger * 1 2 Emmanuel Bengio 4
Maxinder S. Kanwal 5 Tegan Maharaj 1 6 Asja Fischer 7 Aaron Courville 1 2 8 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 9
Simon Lacoste-Julien 1 2

Abstract
We examine the role of memorization in deep
learning, drawing connections to capacity, generalization, and adversarial robustness. While
deep networks are capable of memorizing noise
data, our results suggest that they tend to prioritize learning simple patterns first. In our
experiments, we expose qualitative differences
in gradient-based optimization of deep neural
networks (DNNs) on noise vs. real data. We
also demonstrate that for appropriately tuned
explicit regularization (e.g., dropout) we can
degrade DNN training performance on noise
datasets without compromising generalization on
real data. Our analysis suggests that the notions
of effective capacity which are dataset independent are unlikely to explain the generalization
performance of deep networks when trained with
gradient based methods because training data itself plays an important role in determining the
degree of memorization.

1. Introduction
The traditional view of generalization holds that a model
with sufficient capacity (e.g. more parameters than training
examples) will be able to “memorize” each example, overfitting the training set and yielding poor generalization to
validation and test sets (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Yet deep
neural networks (DNNs) often achieve excellent generalization performance with massively over-parameterized
models. This phenomenon is not well-understood.
*

Equal contribution 1 Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Canada 2 Université de Montréal, Canada 3 Jagiellonian
University, Krakow, Poland 4 McGill University, Canada
5
University of California, Berkeley, USA 6 Polytechnique
Montréal, Canada 7 University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
8
CIFAR Fellow 9 CIFAR Senior Fellow. Correspondence to:
<david.krueger@umontreal.ca>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

From a representation learning perspective, the generalization capabilities of DNNs are believed to stem from
their incorporation of good generic priors (see, e.g., Bengio et al. (2009)). Lin & Tegmark (2016) further suggest
that the priors of deep learning are well suited to the physical world. But while the priors of deep learning may help
explain why DNNs learn to efficiently represent complex
real-world functions, they are not restrictive enough to rule
out memorization.
On the contrary, deep nets are known to be universal approximators, capable of representing arbitrarily complex
functions given sufficient capacity (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik
et al., 1989). Furthermore, recent work has shown that the
expressiveness of DNNs grows exponentially with depth
(Montufar et al., 2014; Poole et al., 2016). These works,
however, only examine the representational capacity, that
is, the set of hypotheses a model is capable of expressing
via some value of its parameters.
Because DNN optimization is not well-understood, it is unclear which of these hypotheses can actually be reached by
gradient-based training (Bottou, 1998). In this sense, optimization and generalization are entwined in DNNs. To account for this, we formalize a notion of the effective capacity (EC) of a learning algorithm A (defined by specifying
both the model and the training procedure, e.g.,“train the
LeNet architecture (LeCun et al., 1998) for 100 epochs using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a learning rate
of 0.01”) as the set of hypotheses which can be reached
by applying that learning algorithm on some dataset. Formally, using set-builder notation:
EC(A) = {h | ∃D such that h ∈ A(D)} ,
where A(D) represents the set of hypotheses that is reachable by A on a dataset D1 .
One might suspect that DNNs effective capacity is sufficiently limited by gradient-based training and early stopping to resolve the apparent paradox between DNNs’ excellent generalization and their high representational capacity.
However, the experiments of Zhang et al. (2017) suggest
that this is not the case. They demonstrate that DNNs are
1

Since A can be stochastic, A(D) is a set.

