Uncorrelation and Evenness: a New Diversity-Promoting Regularizer

Pengtao Xie 1 2 Aarti Singh 1 Eric P. Xing 2

Abstract
Latent space models (LSMs) provide a principled and effective way to extract hidden patterns
from observed data. To cope with two challenges
in LSMs: (1) how to capture infrequent patterns when pattern frequency is imbalanced and
(2) how to reduce model size without sacrificing
their expressiveness, several studies have been
proposed to “diversify” LSMs, which design regularizers to encourage the components therein to
be “diverse”. In light of the limitations of existing approaches, we design a new diversitypromoting regularizer by considering two factors: uncorrelation and evenness, which encourage the components to be uncorrelated and to
play equally important roles in modeling data.
Formally, this amounts to encouraging the covariance matrix of the components to have more
uniform eigenvalues. We apply the regularizer
to two LSMs and develop an efficient optimization algorithm. Experiments on healthcare, image and text data demonstrate the effectiveness
of the regularizer.

1. Introduction
A fundamental task in machine learning (ML) is to discover
latent patterns underlying data, for instance, extracting topics from documents and communities from social networks.
Latent space models (Bishop, 1998; Knott & Bartholomew,
1999; Blei, 2014) are effective tools to accomplish this
task. An LSM contains a collection of learnable components such as hidden units in neural networks and factors in
factor analysis (Harman, 1960). Each component is aimed
at capturing a hidden pattern. In most LSMs, components
are parameterized by vectors.
Among the many challenges encountered in latent space
modeling, two of them are of particular interest to us.
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Petuum Inc. Correspondence to: Pengtao Xie <pengtaox@cs.cmu.edu>, Eric P. Xing <eric.xing@petuum.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

First, under many circumstances, the frequency of patterns
is highly imbalanced. Some patterns have very high frequency while others occur less frequently. As a typical example, in a news corpus, politics and economics are frequent topics (patterns) while furniture and gardening are
infrequent. Classic LSMs are sensitive to the skewness
of pattern frequency and less capable of capturing the infrequent patterns (Wang et al., 2014). Second, when using LSMs, one needs to carefully balance the tradeoff between model size (precisely, the number of components)
and modeling power (Xie, 2015). Larger-sized LSMs are
more expressive, but incur higher computational complexity. It is desirable but challenging to achieve sufficient modeling power with a small number of components.
To address these two challenges, recent studies (Zou &
Adams, 2012; Cogswell et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2015; 2016)
investigate a “diversification” strategy which encourages
the components in LSMs to be mutually different, either
through frequentist-style regularization (Zou & Adams,
2012; Cogswell et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2015) or Bayesian
learning (Xie et al., 2016). They conjecture that: (1)
through “diversification”, some components that are originally aggregated around frequent patterns can be pushed
apart to cover infrequent patterns; (2) “diversified” components bear less redundancy and are mutually complementary; a small number of such components are sufficient to
model data well.
Along this line of research, several diversity-promoting
regularizers have been proposed, based upon determinantal point process (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012; Zou & Adams,
2012), cosine similarity (Yu et al., 2011; Bao et al., 2013;
Xie et al., 2015) and covariance (Malkin & Bilmes, 2008;
Cogswell et al., 2015). While these regularizers demonstrate notable efficacy, they have certain limitations, such
as sensitivity to vector scaling (Zou & Adams, 2012;
Malkin & Bilmes, 2008), inability to measure diversity
in a global manner (Yu et al., 2011; Bao et al., 2013;
Xie et al., 2015) and computational inefficiency (Cogswell
et al., 2015). To address these limitations, we propose
a new diversity-promoting regularizer gaining inspiration
from principal component analysis (Jolliffe, 2002), biological diversity (Magurran, 2013) and information theory
(Cover & Thomas, 2012).

