Convolutional Sequence to Sequence Learning
Jonas Gehring 1 Michael Auli 1 David Grangier 1 Denis Yarats 1 Yann N. Dauphin 1

Abstract
The prevalent approach to sequence to sequence
learning maps an input sequence to a variable length
output sequence via recurrent neural networks.
We introduce an architecture based entirely on
convolutional neural networks. Compared to recurrent
models, computations over all elements can be fully
parallelized during training to better exploit the GPU
hardware and optimization is easier since the number
of non-linearities is fixed and independent of the
input length. Our use of gated linear units eases
gradient propagation and we equip each decoder layer
with a separate attention module. We outperform the
accuracy of the deep LSTM setup of Wu et al. (2016)
on both WMT’14 English-German and WMT’14
English-French translation at an order of magnitude
faster speed, both on GPU and CPU.?

1. Introduction
Sequence to sequence learning has been successful in many tasks
such as machine translation, speech recognition (Sutskever et al.,
2014; Chorowski et al., 2015) and text summarization (Rush
et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2016) amongst
others. The dominant approach to date encodes the input
sequence with a series of bi-directional recurrent neural networks
(RNN) and generates a variable length output with another set
of decoder RNNs, both of which interface via a soft-attention
mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015). In
machine translation, this architecture has been demonstrated to
outperform traditional phrase-based models by large margins
(Sennrich et al., 2016b; Zhou et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016;§2).
Convolutional neural networks are less common for sequence
modeling, despite several advantages (Waibel et al., 1989; LeCun
& Bengio, 1995). Compared to recurrent layers, convolutions
create representations for fixed size contexts, however, the
effective context size of the network can easily be made larger
1

Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Jonas Gehring
<jgehring@fb.com>, Michael Auli<michaelauli@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by the author(s).
?
The source code and models are available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/fairseq.

by stacking several layers on top of each other. This allows
to precisely control the maximum length of dependencies to
be modeled. Convolutional networks do not depend on the
computations of the previous time step and therefore allow
parallelization over every element in a sequence. This contrasts
with RNNs which maintain a hidden state of the entire past that
prevents parallel computation within a sequence.
Multi-layer convolutional neural networks create hierarchical
representations over the input sequence in which nearby input
elements interact at lower layers while distant elements interact
at higher layers. Hierarchical structure provides a shorter path
to capture long-range dependencies compared to the chain
structure modeled by recurrent networks, e.g. we can obtain
a feature representation capturing relationships within a window
of n words by applying only O( nk ) convolutional operations
for kernels of width k, compared to a linear number O(n) for
recurrent neural networks. Inputs to a convolutional network
are fed through a constant number of kernels and non-linearities,
whereas recurrent networks apply up to n operations and
non-linearities to the first word and only a single set of operations
to the last word. Fixing the number of non-linearities applied
to the inputs also eases learning.
Recent work has applied convolutional neural networks to sequence modeling such as Bradbury et al. (2016) who introduce
recurrent pooling between a succession of convolutional layers or
Kalchbrenner et al. (2016) who tackle neural translation without
attention. However, none of these approaches has been demonstrated improvements over state of the art results on large benchmark datasets. Gated convolutions have been previously explored
for machine translation by Meng et al. (2015) but their evaluation
was restricted to a small dataset and the model was used in tandem
with a traditional count-based model. Architectures which are
partially convolutional have shown strong performance on larger
tasks but their decoder is still recurrent (Gehring et al., 2016).
In this paper we propose an architecture for sequence to sequence
modeling that is entirely convolutional. Our model is equipped
with gated linear units (Dauphin et al., 2016) and residual
connections (He et al., 2015a). We also use attention in every
decoder layer and demonstrate that each attention layer only
adds a negligible amount of overhead. The combination of these
choices enables us to tackle large scale problems (§3).
We evaluate our approach on several large datasets for machine
translation as well as summarization and compare to the current

