Post-Inference Prior Swapping

Willie Neiswanger 1 Eric Xing 2

Abstract
While Bayesian methods are praised for their
ability to incorporate useful prior knowledge, in
practice, convenient priors that allow for computationally cheap or tractable inference are commonly used. In this paper, we investigate the following question: for a given model, is it possible
to compute an inference result with any convenient false prior, and afterwards, given any target prior of interest, quickly transform this result into the target posterior? A potential solution is to use importance sampling (IS). However, we demonstrate that IS will fail for many
choices of the target prior, depending on its parametric form and similarity to the false prior. Instead, we propose prior swapping, a method that
leverages the pre-inferred false posterior to efficiently generate accurate posterior samples under arbitrary target priors. Prior swapping lets us
apply less-costly inference algorithms to certain
models, and incorporate new or updated prior information “post-inference”. We give theoretical
guarantees about our method, and demonstrate it
empirically on a number of models and priors.

1. Introduction
There are many cases in Bayesian modeling where a certain choice of prior distribution allows for computationally
simple or tractable inference. For example,
• Conjugate priors yield posteriors with a known parametric form and therefore allow for non-iterative, exact inference (Diaconis et al., 1979).
• Certain priors yield models with tractable conditional
or marginal distributions, which allows efficient approximate inference algorithms to be applied (e.g.
Gibbs sampling (Smith & Roberts, 1993), sampling
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Machine Learning Department,
Pittsburgh, USA 2 CMU School of Computer Science. Correspondence to: Willie Neiswanger <willie@cs.cmu.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

in collapsed models (Teh et al., 2006), or mean-field
variational methods (Wang & Blei, 2013)).
• Simple parametric priors allow for computationally
cheap density queries, maximization, and sampling,
which can reduce costs in iterative inference algorithms (e.g. Metropolis-Hastings (Metropolis et al.,
1953), gradient-based MCMC (Neal, 2011), or sequential Monte Carlo (Doucet et al., 2000)).
For these reasons, one might hope to infer a result under a
convenient-but-unrealistic prior, and afterwards, attempt to
correct the result. More generally, given an inference result
(under a convenient prior or otherwise), one might wish to
incorporate updated prior information, or see a result under different prior assumptions, without having to re-run a
costly inference algorithm.
This leads to the main question of this paper: for a given
model, is it possible to use any convenient false prior to
infer a false posterior, and afterwards, given any target prior
of interest, efficiently and accurately infer the associated
target posterior?
One potential strategy involves sampling from the false
posterior and reweighting these samples via importance
sampling (IS). However, depending on the chosen target
prior—both its parametric form and similarity to the false
prior—the resulting inference can be inaccurate due to high
or infinite variance IS estimates (demonstrated in Sec. 2.1).
We instead aim to devise a method that yields accurate inferences for arbitrary target priors. Furthermore, like IS, we
want to make use of the pre-inferred false posterior, without
simply running standard inference algorithms on the target
posterior. Note that most standard inference algorithms are
iterative and data-dependent: parameter updates at each iteration involve data, and the computational cost or quality
of each update depends on the amount of data used. Hence,
running inference algorithms directly on the target posterior can be costly (especially given a large amount of data
or many target priors of interest) and defeats the purpose of
using a convenient false prior.
In this paper, we propose prior swapping, an iterative, dataindependent method for generating accurate posterior samples under arbitrary target priors. Prior swapping uses the
pre-inferred false posterior to perform efficient updates that

