How Close Are the Eigenvectors of the Sample and Actual Covariance
Matrices?
Andreas Loukas 1

Abstract
How many samples are sufficient to guarantee
that the eigenvectors of the sample covariance
matrix are close to those of the actual covariance matrix? For a wide family of distributions,
including distributions with finite second moment and sub-gaussian distributions supported in
a centered Euclidean ball, we prove that the inner product between eigenvectors of the sample and actual covariance matrices decreases proportionally to the respective eigenvalue distance
and the number of samples. Our findings imply
non-asymptotic concentration bounds for eigenvectors and eigenvalues and carry strong consequences for the non-asymptotic analysis of PCA
and its applications. For instance, they provide
conditions for separating components estimated
from O(1) samples and show that even few samples can be sufficient to perform dimensionality
reduction, especially for low-rank covariances.

1

Introduction

The covariance matrix C of an n-dimensional distribution
is an integral part of data analysis, with numerous occurrences in machine learning and signal processing. It is
therefore crucial to understand how close is the sample coe estimated from a finite numvariance, i.e., the matrix C
ber of samples m, to the actual covariance matrix. Following developments in the tools for the concentration of
measure, (Vershynin, 2012) showed that a sample size of
m = O(n) is up to iterated logarithmic factors sufficient
for all distributions with finite fourth moment
supported in
√
a centered Euclidean ball of radius O( n). Similar results
hold for sub-exponential (Adamczak et al., 2010) and finite
second moment distributions (Rudelson, 1999).
We take an alternative standpoint and ask if we can do
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Andreas Loukas <andreas.loukas@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

better when only a subset of the spectrum is of interest.
Concretely, our objective is to characterize how many samples are sufficient to guarantee that an eigenvector and/or
eigenvalue of the sample and actual covariance matrices
are, respectively, sufficiently close. Our approach is motivated by the observation that methods that utilize the covariance commonly prioritize the estimation of principal
eigenspaces. For instance, in (local) principal component
analysis we are usually interested in the direction of the
first few eigenvectors (Berkmann & Caelli, 1994; Kambhatla & Leen, 1997), where in linear dimensionality reduction one projects the data to the span of the first few eigenvectors (Jolliffe, 2002; Frostig et al., 2016). In the nonasymptotic regime, an analysis of these methods hinges on
characterizing how close are the principal eigenvectors and
eigenspaces of the sample and actual covariance matrices.
Our finding is that the “spectral leaking” occurring in the
eigenvector estimation is strongly concentrated along the
eigenvalue axis. In other words, the eigenvector u
ei of the
sample covariance is far less likely to lie in the span of
an eigenvector uj of the actual covariance when the eigenvalue distance |λi − λj | is large, and the concentration of
the distribution in the direction of uj is small. This agrees
with the intuition that principal components are easier to
estimate, exactly because they are more likely to appear in
the samples of the distribution.
We provide a mathematical argument confirming this phenomenon. Under fairly general conditions, we prove that
!
!
kj2
ki2
(1)
m=O
and m = O
(λi − λj )2
λ2i
samples are asymptotically almost surely (a.a.s.) sufficient
ei −λi |/λi , respectively, is
to guarantee that |he
ui , uj i| and |λ
small for all distributions with finite second moment. Here,
kj2 is a measure of the concentration of the distribution in
the direction of uj . We also attain a high probability bound
for sub-gaussian distributions supported in a centered Euclidean ball. Interestingly, our results lead to sample estimates for linear dimensionality reduction, and suggest that
linear reduction is feasible even from few samples.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the first nonasymptotic results concerning the eigenvectors of the sam-

