FeUdal Networks for Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets 1 Simon Osindero 1 Tom Schaul 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Max Jaderberg 1 David Silver 1
Koray Kavukcuoglu 1

Abstract
We introduce FeUdal Networks (FuNs): a novel
architecture for hierarchical reinforcement learning. Our approach is inspired by the feudal reinforcement learning proposal of Dayan and Hinton, and gains power and efficacy by decoupling end-to-end learning across multiple levels
– allowing it to utilise different resolutions of
time. Our framework employs a Manager module and a Worker module. The Manager operates
at a lower temporal resolution and sets abstract
goals which are conveyed to and enacted by the
Worker. The Worker generates primitive actions
at every tick of the environment. The decoupled
structure of FuN conveys several benefits – in addition to facilitating very long timescale credit
assignment it also encourages the emergence of
sub-policies associated with different goals set
by the Manager. These properties allow FuN to
dramatically outperform a strong baseline agent
on tasks that involve long-term credit assignment
or memorisation.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has recently enjoyed successes in many domains (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2016; Lillicrap
et al., 2015). Nevertheless, long-term credit assignment remains a major challenge for these methods, especially in
environments with sparse reward signals, such as the infamous Montezuma’s Revenge ATARI game. It is symptomatic that the standard approach on the ATARI benchmark suite (Bellemare et al., 2012) is to use an actionrepeat heuristic, where each action translates into several
(usually 4) consecutive actions in the environment. Yet another dimension of complexity is seen in non-Markovian
environments that require memory – these are particularly
1
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets <vezhnick@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

challenging, since the agent has to learn which parts of experience to store for later, using only a sparse reward signal.
The framework we propose takes inspiration from feudal
reinforcement learning (FRL) introduced by Dayan & Hinton (1993), where levels of hierarchy within an agent communicate via explicit goals. Some key insights from FRL
are that goals can be generated in a top-down fashion, and
that goal setting can be decoupled from goal achievement;
a level in the hierarchy communicates to the level below
it what must be achieved, but does not specify how to do
so. Making higher levels reason at a lower temporal resolution naturally structures the agents behaviour into temporally extended sub-policies.
The architecture explored in this work is a fullydifferentiable neural network with two levels of hierarchy
(though there are obvious generalisations to deeper hierarchies). The top level, the Manager, sets goals at a lower
temporal resolution in a latent state-space that is itself
learnt by the Manager. The lower level, the Worker, operates at a higher temporal resolution and produces primitive
actions, conditioned on the goals it receives from the Manager. The Worker is motivated to follow the goals by an
intrinsic reward. However, significantly, no gradients are
propagated between Worker and Manager; the Manager receives its learning signal from the environment alone. In
other words, the Manager learns to select latent goals that
maximise extrinsic reward.
The key contributions of our proposal are: (1) A consistent,
end-to-end differentiable model that embodies and generalizes the principles of FRL. (2) A novel, approximate transition policy gradient update for training the Manager, which
exploits the semantic meaning of the goals it produces. (3)
The use of goals that are directional rather than absolute in
nature. (4) A novel RNN design for the Manager – a dilated LSTM – which extends the longevity of the recurrent
state memories and allows gradients to flow through large
hops in time, enabling effective back-propagation through
hundreds of steps.
Our ablative analysis (Section 5.4) confirms that transitional policy gradient and directional goals are crucial
for best performance. Our experiments on a selection of
ATARI games (including the infamous Montezuma’s re-

