Variational Boosting: Iteratively Refining Posterior Approximations

Andrew C. Miller 1 Nicholas J. Foti 2 Ryan P. Adams 1 3

Abstract
We propose a black-box variational inference
method to approximate intractable distributions
with an increasingly rich approximating class.
Our method, variational boosting, iteratively refines an existing variational approximation by
solving a sequence of optimization problems, allowing a trade-off between computation time and
accuracy. We expand the variational approximating class by incorporating additional covariance
structure and by introducing new components to
form a mixture. We apply variational boosting
to synthetic and real statistical models, and show
that the resulting posterior inferences compare
favorably to existing variational algorithms.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) is a family of methods to approximate an intractable target distribution (typically known
only up to a constant) with a tractable surrogate distribution (Blei et al., 2016; Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright
& Jordan, 2008). VI procedures typically minimize the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the approximation and target distributions by maximizing a tractable lower
bound on the marginal likelihood. The approximating family is often fixed, and typically excludes the neighborhood
surrounding the target distribution, which prevents the approximation from becoming arbitrarily close to the true
posterior. In the context of Bayesian inference, this mismatch between the variational family and the true posterior
often manifests as underestimating the posterior variances of
the model parameters and the inability to capture posterior
correlations (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008).
An alternative approach to posterior inference uses Markov
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 University
of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 3 Google Brain,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Andrew
C. Miller <acm@seas.harvard.edu>, Nicholas J. Foti
<nfoti@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods that approximate a
target distribution with samples drawn from a Markov chain
constructed to admit the target distribution as the stationary
distribution. MCMC enables a trade-off between computation and accuracy: drawing more samples makes the approximation closer to the target distribution. However, MCMC
algorithms typically must be run iteratively and it can be difficult to assess convergence to the true target. Furthermore,
correctly specifying MCMC moves can be more algorithmically restrictive than optimization-based approaches.
To alleviate the mismatch between tractable variational approximations and complicated posterior distributions, we
propose a variational inference method that iteratively allows the approximating family of distributions to become
more complex. Under certain conditions, the proposed approximations are eventually expressive enough to represent
the true target arbitrarily well (though we do not prove our algorithm attains such a universal approximation here). Thus,
the practitioner can trade time fitting a posterior approximation for increased accuracy of posterior estimates. Our
algorithm grows the complexity of the approximating class
in two ways: 1) incorporating rich covariance structure, and
2) sequentially adding new components to the approximating distribution. Our method builds on black-box variational
inference methods using the re-parameterization trick by
adapting it to be used with mixture distributions. This allows
our method to be applied to a variety of target distributions
including those arising from non-conjugate model specifications (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Ranganath et al., 2014;
Salimans & Knowles, 2013). We demonstrate empirically
that our algorithm improves posterior estimates over other
variational methods for several practical Bayesian models.

2. Variational Inference
Given a target distribution with density1 π(x) for a continuous random variable x ∈ X ⊆ RD , variational inference approximates π(x) with a tractable distribution,
q(x; λ), from which we can efficiently draw samples and
form sample-based estimates of functions of x. Variational
methods minimize the KL-divergence, KL(q||π), between
q(·; λ) and the true π as a function of variational parameter λ (Bishop, 2006). Although direct minimization of
1

We assume π(x) is known up to a constant, π̃(x) = Cπ(x).

