Uniform Deviation Bounds for k-Means Clustering
Olivier Bachem 1 Mario Lucic 1 S. Hamed Hassani 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Uniform deviation bounds limit the difference between a model’s expected loss and its loss on a
random sample uniformly for all models in a learning problem. In this paper, we provide a novel
framework to obtain uniform deviation bounds
for unbounded loss functions. As a result, we
obtain competitive uniform deviation bounds for
k-Means clustering under weak assumptions on
the underlying distribution. If the fourth
moment
⇣
⌘
1
is bounded, we prove a rate of O m 2 com⇣
⌘
1
pared to the previously known O m 4 rate.
We further show that this rate also depends on the
kurtosis — the normalized fourth moment which
measures the “tailedness” of the distribution. We
also provide improved rates under progressively
stronger assumptions, namely, bounded higher
moments, subgaussianity and bounded support of
the underlying distribution.

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization — i.e. the training of models on
a finite sample drawn i.i.d from an underlying distribution
— is a central paradigm in machine learning. The hope is
that models trained on the finite sample perform provably
well even on previously unseen samples from the underlying distribution. But how many samples m are required
to guarantee a low approximation error ✏? Uniform deviation bounds provide the answer. Informally, they are the
worst-case difference across all possible models between
the empirical loss of a model and its expected loss. As such,
they determine how many samples are required to achieve a
fixed error in terms of the loss function. In this paper, we
consider the popular k-Means clustering problem and provide uniform deviation bounds based on weak assumptions
on the underlying data generating distribution.
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Olivier Bachem <olivier.bachem@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Related work. Traditional Vapnik-Chervonenkis theory
provides tools to obtain uniform deviation bounds for binary concept classes such as classification using halfspaces
(Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971). While these results have
been extended to provide uniform deviation bounds for sets
of continuous functions bounded in [0, 1] (Haussler, 1992;
Li et al., 2001), these results are not readily applied to kMeans clustering as the underlying loss function in k-Means
clustering is continuous and unbounded.
In their seminal work, Pollard (1981) shows that k-Means
clustering is strongly consistent, i.e., that the optimal cluster
centers on a random sample converge almost surely to the
optimal centers of the distribution under a weak assumption. This has sparked a long line of research on cluster
stability (Ben-David et al., 2006; Rakhlin & Caponnetto,
2007; Shamir & Tishby, 2007; 2008) which investigates the
convergence of optimal parameters both asymptotically and
for finite samples. The vector quantization literature offers
insights into the convergence of empirically optimal quantizers for ⇣k-Means
⌘ in terms of the objective: A minimax
1
rate of O m 2 is known if the underlying distribution
has bounded support (Linder et al., 1994; Bartlett et al.,
1998). A better rate of O m 1 may be achieved for finite support (Antos et al., 2005) or under both bounded
support and regularity assumptions (Levrard et al., 2013).
Ben-David (2007) provides a uniform convergence result for
center based clustering under a bounded support assumption
and Telgarsky & Dasgupta (2013) prove uniform deviation
bounds for k-Means clustering if the underlying distribution
satisfies moment assumptions (see Section 4).
Empirical risk minimization with fat-tailed losses has been
studied in Mendelson et al. (2014), Mendelson (2014),
Grünwald & Mehta (2016) and Dinh et al. (2016). Dinh et al.
(2016) provide fast learning rates for k-Means clustering
but under stronger assumptions than the ones considered in
this paper. Guarantees similar to uniform deviation bounds
can be obtained using importance sampling in the context
of coreset construction (Bachem et al., 2015; Lucic et al.,
2016; 2017).
Our contributions. We provide a new framework to obtain
uniform deviation bounds for unbounded loss functions. We
apply it to k-Means clustering ⇣and provide
uniform devi⌘
1
ation bounds with a rate of O m 2 for finite samples

