Communication-efficient Algorithms for
Distributed Stochastic Principal Component Analysis
Dan Garber 1 Ohad Shamir 2 Nathan Srebro 3

Abstract
We study the fundamental problem of Principal
Component Analysis in a statistical distributed
setting in which each machine out of m stores
a sample of n points sampled i.i.d. from a single unknown distribution. We study algorithms
for estimating the leading principal component
of the population covariance matrix that are both
communication-efficient and achieve estimation
error of the order of the centralized ERM solution that uses all mn samples. On the negative side, we show that in contrast to results obtained for distributed estimation under convexity assumptions, for the PCA objective, simply
averaging the local ERM solutions cannot guarantee error that is consistent with the centralized
ERM. We show that this unfortunate phenomena
can be remedied by performing a simple correction step which correlates between the individual
solutions, and provides an estimator that is consistent with the centralized ERM for sufficientlylarge n. We also introduce an iterative distributed
algorithm that is applicable in any regime of n,
which is based on distributed matrix-vector products. The algorithm gives significant acceleration
in terms of communication rounds over previous
distributed algorithms, in a wide regime of parameters.

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901;
Hotelling, 1933; Jolliffe, 2002) is one of the most celebrated and popular techniques in data analysis and ma1
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
3
Toyota Technological Institute, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to:
Dan Garber <dangar@technion.ac.il>, Ohad
Shamir <ohad.Shamir@weizmann.ac.il>, Nathan Srebro
<nati@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

chine learning. For data that consists of N vectors in
RdP
, x1 , ..., xN , with normalized covariance matrix X̂ =
N
1
>
i=1 xi xi , The PCA method finds the k-dimensional
N
subspace (which corresponds to the span of the top k principal components) such that the projection of the data onto
the subspace has largest variance, i.e., it is the solution to
the optimization problem:
max

W2Rd⇥k ,WT W=I

kX̂Wk2F .

(1)

PCA is often considered in a statistical setting in which the
assumption is that the input vectors are not arbitrary but
sampled i.i.d. from some fixed but unknown distribution
with certain general characteristics D. Then, it is often of
interest to use the observed sample to estimate the top k
principal components of the population covariance matrix,
rather then that of the sample, which leads to the modified
optimization problem:
⇥
⇤
max
kEx⇠D xx> Wk2F .
(2)
W2Rd⇥k ,WT W=I

Of course the empirical estimation problem (1) and the
population estimation problem (2) are well connected, and
it is well-known that under mild assumptions on the distribution D and given a sufficiently large sample, we can
guarantee small estimation error in (2) by solving optimization problem (1).
In this work we consider the problem of estimating the first
principal component (i.e., k = 1) in a statistical and distributed setting. We assume the availability of m machines,
each of which stores a sample of n vectors sampled i.i.d
from a fixed distribution D over Rd , and we are interested
in algorithms that can be applied efficiently to solve Problem (2) for k = 1, with estimation error that approaches
that of a centralized algorithm, which has access to all mn
samples and does not pay for communication between machines. Indeed, when considering the efficiency of algorithms, we will mainly focus on the amount of communication between machines they require, since this is often
the most expensive resource in distributed computing. We
note that the i.i.d. assumption is standard in many applications of PCA, and can be leveraged to get more efficient
algorithms than when the data partition is arbitrary. Also,
we will make a standard assumption that the population covariance matrix has a non-zero additive gap between the

