Stochastic Modified Equations
and Adaptive Stochastic Gradient Algorithms

Qianxiao Li 1 Cheng Tai 2 3 Weinan E 2 3 4

Abstract

where k ≥ 0 and {γk } are i.i.d uniform variates taking values in {1, 2, · · · , n}. The step-size η is the learning rate.
Unlike GD, SGD samples the full gradient and its computational complexity per iterate is independent of n. For
this reason, stochastic gradient algorithms have become increasingly popular in large scale problems.

We develop the method of stochastic modified
equations (SME), in which stochastic gradient
algorithms are approximated in the weak sense
by continuous-time stochastic differential equations. We exploit the continuous formulation
together with optimal control theory to derive
novel adaptive hyper-parameter adjustment policies. Our algorithms have competitive performance with the added benefit of being robust to
varying models and datasets. This provides a
general methodology for the analysis and design
of stochastic gradient algorithms.

Many convergence results are available for SGD and its
variants. However, most are upper-bound type results for
(strongly) convex objectives, often lacking the precision
and generality to characterize the behavior of algorithms
in practical settings. This makes it harder to translate theoretical understanding into algorithm analysis and design.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient algorithms are often used to solve optimization problems of the form
n

min

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
f (x) :=
n i=1

(1)

where f, fi : Rd → R for i = 1, . . . , n. In machine
learning applications, f is typically the total loss function
whereas each fi represents the loss due to the ith training
sample. x is a vector of trainable parameters and n is the
training sample size, which is typically very large.
Solving (1) using the standard gradient descent (GD) requires n gradient evaluations per step and is prohibitively
expensive when n  1. An alternative, the stochastic gradient descent (SGD), is to replace the full gradient ∇f by
a sampled version, serving as an unbiased estimator. In its
simplest form, the SGD iteration is written as
xk+1 = xk − η∇fγk (xk ),
1

(2)
2

Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, Beijing, China 4 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
Correspondence to: Qianxiao Li <liqix@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In this work, we address this by pursuing a different analytical direction. We derive continuous-time stochastic differential equations (SDE) that can be understood as weak
approximations (i.e. approximations in distribution) of
stochastic gradient algorithms. These SDEs contain higher
order terms that vanish as η → 0, but at finite and small
η they offer much needed insight of the algorithms under consideration. In this sense, our framework can be
viewed as a stochastic parallel of the method of modified
equations in the analysis of classical finite difference methods (Noh & Protter, 1960; Daly, 1963; Hirt, 1968; Warming & Hyett, 1974). For this reason, we refer to these SDEs
as stochastic modified equations (SME). Using the SMEs,
we can quantify, in a precise and general way, the leadingorder dynamics of the SGD and its variants. Moreover, the
continuous-time treatment allows the application of optimal control theory to study the problems of adaptive hyperparameter adjustments. This gives rise to novel adaptive algorithms and perhaps more importantly, a general methodology for understanding and improving stochastic gradient
algorithms.
Notation. We distinguish sequential and dimensional indices by writing a bracket around the latter, e.g. xk,(i) is
the ith coordinate of the vector xk , the k th SGD iterate.

2. Stochastic Modified Equations
We now introduce the SME approximation. Background
materials on SDEs are found in Supplementary Materials

