Coresets for Vector Summarization
with Applications to Network Graphs

Dan Feldman 1 Sedat Ozer 2 Daniela Rus 2

Abstract
We provide a deterministic data summarization
algorithm
that approximates the mean p̄ =
P
1
p
of a set P of n vectors in Rd , by a
p∈P
n
weighted mean p̃ of a subset of O(1/ε) vectors,
i.e., independent of both n and d. We prove that
the squared Euclidean distance between p̄ and p̃
is at most ε multiplied by the variance of P . We
use this algorithm to maintain an approximated
sum of vectors from an unbounded stream, using memory that is independent of d, and logarithmic in the n vectors seen so far. Our main
application is to extract and represent in a compact way friend groups and activity summaries
of users from underlying data exchanges. For example, in the case of mobile networks, we can
use GPS traces to identify meetings; in the case
of social networks, we can use information exchange to identify friend groups. Our algorithm
provably identifies the Heavy Hitter entries in a
proximity (adjacency) matrix. The Heavy Hitters
can be used to extract and represent in a compact way friend groups and activity summaries of
users from underlying data exchanges. We evaluate the algorithm on several large data sets.

1. Introduction
The wide-spread use of smart phones, wearable devices,
and social media creates a vast space of digital footprints
for people, which include location information from GPS
traces, phone call history, social media postings, etc. This
is an ever-growing wealth of data that can be used to identify social structures and predict activity patterns. We wish
to extract the underlying social network of a group of mobile users given data available about them (e.g. GPS traces,
phone call history, news articles, etc.) in order to identify
and predict their various activities such as meetings, friend
1

University of Haifa, Israel, 2 CSAIL, MIT. Correspondence
to: Dan Feldman <dannyf.post@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

groups, gathering places, collective activity patterns, etc.
There are several key challenges to achieve these capabilities. First, the data is huge so we need efficient methods
for processing and representing the data. Second, the data
is multi-modal heterogeneous. This presents challenges in
data processing and representation, but also opportunities
to extract correlations that may not be visible in a single
data source. Third, the data is often noisy.
We propose an approach based on coresets to extract underlying connectivity information while performing data summarization for a given a large data set. We focus our intuition examples and evaluations on social networks because
of their intuitive nature and access to data sets, although
the method is general and applies to networks of information in general. Our approach works on streaming datasets
to represent the data in a compact (sparse) way. Our coreset
algorithm gets a stream of vectors and approximates their
sum using small memory. Essentially, a coreset C is a significantly smaller portion (a scaled subset) of the original
and large set D of vectors. Given D and the algorithm A,
where running algorithm A on D is intractable due to lack
of memory, the task-specific coreset algorithm efficiently
reduces the data set D to a coreset C so that running the algorithm A on C requires a low amount of memory and the
result is provable approximately the same as running the
algorithm on D. Coreset captures all the important vectors
in D for a given algorithm A. The challenges are computing C fast and proving that C is the right scaled subset, i.e.,
running the algorithm on C gives approximately the same
result as running the algorithm on D.
More specifically, the goal of this paper is to suggest a way
to maintain a sparse representation of an n × d matrix, by
maintaining a sparse approximation of each of its rows. For
example, in a proximity matrix associated with a social network, instead of storing the average proximity to each of n
users, we would like to store only the N  n largest entries in each row (known as “Heavy Hitters”), which correspond to the people seen by the user most often. Given
an unbounded stream of movements, it is hard to tell which
are the people the user met most, without maintaining a
counter to each person. For example, consider the special
case N = 1. We are given a stream of pairs (i, val) where
i ∈ {1, · · · , n} is an index of a counter, and val is a real
number that represents a score for this counter. Our goal is

