Differentially Private Learning of Undirected Graphical Models Using
Collective Graphical Models

Garrett Bernstein 1 Ryan McKenna 1 Tao Sun 1 Daniel Sheldon 1 2 Michael Hay 3 Gerome Miklau 1

Abstract
We investigate the problem of learning discrete,
undirected graphical models in a differentially
private way. We show that the approach of releasing noisy sufficient statistics using the Laplace
mechanism achieves a good trade-off between
privacy, utility, and practicality. A naive learning algorithm that uses the noisy sufficient statistics “as is” outperforms general-purpose differentially private learning algorithms. However,
it has three limitations: it ignores knowledge
about the data generating process, rests on uncertain theoretical foundations, and exhibits certain pathologies. We develop a more principled
approach that applies the formalism of collective graphical models to perform inference over
the true sufficient statistics within an expectationmaximization framework. We show that this
learns better models than competing approaches
on both synthetic data and on real human mobility data used as a case study.

1. Introduction
Graphical models are a central tool in probabilistic modeling and machine learning. They pair expressive probability models with algorithms that leverage the graphical
structure for efficient inference and learning. However,
with data collection and modeling growing in importance
in nearly all domains of society, there is increasing demand
to apply graphical models in settings where the underlying
data is sensitive and must be kept private. For example,
consider applying graphical models to analyze electronic
health records, with the goal of guiding public health policy. How can we derive these useful population-level outcomes without compromising the privacy of individuals?
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Mount Holyoke College 3 Colgate University. Correspondence to: Garrett Bernstein
<gbernstein@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Differential privacy is a widely studied formalism for private data analysis (Dwork et al., 2006). It provides a statistical privacy guarantee to individuals: the output of a differentially private algorithm is statistically nearly unchanged
even if any single individual’s record is added to or removed from the input data set. The general idea is to carefully randomize the algorithm so that the (random) output
does not depend too much on any individual’s data.
Differentially private machine learning cleanly addresses
the problem of extracting useful population-level models
from data sets while protecting the privacy of individuals.
Indeed, this is an active and important research area (see
Section 1.1), which includes private learning algorithms
for a variety of general frameworks and specific machine
learning models. This paper addresses the problem of privately learning parameters in a widely used class of probabilistic models: discrete, undirected graphical models. Although our problem can be cast in terms of general private
learning frameworks, these do not lead to practical algorithms. Previous work also addresses private learning for
directed graphical models (J. Zhang et al., 2014; Z. Zhang
et al., 2016). Our problem of learning in undirected models, which are not locally normalized, is more general and
substantially harder computationally.
To learn accurate models under differential privacy, it is
critical to randomize the algorithm “just enough” to achieve
the desired privacy guarantee without diminishing the quality of the learned model too much. This is usually done by
modifying a learning algorithm to add noise to some intermediate quantity X, with the noise magnitude calibrated to
the sensitivity of X, a measure of how much X can depend
on any single individual’s data in the worst case (Dwork
et al., 2006). The randomization renders the noisy estimate of X safe for release; all subsequent calculations using the noisy X, but not the original data, are also safe.
Where should noise be injected into a machine learning algorithm to achieve the best utility? We highlight two highlevel goals: (1) Noise should be added at an “information
bottleneck”, so the sensitivity is as small as possible relative to the information being sought,1 (2) noise should be
1
Sensitivity scales with the number of measurements; all else
equal, a lower dimensional quantity will have lower sensitivity.

