Approximate Steepest Coordinate Descent

Sebastian U. Stich 1 Anant Raj 2 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
We propose a new selection rule for the coordinate selection in coordinate descent methods
for huge-scale optimization. The efficiency of
this novel scheme is provably better than the efficiency of uniformly random selection, and can
reach the efficiency of steepest coordinate descent (SCD), enabling an acceleration of a factor
of up to n, the number of coordinates. In many
practical applications, our scheme can be implemented at no extra cost and computational efficiency very close to the faster uniform selection.
Numerical experiments with Lasso and Ridge regression show promising improvements, in line
with our theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction
Coordinate descent (CD) methods have attracted a substantial interest the optimization community in the last few
years (Nesterov, 2012; Richtárik & Takáč, 2016). Due to
their computational efficiency, scalability, as well as their
ease of implementation, these methods are the state-of-theart for a wide selection of machine learning and signal processing applications (Fu, 1998; Hsieh et al., 2008; Wright,
2015). This is also theoretically well justified: The complexity estimates for CD methods are in general better than
the estimates for methods that compute the full gradient in
one batch pass (Nesterov, 2012; Nesterov & Stich, 2017).
In many CD methods, the active coordinate is picked
at random, according to a probability distribution. For
smooth functions it is theoretically well understood how
the sampling procedure is related to the efficiency of the
scheme and which distributions give the best complexity
estimates (Nesterov, 2012; Zhao & Zhang, 2015; AllenZhu et al., 2016; Qu & Richtárik, 2016; Nesterov & Stich,
2017). For nonsmooth and composite functions — that
appear in many machine learning applications — the pic1
EPFL 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems. Correspondence to: Sebastian U. Stich <sebastian.stich@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ture is less clear. For instance in (Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang, 2013; Friedman et al., 2007; 2010; Shalev-Shwartz
& Tewari, 2011) uniform sampling (UCD) is used, whereas
other papers propose adaptive sampling strategies that
change over time (Papa et al., 2015; Csiba et al., 2015; Osokin et al., 2016; Perekrestenko et al., 2017).
A very simple deterministic strategy is to move along the
direction corresponding to the component of the gradient
with the maximal absolute value (steepest coordinate descent, SCD) (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004; Tseng & Yun,
2009). For smooth functions this strategy yields always
better progress than UCD, and the speedup can reach a factor of the dimension (Nutini et al., 2015). However, SCD
requires the computation of the whole gradient vector in
each iteration which is prohibitive (except for special applications, cf. Dhillon et al. (2011); Shrivastava & Li (2014)).
In this paper we propose approximate steepest coordinate
descent (ASCD), a novel scheme which combines the best
parts of the aforementioned strategies: (i) ASCD maintains
an approximation of the full gradient in each iteration and
selects the active coordinate among the components of this
vector that have large absolute values — similar to SCD;
and (ii) in many situations the gradient approximation can
be updated cheaply at no extra cost — similar to UCD. We
show that regardless of the errors in the gradient approximation (even if they are infinite), ASCD performs always
better than UCD.
Similar to the methods proposed in (Tseng & Yun, 2009)
we also present variants of ASCD for composite problems.
We confirm our theoretical findings by numerical experiments for Lasso and Ridge regression on a synthetic dataset
as well as on the RCV1 (binary) dataset.
Structure of the Paper and Contributions. In Sec. 2 we
review the existing theory for SCD and (i) extend it to the
setting of smooth functions. We present (ii) a novel lower
bound, showing that the complexity estimates for SCD and
UCD can be equal in general. We (iii) introduce ASCD
and the save selection rules for both smooth (Sec. 3) and
to composite functions (Sec. 5). We prove that (iv) ASCD
performs always better than UCD (Sec. 3) and (v) it can
reach the performance of SCD (Sec. 6). In Sec. 4 we discuss important applications where the gradient estimate can
efficiently be maintained. Our theory is supported by nu-

