Random Fourier Features for Kernel Ridge Regression:
Approximation Bounds and Statistical Guarantees
Haim Avron 1 Michael Kapralov 2 Cameron Musco 3
Christopher Musco 3 Ameya Velingker 2 Amir Zandieh 2

Abstract

In the above, K 2 Rn⇥n is the kernel matrix or Gram
matrix defined by Kij ⌘ k(xi , xj ) and y ⌘ [y1 · · · yn ]T is
the vector of responses. The KRR estimator can be derived
by minimizing a regularized square loss objective function
over a hypothesis space defined by the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space associated with k(·, ·); however, the details
are not important for this paper.

Random Fourier features is one of the most popular techniques for scaling up kernel methods,
such as kernel ridge regression. However, despite impressive empirical results, the statistical
properties of random Fourier features are still not
well understood. In this paper we take steps toward filling this gap. Specifically, we approach
random Fourier features from a spectral matrix
approximation point of view, give tight bounds
on the number of Fourier features required to
achieve a spectral approximation, and show how
spectral matrix approximation bounds imply statistical guarantees for kernel ridge regression.

While simple, KRR is a powerful technique that is well
understood statistically and capable of achieving impressive empirical results. Nevertheless, the method has a
key weakness: computing the KRR estimator can be prohibitively expensive for large datasets. Solving (1) generally requires ⇥(n3 ) time and ⇥(n2 ) memory. Thus, the design of scalable methods for KRR (and other kernel based
methods) has been the focus of intensive research in recent
years (Zhang et al., 2015; Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015; Musco
& Musco, 2016; Avron et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Kernel methods constitute a powerful paradigm for devising non-parametric modeling techniques for a wide range
of problems in machine learning. One of the most elementary is Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR). Given training data
(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ) 2 X ⇥ Y, where X ✓ Rd is an input
domain and Y ✓ R is an output domain, a positive definite
kernel function k : X ⇥ X ! R, and a regularization parameter > 0, the response for a given input x is estimated
as:
n
X
f¯(x) ⌘
k(xj , x)↵j
j=1

where ↵ = (↵1 · · · ↵n )T is the solution of the equation
(K + In )↵ = y.

(1)

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences, Tel
Aviv University, Israel 2 School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland 3 Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, USA. Correspondence
to: Haim Avron <haimav@post.tau.ac.il>, Michael Kapralov
<michael.kapralov@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

One of the most popular approaches to scaling up kernel
based methods is random Fourier features sampling, originally proposed by Rahimi & Recht (2007). For shiftinvariant kernels (e.g. the Gaussian kernel), Rahimi &
Recht (2007) presented a distribution D on functions from
X to Cs (s is a parameter) such that for every x, z 2 Rd
k(x, z) = E'⇠D ['(x)⇤ '(z)] .
The idea is to sample ' from D and use k̃(x, z) ⌘
'(x)⇤ '(y) as a surrogate kernel. The resulting approximate KRR estimator can be computed in O(ns2 ) time and
O(ns) memory (see §2.2 for details), giving substantial
computational savings if s ⌧ n.
This approach naturally raises the question: how large
should s be to ensure a high quality estimator? Or, using
the exact KRR estimator as a natural baseline: how large
should s be for the random Fourier features estimator to be
almost as good as the exact KRR estimator? Answering
this question can help us determine when random Fourier
features can be useful, whether the method needs to be improved, and how to go about improving it.
The original random Fourier features analysis (Rahimi
& Recht, 2007) bounds the point-wise distance between

