On the Expressive Power of Deep Neural Networks

Maithra Raghu 1 2 Ben Poole 3 Jon Kleinberg 1 Surya Ganguli 3 Jascha Sohl Dickstein 2

Abstract
We propose a new approach to the problem of
neural network expressivity, which seeks to characterize how structural properties of a neural network family affect the functions it is able to compute. Our approach is based on an interrelated
set of measures of expressivity, unified by the
novel notion of trajectory length, which measures how the output of a network changes as
the input sweeps along a one-dimensional path.
Our findings show that: (1) The complexity of
the computed function grows exponentially with
depth (2) All weights are not equal: trained networks are more sensitive to their lower (initial)
layer weights (3) Trajectory regularization is a
simpler alternative to batch normalization, with
the same performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have proved astoundingly effective
at a wide range of empirical tasks, from image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to playing Go (Silver et al.,
2016), and even modeling human learning (Piech et al.,
2015).
Despite these successes, understanding of how and why
neural network architectures achieve their empirical successes is still lacking. This includes even the fundamental question of neural network expressivity, how the architectural properties of a neural network (depth, width, layer
type) affect the resulting functions it can compute, and its
ensuing performance.
This is a foundational question, and there is a rich history
of prior work addressing expressivity in neural networks.
However, it has been challenging to derive conclusions that
provide both theoretical generality with respect to choices
of architecture as well as meaningful insights into practical
1
Cornell University 2 Google Brain 3 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Maithra Raghu <maithrar@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

performance.
Indeed, the very first results on this question take a highly
theoretical approach, from using functional analysis to
show universal approximation results (Hornik et al., 1989;
Cybenko, 1989), to analysing expressivity via comparisons
to boolean circuits (Maass et al., 1994) and studying network VC dimension (Bartlett et al., 1998). While these
results provided theoretically general conclusions, the shallow networks they studied are very different from the deep
models that have proven so successful in recent years.
In response, several recent papers have focused on understanding the benefits of depth for neural networks (Pascanu et al., 2013; Montufar et al., 2014; Eldan and Shamir,
2015; Telgarsky, 2015; Martens et al., 2013; Bianchini and
Scarselli, 2014). These results are compelling and take
modern architectural changes into account, but they only
show that a specific choice of weights for a deeper network
results in inapproximability by a shallow (typically one or
two hidden layers) network.
In particular, the goal of this new line of work has been
to establish lower bounds — showing separations between
shallow and deep networks — and as such they are based
on hand-coded constructions of specific network weights.
Even if the weight values used in these constructions are
robust to small perturbations (as in (Pascanu et al., 2013;
Montufar et al., 2014)), the functions that arise from these
constructions tend toward extremal properties by design,
and there is no evidence that a network trained on data ever
resembles such a function.
This has meant that a set of fundamental questions about
neural network expressivity has remained largely unanswered. First, we lack a good understanding of the “typical” case rather than the worst case in these bounds for
deep networks, and consequently have no way to evaluate whether the hand-coded extremal constructions provide
a reflection of the complexity encountered in more standard settings. Second, we lack an understanding of upper
bounds to match the lower bounds produced by this prior
work; do the constructions used to date place us near the
limit of the expressive power of neural networks, or are
there still large gaps? Finally, if we had an understanding
of these two issues, we might begin to draw connections
between network expressivity and observed performance.

