Learning Sleep Stages from Radio Signals:
A Conditional Adversarial Architecture
Mingmin Zhao 1 Shichao Yue 1 Dina Katabi 1 Tommi S. Jaakkola 1 Matt T. Bianchi 2

Abstract
We focus on predicting sleep stages from radio
measurements without any attached sensors on
subjects. We introduce a new predictive model
that combines convolutional and recurrent neural networks to extract sleep-specific subjectinvariant features from RF signals and capture
the temporal progression of sleep. A key innovation underlying our approach is a modified adversarial training regime that discards extraneous information specific to individuals or measurement conditions, while retaining all information relevant to the predictive task. We analyze our game theoretic setup and empirically
demonstrate that our model achieves significant
improvements over state-of-the-art solutions.

1. Introduction
Sleep plays a vital role in an individual’s health and wellbeing. Sleep progresses in cycles that involve multiple sleep stages: Awake, Light sleep, Deep sleep and
REM (Rapid Eye Movement). Different stages are associated with different physiological functions. For example, deep sleep is essential for tissue growth, muscle repair,
and memory consolidation, while REM helps procedural
memory and emotional health. At least, 40 million Americans each year suffer from chronic sleep disorders (National Institute of Health). Most sleep disorders can be
managed once they are correctly diagnosed (National Institute of Health). Monitoring sleep stages is beneficial
for diagnosing sleep disorders, and tracking the response
to treatment (Carskadon & Rechtschaffen, 2000).
Prevailing approaches for monitoring sleep stages are inconvenient and intrusive. The medical gold standard relies on Polysomnography (PSG), which is typically conMIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Mingmin Zhao
<mingmin@mit.edu>.

ducted in a hospital or sleep lab, and requires the subject to
wear a plethora of sensors, such as EEG-scalp electrodes,
an ECG monitor, multiple chest bands, and nasal probes.
As a result, patients can experience sleeping difficulties,
which renders the measurements unrepresentative (Herbst,
2010). Furthermore, the cost and discomfort of PSG limit
the potential for long term sleep studies.
Recent advances in wireless systems have demonstrated
that radio technologies can capture physiological signals
without body contact (Kaltiokallio et al., 2014; Adib et al.,
2015; Zhao et al., 2016). These technologies transmit a
low power radio signal (i.e., 1000 times lower power than
a cell phone transmission) and analyze its reflections. They
extract a person’s breathing and heart beats from the radio frequency (RF) signal reflected off her body. Since the
cardio-respiratory signals are correlated with sleep stages,
in principle, one could hope to learn a subject’s sleep stages
by analyzing the RF signal reflected off her body. Such a
system would significantly reduce the cost and discomfort
of today’s sleep staging, and allow for long term sleep stage
monitoring.
There are multiple challenges in realizing the potential
of RF measurements for sleep staging. In particular, we
must learn RF signal features that capture the sleep stages
and their temporal progression, and the features should be
transferable to new subjects and different environments.
The problem is that RF signals carry much information that
is irrelevant to sleep staging, and are highly dependent on
the individuals and the measurement conditions. Specifically, they reflect off all objects in the environment including walls and furniture, and are affected by the subject’s position and distance from the radio device. These challenges
were not addressed in past work which used hand-crafted
signal features to train a classifier (Zaffaroni et al., 2014;
Tataraidze et al., 2016b). The accuracy was relatively low
(∼64%) and the model did not generalize beyond the environment where the measurements were collected.

1

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

This paper presents a new model that delivers a significantly higher accuracy and generalizes well to new environments and subjects. The model adapts a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract stage-specific features from RF spectrograms, and couples it with a recurrent

