Nonparanormal Information Estimation

Shashank Singh 1 Barnabás Póczos 1

Abstract
We study the problem of using i.i.d. samples
from an unknown multivariate probability distribution p to estimate the mutual information of p.
This problem has recently received attention in
two settings: (1) where p is assumed to be Gaussian and (2) where p is assumed only to lie in a
large nonparametric smoothness class. Estimators proposed for the Gaussian case converge in
high dimensions when the Gaussian assumption
holds, but are brittle, failing dramatically when
p is not Gaussian, while estimators proposed for
the nonparametric case fail to converge with realistic sample sizes except in very low dimension.
Hence, there is a lack of robust mutual information estimators for many realistic data. To address this, we propose estimators for mutual information when p is assumed to be a nonparanormal (or Gaussian copula) model, a semiparametric compromise between Gaussian and nonparametric extremes. Using theoretical bounds and
experiments, we show these estimators strike a
practical balance between robustness and scalability.

1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with the problem of estimating
entropy or mutual information of an unknown probability
density p over RD , given n i.i.d. samples from p. Entropy
and mutual information are fundamental information theoretic quantities, and consistent estimators for these quantities have a host of applications within machine learning,
statistics, and signal processing. For example, entropy estimators have been used for goodness-of-fit testing (Goria
et al., 2005), parameter estimation in semi-parametric models (Wolsztynski et al., 2005), texture classification and image registration (Hero et al., 2001; 2002), change point de1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Shashank Singh <sss1@andrew.cmu.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tection (Bercher & Vignat, 2000), and anomaly detection
in networks (Noble & Cook, 2003; Nychis et al., 2008;
Bereziński et al., 2015). Mutual information is a popular nonparametric measure of dependence, whose estimators have been used in feature selection (Peng et al., 2005;
Shishkin et al., 2016), clustering (Aghagolzadeh et al.,
2007), learning graphical models (Chow & Liu, 1968),
fMRI data processing (Chai et al., 2009), prediction of protein structures (Adami, 2004), boosting and facial expression recognition (Shan et al., 2005), and fitting deep nonlinear models (Hunter & Hodas, 2016). Estimators for both
entropy and mutual information have been used in independent component and subspace analysis (Learned-Miller &
Fisher, 2003; Szabó et al., 2007a).
Motivated by these and other applications, several very recent lines of work (discussed in Section 3) have studied
information estimation,1 focusing largely on two settings:
1. Gaussian Setting: If p is known to be Gaussian,
there exist information estimators
 with mean squared error
(MSE) at most −2 log 1 − D
n and an (almost matching)
minimax lower bound of 2D/n (Cai et al., 2015).
2. Nonparametric Setting: If p is assumed to lie in a nonparametric smoothness class, such an s-order2 Hölder or
Sobolev class,
minimax MSE is of asymptotic orn then the 8s o
der  max n−1 , n− 4s+D (Birgé & Massart, 1995).
In the Gaussian setting, consistent estimation is tractable
even in the high-dimensional case where D increases fairly
quickly with n, as long as D/n → 0. However, optimal
estimators for the Gaussian setting rely heavily on the assumption of joint Gaussianity, and their performance can
degrade quickly when the data deviate from Gaussian. Especially in high dimensions, it is unlikely that data are
jointly Gaussian, making these estimators brittle in practice. In the nonparametric setting, the theoretical convergence rate decays exponentially with D, and, it has been
found empirically that information estimators for this setting fail to converge at realistic sample sizes in all but very
low dimensions. Also, most nonparametric estimators are
sensitive to tuning of bandwidth parameters, which is chal1
We will collectively call the closely related problems of entropy and mutual information estimation information estimation.
2
Here, s encodes the degree of smoothness, roughly corresponding to the number of continuous derivatives of p.

