Optimal and Adaptive Off-policy Evaluation in Contextual Bandits

Yu-Xiang Wang 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Miroslav Dudík 2

Abstract
We study the off-policy evaluation problem—
estimating the value of a target policy using data
collected by another policy—under the contextual
bandit model. We consider the general (agnostic)
setting without access to a consistent model of rewards and establish a minimax lower bound on the
mean squared error (MSE). The bound is matched
up to constants by the inverse propensity scoring
(IPS) and doubly robust (DR) estimators. This
highlights the difficulty of the agnostic contextual
setting, in contrast with multi-armed bandits and
contextual bandits with access to a consistent reward model, where IPS is suboptimal. We then
propose the SWITCH estimator, which can use an
existing reward model (not necessarily consistent)
to achieve a better bias-variance tradeoff than IPS
and DR. We prove an upper bound on its MSE
and demonstrate its benefits empirically on a diverse collection of data sets, often outperforming
prior work by orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandits refer to a learning setting where the
learner repeatedly observes a context, takes an action and
observes a reward for the chosen action in the observed
context, but no feedback on any other action. An example is
movie recommendation, where the context describes a user,
actions are candidate movies and the reward measures if the
user enjoys the recommended movie. The learner produces
a policy, meaning a mapping from contexts to actions. A
common question in such settings is, given a target policy,
what is its expected reward? By letting the policy choose
actions (e.g., recommend movies to users), we can compute
its reward. Such online evaluation is typically costly since it
exposes users to an untested experimental policy, and does
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 2 Microsoft Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@cs.cmu.edu>, Alekh Agarwal <alekha@microsoft.com>,
Miroslav Dudík <mdudik@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

not scale to evaluating many different target policies.
Off-policy evaluation is an alternative paradigm for the same
question. Given logs from the existing system, which might
be choosing actions according to a very different logging
policy than the one we seek to evaluate, can we estimate
the expected reward of the target policy? There are three
classes of approaches to address this question: the direct
method (DM), also known as regression adjustment, inverse
propensity scoring (IPS) (Horvitz & Thompson, 1952) and
doubly robust (DR) estimators (Robins & Rotnitzky, 1995;
Bang & Robins, 2005; Dudík et al., 2011; 2014).
Our first goal in this paper is to study the optimality of
these three classes of approaches (or lack thereof), and more
fundamentally, to quantify the statistical hardness of offpolicy evaluation. This problem was previously studied
for multi-armed bandits (Li et al., 2015) and is related to
a large body of work on asymptotically optimal estimators
of average treatment effects (ATE) (Hahn, 1998; Hirano
et al., 2003; Imbens et al., 2007; Rothe, 2016), which can be
viewed as a special case of off-policy evaluation. In both settings, a major underlying assumption is that rewards can be
consistently estimated from the features (i.e., covariates) describing contexts and actions, either via a parametric model
or non-parametrically. Under such consistency assumptions,
it has been shown that DM and/or DR are optimal (Imbens
et al., 2007; Li et al., 2015; Rothe, 2016),1 whereas standard
IPS is not (Hahn, 1998; Li et al., 2015), but it becomes
(asymptotically) optimal when the true propensity scores
are replaced by suitable estimates (Hirano et al., 2003).
Unfortunately, consistency of a reward model can be difficult to achieve in practice. Parametric models tend to suffer
from a large bias (see, e.g., the empirical evaluation of Dudík
et al., 2011) and non-parametric models are limited to small
dimensions, otherwise non-asymptotic terms become too
large (see, e.g., the analysis of non-parametric regression by
Bertin et al., 2004). Therefore, here we ask: What can be
said about hardness of policy evaluation in the absence of
reward-model consistency?
In this pursuit, we provide the first rate-optimal lower bound
on the mean-squared error (MSE) for off-policy evaluation
1

The precise assumptions vary for each estimator, and are
somewhat weaker for DR than for DM.

