Algorithmic Stability and Hypothesis Complexity

Tongliang Liu 1 Gábor Lugosi 2 3 4 Gergely Neu 5 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract
We introduce a notion of algorithmic stability of
learning algorithms—that we term argument stability—that captures stability of the hypothesis
output by the learning algorithm in the normed
space of functions from which hypotheses are selected. The main result of the paper bounds the
generalization error of any learning algorithm in
terms of its argument stability. The bounds are
based on martingale inequalities in the Banach
space to which the hypotheses belong. We apply
the general bounds to bound the performance of
some learning algorithms based on empirical risk
minimization and stochastic gradient descent.

1. Introduction
Many efforts have been made to analyze various notions
of algorithmic stability and prove that a broad spectrum of
learning algorithms are stable in some sense. Intuitively,
a learning algorithm is said to be stable if slight perturbations in the training data result in small changes in the
output of the algorithm, and these changes vanish as the
data set grows bigger and bigger (Bonnans & Shapiro,
2013). For example, Devroye & Wagner (1979), Lugosi
& Pawlak (1994), and Zhang (2003) showed that several
non-parametric learning algorithms are stable; Bousquet &
Elisseeff (2002) proved that `2 regularized learning algorithms are uniformly stable; Wibisono et al. (2009) generalized Bousquet and Elisseeff’s results and proved that regularized learning algorithms with strongly convex penalty
functions on bounded domains, e.g., `p regularized learning algorithms for 1 < p ≤ 2, are also uniformly stable;
1

UBTech Sydney AI Institute, School of IT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia 2 Department of Economics and
Business, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain 3 ICREA,
Pg. Llus Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain 4 Barcelona
Graduate School of Economics 5 AI group, DTIC, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence to:
Tongliang Liu <tliang.liu@gmail.com>, Gábor Lugosi <gabor.lugosi@upf.edu>, Gergely Neu <gergely.neu@gmail.com>,
Dacheng Tao <dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, 2017. JMLR: W&CP. Copyright
2017 by the author(s).

Hardt et al. (2015) showed that parametric models trained
by stochastic gradient descent algorithms are uniformly
stable; and Liu et al. (2017) proved that tasks in multi-task
learning can act as regularizers and that multi-task learning
in a very general setting will therefore be uniformly stable
under mild assumptions.
The notion of algorithmic stability has been an important
tool in deriving theoretical guarantees of the generalization
abilities of learning algorithms. Various notions of stability have been introduced and have been exploited to derive generalization bounds. For some examples, Mukherjee
et al. (2006) proved that a statistical form of leave-one-out
stability is a sufficient and necessary condition for the generalization and learnability of empirical risk minimization
learning algorithms; Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2010) defined
a weaker notion, the so-called “on-average-replace-oneexample stability”, and showed that this condition is both
sufficient and necessary for the generalization and learnability of a general learning setting.
In this paper we study learning algorithms that select a hypothesis (i.e., a function used for prediction) from a certain
fixed class of functions belonging to a separable Banach
space. We introduce a notion of argument stability which
measures the impact of changing a single training example on the hypothesis selected by the learning algorithm.
This notion of stability is stronger than uniform algorithmic stability of Bousquet & Elisseeff (2002) that is only
concerned about the change in the loss but not the hypothesis itself. However, as we will show, the new notion is still
quite natural and holds for a variety of learning algorithms.
On the other hand, it allows one to exploit martingale inequalities (Boucheron et al., 2013) in the Banach space of
the hypotheses. Indeed, the performance bounds we derive
for stable algorithms depend on characteristics related to
the martingale type of the Banach space.
Generalization bounds typically depend on the complexity
of a class of hypotheses that can be chosen by the learning
algorithm. Exploiting the local estimates of the complexity of the predefined hypothesis class is a promising way
to obtain sharp bounds. Building on martingale inequalities in the Banach space of the hypotheses, we define a
subset of the predefined hypothesis class, whose elements
will (or will have a high probability to) be output by a

