Identifying Best Interventions through Online Importance Sampling
Rajat Sen * 1 Karthikeyan Shanmugam * 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
Motivated by applications in computational advertising and systems biology, we consider the
problem of identifying the best out of several
possible soft interventions at a source node V
in an acyclic causal directed graph, to maximize
the expected value of a target node Y (located
downstream of V ). Our setting imposes a fixed
total budget for sampling under various interventions, along with cost constraints on different
types of interventions. We pose this as a best arm
identification bandit problem with K arms where
each arm is a soft intervention at V, and leverage
the information leakage among the arms to provide the first gap dependent error and simple regret bounds for this problem. Our results are a
significant improvement over the traditional best
arm identification results. We empirically show
that our algorithms outperform the state of the
art in the Flow Cytometry data-set, and also apply our algorithm for model interpretation of the
Inception-v3 deep net that classifies images.

1. Introduction
Causal graphs (Pearl, 2009b) are useful for representing
causal relationships among interacting variables in large
systems (Bottou et al., 2013). Over the last few decades,
causal models have found use in computational advertising (Bottou et al., 2013), biological systems (Meinshausen et al., 2016), sociology (Blalock, 1985), agriculture (Splawa-Neyman et al., 1990) and epidemiology (Joffe
et al., 2012). There are two important questions commonly
studied with causal graphs: (i) How to learn a directed
causal graph that encodes the pattern of interaction among
components in a system (casual structure learning)? (Pearl,
2009b) , and (ii) Using previously acquired (partial) knowledge about the causal graph structure, how to estimate
*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Texas at Austin 2 IBM
Thomas J. Watson Research Center. Correspondence to: Rajat
Sen <rajat.sen@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Hidden Variables
Ad inventory

User-Use
Intention

CTR Prediction
Algorithm

UserQu
Query
Ads chosen

Bids Chosen

Predicted Click
Through rate
Pricing
Ad Placement
Design
Actual C
User Clicks

C
Revenue

Figure 1. Computational advertising example borrowed from
(Bottou et al., 2013). Various observable and hidden variables
are shown. The topology of the causal graph is known; however
the strengths of most interactions are unknown. A click-rate scoring algorithm predicts future user click through rates from users’
search queries and the set of ads relevant to the user query chosen from an ad inventory. The algorithm’s output determines the
ads displayed (as well as the display style), and through a complex causal graph, finally determines actual revenue. The part of
the network in bold – distribution of user queries and matching
ad keywords is known (including strengths), and the input output
characteristics of several candidate (randomized) click-rate scoring algorithms are known. The objective is to choose the best
algorithm that maximizes the revenue (target in bold red).

and/or to optimize the effect of a new intervention on other
variables (optimization) (Bottou et al., 2013; Joffe et al.,
2012; Kemmeren et al., 2014; Bonneau et al., 2007; Krouk
et al., 2013)? Here, an intervention is a forcible change to
the value of a variable in a system. The change either alters
the relationship between the parental causes and the variable, or decouples it from the parental causes entirely. Our
focus is on optimizing over a given set of interventions.
An illustrative example includes online advertising (Bottou
et al., 2013), where there is a collection of click-through
rate scoring algorithms that provide an estimate of the probability that an user clicks on an ad displayed at a specific
position. The interventions occur through the choice of
click-through rate scoring algorithm; the algorithm choice
directly impacts ad placement and pricing, and through a
complex network of interactions, affects the revenue generated through advertisements. The revenue is used to determine the best scoring algorithm (optimize for the best
intervention); see Figure 1. Another example is in biological gene-regulatory networks (Bonneau et al., 2007), where
a large number of genomes interact amongst each other and

