Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks

Chelsea Finn 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 2 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
We propose an algorithm for meta-learning that
is model-agnostic, in the sense that it is compatible with any model trained with gradient descent and applicable to a variety of different
learning problems, including classification, regression, and reinforcement learning. The goal
of meta-learning is to train a model on a variety of learning tasks, such that it can solve new
learning tasks using only a small number of training samples. In our approach, the parameters of
the model are explicitly trained such that a small
number of gradient steps with a small amount
of training data from a new task will produce
good generalization performance on that task. In
effect, our method trains the model to be easy
to fine-tune. We demonstrate that this approach
leads to state-of-the-art performance on two fewshot image classification benchmarks, produces
good results on few-shot regression, and accelerates fine-tuning for policy gradient reinforcement
learning with neural network policies.

1. Introduction
Learning quickly is a hallmark of human intelligence,
whether it involves recognizing objects from a few examples or quickly learning new skills after just minutes of
experience. Our artificial agents should be able to do the
same, learning and adapting quickly from only a few examples, and continuing to adapt as more data becomes available. This kind of fast and flexible learning is challenging,
since the agent must integrate its prior experience with a
small amount of new information, while avoiding overfitting to the new data. Furthermore, the form of prior experience and new data will depend on the task. As such,
for the greatest applicability, the mechanism for learning to
learn (or meta-learning) should be general to the task and
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 OpenAI. Correspondence
to: Chelsea Finn <cbfinn@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the form of computation required to complete the task.
In this work, we propose a meta-learning algorithm that
is general and model-agnostic, in the sense that it can be
directly applied to any learning problem and model that
is trained with a gradient descent procedure. Our focus
is on deep neural network models, but we illustrate how
our approach can easily handle different architectures and
different problem settings, including classification, regression, and policy gradient reinforcement learning, with minimal modification. In meta-learning, the goal of the trained
model is to quickly learn a new task from a small amount
of new data, and the model is trained by the meta-learner
to be able to learn on a large number of different tasks.
The key idea underlying our method is to train the model’s
initial parameters such that the model has maximal performance on a new task after the parameters have been updated through one or more gradient steps computed with
a small amount of data from that new task. Unlike prior
meta-learning methods that learn an update function or
learning rule (Schmidhuber, 1987; Bengio et al., 1992;
Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017), our
algorithm does not expand the number of learned parameters nor place constraints on the model architecture (e.g.
by requiring a recurrent model (Santoro et al., 2016) or a
Siamese network (Koch, 2015)), and it can be readily combined with fully connected, convolutional, or recurrent neural networks. It can also be used with a variety of loss functions, including differentiable supervised losses and nondifferentiable reinforcement learning objectives.
The process of training a model’s parameters such that a
few gradient steps, or even a single gradient step, can produce good results on a new task can be viewed from a feature learning standpoint as building an internal representation that is broadly suitable for many tasks. If the internal
representation is suitable to many tasks, simply fine-tuning
the parameters slightly (e.g. by primarily modifying the top
layer weights in a feedforward model) can produce good
results. In effect, our procedure optimizes for models that
are easy and fast to fine-tune, allowing the adaptation to
happen in the right space for fast learning. From a dynamical systems standpoint, our learning process can be viewed
as maximizing the sensitivity of the loss functions of new
tasks with respect to the parameters: when the sensitivity
is high, small local changes to the parameters can lead to

