Identify the Nash Equilibrium in Static Games with Random Payoffs

Yichi Zhou 1 Jialian Li 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
We study the problem on how to learn the pure
Nash Equilibrium of a two-player zero-sum static
game with random payoffs under unknown distributions via efficient payoff queries. We introduce a multi-armed bandit model to this problem
due to its ability to find the best arm efficiently
among random arms and propose two algorithms
for this problem—LUCB-G based on the confidence bounds and a racing algorithm based on
successive action elimination. We provide an
analysis on the sample complexity lower bound
when the Nash Equilibrium exists.

1. Introduction
We consider the static zero-sum game where two players
are involved with finite pure strategies. From game theory, if both players use only pure strategies and the payoffs
are distinct from each other, at most one pure Nash Equilibrium (NE) exists (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994). We
concentrate on the setting where all payoffs are random
variables under some unknown distributions. Samples (or
queries) can be obtained by submitting pure strategies of
the two players and receiving the associated payoffs. Our
target is to answer the questions: (1) whether there is a pure
NE; and 2) how to identify it if exists using as few queries
as possible.
Our motivation for this problem comes from the need of
identifying NE in many practical competitive situations.
Since NE is a fundamental concept in game theory and
many other fields, the computational complexity needed for
NE is of much interest. However, in practice we are often
given access to the data generated from some practical phenomena, rather than a clear rule for the payoffs of the game.
Hence, the empirical game-theoretic analysis (Wellman,
2006; Jordan et al., 2008) has received a lot of attention

to estimate the practical games through simulation. In the
empirical modeling, pure-strategy profiles of players are
submitted to the game and we receive the associated payoffs. Fearnley et al. (2015) consider the process managed
in an online manner by algorithms and analyze the complexity of these payoff-query algorithms. The main focus
is on whether the query methods can figure out mixed Nash
Equilibrium with only a fraction of profiles. Extensions
have been made to obtain query complexity on approximate
Nash Equilibrium (Babichenko, 2016), correlated equilibrium (Hart & Nisan, 2016), and well-supported approximate correlated equilibrium (Goldberg & Roth, 2016).
The above work is essentially a revealed-payoff search
model (Jordan et al., 2008), where payoffs are deterministic
and every profile only needs to be queried at most once. We
concentrate on the noisy-payoff model (Jordan et al., 2008),
where the received payoff of a query is a sample of an underlying distribution. This random payoff setting is more
realistic in practice, where randomness naturally arises because of incomplete information, noise, or other stochastic
factors in the world. A simple but well-known example is
the coin flipping game, where two players throw a coin and
guess its landing upper side. Since the physical process of
coin landing can be determined by many noisy factors, the
payoffs to the two players, which depend on the landing
results, are random. This notable discrepancy leads to different algorithms and complexity bounds for the two models, since for noisy-payoff models, more queries are needed
for any profile to get an estimated payoff near its expectation value with high probability and the additional computational cost can take a dominating role in complexity. Previous work has explored different methods for noisy payoff models, such as interleaving the samples (Walsh et al.,
2003) and using regression for payoffs (Vorobeychik et al.,
2007). This paper turns to bandit models, a relatively natural direction from the view of online learning, since query
methods themselves hold a sequential property. Put another
way, we select a strategy to submit based on previous observations at each round of query methods.

1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab, State Key Lab
for Intell. Tech. & Systems, CBICR Center, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

This task can be viewed as a variant of best arm identification (BAI) in the literature of multi-armed bandits
(Jamieson & Nowak, 2014), where different pure strategy
profiles are regarded as arms. The classical BAI problem
is to identify which arm is the one with the highest mean.

