Cost-Optimal Learning of Causal Graphs
Murat Kocaoglu 1 Alex Dimakis 1 Sriram Vishwanath 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a causal
graph over a set of variables with interventions.
We study the cost-optimal causal graph learning problem: For a given skeleton (undirected
version of the causal graph), design the set of
interventions with minimum total cost, that can
uniquely identify any causal graph with the given
skeleton. We show that this problem is solvable
in polynomial time. Later, we consider the case
when the number of interventions is limited. For
this case, we provide polynomial time algorithms
when the skeleton is a tree or a clique tree. For a
general chordal skeleton, we develop an efficient
greedy algorithm, which can be improved when
the causal graph skeleton is an interval graph.

1. Introduction
Causal inference is important for many applications
including, among others, biology, econometrics and
medicine (Chalupka et al., 2016; Grosse-Wentrup et al.,
2016; Ramsey et al., 2010). Randomized trials are the
golden standard for causal inference since they lead to reliable conclusions with minimal assumptions. The problem
is that enforcing randomization to different variables in a
causal inference problem can have significant and varying
costs. A causal discovery algorithm should take these costs
into account and optimize experiments accordingly.
In this paper we formulate this problem of learning a causal
graph when there is a cost for intervening on each variable. We follow the structural equation modeling framework (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2001) and use interventions, i.e., experiments. To perform each intervention, a
scientist randomizes a set of variables and collects new data
from the perturbed system. For example, suppose the scientist wants to discover the causal graph between a set of
patient features, such as diet and blood sugar, and diabetes.
1

The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Murat Kocaoglu <mkocaoglu@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Suppose she decides to perform an intervention on the diet
variable. This entails forcing the desired dietary restrictions
on a random subset of the participating patients. Next, suppose she decides to perform an intervention on the blood
sugar variable. This intervention requires the scientist to
adjust the blood sugar directly, for example through injection of glucose rather than through diet control. An intervention on the blood sugar is arguably harder to perform
than a dietary restriction. Hence, the blood sugar variable
should be assigned a larger intervention cost than the diet
variable. Performing an intervention on the variable diabetes is impractical and also unethical. Hence it should be
potentially given the cost of infinity.
In this paper we study the following problem: We want to
learn a causal graph where each variable has a cost. For
each intervention set, the cost is the sum of the costs of all
the variables in the set. Total cost is the sum of the costs
of the performed interventions. We would like to learn a
causal graph with the minimum possible total cost.
Our Contributions: This is a natural problem that, to the
best of our knowledge, has not been previously studied except for some special cases as we explain in the related
work section. Our results are as follows:
• We show that the problem of designing the minimum
cost interventions to learn a causal graph can be solved
in polynomial time.
• We study the minimum cost intervention design problem when the number of interventions is limited. We
formulate the cost-optimum intervention design problem as an integer linear program. This formulation allows us to identify two causal graph families for which
the problem can be solved in polynomial time.
• For general graphs, we develop an efficient greedy algorithm. We also propose an improved variant of this
algorithm, which runs in polynomial time when the
skeleton of the causal graph is an interval graph.
Our machinery is graph theoretic. We rely on the connection between graph separating systems and proper colorings. Although this connection was previously discovered,
it does not seem to be widely known in the literature.

