Tensor Decomposition with Smoothness
Masaaki Imaizumi 1 Kohei Hayashi 2 3

Abstract
Real data tensors are typically high dimensional;
however, their intrinsic information is preserved
in low-dimensional space, which motivates the
use of tensor decompositions such as Tucker
decomposition. Frequently, real data tensors
smooth in addition to being low dimensional,
which implies that adjacent elements are similar
or continuously changing. These elements typically appear as spatial or temporal data. We propose smoothed Tucker decomposition (STD) to
incorporate the smoothness property. STD leverages smoothness using the sum of a few basis
functions; this reduces the number of parameters.
An objective function is formulated as a convex
problem, and an algorithm based on the alternating direction method of multipliers is derived to
solve the problem. We theoretically show that,
under the smoothness assumption, STD achieves
a better error bound. The theoretical result and
performances of STD are numerically verified.

1. Introduction
A tensor (i.e., a multi-way array) is a data structure that is a
generalization of a matrix, and it can represent higher-order
relationships. Tensors appear in various applications such
as image analysis (Jia et al., 2014), data mining (Kolda &
Sun, 2008), and medical analysis (Zhou et al., 2013). For
instance, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
records brain activities in each time period as voxels, which
are represented as 4-way tensors (X-axis ⇥ Y-axis ⇥ Z-axis
⇥ time). Frequently, data tensors in the real world contain several missing elements and/or are corrupted by noise,
which leads to the tensor completion problem for predicting missing elements and the tensor recovery problem for
removing noise.
1

Institute of Statistical Mathematics 2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 3 RIKEN. Correspondence to: Masaaki Imaizumi <insou11@hotmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

To solve these problems, the low-rank assumption, i.e.,
given tensor is generated from a small number of latent
factors, is widely used. If the number of observed elements is sufficiently larger than the number of latent factors (i.e., rank) and noise level, we can estimate latent factors and reconstruct the entire structure. The methods of
estimating latent factors are collectively referred to as tensor decompositions. There are several formulations of tensor decompositions such as Tucker decomposition (Tucker,
1966) and the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC(CP) decomposition (Harshman, 1970). While these methods were originally formulated as nonconvex problems, several authors
have studied their convex relaxations in recent years (Liu
et al., 2009; Tomioka et al., 2010; Signoretto et al., 2011;
Gandy et al., 2011).
Another important, yet less explored, assumption is the
smoothness property. Consider fMRI data as a tensor X. As fMRI data are spatiotemporal, each element of X is expected to be similar to its adjacent elements with every way, i.e., xi,j,k,t should be close to
xi±1,j,k,t , xi,j±1,k,t , xi,j,k±1,t , and xi,j,k,t±1 . In statistics,
this kind of smoothness property has been studied through
functional data analysis (Ramsay, 2006; Hsing & Eubank,
2015). Studies show that the smoothness assumption increases sample efficiency, i.e., estimation is more accurate with small sample size. Another advantage is that
the smoothness assumption makes interpolation possible,
i.e., we can impute an unobserved value using its adjacent
observed values. This interpolation ability is particularly
useful for solving a specific tensor completion problem referred to as the tensor interpolation problem, as known as
the “cold-start” problem (Gantner et al., 2010). Suppose
a case in which fMRI tensor X is completely missing at
t = t0 . In this case, standard tensor decompositions cannot
predict missing elements because there is no information
to estimate the latent factor at t = t0 . However, using the
smoothness property, we can estimate the missing elements
from the elements at t = t0 1 and t = t0 + 1.
A fundamental challenge of tensor completion and recovery methods is to analyze their performance. Tomioka et al.
(2011) extensively studied the statistical performance of
low-rank tensor decompositions. On the contrary, the performance of tensor decompositions incorporating smoothness (Yokota et al., 2015b;a; Amini et al., 2013) has never

