Random Feature Expansions for Deep Gaussian Processes

Kurt Cutajar 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 2 Pietro Michiardi 1 Maurizio Filippone 1

Abstract
The composition of multiple Gaussian Processes
as a Deep Gaussian Process (DGP) enables a deep
probabilistic nonparametric approach to flexibly
tackle complex machine learning problems with
sound quantification of uncertainty. Existing inference approaches for DGP models have limited scalability and are notoriously cumbersome
to construct. In this work we introduce a novel
formulation of DGPs based on random feature
expansions that we train using stochastic variational inference. This yields a practical learning framework which significantly advances the
state-of-the-art in inference for DGPs, and enables accurate quantification of uncertainty. We
extensively showcase the scalability and performance of our proposal on several datasets with
up to 8 million observations, and various DGP architectures with up to 30 hidden layers.

1. Introduction
Given their impressive performance on machine learning and pattern recognition tasks, Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) have recently attracted a considerable deal of attention in several applied domains such as computer vision
and natural language processing; see, e.g., LeCun et al.
(2015) and references therein. Deep Gaussian Processes
(DGPs; Damianou & Lawrence, 2013) alleviate the outstanding issue characterizing DNNs of having to specify
the number of units in hidden layers by implicitly working
with infinite representations at each layer. From a generative perspective, DGPs transform the inputs using a cascade of Gaussian Processes (GPs; Rasmussen & Williams,
1

Department of Data Science, EURECOM, France
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia.
Correspondence to:
Kurt Cutajar <kurt.cutajar@eurecom.fr>, Pietro Michiardi
<pietro.michiardi@eurecom.fr>, Edwin V. Bonilla Cutajar <e.bonilla@unsw.edu.au>, Maurizio Filippone <maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2006) such that the output of each layer of GPs forms the
input to the GPs at the next layer, effectively implementing
a deep probabilistic nonparametric model for compositions
of functions (Neal, 1996; Duvenaud et al., 2014).
Because of their probabilistic formulation, it is natural to
approach the learning of DGPs through Bayesian inference
techniques; however, the application of such techniques
to learn DGPs leads to various forms of intractability. A
number of contributions have been proposed to recover
tractability, extending or building upon the literature on approximate methods for GPs. Nevertheless, only few works
leverage one of the key features that arguably make DNNs
so successful, that is being scalable through the use of minibatch-based learning (Hensman & Lawrence, 2014; Dai
et al., 2016; Bui et al., 2016). Even among these works,
there does not seem to be an approach that is truly applicable to large-scale problems, and practical beyond only a
few hidden layers.
In this paper, we develop a practical learning framework for
DGP models that significantly improves the state-of-the-art
on those aspects. In particular, our proposal introduces two
sources of approximation to recover tractability, while (i)
scaling to large-scale problems, (ii) being able to work with
moderately deep architectures, and (iii) being able to accurately quantify uncertainty. The first is a model approximation, whereby the GPs at all layers are approximated using
random feature expansions (Rahimi & Recht, 2008); the
second approximation relies upon stochastic variational inference to retain a probabilistic and scalable treatment of
the approximate DGP model.
We show that random feature expansions for DGP models
yield Bayesian DNNs with low-rank weight matrices, and
the expansion of different covariance functions results in
different DNN activation functions, namely trigonometric
for the Radial Basis Function (RBF) covariance, and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) functions for the ARC - COSINE
covariance. In order to retain a probabilistic treatment of
the model we adapt the work on variational inference for
DNN s and variational autoencoders (Graves, 2011; Kingma
& Welling, 2014) using mini-batch-based stochastic gradient optimization, which can exploit GPU and distributed
computing. In this respect, we can view the probabilistic
treatment of DGPs approximated through random feature

