ProtoNN: Compressed and Accurate kNN for Resource-scarce Devices

Chirag Gupta 1 Arun Sai Suggala 1 2 Ankit Goyal 1 3 Harsha Vardhan Simhadri 1
Bhargavi Paranjape 1 Ashish Kumar 1 Saurabh Goyal 4 Raghavendra Udupa 1 Manik Varma 1
Prateek Jain 1

Abstract
Several real-world applications require real-time
prediction on resource-scarce devices such as an
Internet of Things (IoT) sensor. Such applications demand prediction models with small storage and computational complexity that do not
compromise significantly on accuracy. In this
work, we propose ProtoNN, a novel algorithm
that addresses the problem of real-time and accurate prediction on resource-scarce devices. ProtoNN is inspired by k-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
but has several orders lower storage and prediction complexity. ProtoNN models can be deployed even on devices with puny storage and
computational power (e.g. an Arduino UNO
with 2kB RAM) to get excellent prediction accuracy. ProtoNN derives its strength from three key
ideas: a) learning a small number of prototypes
to represent the entire training set, b) sparse low
dimensional projection of data, c) joint discriminative learning of the projection and prototypes
with explicit model size constraint. We conduct
systematic empirical evaluation of ProtoNN on
a variety of supervised learning tasks (binary,
multi-class, multi-label classification) and show
that it gives nearly state-of-the-art prediction accuracy on resource-scarce devices while consuming several orders lower storage, and using minimal working memory.

1. Introduction
Real-time and accurate prediction on resource-constrained
devices is critical for several Machine Learning (ML) do1

Microsoft Research, India 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh 3 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
4
IIT Delhi, India.
Correspondence to: Arun Sai Suggala <asuggala@andrew.cmu.edu>, Prateek Jain <prajain@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

mains. Internet-of-things (IoT) is one such rapidly growing domain. IoT devices have the potential to provide realtime, local, sensor-based solutions for a variety of areas
like housing, factories, farming, even everyday utilities like
toothbrushes and spoons. The ability to use machine learning on data collected from IoT sensors opens up a myriad
of possibilities. For example, smart factories measure temperature, noise and various other parameters of their machines. ML based anomaly detection models can then be
applied on this sensor data to preemptively schedule maintenance of a machine and avoid failure.
However, machine learning in IoT scenarios is so far limited to cloud-based predictions where large deep learning
models are deployed to provide accurate predictions. The
sensors/embedded devices have limited compute/storage
abilities and are tasked only with sensing and transmitting
data to the cloud. Such a solution does not take into account
several practical concerns like privacy, bandwidth, latency
and battery issues. For example, consider the energy costs
of communication if each IoT device on each machine in
a smart factory has to continuously send data and receive
predictions from the cloud.
Consider a typical IoT device that has ≤ 32kB RAM and
a 16MHz processor. Most existing ML models cannot be
deployed on such tiny devices. Recently, several methods
(Han et al., 2016; Nan et al., 2015; Kusner et al., 2014) have
been proposed to produce models that are compressed compared to large DNN/kernel-SVM/decision-tree based classifiers. However, none of these methods work well at the
scale of IoT devices. Moreover, they do not offer natural
extensions to supervised learning problems other than the
ones they were initially designed for.
In this paper, we propose a novel kNN based algorithm
(ProtoNN) that can be deployed on the tiniest of devices,
can handle general supervised learning problems, and can
produce state-of-the-art accuracies with just ≈16kB of
model size on many benchmark datasets. A key reason for
selecting kNN as the algorithm of choice is due to its generality, ease of implementation on tiny devices, and small
number of parameters to avoid overfitting. However, kNN
suffers from three issues which limit its applicability in

