The Predictron: End-To-End Learning and Planning

David Silver * 1 Hado van Hasselt * 1 Matteo Hessel * 1 Tom Schaul * 1 Arthur Guez * 1 Tim Harley 1
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold 1 David Reichert 1 Neil Rabinowitz 1 Andre Barreto 1 Thomas Degris 1

Abstract
One of the key challenges of artificial intelligence is to learn models that are effective in the
context of planning. In this document we introduce the predictron architecture. The predictron
consists of a fully abstract model, represented by
a Markov reward process, that can be rolled forward multiple “imagined” planning steps. Each
forward pass of the predictron accumulates internal rewards and values over multiple planning depths. The predictron is trained end-toend so as to make these accumulated values accurately approximate the true value function. We
applied the predictron to procedurally generated
random mazes and a simulator for the game of
pool. The predictron yielded significantly more
accurate predictions than conventional deep neural network architectures.

1. Introduction
The central idea of model-based reinforcement learning is
to decompose the RL problem into two subproblems: learning a model of the environment, and then planning with this
model. The model is typically represented by a Markov
reward process (MRP) or decision process (MDP). The
planning component uses this model to evaluate and select among possible strategies. This is typically achieved
by rolling forward the model to construct a value function that estimates cumulative reward. In prior work, the
model is trained essentially independently of its use within
the planner. As a result, the model is not well-matched
with the overall objective of the agent. Prior deep reinforcement learning methods have successfully constructed
models that can unroll near pixel-perfect reconstructions
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London.
Correspondence to: David Silver <davidsilver@google.com>, Hado
van Hasselt <hado@google.com>, Matteo Hessel <mtthss@google.com>, Tom Schaul <schaul@google.com>,
Arthur Guez <aguez@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

(Oh et al., 2015; Chiappa et al., 2016); but are yet to surpass state-of-the-art model-free methods in challenging RL
domains with raw inputs (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016).
In this paper we introduce a new architecture, which we
call the predictron, that integrates learning and planning
into one end-to-end training procedure. At every step, a
model is applied to an internal state, to produce a next
state, reward, discount, and value estimate. This model
is completely abstract and its only goal is to facilitate accurate value prediction. For example, to plan effectively
in a game, an agent must be able to predict the score. If
our model makes accurate predictions, then an optimal plan
with respect to our model will also be optimal for the underlying game – even if the model uses a different state
space (e.g., abstract representations of enemy positions, ignoring their shapes and colours), action space (e.g., highlevel actions to move away from an enemy), rewards (e.g.,
a single abstract step could have a higher value than any
real reward), or even time-step (e.g., a single abstract step
could “jump” the agent to the end of a corridor). All we require is that trajectories through the abstract model produce
scores that are consistent with trajectories through the real
environment. This is achieved by training the predictron
end-to-end, so as to make its value estimates as accurate as
possible.
An ideal model could generalise to many different prediction tasks, rather than overfitting to a single task; and could
learn from a rich variety of feedback signals, not just a
single extrinsic reward. We therefore train the predictron
to predict a host of different value functions for a variety
of pseudo-reward functions and discount factors. These
pseudo-rewards can encode any event or aspect of the environment that the agent may care about, e.g., staying alive
or reaching the next room.
We focus upon the prediction task: estimating value functions in MRP environments with uncontrolled dynamics.
In this case, the predictron can be implemented as a deep
neural network with an MRP as a recurrent core. The predictron unrolls this core multiple steps and accumulates rewards into an overall estimate of value.
We applied the predictron to procedurally generated ran-

