Local-to-Global Bayesian Network Structure Learning

Tian Gao 1 Kshitij Fadnis 1 Murray Campbell 1

Abstract
We introduce a new local-to-global structure
learning algorithm, called graph growing structure learning (GGSL), to learn Bayesian network
(BN) structures. GGSL starts at a (random) node
and then gradually expands the learned structure
through a series of local learning steps. At each
local learning step, the proposed algorithm only
needs to revisit a subset of the learned nodes,
consisting of the local neighborhood of a target, and therefore improves on both memory and
time efficiency compared to traditional global
structure learning approaches. GGSL also improves on the existing local-to-global learning
approaches by removing the need for conflictresolving AND-rules, and achieves better learning accuracy. We provide theoretical analysis
for the local learning step, and show that GGSL
outperforms existing algorithms on benchmark
datasets. Overall, GGSL demonstrates a novel
direction to scale up BN structure learning while
limiting accuracy loss.

1. Introduction
Bayesian networks have been used in classification (Aliferis et al., 2010), feature selection (Gao et al., 2015), latent
variable discovery (Lazic et al., 2013; Gao & Ji, 2016a),
and knowledge discovery (Spirtes et al., 1999; Gao & Ji,
2015) in various domains (Ott et al., 2004). However, due
to its NP-hard nature (Chickering et al., 2012), exact BN
structure learning on directed acyclic graphs (DAG) faces
scalability issues.
In this paper, we consider a local-to-global approach to
learn the Bayesian network structure, starting from the local graph structure of one node and then gradually expanding the graph based on already learned structures.
1

IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown
Heights, NY 10598 USA. Correspondence to: Tian Gao
<tgao@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The predominant exact score-based structure learning algorithms adopt the global approach and focus on better scoring criteria (Acid et al., 2005; Brenner & Sontag, 2013) or more efficient search procedures (Chickering, 2002; Koivisto & Sood, 2004; Silander & Myllymaki,
2006; Jaakkola et al., 2010; Cussens, 2011; Yuan & Malone, 2013) to navigate the intractable search space of possible directed acyclic graphs over all the variables present.
Despite such progress, the practical usage of these algorithms is still limited when there are large numbers of variables. Many approximations (Scanagatta et al., 2015), constraints (de Campos et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2016), and
assumptions (Nie et al., 2014) are utilized to alleviate time
and memory complexity.
Instead of searching the entire DAG space for all the variables at the same time, the local-to-global approach limits the size of the space by learning a local structure with
only a limited number of variables. These variables consists of potential candidates for local structures, usually defined by the parent-child (PC) or the Markov Blanket (MB)
(Pearl, 1988) set of a target node in a DAG. Many local
learning algorithms (Koller & Sahami, 1996; Tsamardinos et al., 2003; Fu & Desmarais, 2008) iteratively query
new variables to update and learn the local structure, either PC, MB set or both, for one specific target variable.
Many constraint-based and score-based local learning algorithms have been proposed and shown to have promising performances in practice (Aliferis et al., 2010). Using
learned local structures, some prior works have proposed to
combine the local structures for the global structure. Several works (Margaritis & Thrun, 1999; Pellet & Ellisseeff,
2008) have proposed algorithms to identify MBs of every node in the graph first, and then connect the MBs in
a maximally consistent way to learn the global structure
of a BN. Both constraint-based (Tsamardinos et al., 2006)
and score-based local-to-global structure learning methods
(Niinimaki & Parviainen, 2012) have been proposed. This
local-to-global approach has the benefit of improving the
exact structure learning efficiency, as at each step only a
small number of variables are expected to be used, although
the accuracy has not been very competitive.
We aim to improve the accuracy of the local-to-global approach and propose a new local-to-global structure learning
algorithm. The algorithm starts the local learning at one

