Faster Principal Component Regression
and Stable Matrix Chebyshev Approximation

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu * 1 Yuanzhi Li * 2

Abstract
We solve principal component regression (PCR),
up to a multiplicative accuracy 1+γ, by reducing
e −1 ) black-box calls of ridge
the problem to O(γ
regression. Therefore, our algorithm does not require any explicit construction of the top principal components, and is suitable for large-scale
PCR instances. In contrast, previous result ree −2 ) such black-box calls. We obtain
quires O(γ
this result by developing a general stable recurrence formula for matrix Chebyshev polynomials, and a degree-optimal polynomial approximation to the matrix sign function. Our techniques
may be of independent interests, especially when
designing iterative methods.

1

Introduction

In machine learning and statistics, it is often desirable to
represent a large-scale dataset in a more tractable, lowerdimensional form, without losing too much information.
One of the most robust ways to achieve this goal is through
principal component projection (PCP):
PCP: project vectors onto the span of the top principal components of the a matrix.
It is well-known that PCP decreases noise and increases efficiency in downstream tasks. One of the main applications
is principal component regression (PCR):
PCR: linear regression but restricted to the subspace of top principal components.
Classical algorithms for PCP or PCR rely on a principal
component analysis (PCA) solver to recover the top principal components first; with these components available, the

tasks of PCP and PCR become trivial because the projection matrix can be constructed explicitly.
Unfortunately, PCA solvers demand a running time that
at least linearly scales with the number of top principal
components chosen for the projection. For instance, to
project a vector onto the top 1000 principal components of
a high-dimensional dataset, even the most efficient Krylovbased (Musco & Musco, 2015) or Lanczos-based (AllenZhu & Li, 2016a) methods require a running time that is
proportional to 1000 × 40 = 4 × 104 times the input matrix
sparsity, if the Krylov or Lanczos method is executed for
40 iterations. This is usually computationally intractable.
1.1

Approximating PCP Without PCA

In this paper, we propose the following notion of PCP ap0
proximation. Given a data matrix A ∈ Rd ×d (with singular values no greater than 1) and a threshold λ > 0, we
say that an algorithm solves (γ, ε)-approximate PCP if —
informally speaking and up to a multiplicative 1±ε error—
it projects (see Def. 3.1 for a formal definition)


1. eigenvector ν of A> A with value in λ(1 + γ), 1 to ν,


2. eigenvector ν of A> A with value in 0, λ(1 − γ) to ~0,

3. eigenvector ν of A> A with value in λ(1 − γ), λ(1 +

γ) to “anywhere between ~0 and ν.”
Such a definition also extends to (γ, ε)-approximate PCR
(see Def. 3.2).
It was first noticed by Frostig et al. (Frostig et al., 2016)
that approximate PCP and PCR be solved with a running
time independent of the number of principal components
above threshold λ. More specifically, they reduced (γ, ε)approximate PCP and PCR to

O γ −2 log(1/ε) black-box calls of
any ridge regression subroutine

*

Equal contribution . Future version of this paper shall
be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.04773.
1
Microsoft Reseaerch 2 Princeton University. Correspondence
to: Zeyuan Allen-Zhu <zeyuan@csail.mit.edu>, Yuanzhi Li
<yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

where each call computes (A> A + λI)−1 u for some vector u.1 Our main focus of this paper is to quadratically
improve this performance and reduce PCP and PCR to
1
Ridge regression is often considered as an easy-to-solve machine learning problem: using for instance SVRG (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013), one can usually solve ridge regression to an 10−8
accuracy with at most 40 passes of the data.

