Count-Based Exploration with Neural Density Models
Georg Ostrovski 1 Marc G. Bellemare 1 Aäron van den Oord 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
Bellemare et al. (2016) introduced the notion of
a pseudo-count, derived from a density model,
to generalize count-based exploration to nontabular reinforcement learning. This pseudocount was used to generate an exploration bonus
for a DQN agent and combined with a mixed
Monte Carlo update was sufficient to achieve
state of the art on the Atari 2600 game Montezuma’s Revenge. We consider two questions
left open by their work: First, how important is
the quality of the density model for exploration?
Second, what role does the Monte Carlo update
play in exploration? We answer the first question
by demonstrating the use of PixelCNN, an advanced neural density model for images, to supply a pseudo-count. In particular, we examine the
intrinsic difficulties in adapting Bellemare et al.’s
approach when assumptions about the model are
violated. The result is a more practical and general algorithm requiring no special apparatus. We
combine PixelCNN pseudo-counts with different
agent architectures to dramatically improve the
state of the art on several hard Atari games. One
surprising finding is that the mixed Monte Carlo
update is a powerful facilitator of exploration in
the sparsest of settings, including Montezuma’s
Revenge.

1. Introduction
Exploration is the process by which an agent learns about
its environment. In the reinforcement learning framework,
this involves reducing the agent’s uncertainty about the
environment’s transition dynamics and attainable rewards.
From a theoretical perspective, exploration is now wellunderstood (e.g. Strehl & Littman, 2008; Jaksch et al.,
2010; Osband et al., 2016), and Bayesian methods have
1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Georg Ostrovski <ostrovski@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

been successfully demonstrated in a number of settings
(Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Guez et al., 2012). On the
other hand, practical algorithms for the general case remain
scarce; fully Bayesian approaches are usually intractable in
large state spaces, and the count-based method typical of
theoretical results is not applicable in the presence of value
function approximation.
Recently, Bellemare et al. (2016) proposed the notion of
pseudo-count as a reasonable generalization of the tabular setting considered in the theory literature. The pseudocount is defined in terms of a density model ρ trained on
the sequence of states experienced by an agent:
N̂(x) = ρ(x)n̂(x),
where n̂(x) can be thought of as a total pseudo-count computed from the model’s recoding probability ρ0 (x), the
probability of x computed immediately after training on
x. As a practical application the authors used the pseudocounts derived from the simple CTS density model (Bellemare et al., 2014) to incentivize exploration in Atari 2600
agents. One of the main outcomes of their work was substantial empirical progress on the infamously hard game
M ONTEZUMA’ S R EVENGE.
Their method critically hinged on several assumptions
regarding the density model: 1) the model should be
learning-positive, i.e. the probability assigned to a state x
should increase with training; 2) it should be trained online, using each sample exactly once; and 3) the effective
model step-size should decay at a rate of n−1 . Part of their
empirical success also relied on a mixed Monte Carlo/QLearning update rule, which permitted fast propagation of
the exploration bonuses.
In this paper, we set out to answer several research questions related to these modelling choices and assumptions:
1. To what extent does a better density model give rise to
better exploration?
2. Can the above modelling assumptions be relaxed
without sacrificing exploration performance?
3. What role does the mixed Monte Carlo update play in
successfully incentivizing exploration?

