Relative Fisher Information and Natural Gradient for Learning Large
Modular Models
Ke Sun 1 Frank Nielsen 2 3

Abstract
Fisher information and natural gradient provided
deep insights and powerful tools to artificial neural networks. However related analysis becomes
more and more difficult as the learner’s structure
turns large and complex. This paper makes a preliminary step towards a new direction. We extract
a local component from a large neural system,
and define its relative Fisher information metric
that describes accurately this small component,
and is invariant to the other parts of the system.
This concept is important because the geometry
structure is much simplified and it can be easily
applied to guide the learning of neural networks.
We provide an analysis on a list of commonly
used components, and demonstrate how to use
this concept to further improve optimization.

1. Fisher Information Metric
The Fisher Information Metric (FIM) I(Θ) = (Iij ) of a
statistical parametric model p(x | Θ) of order D is defined
by a D × D positive semidefinite
(psd)
i matrix (I(Θ)  0)
h
∂l ∂l
with coefficients Iij = Ep ∂Θi ∂Θj , where l(Θ) denotes
the log-density function log p(x | Θ). Under light regularity conditions, FIM can be rewritten equivalently as

Iij = −Ep

2

∂ l
∂Θi ∂Θj



Z
=4

∂

p

p(x | Θ) ∂
∂Θi

p

p(x | Θ)
dx.
∂Θj

As its empirical counterpart, the observed FIM (Efron &
Hinkley, 1978) with respect to (wrt) a sample set Xn =
{xk }nk=1 is Î(Θ | Xn ) = −∇2 l(Θ | Xn ), which is often evaluated at the maximum likelihood estimate Θ =
Θ̂(Xn ). By the law of large numbers, Î(Θ) converges to
the (expected) FIM I(Θ) as n → ∞.
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia 2 École Polytechnique, France
3
Sony Computer Science Laboratories Inc., Japan.
Correspondence to: Ke Sun <sunk@ieee.org>, Frank Nielsen
<Frank.Nielsen@acm.org>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The FIM is not invariant and depends on the parameterization. We can optionally write I(Θ) as IΘ (Θ) to emphasize the coordinate system. By definition, IΘ (Θ) =
∂Λi
is the JacoJ | IΛ (Λ)J where J = (Jij ), Jij = ∂Θ
j
bian matrix. For example, the FIM of regular natural exponential families (NEFs) l(Θ) = Θ| t(x) − F (Θ) (loglinear models with sufficient statistics t(x)) is I(Θ) =
∇2 F (Θ)  0, the Hessian of the log-normalizer function
F (Θ). Although exponential families can approximate arbitrarily any smooth density (Cobb et al., 1983), the lognormalizer function may not be available in closed-form
nor computationally tractable (Montanari, 2015).
The FIM is an important concept for statistical machine
learning. It gives a Riemannian metric (Hotelling, 1929;
Rao, 1945) of the learning parameter space which is
unique (Čencov, 1982; Dowty, 2017). Hence any learning is in a space that is intrinsically curved based on the
FIM, regardless of the choice of the coordinate system. It
also gives a bound (Fréchet, 1943; Cramér, 1946; Nielsen,
2013) of learning efficiency saying that the variance of any
unbiased learning of Θ is at least I −1 (Θ)/n, where n is
the i.i.d. sample size. The FIM is applied to neural network
optimization (Amari, 1997), metric learning (Lebanon,
2005), reinforcement learning (Thomas, 2014) and manifold learning (Sun & Marchand-Maillet, 2014).
However computing the FIM is expensive. Besides the fact
that learning machines have often singularities (Watanabe,
2009) (|I(Θ)| = 0, not full rank) characterized by plateaux
in gradient learning, computing/estimating the FIM of a
large neuron system (e.g. one with millions of parameters,
Szegedy, Christian et al. 2015) is very challenging due to
the finiteness of data, and the huge number D(D+1)
of ma2
trix coefficients to evaluate. Furthermore, gradient descent
techniques require inverting this large matrix and tuning the
learning rate.
To tackle this problem, past works mainly focus on how
to approximate the FIM with a block diagonal form (Kurita, 1994; Le Roux et al., 2008; Martens, 2010; Pascanu &
Bengio, 2014; Martens & Grosse, 2015) or quasi-diagonal
form (Ollivier, 2013; Marceau-Caron & Ollivier, 2016).
This global approach faces increasing approximation error
and increasing computational cost as the system scales up

