End-to-End Learning for Structured Prediction Energy Networks
David Belanger 1 Bishan Yang 2 Andrew McCallum 1

Abstract
Structured Prediction Energy Networks (SPENs)
are a simple, yet expressive family of structured prediction models (Belanger & McCallum, 2016). An energy function over candidate
structured outputs is given by a deep network,
and predictions are formed by gradient-based
optimization. This paper presents end-to-end
learning for SPENs, where the energy function
is discriminatively trained by back-propagating
through gradient-based prediction. In our experience, the approach is substantially more accurate than the structured SVM method of Belanger & McCallum (2016), as it allows us to
use more sophisticated non-convex energies. We
provide a collection of techniques for improving
the speed, accuracy, and memory requirements
of end-to-end SPENs, and demonstrate the power
of our method on 7-Scenes image denoising and
CoNLL-2005 semantic role labeling tasks. In
both, inexact minimization of non-convex SPEN
energies is superior to baseline methods that use
simplistic energy functions that can be minimized exactly.

1. Introduction
In a variety of application domains, given an input x we
seek to predict a structured output y. For example, given
a noisy image, we predict a clean version of it, or given
a sentence we predict its semantic structure. Often, it is
insufficient to employ a feed-forward predictor y = F (x),
since this may have prohibitive sample complexity, fail to
model global interactions among outputs, or fail to enforce
hard output constraints. Instead, it can be advantageous to
define the prediction function implicitly in terms of energy
1

University of Massachusetts, Amherst 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: David Belanger <belanger@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

minimization (LeCun et al., 2006):
ŷ = arg miny Ex (y),

(1)

where Ex (·) depends on x and learned parameters.
This approach includes factor graphs (Kschischang et al.,
2001), e.g., conditional random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001), and many recurrent neural networks
(Sec. 2.1). Output constraints can be enforced using
constrained optimization. Compared to feed-forward approaches, energy-based approaches often provide better opportunities to inject prior knowledge about likely outputs
and often have more parsimonious models. On the other
hand, energy-based prediction requires non-trivial search in
the exponentially-large space of outputs, and search techniques often need to be designed on a case-by-case basis.
Structured prediction energy networks (SPENs) (Belanger
& McCallum, 2016) help reduce these concerns. They
can capture high-arity interactions among components of
y that would lead to intractable factor graphs and provide
a mechanism for automatic structure learning. This is accomplished by expressing the energy function in Eq. (1)
as a deep architecture and forming predictions by approximately optimizing y using gradient descent.
While providing the expressivity and generality of deep
networks, SPENs also maintain the useful semantics of energy functions: domain experts can design architectures to
capture known properties of the data, energy functions can
be combined additively, and we can perform constrained
optimization over y. Most importantly, SPENs provide
for black-box interaction with the energy, via forward and
back-propagation. This allows practitioners to explore a
wide variety of models without the need to hand-design
corresponding prediction methods.
Belanger & McCallum (2016) train SPENs using a structured SVM (SSVM) loss (Taskar et al., 2004; Tsochantaridis et al., 2004) and achieve competitive performance
on simple multi-label classification tasks. Unfortunately,
we have found it difficult to extend their method to more
complex domains. SSVMs are unreliable when exact energy minimization is intractable, as loss-augmented inference may fail to discover margin violations (Sec. 2.3).
In response, we present end-to-end training of SPENs,

