Latent Feature Lasso
Ian E.H. Yen 1 Wei-Cheng Lee 2 Sung-En Chang 2 Arun S. Suggala 1 Shou-De Lin 2 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
The latent feature model (LFM), proposed in
(Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2005), but possibly
with earlier origins, is a generalization of a mixture model, where each instance is generated not
from a single latent class but from a combination of latent features. Thus, each instance has
an associated latent binary feature incidence vector indicating the presence or absence of a feature. Due to its combinatorial nature, inference
of LFMs is considerably intractable, and accordingly, most of the attention has focused on nonparametric LFMs, with priors such as the Indian
Buffet Process (IBP) on infinite binary matrices.
Recent efforts to tackle this complexity either
still have computational complexity that is exponential, or sample complexity that is high-order
polynomial w.r.t. the number of latent features.
In this paper, we address this outstanding problem of tractable estimation of LFMs via a novel
atomic-norm regularization, which gives an algorithm with polynomial run-time and sample complexity without impractical assumptions on the
data distribution.

1. Introduction
Latent variable models are widely used in unsupervised
learning, in part because they provide compact and interpretable representations of the distribution over the observed data. The most common and simplest such latent
variable model is a mixture model, which associates each
observed object with a latent class. However, in many
real-world applications, observations are better described
by a combination of latent features than a single latent
class. Accordingly, admixture or mixed membership models have been proposed (Airoldi et al., 2014), that in the
simplest settings, assign each object to a convex combi1

Carnegie Mellon University, U.S.A. 2 National Taiwan
University, Taiwan.
Correspondence to: Ian E.H. Yen
<eyan@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

nation of latent classes. For instance, a document object
could be modeled as a convex combination of topic objects. There are many settings however where a convex
combination might be too restrictive, and the objects are
better modeled as simply a collection of latent classes. An
example is web image, which can often described by multiple tags rather than a single class, or even by a convex
combination of tag objects. Another example is the model
of user, who might have multiple interests in the context of
a recommendation system, or be involved in multiple communities in a social network. With such settings in mind,
(Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2005) proposed a latent feature
model (LFM), where each observed object can be represented by a binary vector that indicates the presence or absence of each of a collection of latent features. Their proposed model extended earlier models with a similar flavor
for specialized settings, such as (Ueda & Saito, 2003) for
bag of words models for text. The latent feature model
can also be connected to sparse PCA models (d’Aspremont
et al., 2007; Jolliffe et al., 2003) by considering a pointwise product of the binary feature incidence vector with
another real-valued vector. As (Griffiths & Ghahramani,
2005) showed, LFM handily outperforms clustering as an
efficient and interpretable data representation, particularly
in settings where the object can be naturally represented as
a collection of latent features or parts.
However, the estimation (inference) of an LFM from data
is difficult, due to the combinatorial nature of the binary
feature incidence vectors. Indeed, with N samples, and K
latent features, the number of possible binary matrices consisting of the N binary feature incidence vectors is 2N K .
And not in the least, the log-likelihood of LFM is not a
concave function of its parameters.
Given that the finite feature case seems intractable, right
from the outset, attention has focused on the nonparametric infinite feature case, where a prior known as the Indian
Buffet Process (IBP) has been proposed for the infinite binary matrices consisting of the feature incidence vectors
given infinite set of latent features (Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2011). While the IBP prior provides useful structure,
inference remains a difficult problem, and in practice, one
often relies on local search methods (Broderick et al., 2013)
to find an estimate of parameters, or employ Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Doshi-Velez & Ghahramani, 2009)

