Estimating the unseen from multiple populations

Aditi Raghunathan 1 Gregory Valiant 1 James Zou 1 2

Abstract
Given samples from a distribution, how many
new elements should we expect to find if we continue sampling this distribution? This is an important and actively studied problem, with many
applications ranging from unseen species estimation to genomics. We generalize this extrapolation and related unseen estimation problems to
the multiple population setting, where population
j has an unknown distribution Dj from which we
observe nj samples. We derive an optimal estimator for the total number of elements we expect
to find among new samples across the populations. Surprisingly, we prove that our estimator’s
accuracy is independent of the number of populations. We also develop an efficient optimization algorithm to solve the more general problem
of estimating multi-population frequency distributions. We validate our methods and theory
through extensive experiments. Finally, on a real
dataset of human genomes across multiple ancestries, we demonstrate how our approach for
unseen estimation can enable cohort designs that
can discover interesting mutations with greater
efficiency.

1. Introduction
Given samples from a distribution, many settings in machine learning and statistics involves estimating properties
of the unseen portion of the distribution, i.e. elements in
the support of the distribution that are not observed in the
samples collected so far. One important example of estimating the unseen is the problem of predicting the number
of distinct new elements in additional samples collected.
This question is famously illustrated by the case of Corbet’s
butterflies. Alexander Corbet was a British naturalist who
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 2 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub,
San Francisco, CA. Correspondence to: Aditi Raghunathan <aditir@stanford.edu>, Gregory Valiant <valiant@stanford.edu>,
James Zou <jamesz@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

spent two years in Malaya trapping butterflies. He found
118 rare species of butterflies for which he found only one
specimen, another 74 species with two specimens, 44 with
three specimens, etc. Corbet was naturally interested in
the butterflies that are heretofore unseen. In particular, he
wanted to estimate how many distinct new species of butterflies he can expect to discover if he were to conduct a
new expedition to Malaya—such an estimate could help
determine whether a new experiment is warranted. GoodToulmin, extending earlier work of Ronald Fisher, came
up with the remarkable estimate that the number of new
species Corbet can expect to find is simply the alternating sum 118 - 74 + 44 - ... The Good-Toulmin estimator
sparked the investigation into how to estimate the discovery rate of new elements and this remains an active area of
research. Estimating the discovery rate has many important
applications beyond the original species collection setting.
In genomics, for example, an important question is: given
the genetic variation already identified in the genomes of
individuals from some population (say, East Asia), how
many additional mutations do we expect to find by sequencing the genomes of additional individuals from East
Asia. An accurate answer to this question can improve the
cohort design of new population sequencing experiments.
Predicting the number of new elements is a particular instance of estimating the unseen. In other applications, one
may want to estimate different statistics that also depend on
the currently unobserved elements. For example, one may
want to predict how many new elements will be observed
at least twice (for reproducibility) or at most three times (if
the focus is on rare elements). More generally, one may
want to estimate the histogram of the underlying distribution, which summarizes the frequency distribution of all the
elements (see Sec. 2 for precise definition) and from which
these other statistics can be derived.
The unseen estimation literature has focused on the setting
where there is a single distribution which generate current
samples as well as any future samples. In practice, we
often have multiple distinct distributions and we observe
varying number of samples from each distribution. In the
genomics example above, in addition to sequencing data
from East Asians, we also have genome sequences of individuals from Europe, Africa, etc. The relevant question
is: given we currently have the genomes of ni individuals

