Neural Episodic Control

Alexander Pritzel 1
Benigno Uria 1
Sriram Srinivasan 1
1
1
Demis Hassabis Daan Wierstra Charles Blundell 1

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning methods attain
super-human performance in a wide range of environments. Such methods are grossly inefficient,
often taking orders of magnitudes more data than
humans to achieve reasonable performance. We
propose Neural Episodic Control: a deep reinforcement learning agent that is able to rapidly
assimilate new experiences and act upon them.
Our agent uses a semi-tabular representation of
the value function: a buffer of past experience containing slowly changing state representations and
rapidly updated estimates of the value function.
We show across a wide range of environments
that our agent learns significantly faster than other
state-of-the-art, general purpose deep reinforcement learning agents.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning agents have achieved state-ofthe-art results in a variety of complex environments (Mnih
et al., 2015; 2016), often surpassing human performance (Silver et al., 2016). Although the final performance
of these agents is impressive, these techniques usually require several orders of magnitude more interactions with
their environment than a human in order to reach an equivalent level of expected performance. For example, in the
Atari 2600 set of environments (Bellemare et al., 2013),
deep Q-networks (Mnih et al., 2016) require more than 200
hours of gameplay in order to achieve scores similar to those
a human player achieves after two hours (Lake et al., 2016).
The glacial learning speed of deep reinforcement learning
has several plausible explanations and in this work we focus
on addressing these:
1. Stochastic gradient descent optimisation requires the use
of small learning rates. Due to the global approximation
nature of neural networks, high learning rates cause catastrophic interference (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). Low
1
Deepmind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Alexander
Pritzel <apritzel@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Adrià Puigdomènech Badia 1

Oriol Vinyals 1

learning rates mean that experience can only be incorporated into a neural network slowly.
2. Environments with a sparse reward signal can be difficult
for a neural network to model as there may be very few
instances where the reward is non-zero. This can be viewed
as a form of class imbalance where low-reward samples
outnumber high-reward samples by an unknown number.
Consequently, the neural network disproportionately underperforms at predicting larger rewards, making it difficult for
an agent to take the most rewarding actions.
3. Reward signal propagation by value-bootstrapping techniques, such as Q-learning, results in reward information
being propagated one step at a time through the history of
previous interactions with the environment. This can be
fairly efficient if updates happen in reverse order in which
the transitions occur. However, in order to train on uncorrelated minibatches DQN-style, algorithms train on randomly
selected transitions, and, in order to further stabilise training,
require the use of a slowly updating target network further
slowing down reward propagation.
In this work we shall focus on addressing the three concerns listed above; we must note, however, that other recent
advances in exploration (Osband et al., 2016), hierarchical
reinforcement learning (Vezhnevets et al., 2016) and transfer learning (Rusu et al., 2016; Fernando et al., 2017) also
make substantial contributions to improving data efficiency
in deep reinforcement learning over baseline agents.
In this paper we propose Neural Episodic Control (NEC),
a method which tackles the limitations of deep reinforcement learning listed above and demonstrates dramatic improvements on the speed of learning for a wide range of
environments. Critically, our agent is able to rapidly latch
onto highly successful strategies as soon as they are experienced, instead of waiting for many steps of optimisation
(e.g., stochastic gradient descent) as is the case with DQN
(Mnih et al., 2015) and A3C (Mnih et al., 2016).
Our work is in part inspired by the hypothesised role of the
Hippocampus in decision making (Lengyel & Dayan, 2007;
Blundell et al., 2016) and also by recent work on one-shot
learning (Vinyals et al., 2016) and learning to remember
rare events with neural networks (Kaiser et al., 2016). Our
agent uses a semi-tabular representation of its experience
of the environment possessing several of the features of
episodic memory such as long term memory, sequentiality,

