SPLICE: Fully Tractable Hierarchical Extension of ICA with Pooling

Jun-ichiro Hirayama 1 2 Aapo Hyvärinen 3 4 Motoaki Kawanabe 2 1

Abstract
We present a novel probabilistic framework for
a hierarchical extension of independent component analysis (ICA), with a particular motivation in neuroscientific data analysis and modeling. The framework incorporates a general subspace pooling with linear ICA-like layers stacked
recursively. Unlike related previous models, our
generative model is fully tractable: both the likelihood and the posterior estimates of latent variables can readily be computed with analytically
simple formulae. The model is particularly simple in the case of complex-valued data since
the pooling can be reduced to taking the modulus of complex numbers. Experiments on electroencephalography (EEG) and natural images
demonstrate the validity of the method.

1. Introduction
Linear component analysis and pooling are two fundamental concepts of unsupervised representation or feature
learning on continuous-valued data. The basic method for
linear decomposition is independent component analysis
(ICA) (Hyvärinen et al., 2001b) or sparse coding. Pooling
originates from computational models of “complex cells”
in the visual cortex (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962; Adelson &
Bergen, 1985), which typically takes the sum of squares
of components or neuronal outputs (L2 -pooling) to achieve
invariances in higher features. The combination of the two
concepts have so far found many applications, including
advanced image recognition by deep neural networks.
In the present study, we focus on applications of great
current interest related to neuroscience/engineering, such
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP),
Tokyo, Japan 2 Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR), Kyoto, Japan 3 Department of Computer Science and HIIT, University of Helsinki, Finland 4 Gatsby
Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, UK. Correspondence to: Jun-ichiro Hirayama <junichiro.hirayama@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

as electro- or magneto-encephalography (EEG/MEG) signal analysis and natural image statistics (Hyvärinen et al.,
2009). Related previous studies have longly attempted to
combine together linear component analysis and pooling
and further built them up to hierarchical probabilistic models (Hyvärinen & Hoyer, 2000; Hyvärinen et al., 2001a;
Valpola et al., 2004; Karklin & Lewicki, 2005; Shan et al.,
2006; Onton & Makeig, 2009; Cadieu & Olshausen, 2012;
Hirayama et al., 2015; Hosoya & Hyvärinen, 2015), among
which one of the earliest combination of ICA with pooling was independent subspace analysis (ISA) (Hyvärinen
& Hoyer, 2000). A more general energy-based modeling
(EBM) framework (e.g., Osindero et al., 2006; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Köster & Hyvärinen, 2010; Ngiam
et al., 2011) has also been popularly used. These developments were somewhat parallel with the rise of general
unsupervised deep learning techniques (see, e.g., Bengio
et al., 2013, for review), while those neuroscientific applications specifically seek simple explanations and interpretations of data, and even two- or three-layer architectures
have been of practical relevance.
However, related previous models were highly intractable,
and they necessarily resorted to approximative or nonconventional methods, e.g., for learning and inference.
Such a lack of theoretical transparency, as well as the computational difficulties associated, has hindered their extensive applications and further developments. Specifically,
hierarchical generative models usually need approximations or numerical methods to evaluate the posterior estimates on latent variables or the likelihood (Bengio et al.,
2013); EBM may avoid approximate posterior computation, while being still hampered by an intractable partition function (normalizing constant) to compute the likelihood. Conventional maximum likelihood (ML) estimation
is thus not easily applicable in both types of models. In
practice, simply stacking together ICA/ISA models trained
layerwise, or with fixed lower layers, has often been used
as an alternative (e.g., Shan et al., 2006; Onton & Makeig,
2009; Le et al., 2011; Cadieu & Olshausen, 2012; Hosoya
& Hyvärinen, 2015) although its theoretical underpinning
is rather unclear.
Here, we present a simple, fully tractable statistical framework for a hierarchical extension of ICA with an intrinsic pooling mechanism. We will refer to the framework as

