Multi-objective Bandits: Optimizing the Generalized Gini Index
Róbert Busa-Fekete 1 Balázs Szörényi 2 3 Paul Weng 4 5 Shie Mannor 3

Abstract
We study the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem
where the agent receives a vectorial feedback that
encodes many possibly competing objectives to
be optimized. The goal of the agent is to find
a policy, which can optimize these objectives
simultaneously in a fair way. This multi-objective
online optimization problem is formalized by using the Generalized Gini Index (GGI) aggregation
function. We propose an online gradient descent
algorithm which exploits the convexity of the GGI
aggregation function, and controls the exploration
in a careful way achieving a distribution-free regret
Õ(T 1/2 ) with high probability. We test our
algorithm on synthetic data as well as on an electric
battery control problem where the goal is to trade
off the use of the different cells of a battery in
order to balance their respective degradation rates.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem (or bandit problem)
refers to an iterative decision making problem in which an
agent repeatedly chooses among K options, metaphorically
corresponding to pulling one of K arms of a bandit machine.
In each round, the agent receives a random payoff, which
is a reward or a cost that depends on the arm being selected.
The agent’s goal is to optimize an evaluation metric, e.g., the
error rate (expected percentage of times a suboptimal arm is
played) or the cumulative regret (difference between the sum
of payoffs obtained and the (expected) payoffs that could
have been obtained by selecting the best arm in each round).
In the stochastic multi-armed bandit setup, the payoffs are
assumed to obey fixed distributions that can vary with the
arms but do not change with time. To achieve the desired goal,
*
Equal contribution 1 Yahoo Research, New York, NY, USA
Research Group on AI, Hungarian Acad. Sci. and Univ. of
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary 3 Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel 4 SYSU-CMU JIE, SEIT, SYSU, Guangzhou, P.R. China
5
SYSU-CMU JRI, Shunde, P.R. China. Correspondence to: Paul
Weng <paul@weng.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

the agent has to tackle the classical exploration/exploitation
dilemma: It has to properly balance the pulling of arms
that were found to yield low costs in earlier rounds and the
selection of arms that have not yet been tested often enough
(Auer et al., 2002a; Lai & Robbins, 1985).
The bandit setup has become the standard modeling
framework for many practical applications, such as online
advertisement (Slivkins, 2014) or medical treatment design
(Press, 2009) to name a few. In these tasks, the feedback is
formulated as a single real value. However many real-world
online learning problems are rather multi-objective, i.e., the
feedback consists of a vectorial payoffs. For example, in our
motivating example, namely an electric battery control problem, the learner tries to discover a “best” battery controller,
which balances the degradation rates of the battery cells (i.e.,
components of a battery), among a set of controllers while
facing a stochastic power demand. Besides, there are several
studies published recently that consider multi-objective
sequential decision problem under uncertainty (Drugan &
Nowé, 2013; Roijers et al., 2013; Mahdavi et al., 2013).
In this paper, we formalize the multi-objective multi-armed
bandit setting where the feedback received by the agent is in
the form of a D-dimensional cost vector. The goal here is to
be both efficient, i.e., minimize the cumulative cost for each
objective, and fair, i.e., balance the different objectives. One
natural way to ensure this is to try to find a cost vector on the
Pareto front that is closest to the origin or to some other ideal
point. A generalization of this approach (when using the
infinite norm) is the Generalized Gini Index (GGI), a wellknown inequality measure in economics (Weymark, 1981).
GGI is convex, which suggests applying the Online
Convex Optimization (OCO) techniques (Hazan, 2016;
Shalev-Shwartz, 2012). However, a direct application of this
technique may fail to optimize GGI under noise, because
the objective can be only observed with a bias that is induced
by the randomness of the cost vectors and by the fact that the
performance is measured by the function value of the average
cost instead of the average of the costs’ function value. The
solution we propose is an online learning algorithm which
is based on Online Gradient Descent (OGD) (Zinkevich,
2003; Hazan, 2016) with additional exploration that enables
us to control the bias of the objective function. We also show
that its regret is almost optimal: up to a logarithmic factor,

