Video Pixel Networks
Nal Kalchbrenner 1 Aäron van den Oord 1 Karen Simonyan 1 Ivo Danihelka 1
Oriol Vinyals 1 Alex Graves 1 Koray Kavukcuoglu 1

Abstract
We propose a probabilistic video model, the
Video Pixel Network (VPN), that estimates the
discrete joint distribution of the raw pixel values in a video. The model and the neural architecture reflect the time, space and color structure of video tensors and encode it as a fourdimensional dependency chain. The VPN approaches the best possible performance on the
Moving MNIST benchmark, a leap over the previous state of the art, and the generated videos
show only minor deviations from the ground
truth. The VPN also produces detailed samples on the action-conditional Robotic Pushing
benchmark and generalizes to the motion of
novel objects.

1. Introduction
Video modelling has remained a challenging problem due
to the complexity and ambiguity inherent in video data.
Current approaches range from mean squared error models based on deep neural networks (Srivastava et al., 2015a;
Oh et al., 2015), to models that predict quantized image
patches (Ranzato et al., 2014), incorporate motion priors (Patraucean et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016) or use adversarial losses (Mathieu et al., 2015; Vondrick et al., 2016).
Despite the wealth of approaches, future frame predictions
that are free of systematic artifacts (e.g. blurring) have been
out of reach even on relatively simple benchmarks like
Moving MNIST (Srivastava et al., 2015a).
We propose the Video Pixel Network (VPN), a generative
video model based on deep neural networks, that reflects
the factorization of the joint distribution of the pixel values in a video. The model encodes the four-dimensional
structure of video tensors and captures dependencies in the
time dimension of the data, in the two space dimensions of
1
Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Nal
Kalchbrenner <nalk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

each frame and in the color channels of a pixel. This makes
it possible to model the stochastic transitions locally from
one pixel to the next and more globally from one frame to
the next without introducing independence assumptions in
the conditional factors. The factorization further ensures
that the model stays fully tractable; the likelihood that the
model assigns to a video can be computed exactly. The
model operates on pixels without preprocessing and predicts discrete multinomial distributions over raw pixel intensities, allowing the model to estimate distributions of
any shape.
The architecture of the VPN consists of two parts: resolution preserving CNN encoders and PixelCNN decoders
(van den Oord et al., 2016b). The CNN encoders preserve
at all layers the spatial resolution of the input frames in
order to maximize representational capacity. The outputs
of the encoders are combined over time with a convolutional LSTM that also preserves the resolution (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997; Shi et al., 2015). The PixelCNN
decoders use masked convolutions to efficiently capture
space and color dependencies and use a softmax layer to
model the multinomial distributions over raw pixel values.
The network uses dilated convolutions in the encoders to
achieve larger receptive fields and better capture global motion. The network also utilizes newly defined multiplicative
units and corresponding residual blocks.
We evaluate VPNs on two benchmarks. The first is the
Moving MNIST dataset (Srivastava et al., 2015a) where,
given 10 frames of two moving digits, the task is to predict the following 10 frames. In Sect. 5 we show that
the VPN achieves 87.6 nats/frame, a score that is near the
lower bound on the loss (calculated to be 86.3 nats/frame);
this constitutes a significant improvement over the previous best result of 179.8 nats/frame (Patraucean et al.,
2015). The second benchmark is the Robotic Pushing
dataset (Finn et al., 2016) where, given two natural video
frames showing a robotic arm pushing objects, the task is to
predict the following 18 frames. We show that the VPN not
only generalizes to new action sequences with objects seen
during training, but also to new action sequences involving novel objects not seen during training. Random samples from the VPN preserve remarkable detail throughout
the generated sequence. We also define a baseline model

