Compressed Sensing using Generative Models
Ashish Bora 1 Ajil Jalal 2 Eric Price 1 Alexandros G. Dimakis 2

Abstract
The goal of compressed sensing is to estimate a
vector from an underdetermined system of noisy
linear measurements, by making use of prior
knowledge on the structure of vectors in the relevant domain. For almost all results in this literature, the structure is represented by sparsity
in a well-chosen basis. We show how to achieve
guarantees similar to standard compressed sensing but without employing sparsity at all. Instead, we suppose that vectors lie near the range
of a generative model G : Rk ! Rn . Our main
theorem is that, if G is L-Lipschitz, then roughly
O(k log L) random Gaussian measurements suffice for an `2 /`2 recovery guarantee. We demonstrate our results using generative models from
published variational autoencoder and generative
adversarial networks. Our method can use 5-10x
fewer measurements than Lasso for the same accuracy.

1. Introduction
Compressive or compressed sensing is the problem of reconstructing an unknown vector x⇤ 2 Rn after observing
m < n linear measurements of its entries, possibly with
added noise:
y = Ax⇤ + ⌘,
where A 2 Rm⇥n is called the measurement matrix and
⌘ 2 Rm is noise. Even without noise, this is an underdetermined system of linear equations, so recovery is impossible unless we make an assumption on the structure
Code for experiments in the paper can be found at:
https://github.com/AshishBora/csgm 1 University
of Texas at Austin, Department of Computer Science
2
University of Texas at Austin, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering. Correspondence to: Ashish Bora
<ashish.bora@utexas.edu>, Ajil Jalal <ajiljalal@utexas.edu>,
Eric Price <ecprice@cs.utexas.edu>, Alexandros G. Dimakis
<dimakis@austin.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

of the unknown vector x⇤ . We need to assume that the unknown vector is “natural,” or “simple,” in some applicationdependent way.
The most common structural assumption is that the vector x⇤ is k-sparse in some known basis (or approximately
k-sparse). Finding the sparsest solution to an underdetermined system of linear equations is NP-hard, but still convex optimization can provably recover the true sparse vector x⇤ if the matrix A satisfies conditions such as the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) or the related Restricted
Eigenvalue Condition (REC) (Tibshirani, 1996; Candes
et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006; Bickel et al., 2009). The problem is also called high-dimensional sparse linear regression
and there is vast literature on establishing conditions for
different recovery algorithms, different assumptions on the
design of A and generalizations of RIP and REC for other
structures, see e.g. (Bickel et al., 2009; Negahban et al.,
2009; Agarwal et al., 2010; Loh & Wainwright, 2011; Bach
et al., 2012).
This significant interest is justified since a large number of
applications can be expressed as recovering an unknown
vector from noisy linear measurements. For example,
many tomography problems can be expressed in this framework: x⇤ is the unknown true tomographic image and the
linear measurements are obtained by x-ray or other physical sensing system that produces sums or more general linear projections of the unknown pixels. Compressed sensing has been studied extensively for medical applications
including computed tomography (CT) (Chen et al., 2008),
rapid MRI (Lustig et al., 2007) and neuronal spike train
recovery (Hegde et al., 2009). Another impressive application is the “single pixel camera” (Duarte et al., 2008),
where digital micro-mirrors provide linear combinations to
a single pixel sensor that then uses compressed sensing reconstruction algorithms to reconstruct an image. These results have been extended by combining sparsity with additional structural assumptions (Baraniuk et al., 2010; Hegde
et al., 2015), and by generalizations such as translating
sparse vectors into low-rank matrices (Negahban et al.,
2009; Bach et al., 2012; Foygel & Mackey, 2014). These
results can improve performance when the structural assumptions fit the sensed signals. Other works perform “dictionary learning,” seeking overcomplete bases where the
data is more sparse (see (Chen & Needell, 2016) and refer-

