Natasha: Faster Non-Convex Stochastic Optimization
via Strongly Non-Convex Parameter

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu 1

Abstract
Given a non-convex function f (x) that is an average of n smooth functions, we design stochastic first-order methods to find its approximate
stationary points. The performance of our new
methods depend on the smallest (negative) eigenvalue −σ of the Hessian. This parameter σ
captures how strongly non-convex f (x) is, and
is analogous to the strong convexity parameter
for convex optimization. At least in theory, our
methods outperform known results for a range of
parameter σ, and can also be used to find approximate local minima. Our result implies an interesting dichotomy: there exists a threshold σ0 so
that the (currently) fastest methods for σ > σ0
and for σ < σ0 have different behaviors: the former scales with n2/3 and the latter scales with
n3/4 .

1

Introduction

We study the problem of composite non-convex minimization:
n
o
n
1X
fi (x)
min F (x) := ψ(x) + f (x) := ψ(x) +
n i=1
x∈Rd
(1.1)
where each fi (x) is nonconvex but smooth, and ψ(·) is
proper convex, possibly nonsmooth, but relatively simple.
We are interested in finding a point x that is an approximate
local minimum of F (x).
Pn
• The finite-sum structure f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) arises
prominently in large-scale machine learning tasks. In
particular, when minimizing loss over a training set,
each example i corresponds to one loss function fi (·)
in the summation. This finite-sum structure allows one
to perform stochastic gradient descent with respect to a
Future version of this paper shall be found at http://
arxiv.org/abs/1702.00763. 1 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Zeyuan Allen-Zhu <zeyuan@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

random ∇fi (x).
• The so-called proximal term ψ(x) adds more generality to the model. For instance, if ψ(x) is the indicator
function of a convex set, then problem (1.1) becomes
constraint minimization; if ψ(x) = kxk1 , then we can
allow problem (1.1) to perform feature selection. In
general, ψ(x) has to be a simple function where the
1
kx − x0 k2 }
projection operation arg minx {ψ(x) + 2η
is efficiently computable. At a first reading of this paper, one can assume ψ(x) ≡ 0 for simplicity.
Many non-convex machine learning problems fall into
problem (1.1). Most notably, training deep neural networks
and classifications with sigmoid loss correspond to (1.1)
where neither fi (x) or f (x) is convex. However, our understanding to this challenging non-convex problem is very
limited.
1.1

Strongly Non-Convex Optimization

Let L be the smoothness parameter for each fi (x), meaning
all the eigenvalues of ∇2 fi (x) lie in [−L, L].1
We denote byP
σ ∈ [0, L] the strong-nonconvexity parameter
n
of f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x), meaning that
all the eigenvalues of ∇2 f (x) lie in [−σ, L].
We emphasize that parameter σ is analogous to the strongconvexity parameter µ for convex optimization, where all
the eigenvalues of ∇2 f (x) lie in [µ, L] for some µ > 0.
We wish to find an ε-approximate stationary point (a.k.a.
critical point) of F (x), that is
a point x satisfying kG(x)k ≤ ε
where G(x) is the so-called gradient mapping of F (x) (see
Section 2 for a formal definition). In the special case of
ψ(·) ≡ 0, gradient mapping G(x) is the same as gradient
∇f (x), so x satisfies k∇f (x)k ≤ ε.
Since f (·) is σ-strongly nonconvex, any ε-approximate stationary point is automatically also an (ε, σ)-approximate
local minimum — meaning that the Hessian of the output
point ∇2 f (x)  −σI is approximately positive semidefinite (PSD).
1
This definition also applies to functions f (x) that are not
twice differentiable, see Section 2 for details.

