Stabilising Experience Replay for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Jakob Foerster * 1 Nantas Nardelli * 1 Gregory Farquhar 1 Triantafyllos Afouras 1
Philip. H. S. Torr 1 Pushmeet Kohli 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
Many real-world problems, such as network
packet routing and urban traffic control, are
naturally modeled as multi-agent reinforcement
learning (RL) problems. However, existing
multi-agent RL methods typically scale poorly in
the problem size. Therefore, a key challenge is to
translate the success of deep learning on singleagent RL to the multi-agent setting. A major
stumbling block is that independent Q-learning,
the most popular multi-agent RL method, introduces nonstationarity that makes it incompatible with the experience replay memory on which
deep Q-learning relies. This paper proposes two
methods that address this problem: 1) using a
multi-agent variant of importance sampling to
naturally decay obsolete data and 2) conditioning each agent’s value function on a fingerprint
that disambiguates the age of the data sampled
from the replay memory. Results on a challenging decentralised variant of StarCraft unit micromanagement confirm that these methods enable
the successful combination of experience replay
with multi-agent RL.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), which enables an agent to
learn control policies on-line given only sequences of
observations and rewards, has emerged as a dominant
paradigm for training autonomous systems. However,
many real-world problems, such as network packet delivery (Ye et al., 2015), rubbish removal (Makar et al., 2001),
and urban traffic control (Kuyer et al., 2008; Van der Pol
& Oliehoek, 2016), are naturally modeled as cooperative
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA. Correspondence to: Jakob Foerster <jakob.foerster@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Nantas
Nardelli <nantas@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

multi-agent systems. Unfortunately, tackling such problems with traditional RL is not straightforward.
If all agents observe the true state, then we can model a cooperative multi-agent system as a single meta-agent. However, the size of this meta-agent’s action space grows exponentially in the number of agents. Furthermore, it is not
applicable when each agent receives different observations
that may not disambiguate the state, in which case decentralised policies must be learned.
A popular alternative is independent Q-learning (IQL)
(Tan, 1993), in which each agent independently learns its
own policy, treating other agents as part of the environment. While IQL avoids the scalability problems of centralised learning, it introduces a new problem: the environment becomes nonstationary from the point of view of each
agent, as it contains other agents who are themselves learning, ruling out any convergence guarantees. Fortunately,
substantial empirical evidence has shown that IQL often
works well in practice (Matignon et al., 2012).
Recently, the use of deep neural networks has dramatically
improved the scalability of single-agent RL (Mnih et al.,
2015). However, one element key to the success of such
approaches is the reliance on an experience replay memory, which stores experience tuples that are sampled during
training. Experience replay not only helps to stabilise the
training of a deep neural network, it also improves sample
efficiency by repeatedly reusing experience tuples. Unfortunately, the combination of experience replay with IQL
appears to be problematic: the nonstationarity introduced
by IQL means that the dynamics that generated the data in
the agent’s replay memory no longer reflect the current dynamics in which it is learning. While IQL without a replay
memory can learn well despite nonstationarity so long as
each agent is able to gradually track the other agents’ policies, that seems hopeless with a replay memory constantly
confusing the agent with obsolete experience.
To avoid this problem, previous work on deep multi-agent
RL has limited the use of experience replay to short, recent
buffers (Leibo et al., 2017) or simply disabled replay altogether (Foerster et al., 2016). However, these workarounds
limit the sample efficiency and threaten the stability of
multi-agent RL. Consequently, the incompatibility of ex-

