Minimax Regret Bounds for Reinforcement Learning

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar 1 Ian Osband 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of provably optimal
exploration in reinforcement learning for finite
horizon MDPs. We show that an optimistic
modification√to value iteration achieves
√ a regret
e HSAT +H 2 S 2 A+H T ) where
bound of O(
H is the time horizon, S the number of states, A
the number of actions and T the number of timesteps. This result improves
√ over the best previe
AT ) achieved by the
ous known bound O(HS
UCRL2 algorithm of Jaksch et al. (2010). The
key significance of our new results is that when
3 3
T ≥
√ H S A and SA ≥ H, it leads to a regret of
e
O( HSAT√
) that matches the established lower
bound of Ω( HSAT ) up to a logarithmic factor.
Our analysis contains two key insights. We use
careful application of concentration inequalities
to the optimal value function as a whole, rather
than to the transitions probabilities (to improve
scaling in S), and we define Bernstein-based "exploration bonuses" that use the empirical variance of the estimated values at the next states (to
improve scaling in H).

1. Introduction
We consider the reinforcement learning (RL) problem of an
agent interacting with an environment in order to maximize
its cumulative rewards through time (Burnetas & Katehakis, 1997; Sutton & Barto, 1998). We model the environment as a Markov decision process (MDP) whose transition dynamics are unknown from the agent. As the agent
interacts with the environment it observes the states, actions and rewards generated by the system dynamics. This
leads to a fundamental trade off: should the agent explore
poorly-understood states and actions to gain information
and improve future performance, or exploit its knowledge
to optimize short-run rewards.
1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Mohammad
Gheshlaghi Azar <mazar@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The most common approach to this learning problem is
to separate the process of estimation and optimization.
In this paradigm, point estimates of the unknown quantities are used in place of the unknown parameters and a
plan is made with respect to these estimates. Naive optimization with respect to these point estimates can lead
to premature exploitation and so may never learn the optimal policy. Dithering approaches to exploration (e.g.,
-greedy) address this failing through random action selection. However, as this exploration is not directed the
resultant algorithms may take exponentially long to learn
(Kearns & Singh, 2002). In order to learn efficiently it is
necessary that the agent prioritizes potentially informative
states and actions. To do this, it is important that the agent
maintains some notion of its own uncertainty. In some
sense, given any prior belief, the optimal solution to this
exploration/exploitation dilemma is given by the dynamic
programming in the extended Bayesian belief state (Bertsekas, 2007). However, the computational demands of this
method become intractable for even small problems (Guez
et al., 2013) while finite approximations can be arbitrarily
poor (Munos, 2014).
To combat these failings, the majority of provably efficient
learning algorithms employ a heuristic principle known as
optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU). In these algorithms, each state and action is afforded some “optimism”
such that its imagined value is as high as statistically plausible. The agent then chooses a policy under this optimistic view of the world. This allows for efficient exploration since poorly-understood states and actions are afforded higher optimistic bonus. As the agent resolves its
uncertainty, the effects of optimism will reduce and the
agent’s policy will approach optimality. Almost all reinforcement learning algorithms with polynomial bounds on
sample complexity employ optimism to guide exploration
(Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002;
Strehl et al., 2006; Dann et al., 2017).
An alternative principle motivated by the Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) has emerged as a practical competitor to optimism. The algorithm posterior sampling reinforcement learning (PSRL) maintains a posterior distribution for MDPs and, at each episode of interaction, follows a policy which is optimal for a single random sample
(Strens, 2000). Previous works have argue for the potential

