Robust Adversarial Reinforcement Learning

Lerrel Pinto 1 James Davidson 2 Rahul Sukthankar 3 Abhinav Gupta 1 3

Abstract
Deep neural networks coupled with fast simulation and improved computation have led to recent successes in the field of reinforcement learning (RL). However, most current RL-based approaches fail to generalize since: (a) the gap between simulation and real world is so large that
policy-learning approaches fail to transfer; (b)
even if policy learning is done in real world, the
data scarcity leads to failed generalization from
training to test scenarios (e.g., due to different
friction or object masses). Inspired from H∞
control methods, we note that both modeling errors and differences in training and test scenarios can be viewed as extra forces/disturbances in
the system. This paper proposes the idea of robust adversarial reinforcement learning (RARL),
where we train an agent to operate in the presence of a destabilizing adversary that applies disturbance forces to the system. The jointly trained
adversary is reinforced – that is, it learns an optimal destabilization policy. We formulate the
policy learning as a zero-sum, minimax objective function. Extensive experiments in multiple
environments (InvertedPendulum, HalfCheetah,
Swimmer, Hopper, Walker2d and Ant) conclusively demonstrate that our method (a) improves
training stability; (b) is robust to differences in
training/test conditions; and c) outperform the
baseline even in the absence of the adversary.

1. Introduction
High-capacity function approximators such as deep neural networks have led to increased success in the field of
reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
2016; Gu et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Mordatch
et al., 2015). However, a major bottleneck for such
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Brain 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Lerrel Pinto <lerrelp@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

policy-learning methods is their reliance on data: training high-capacity models requires huge amounts of training data/trajectories. While this training data can be easily
obtained for tasks like games (e.g., Doom, Montezuma’s
Revenge) (Mnih et al., 2015), data-collection and policy
learning for real-world physical tasks are significantly more
challenging.
There are two possible ways to perform policy learning for
real-world physical tasks:
• Real-world Policy Learning: The first approach is to
learn the agent’s policy in the real-world. However,
training in the real-world is too expensive, dangerous
and time-intensive leading to scarcity of data. Due to
scarcity of data, training is often restricted to a limited
set of training scenarios, causing overfitting. If the
test scenario is different (e.g., different friction coefficient), the learned policy fails to generalize. Therefore, we need a learned policy that is robust and generalizes well across a range of scenarios.
• Learning in simulation: One way of escaping the
data scarcity in the real-world is to transfer a policy
learned in a simulator to the real world. However the
environment and physics of the simulator are not exactly the same as the real world. This reality gap often
results in unsuccessful transfer if the learned policy
isn’t robust to modeling errors (Christiano et al., 2016;
Rusu et al., 2016).
Both the test-generalization and simulation-transfer issues
are further exacerbated by the fact that many policylearning algorithms are stochastic in nature. For many hard
physical tasks such as Walker2D (Erez et al., 2011), only a
small fraction of runs leads to stable walking policies. This
makes these approaches even more time and data-intensive.
What we need is an approach that is significantly more stable/robust in learning policies across different runs and initializations while requiring less data during training.
So, how can we model uncertainties and learn a policy robust to all uncertainties? How can we model the
gap between simulations and real-world? We begin with
the insight that modeling errors can be viewed as extra forces/disturbances in the system (Başar & Bernhard,
2008). For example, high friction at test time might be
modeled as extra forces at contact points against the di-

