Capacity Releasing Diffusion for Speed and Locality

Di Wang 1 Kimon Fountoulakis 2 Monika Henzinger 3 Michael W. Mahoney 2 Satish Rao 1

Abstract
Diffusions and related random walk procedures
are of central importance in many areas of machine learning, data analysis, and applied mathematics. Because they spread mass agnostically at
each step in an iterative manner, they can sometimes spread mass “too aggressively,” thereby
failing to find the “right” clusters. We introduce a
novel Capacity Releasing Diffusion (CRD) Process, which is both faster and stays more local than the classical spectral diffusion process.
As an application, we use our CRD Process to
develop an improved local algorithm for graph
clustering. Our local graph clustering method
can find local clusters in a model of clustering
where one begins the CRD Process in a cluster whose vertices are connected better internally
than externally by an O(log2 n) factor, where n
is the number of nodes in the cluster. Thus, our
CRD Process is the first local graph clustering
algorithm that is not subject to the well-known
quadratic Cheeger barrier. Our result requires a
certain smoothness condition, which we expect
to be an artifact of our analysis. Our empirical
evaluation demonstrates improved results, in particular for realistic social graphs where there are
moderately good—but not very good—clusters.

1. Introduction
Diffusions and related random walk procedures are of central importance in many areas of machine learning, data
analysis, and applied mathematics, perhaps most conspicuously in the area of spectral clustering (Cheeger, 1969;
Donath & Hoffman, 1973; von Luxburg, 2006; Shi & Malik, 2000), community detection in networks (Ng et al.,
2001; White & Smyth, 2005; Leskovec et al., 2009; Jeub
et al., 2015), so-called manifold learning (Belkin & Niyogi,
1

EECS, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 2 ICSI and Statistics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 3 Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to: Di Wang
<wangd@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2003; Mahoney et al., 2012), and PageRank-based spectral
ranking in web ranking (Page et al., 1999; Gleich, 2015).
Particularly relevant for our results are local/personalized
versions of PageRank (Jeh & Widom, 2003) and local/distributed versions of spectral clustering (Spielman &
Teng, 2004; Andersen et al., 2006; Andersen & Peres,
2009). These latter algorithms can be used to find provablygood small-sized clusters in very large graphs without even
touching the entire graph; they have been implemented and
applied to billion-node graphs (Shun et al., 2016); and they
have been used to characterize the clustering and community structure in a wide range of social and information networks (Leskovec et al., 2009; Jeub et al., 2015).
Somewhat more formally, we will use the term diffusion on
a graph to refer to a process that spreads mass among vertices by sending mass along edges step by step according to
some rule. With this interpretation, classical spectral diffusion spreads mass by distributing the mass on a given node
equally to the neighbors of that node in an iterative manner.
A well-known problem with spectral methods is that—due
to their close relationship with random walks—they sometimes spread mass “too aggressively,” and thereby they
don’t find the “right” partition. In theory, this can be seen
with so-called Cockroach Graph (Guattery & Miller, 1998;
von Luxburg, 2006). In practice, this is seen by the extreme sensitivity of spectral methods to high-degree nodes
and other structural heterogeneities in real-world graphs
constructed from very noisy data (Leskovec et al., 2009;
Jeub et al., 2015). More generally, it is well-known that
spectral methods can be very sensitive to a small number
of random edges, e.g., in small-world graphs, that “short
circuit” very distant parts of the original graph, as well as
other noise properties in realistic data. Empirically, this
is well-known to be a particular problem when there are
moderately good—but not very good—clusters in the data,
a situation that is all too common in machine learning and
data analysis applications (Jeub et al., 2015).
Here, we introduce a novel Capacity Releasing Diffusion
(CRD) Process to address this problem. Our CRD Process is a type of diffusion that spreads mass according to
a carefully-constructed push-relabel rule, using techniques
that are well-known from flow-based graph algorithms, but
modified here to release the capacity of edges to transmit
mass. Our CRD Process has better properties with respect

