Sketched Ridge Regression: Optimization Perspective,
Statistical Perspective, and Model Averaging

Shusen Wang 1 Alex Gittens 2 Michael W. Mahoney 1

Abstract
We address the statistical and optimization impacts of using classical sketch versus Hessian
sketch to solve approximately the Matrix Ridge
Regression (MRR) problem. Prior research has
considered the effects of classical sketch on least
squares regression (LSR), a strictly simpler problem. We establish that classical sketch has a
similar effect upon the optimization properties
of MRR as it does on those of LSR—namely,
it recovers nearly optimal solutions. In contrast,
Hessian sketch does not have this guarantee; instead, the approximation error is governed by a
subtle interplay between the “mass” in the responses and the optimal objective value. For
both types of approximations, the regularization
in the sketched MRR problem gives it significantly different statistical properties from the
sketched LSR problem. In particular, there is
a bias-variance trade-off in sketched MRR that
is not present in sketched LSR. We provide upper and lower bounds on the biases and variances of sketched MRR; these establish that the
variance is significantly increased when classical
sketches are used, while the bias is significantly
increased when using Hessian sketches. Empirically, sketched MRR solutions can have risks that
are higher by an order-of-magnitude than those
of the optimal MRR solutions. We establish theoretically and empirically that model averaging
greatly decreases this gap. Thus, in the distributed setting, sketching combined with model
averaging is a powerful technique that quickly
obtains near-optimal solutions to the MRR prob1
International Computer Science Institute and Department of
Statistics, University of California at Berkeley, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA.
Correspondence to: Shusen Wang <shusen@berkeley.edu>,
Alex Gittens <gittea@rpi.edu>, Michael W. Mahoney <mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

lem while greatly mitigating the statistical risks
incurred by sketching.

1. Introduction
Regression is one of the most fundamental problems in machine learning. The simplest and most thoroughly studied
regression model is least squares regression (LSR). Given
features X = [xT1 ; . . . , xTn ] ∈ Rn×d and responses y =
[y1 , . . . , yn ]T ∈ Rn , the LSR problem minw kXw − yk22
can be solved in O(nd2 ) time using the QR decomposition
or in O(ndt) time using accelerated gradient descent algorithms. Here, t is the number of iterations, which depends
on the initialization, the condition number of X, and the
stopping criterion.
This paper considers the n  d problem, where there
is much redundancy in X. Matrix sketching, as used
within Randomized Linear Algebra (RLA) (Mahoney,
2011; Woodruff, 2014), works by reducing the size of X
without losing too much information; this operation can
be modeled as taking actual rows or linear combinations
of the rows of X with a sketching matrix S to form the
sketch ST X. Here S ∈ Rn×s satisfies d < s  n so that
ST X generically has the same rank but much fewer rows
as X. Sketching has been used to speed up LSR (Drineas
et al., 2006; 2011; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013; Meng &
Mahoney, 2013; Nelson & Nguyên, 2013) by solving the
sketched LSR problem minw kST Xw − ST yk22 instead
of the original LSR problem. Solving sketched LSR costs
either O(sd2 + Ts ) time using the QR decomposition or
O(sdt + Ts ) time using accelerated gradient descent algorithms, where t is as defined previously1 and Ts is the
time cost of sketching. For example, Ts = O(nd log s)
when S is the subsampled randomized Hadamard transform (Drineas et al., 2011), and Ts = O(nd) when S is
a CountSketch matrix (Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013).
There has been much work in RLA on analyzing the
quality of sketched LSR with different sketching methods
and different objectives; see the reviews (Mahoney, 2011;
1
The condition number of XT SST X is very close to that of
XT X, and thus the number of iterations t is almost unchanged.

