Being Robust (in High Dimensions) Can Be Practical

Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Gautam Kamath * 2 Daniel M. Kane * 3 Jerry Li * 2 Ankur Moitra * 2 Alistair Stewart * 1

Abstract
Robust estimation is much more challenging in
high dimensions than it is in one dimension:
Most techniques either lead to intractable optimization problems or estimators that can tolerate only a tiny fraction of errors. Recent work
in theoretical computer science has shown that,
in appropriate distributional models, it is possible to robustly estimate the mean and covariance
with polynomial time algorithms that can tolerate
a constant fraction of corruptions, independent of
the dimension. However, the sample and time
complexity of these algorithms is prohibitively
large for high-dimensional applications. In this
work, we address both of these issues by establishing sample complexity bounds that are optimal, up to logarithmic factors, as well as giving
various refinements that allow the algorithms to
tolerate a much larger fraction of corruptions. Finally, we show on both synthetic and real data
that our algorithms have state-of-the-art performance and suddenly make high-dimensional robust estimation a realistic possibility.

1. Introduction
Robust statistics was founded in the seminal works of
(Tukey, 1960) and (Huber, 1964). The overarching motto
is that any model (especially a parametric one) is only approximately valid, and that any estimator designed for a
particular distribution that is to be used in practice must
also be stable in the presence of model misspecification.
The standard setup is to assume that the samples we are
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California, USA 2 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 3 University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. Correspondence to: Ilias Diakonikolas <diakonik@usc.edu>,
Gautam Kamath <g@csail.mit.edu>, Daniel M. Kane
<dakane@cs.ucsd.edu>,
Jerry Li <jerryzli@mit.edu>,
Ankur Moitra <moitra@mit.edu>, Alistair Stewart <alistais@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

given come from a nice distribution, but that an adversary
has the power to arbitrarily corrupt a constant fraction of
the observed data. After several decades of work, the robust statistics community has discovered a myriad of estimators that are provably robust. An important feature of
this line of work is that it can tolerate a constant fraction of
corruptions independent of the dimension and that there are
estimators for both the location (e.g., the mean) and scale
(e.g., the covariance). See (Huber & Ronchetti, 2009) and
(Hampel et al., 1986) for further background.
It turns out that there are vast gaps in our understanding of
robustness, when computational considerations are taken
into account. In one dimension, robustness and computational efficiency are in perfect harmony. The empirical
mean and empirical variance are not robust, because a single corruption can arbitrarily bias these estimates, but alternatives such as the median and the interquartile range are
straightforward to compute and are provably robust.
But in high dimensions, there is a striking tension between
robustness and computational efficiency. Let us consider
estimators for location. The Tukey median (Tukey, 1960)
is a natural generalization of the one-dimensional median
to high-dimensions. It is known that it behaves well (i.e.,
it needs few samples) when estimating the mean for various symmetric distributions (Donoho & Gasko, 1992; Chen
et al., 2016). However, it is hard to compute in general (Johnson & Preparata, 1978; Amaldi & Kann, 1995)
and the many heuristics for computing it degrade badly
in the quality of their approximation as the dimension
scales (Clarkson et al., 1993; Chan, 2004; Miller & Sheehy,
2010). The same issues plague estimators for scale. The
minimum volume ellipsoid (Rousseeuw, 1985) is a natural
generalization of the one-dimensional interquartile range
and is provably robust in high-dimensions, but is also hard
to compute. And once again, heuristics for computing
it (Van Aelst & Rousseeuw, 2009; Rousseeuw & Struyf,
1998) work poorly in high dimensions.
The fact that robustness in high dimensions seems to come
Collectively, the authors were supported by NSF CCF1652862, CCF-1551875, CCF-1617730, CCF-1650733, CCF1553288, CCF-1453261, ONR N00014-12-1-0999, three Sloan
Research Fellowships, two Google Faculty Research Awards, an
NSF fellowship, the MIT NEC Corporation, and a USC startup
grant.

