Fast Bayesian Intensity Estimation for the Permanental Process

Christian J. Walder 1 2 Adrian N. Bishop 1 2 3

Abstract
The Cox process is a stochastic process which
generalises the Poisson process by letting the underlying intensity function itself be a stochastic
process. In this paper we present a fast Bayesian
inference scheme for the permanental process,
a Cox process under which the square root of
the intensity is a Gaussian process. In particular we exploit connections with reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, to derive efficient approximate Bayesian inference algorithms based on the
Laplace approximation to the predictive distribution and marginal likelihood. We obtain a simple
algorithm which we apply to toy and real-world
problems, obtaining orders of magnitude speed
improvements over previous work.

1. Introduction
The Poisson process is an important model for point data
in which samples of the process are locally finite subsets
of some domain such as time or space. The process is
parametrised by an intensity function, the integral of which
gives the expected number of points in the domain of integration — for a gentle introduction we recommend (Baddeley, 2007). In the typical case of unknown intensity function we may place a non-parametric prior over it via e.g. the
Gaussian Process (GP) and perform Bayesian inference.
Inference under such models is challenging due to both the
GP prior and the non factorial nature of the Poisson process
likelihood (1), which includes an integral of the intensity
function. One may resort to discretising the domain (Rathbun & Cressie, 1994; Møller et al., 1998; Rue et al., 2009)
or performing Monte Carlo approximations (Adams et al.,
2009; Diggle et al., 2013). Fast Laplace approximates were
studied in (Cunningham et al., 2008; Illian et al., 2012;
Flaxman et al., 2015) and variational methods were applied
1

2

Data61, CSIRO, Australia The Australian National University 3 University of Technology Sydney. Correspondence to:
Christian <christian.walder@anu.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

in (Lloyd et al., 2015; Kom Samo & Roberts, 2015).
To satisfy non-negativity of the intensity function one
transforms the GP prior. The log-Gaussian Cox Process,
with GP distributed log intensity, has been the subject of
much study; see e.g. (Rathbun & Cressie, 1994; Møller
et al., 1998; Illian et al., 2012; Diggle et al., 2013), Alternative formulations for introducing a GP prior exist, e.g.
(Adams et al., 2009). More recent research has highlighted
the analytical and computational advantages (Lloyd et al.,
2015; 2016; Flaxman et al., 2017; Møller et al., 1998) of the
permanental process, which has GP distributed square root
intensity (Shirai & Takahashi, 2003; McCullagh & Møller,
2006) — we discuss the relationship between these methods and the present work in more detail in subsection 2.2.
In section 2 we introduce the Poisson and permanental processes, and place our work in the context of existing literature. Section 3 reviews Flaxman et al. (2017), slightly
recasting it as regularised maximum likelihood for the permanental process. Our Bayesian scheme is then derived in
section 4. In section 5 we discuss the choice of covariance
function for the GP prior, before presenting some numerical experiments in section 6 and concluding in section 7.

2. The Model
2.1. The Poisson Process
We view the inhomogeneous Poisson process on Ω as a
distribution over locally finite subsets of Ω. The number N (X ) of elements in some X ⊆ Ω is assumed to
be
R distributed as Poisson(Λ(X , µ)), where Λ(S, µ) :=
λ(x)dµ(x) gives the mean of the Poisson distribux∈S
tion. It turns out that this implies the likelihood function
m

p ({xi }i=1 |λ, Ω) =

m
Y

λ(xi ) exp (−Λ(Ω)) .

(1)

i=1

2.2. Latent Gaussian Process Intensities
To model unknown λ(x), we employ a non-parametric
prior over functions, namely the Gaussian process (GP).
To ensure that λ is non-negative valued we include a deterministic “link” function g : R → R+ so that we have
the prior over λ defined by λ = g ◦ f and f ∼ GP(k),
where k is the covariance function for f . The most com-

