Risk Bounds for Transferring Representations With and Without Fine-Tuning

Daniel McNamara 1 Maria-Florina Balcan 2

Abstract
A popular machine learning strategy is the transfer of a representation (i.e. a feature extraction
function) learned on a source task to a target task.
Examples include the re-use of neural network
weights or word embeddings. We develop sufficient conditions for the success of this approach.
If the representation learned from the source task
is fixed, we identify conditions on how the tasks
relate to obtain an upper bound on target task risk
via a VC dimension-based argument. We then
consider using the representation from the source
task to construct a prior, which is fine-tuned using target task data. We give a PAC-Bayes target task risk bound in this setting under suitable
conditions. We show examples of our bounds
using feedforward neural networks. Our results
motivate a practical approach to weight transfer,
which we validate with experiments.

1. Introduction
A widely used machine learning technique is the transfer
of a representation learned from a source task, for which
labeled data is abundant, to a target task, for which labeled
data is scarce. This may be effective if the tasks approximately share an intermediate representation. For example:
• features learned from an image of a human face to predict age may also be useful for predicting gender
• word embeddings learned to predict word contexts
may also be useful for part of speech tagging
• features learned from financial data to predict loan default may also be useful for predicting insurance fraud.
Often a representation is learned by a different organization
that may have greater access to data, computational and human resources. Examples are the Google word2vec package (Mikolov et al., 2013), and downloadable pre-trained
1
The Australian National University and Data61, Canberra, ACT, Australia 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel McNamara
<daniel.mcnamara@anu.edu.au>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

neural networks.1 Under this ‘representation-as-a-service’
model, a user may expect to access the representation itself,
as well as information about its performance on the source
task data on which it was trained. We aim to convert this
into a guarantee of the usefulness of the representation on
other tasks, which is known in advance without the effort
or cost of testing the representation on the target task(s).
Our analysis also covers the case where the source task is
constructed from unlabeled data, as in neural network unsupervised pre-training.
We consider two approaches to transferring a representation learned from a source task to a target task, as shown in
Figure 1. We may either treat the representation as fixed, or
we may narrow the class of representations considered on
the target task, which we refer to as fine-tuning. The fixed
option may be attractive when very little labeled target task
data is available and hence overfitting is a strong concern,
while the advantage of fine-tuning is relatively greater hypothesis class expressiveness.
Let X, Y and Z be sets known as the input, output and
feature spaces respectively. Let F be a class of representations, where f : X → Z for f ∈ F . Let G be a class
of specialized classifiers, where g : Z → Y for g ∈ G.
Let the hypothesis class H := {h : ∃f ∈ F, g ∈ G
such that h = g ◦ f }. Let hS , hT : X → Y be the labeling functions and PS , PT be the input distributions for
source task S and target task T respectively. We consider
the setting Y = {−1, 1}. Let the risk of a hypothesis
h on S and T be RS (h) := Ex∼PS [hS (x) 6= h(x)] and
RT (h) := Ex∼PT [hT (x) 6= h(x)] respectively. Let R̂S (h)
and R̂T (h) be the corresponding empirical (i.e. training
set) risks. We have mS labelled points for S and mT labelled points for T . Let dH be the VC dimension of H.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we introduce related work. In Sections 3 and 4 we
analyze the cases where the transferred representation is
fixed and fine-tuned respectively. In Section 5 we apply
the results and use them to motivate and test a practical approach to weight transfer in neural networks. We conclude
in Section 6 and defer more involved proofs to Section 7.
1
See
http://code.google.com/archive/p/
word2vec,
http://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/
model_zoo and http://vlfeat.org/matconvnet/
pretrained for examples.

