Gradient Coding:
Avoiding Stragglers in Distributed Learning

Rashish Tandon 1 Qi Lei 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 3 Nikos Karampatziakis 4

Abstract

W1

W2

W3

We propose a novel coding theoretic framework
for mitigating stragglers in distributed learning.
We show how carefully replicating data blocks
and coding across gradients can provide tolerance to failures and stragglers for synchronous
Gradient Descent. We implement our schemes
in python (using MPI) to run on Amazon EC2,
and show how we compare against baseline approaches in running time and generalization error.

D1

D2

D3

1. Introduction
We propose a novel coding theoretic framework for mitigating stragglers in distributed learning. The central idea
can be seen through the simple example of Figure 1: Consider synchronous Gradient Descent (GD) on three workers (W1 ,W2 ,W3 ). The baseline vanilla system is shown in
the top figure and operates as follows: The three workers
have different partitions of the labeled data stored locally
(D1 ,D2 ,D3 ) and all share the current model. Worker 1 computes the gradient of the model on examples in partition D1 ,
denoted by g1 . Similarly, Workers 2 and 3 compute g2 and
g3 . The three gradient vectors are then communicated to a
central node (called the master/aggregator) A which computes the full gradient by summing these vectors g1 +g2 +g3
and updates the model with a gradient step. The new model
is then sent to the workers and the system moves to the next
round (where the same examples or other labeled examples,
say D4 ,D5 ,D6 , will be used in the same way).
The problem is that sometimes worker nodes can be stragglers (Li et al., 2014; Ho et al., 2013; Dean et al., 2012)
i.e. delay significantly in computing and communicating
gradient vectors to the master. This is especially pronounced
for cheaper virtual machines in the cloud. For example on
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA 2 Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
4
Microsoft, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Rashish Tandon <rashish@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

g1

g3

g2

A
g1 + g2 + g3

(a) Naive synchronous gradient descent
W1

W2

W3

D1
D2

D2
D3

D3

g1/2 + g2

g2 - g3

D1
g1/2 + g3

A
g1 + g2 + g3 (from any 2)

(b) Gradient coding: The vector
g1 + g2 + g3 is in the span of any
two out of the vectors g1 /2 + g2,
g2 − g3 and g1 /2 + g3 .

Figure 1: The idea of Gradient Coding.
t2.micro machines on Amazon EC2, as can be seen in
Figure 2: some machines can be 5× slower in computing
and communicating gradients compared to typical performance.
First, we discuss one way to resolve this problem if we
replicate some data across machines by considering the
placement in Fig.1 (b) but without coding. As can be seen,
in Fig. 1 (b) each example is replicated two times using
a specific placement policy. Each worker is assigned to
compute two gradients on the two examples they have for
this round. For example, W1 will compute vectors g1 and
g2 . Now lets assume that W3 is the straggler. If we use
control messages, W1 , W2 can notify the master A that they
are done. Subsequently, if feedback is used, the master
can ask W1 to send g1 and g2 and W2 to send g3 . These
feedback control messages can be much smaller than the

