Toward Efficient and Accurate Covariance Matrix
Estimation on Compressed Data

Xixian Chen 1 2 Michael R. Lyu 1 2 Irwin King 1 2

Abstract
Estimating covariance matrices is a fundamental technique in various domains, most notably
in machine learning and signal processing. To
tackle the challenges of extensive communication costs, large storage capacity requirements,
and high processing time complexity when handling massive high-dimensional and distributed
data, we propose an efficient and accurate covariance matrix estimation method via data compression. In contrast to previous data-oblivious
compression schemes, we leverage a data-aware
weighted sampling method to construct lowdimensional data for such estimation. We rigorously prove that our proposed estimator is unbiased and requires smaller data to achieve the
same accuracy with specially designed sampling
distributions. Besides, we depict that the computational procedures in our algorithm are efficient.
All achievements imply an improved tradeoff between the estimation accuracy and computational
costs. Finally, the extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets validate the superior property of our method and illustrate that it
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Covariance matrices play a fundamental role in machine
learning and statistics owing to their capability to retain the
second-order information of data samples (Feller, 1966).
For example, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) along
1

Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese Univer2
sity of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China.
Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Xixian Chen <xxchen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>,
Michael R. Lyu <lyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Irwin King
<king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

with its extensions (Zou et al., 2006), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), and Quadratic Discriminant Analysis
(QDA) (Anzai, 2012) are powerful for dimension reduction
and denoising, which require the estimation of a covariance
matrix from a given collection of data points. Other prominent examples include Generalized Least Squares (GLS)
regression that requires the estimation of the noise covariance matrix (Kariya & Kurata, 2004), Independent Component Analysis (ICA) that relies on pre-whitening based on
the covariance matrix (Hyvärinen et al., 2004), and Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) (Hansen, 1982) that
improves the effectiveness by a precise covariance matrix.
Many practical applications also rely on covariance matrix directly (Bartz, 2016). In biology, gene relevance networks and gene association networks are straightforwardly
inferred from the covariance matrix (Butte et al., 2000;
Schäfer & Strimmer, 2005). In modern wireless communications, protocols optimize the bandwidth based on covariance estimates (Tulino & Verdú, 2004). In array signal processing, the capon beamformer linearly combines
the sensors to minimize the noise in the signal, which is
closely related to the portfolio optimization on covariance
matrices (Abrahamsson et al., 2007). For policy learning
in the field of robotics, it requires reliable estimates of the
covariance matrix between policy parameters (Deisenroth
et al., 2013).
Calculation of a covariance matrix usually requires enormous computational resources in the form of communication and storage because large and high-dimensional data
are now routinely gathered at an exploding rate from many
distributed remote sites, such as sensor networks, surveillance, and distributed databases (Haupt et al., 2008; Shi
et al., 2014; Ha & Barber, 2015). In particular, high communication cost of transmitting the distributed data from
the remote sites to the fusion center (i.e., a destination to
conduct complex data analysis tasks) will require tremendous bandwidth and power consumption (Srisooksai et al.,
2012; Abbasi-Daresari & Abouei, 2016). Formally, given
a data matrix X ∈ Rd×n with d features and n instances
collected from the remote sites, the covariance matrix is
computed in the
by C , n1 XXT − x̄x̄T ,
Pnfusion center
1
d
where x̄ = n i=1 xi ∈ R (Feller, 1966). For simplicity

