Stochastic Generative Hashing
Bo Dai* 1 Ruiqi Guo* 2 Sanjiv Kumar 2 Niao He 3 Le Song 1

Abstract
Learning-based binary hashing has become a
powerful paradigm for fast search and retrieval
in massive databases. However, due to the requirement of discrete outputs for the hash functions, learning such functions is known to be
very challenging. In addition, the objective functions adopted by existing hashing techniques are
mostly chosen heuristically. In this paper, we
propose a novel generative approach to learn
hash functions through Minimum Description
Length principle such that the learned hash codes
maximally compress the dataset and can also
be used to regenerate the inputs. We also develop an efficient learning algorithm based on the
stochastic distributional gradient, which avoids
the notorious difficulty caused by binary output
constraints, to jointly optimize the parameters
of the hash function and the associated generative model. Extensive experiments on a variety
of large-scale datasets show that the proposed
method achieves better retrieval results than the
existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Search for similar items in web-scale datasets is a fundamental step in a number of applications, especially in image and document retrieval. Formally, given a reference
d
dataset X = {xi }N
i=1 with x 2 X ⇢ R , we want to retrieve similar items from X for a given query y according
to some similarity measure sim(x, y). When the negative
Euclidean distance is used, i.e., sim(x, y) = kx yk2 ,
this corresponds to L2 Nearest Neighbor Search (L2NNS)
problem; when the inner product is used, i.e., sim(x, y) =
x> y, it becomes a Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS)
problem. In this work, we focus on L2NNS for simplicity,
however our method handles MIPS problems as well, as
*
Equal contribution . This work was done during internship at
Google Research NY. 1 Georgia Institute of Technology. 2 Google
Research, NYC 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Bo Dai <bodai@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

shown in the supplementary material D. Brute-force linear
search is expensive for large datasets. To alleviate the time
and storage bottlenecks, two research directions have been
studied extensively: (1) partition the dataset so that only
a subset of data points is searched; (2) represent the data
as codes so that similarity computation can be carried out
more efficiently. The former often resorts to search-tree or
bucket-based lookup; while the latter relies on binary hashing or quantization. These two groups of techniques are
orthogonal and are typically employed together in practice.
In this work, we focus on speeding up search via binary
hashing. Hashing for similarity search was popularized by
influential works such as Locality Sensitive Hashing (Indyk
and Motwani, 1998; Gionis et al., 1999; Charikar , 2002).
The crux of binary hashing is to utilize a hash function,
f (·) : X ! {0, 1}l , which maps the original samples in
X 2 Rd to l-bit binary vectors h 2 {0, 1}l while preserving the similarity measure, e.g., Euclidean distance or inner product. Search with such binary representations can
be efficiently conducted using Hamming distance computation, which is supported via POPCNT on modern CPUs
and GPUs. Quantization based techniques (Babenko and
Lempitsky, 2014; Jegou et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2014b)
have been shown to give stronger empirical results but
tend to be less efficient than Hamming search over binary
codes (Douze et al., 2015; He et al., 2013).
Data-dependent hash functions are well-known to perform
better than randomized ones (Wang et al., 2014). Learning hash functions or binary codes has been discussed in
several papers, including spectral hashing (Weiss et al.,
2009), semi-supervised hashing (Wang et al., 2010), iterative quantization (Gong and Lazebnik, 2011), and others (Liu et al., 2011; Gong et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014; Shen
et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2016). The main idea behind these
works is to optimize some objective function that captures
the preferred properties of the hash function in a supervised
or unsupervised fashion.
Even though these methods have shown promising performance in several applications, they suffer from two main
drawbacks: (1) the objective functions are often heuristically constructed without a principled characterization of
goodness of hash codes, and (2) when optimizing, the binary constraints are crudely handled through some relaxation, leading to inferior results (Liu et al., 2014). In this

