McGan: Mean and Covariance Feature Matching GAN

Youssef Mroueh * 1 2 Tom Sercu * 1 2 Vaibhava Goel 2

Abstract
We introduce new families of Integral Probability Metrics (IPM) for training Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). Our IPMs are based on
matching statistics of distributions embedded in
a finite dimensional feature space. Mean and covariance feature matching IPMs allow for stable training of GANs, which we will call McGan. McGan minimizes a meaningful loss between distributions.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning of distributions is an important
problem, in which we aim to learn underlying features that
unveil the hidden the structure in the data. The classic approach to learning distributions is by explicitly parametrizing the data likelihood and fitting this model by maximizing the likelihood of the real data. An alternative recent approach is to learn a generative model of the data without explicit parametrization of the likelihood. Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) fall
under this category.
We focus on the GAN approach. In a nutshell GANs learn
a generator of the data via a min-max game between the
generator and a discriminator, which learns to distinguish
between “real” and “fake” samples. In this work we focus
on the objective function that is being minimized between
the learned generator distribution Pθ and the real data distribution Pr .
The original work of (Goodfellow et al., 2014) showed that
in GAN this objective is the Jensen-Shannon divergence.
(Nowozin et al., 2016) showed that other ϕ-divergences can
be successfully used. The Maximum Mean Discrepancy
objective (MMD) for GAN training was proposed in (Li
*

Equal contribution 1 AI Foundations. IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA 2 Watson Multimodal Algorithms and
Engines Group. IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Youssef Mroueh <mroueh@us.ibm.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 2015; Dziugaite et al., 2015). As shown empirically
in (Salimans et al., 2016), one can train the GAN discriminator using the objective of (Goodfellow et al., 2014) while
training the generator using mean feature matching. An energy based objective for GANs was also developed recently
(Zhao et al., 2017). Finally, closely related to our paper,
the recent work Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) of (Arjovsky
et al., 2017) proposed to use the Earth Moving distance
(EM) as an objective for training GANs. Furthermore (Arjovsky et al., 2017) show that the EM objective has many
advantages as the loss function correlates with the quality
of the generated samples and the mode dropping problem
is reduced in WGAN.
In this paper, inspired by the MMD distance and the kernel
mean embedding of distributions (Muandet et al., 2016) we
propose to embed distributions in a finite dimensional feature space and to match them based on their mean and covariance feature statistics. Incorporating first and second
order statistics has a better chance to capture the various
modes of the distribution. While mean feature matching
was empirically used in (Salimans et al., 2016), we show in
this work that it is theoretically grounded: similarly to the
EM distance in (Arjovsky et al., 2017), mean and covariance feature matching of two distributions can be written
as a distance in the framework of Integral Probability Metrics (IPM) (Muller, 1997). To match the means, we can
use any `q norm, hence we refer to mean matching IPM, as
IPMµ,q . For matching covariances, in this paper we consider the Ky-Fan norm, which can be computed cheaply
without explicitly constructing the full covariance matrices,
and refer to the corresponding IPM as IPMΣ .
Our technical contributions can be summarized as follows:
a) We show in Section 3 that the `q mean feature matching
IPMµ,q has two equivalent primal and dual formulations
and can be used as an objective for GAN training in both
formulations.
b) We show in Section 3.3 that the parametrization used in
Wasserstein GAN corresponds to `1 mean feature matching
GAN (IPMµ,1 GAN in our framework).
c) We show in Section 4.2 that the covariance feature
matching IPMΣ admits also two dual formulations, and can
be used as an objective for GAN training.

