Nearly Optimal Robust Matrix Completion

Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri 1 Kartik Gupta 1 Prateek Jain 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of Robust Matrix Completion (RMC) where the goal
is to recover a low-rank matrix by observing
a small number of its entries out of which a
few can be arbitrarily corrupted. We propose a
simple projected gradient descent-based method
to estimate the low-rank matrix that alternately
performs a projected gradient descent step and
cleans up a few of the corrupted entries using hard-thresholding. Our algorithm solves
RMC using nearly optimal number of observations while tolerating a nearly optimal number
of corruptions. Our result also implies significant improvement over the existing time complexity bounds for the low-rank matrix completion problem. Finally, an application of our result to the robust PCA problem (low-rank+sparse
matrix separation) leads to nearly linear time (in
matrix dimensions) algorithm for the same; existing state-of-the-art methods require quadratic
time. Our empirical results corroborate our theoretical results and show that even for moderate
sized problems, our method for robust PCA is an
order of magnitude faster than the existing methods.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the Robust Matrix Completion
(RMC) problem where the goal is to recover an underlying
low-rank matrix by observing a small number of sparsely
corrupted entries. Formally,
RMC:

Find rank-r matrix L∗ ∈ Rm×n
using Ω and PΩ (L∗ ) + S ∗ , (1)

where Ω ⊆ [m] × [n] is the set of observed entries
(throughout the paper we assume that m ≤ n), S ∗ denotes the sparse corruptions of the observed entries, i.e.,
1
Microsoft Research India. Correspondence to: Prateek Jain
<prajain@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Supp(S ∗ ) ⊂ Ω and sampling operator PΩ : Rm×n →
Rm×n is defined as:
(
Aij , if (i, j) ∈ Ω
(PΩ (A))ij =
(2)
0,
otherwise.
RMC is an important problem with several applications.
It is used to model recommendation systems with outliers
and to perform PCA under gross outliers as well as erasures (Jalali et al., 2011). In addition, it is a strict generalization of the following two fundamental problems in
machine learning:
Matrix Completion (MC): Matrix completion is the task
of completing a low rank matrix given a subset of entries of the matrix. It is widely used in recommender systems and also finds applications in system identification
and global positioning. Note that it is a special case of
the RMC problem where the matrix S ∗ = 0. State-of-theart result for MC uses nuclear norm minimization and requires |Ω| ≥ µ2 nr2 log2 n under standard µ-incoherence
assumption (see Section 3). But it requires O(m2 n) time
in general. The best sample complexity result for a nonconvex iterative method (with at most logarithmic dependence on the condition number of L∗ ) achieve exact recovery when |Ω| ≥ µ6 nr5 log2 n and needs O(|Ω|r) computational steps.
Robust PCA (RPCA): RPCA aims to decompose a
sparsely corrupted low rank matrix into its low rank and
sparse components. It corresponds to another special case
of RMC where the whole matrix is observed. State-ofthe-art results for RPCA shows exact recovery of a rank-r,
∗
µ-incoherent
L (see Assumption 1, Section 3) if at most

ρ = O µ12 r fraction of the entries in each row/column of
S ∗ are corrupted (Hsu et al., 2011; Netrapalli et al., 2014).
Moreover, St-NcRPCA algorithm (Netrapalli et al., 2014)
solves the problem in time O(mnr2 ).
Therefore, an efficient solution to the RMC problem implies efficient solutions to both the MC and RPCA problems. In this work, we attempt to answer the following
open question (assuming m ≤ n):
Can RMC be solved exactly by using |Ω| = O(rn log n)
observations out of which O( µ12 r ) fraction of the observed

