Prediction under Uncertainty in Sparse Spectrum Gaussian Processes
with Applications to Filtering and Control

Yunpeng Pan 1 2 Xinyan Yan 1 3 Evangelos A. Theodorou 1 2 Byron Boots 1 3

Abstract

ization,
Z

Sparse Spectrum Gaussian Processes (SSGPs)
are a powerful tool for scaling Gaussian processes (GPs) to large datasets. Existing SSGP
algorithms for regression assume deterministic
inputs, precluding their use in many real-world
robotics and engineering applications where accounting for input uncertainty is crucial. We
address this problem by proposing two analytic
moment-based approaches with closed-form expressions for SSGP regression with uncertain inputs. Our methods are more general and scalable than their standard GP counterparts, and are
naturally applicable to multi-step prediction or
uncertainty propagation. We show that efficient
algorithms for Bayesian filtering and stochastic
model predictive control can use these methods,
and we evaluate our algorithms with comparative
analyses and both real-world and simulated experiments.

1. Introduction
The problem of prediction under uncertainty, appears in
many fields of science and engineering that involve sequential prediction including state estimation (Ko & Fox,
2009; Deisenroth et al., 2012), time series prediction (Girard et al., 2003), stochastic process approximation (Archambeau et al., 2007), and planning and control (Deisenroth et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2015). In these problems, uncertainty can be found in both the predictive models and the
model’s inputs. Formally, we are often interested in finding
the probability density of a prediction y, given a distribution p(x) and a probabilistic model p(y|x). By marginal1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA 2 School of Aerospace Engineering 3 School of Interactive Computing.
Correspondence to: Yunpeng Pan
<ypan37@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

p(y) =

p(y|x)p(x) dx.

(1)

Unfortunately, computing this integral exactly is often intractable. In this paper, we tackle a subfamily of (1) where:
1) the probabilistic model is learned from data and specified by a sparse spectrum representation of a Gaussian process (SSGP); and 2) the input x is normally distributed. We
show that analytic expressions of the moments of p(y) can
be derived and that these are directly applicable to sequential prediction problems like filtering and control.
1.1. Related work
Gaussian Process (GP) regression with uncertain inputs
has been addressed by Candela et al. (2003); Girard et al.
(2003), and extended to the multivariate outputs by Kuss
(2006). These methods have led to the development of
many algorithms in reinforcement learning (Rasmussen &
Kuss, 2004; Deisenroth et al., 2015), Bayesian filtering
(Ko & Fox, 2009; Deisenroth et al., 2009), and smoothing
(Deisenroth et al., 2012). However, these approaches have
two major limitations: 1) they are not directly applicable
to large datasets, due to the polynomial time complexity
for exact inference (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006); and 2)
analytic moment expressions, when used, are restricted to
squared exponential (SE) kernels (Kuss, 2006) and cannot
be generalized to other kernels in a straightforward way.
A common method for approximating large-scale kernel
machines is through random Fourier features (Rahimi &
Recht, 2007). The key idea is to map the input to a lowdimensional feature space yielding fast linear methods. In
the context of GP regression (GPR), this idea leads to the
sparse spectrum GPR (SSGPR) algorithm (Lázaro-Gredilla
et al., 2010). SSGP has been extended in a number of ways
for, e.g. incremental model learning (Gijsberts & Metta,
2013), and large-scale GPR (Dai et al., 2014; Yan et al.,
2015). However, to the best of our knowledge, prediction
under uncertainty for SSGPs has not been explored. Although there are several alternative approximations to exact
GP inference including approximating the posterior distribution using inducing points, e.g., (Snelson & Ghahramani,
2006; Titsias, 2009; Cheng & Boots, 2016), comparing different GP approximations is not the focus of this paper.

