Online Learning to Rank in Stochastic Click Models
Masrour Zoghi 1 Tomas Tunys 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3 Branislav Kveton 4 Csaba Szepesvari 5
Zheng Wen 4

Abstract
Online learning to rank is a core problem in information retrieval and machine learning. Many
provably efficient algorithms have been recently
proposed for this problem in specific click models. The click model is a model of how the user
interacts with a list of documents. Though these
results are significant, their impact on practice is
limited, because all proposed algorithms are designed for specific click models and lack convergence guarantees in other models. In this work,
we propose BatchRank, the first online learning
to rank algorithm for a broad class of click models. The class encompasses two most fundamental click models, the cascade and position-based
models. We derive a gap-dependent upper bound
on the T -step regret of BatchRank and evaluate
it on a range of web search queries. We observe
that BatchRank outperforms ranked bandits and
is more robust than CascadeKL-UCB, an existing
algorithm for the cascade model.

1. Introduction
Learning to rank (LTR) is a core problem in information
retrieval (Liu, 2011) and machine learning; with numerous
applications in web search, recommender systems and ad
placement. The goal of LTR is to present a list of K documents out of L that maximizes the satisfaction of the user.
This problem has been traditionally solved by training supervised learning models on manually annotated relevance
judgments. However, strong evidence suggests (Agichtein
1
Independent Researcher, Vancouver, BC, Canada (Part
of this work was done during an internship at Adobe Research) 2 Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
3
DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA (This work was done
while the author was at Adobe Research) 4 Adobe Research, San
Jose, CA, USA 5 University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
Correspondence to: Branislav Kveton <kveton@adobe.com>,
Masrour Zoghi <masrour@zoghi.org>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 2006; Zoghi et al., 2016) that the feedback of users,
that is clicks, can lead to major improvements over supervised LTR methods. In addition, billions of users interact
daily with commercial LTR systems, and it is finally feasible to interactively and adaptive maximize the satisfaction
of these users from clicks.
These observations motivated numerous papers on online
LTR methods, which utilize user feedback to improve the
quality of ranked lists. These methods can be divided into
two groups: learning the best ranker in a family of rankers
(Yue & Joachims, 2009; Hofmann et al., 2013), and learning the best list under some model of user interaction with
the list (Radlinski et al., 2008a; Slivkins et al., 2013), such
as a click model (Chuklin et al., 2015). The click model is
a stochastic model of how the user examines and clicks on
a list of documents. In this work, we focus on online LTR
in click models and address a shortcoming of all past work
on this topic.
More precisely, many algorithms have been proposed and
analyzed for finding the optimal ranked list in the cascade
model (CM) (Kveton et al., 2015a; Combes et al., 2015;
Kveton et al., 2015b; Zong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016), the
dependent-click model (DCM) (Katariya et al., 2016), and
the position-based model (PBM) (Lagree et al., 2016). The
problem is that if the user interacts with ranked lists using
a different click model, the theoretical guarantees cease to
hold. Then, as we show empirically, these algorithms may
converge to suboptimal solutions. This is a grave issue because it is well known that no single click model captures
the behavior of an entire population of users (Grotov et al.,
2015). Therefore, it is critical to develop efficient learning
algorithms for multiple click models, which is the aim of
this paper.
We make the following contributions:
• We propose stochastic click bandits, a learning framework for maximizing the expected number of clicks in
online LTR in a broad class of click models, which includes both the PBM (Richardson et al., 2007) and CM
(Craswell et al., 2008).
• We propose the first algorithm, BatchRank, that is guaranteed to learn the optimal solution in a diverse class of
click models. This is of a great practical significance, as

