Stochastic Gradient Monomial Gamma Sampler

Yizhe Zhang 1 Changyou Chen 1 Zhe Gan 1 Ricardo Henao 1 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
Recent advances in stochastic gradient techniques have made it possible to estimate posterior distributions from large datasets via Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). However, when
the target posterior is multimodal, mixing performance is often poor. This results in inadequate exploration of the posterior distribution. A
framework is proposed to improve the sampling
efficiency of stochastic gradient MCMC, based
on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. A generalized kinetic function is leveraged, delivering superior
stationary mixing, especially for multimodal distributions. Techniques are also discussed to overcome the practical issues introduced by this generalization. It is shown that the proposed approach is better at exploring complex multimodal
posterior distributions, as demonstrated on multiple applications and in comparison with other
stochastic gradient MCMC methods.

1. Introduction
The development of increasingly sophisticated Bayesian
models in modern machine learning has accentuated the
need for efficient generation of asymptotically exact samples from complex posterior distributions. Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) is an important framework for drawing samples from a target density function. MCMC sampling typically aims to estimate a desired expectation in
terms of a collection of samples, avoiding the need to
compute intractable integrals. The Metropolis algorithm
(Metropolis et al., 1953) was originally proposed to tackle
this task. Despite great success, this method is based
on random walk exploration, which often leads to inefficient posterior sampling (with a finite number of samples).
Alternatively, exploration of a target distribution can be
guided using proposals inspired by Hamiltonian dynam1
Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708. Correspondence to:
Yizhe Zhang <yizhe.zhang@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ics, leading to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane
et al., 1987). Aided by gradient information, HMC is able
to move efficiently in parameter space, thus greatly improving exploration. However, the emergence of big datasets
poses a new challenge for HMC, as evaluation of gradients
on whole datasets becomes computationally demanding, if
not prohibitive, in many cases.
To scale HMC methods to big data, recent advances in
Stochastic Gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC) have subsampled the dataset into minibatches in each iteration, to decrease computational burden (Welling & Teh, 2011; Chen
et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015). Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) (Welling & Teh,
2011) was first proposed to generate approximate samples from a posterior distribution using minibatches. Since
then, research has focused on leveraging the minibatch idea
while also providing theoretical guarantees. For instance,
Teh et al. (2014) showed that by appropriately injecting
noise while using a stepsize-decay scheme, SGLD is able to
converge asymptotically to the desired posterior. Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) (Chen
et al., 2014) extended SGLD with auxiliary momentum
variables, akin to HMC, and introduced a friction term to
counteract the stochastic noise due to subsampling. However, exact estimation of such noise is needed to guarantee a correct SGHMC sampler. To alleviate this issue, the
Stochastic Gradient Nosé-Hoover Thermostat (SGNHT)
(Ding et al., 2014) algorithm introduced so-called thermostat variables to adaptively estimate stochastic noise via a
thermal-equilibrium condition.
One standing challenge of SG-MCMC methods is inefficiency when exploring complex multimodal distributions.
This limitation is commonly found in latent variable models with a multi-layer structure. Inefficiency is manifested because sampling algorithms have difficulties moving across modes, while traveling along the surface of the
distribution. As a result, it may take a very large number of
iterations (posterior samples) to cover more than one mode,
greatly limiting scalability.
We investigate strategies for improving mixing in SGMCMC. We propose the Stochastic Gradient Monomial
Gamma Thermostat (SGMGT), building upon the Monomial Gamma Sampler (MGS) proposed by Zhang et al.

