Improving Stochastic Policy Gradients in Continuous Control with Deep
Reinforcement Learning using the Beta Distribution
Po-Wei Chou 1 Daniel Maturana 1 Sebastian Scherer 1

Abstract
Recently, reinforcement learning with deep neural networks has achieved great success in challenging continuous control problems such as 3D
locomotion and robotic manipulation. However,
in real-world control problems, the actions one
can take are bounded by physical constraints,
which introduces a bias when the standard Gaussian distribution is used as the stochastic policy.
In this work, we propose to use the Beta distribution as an alternative and analyze the bias
and variance of the policy gradients of both policies. We show that the Beta policy is bias-free
and provides signiﬁcantly faster convergence and
higher scores over the Gaussian policy when
both are used with trust region policy optimization (TRPO) and actor critic with experience replay (ACER), the state-of-the-art on- and offpolicy stochastic methods respectively, on OpenAI Gym’s and MuJoCo’s continuous control environments.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, reinforcement learning with deep feature representations (Hinton et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) has achieved unprecedented (or even super-human
level) successes in many tasks, including playing Go (Silver et al., 2016) and playing Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013;
2015; Guo et al., 2014; Schulman et al., 2015a).
In reinforcement learning tasks, the agent’s action space
may be discrete, continuous, or some combination of both.
Continuous action spaces are generally more challenging
(Lillicrap et al., 2015). A naive approach to adapting deep
reinforcement learning methods, such as deep Q-learning
(Mnih et al., 2013), to continuous domains is simply dis1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Sebastian Scherer <basti@andrew.cmu.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. An example of continuous control with bounded action
space. In most real-world continuous control problems, the actions can only take on values within some bounded interval (ﬁnite
support). For example, the steering angle of most Ackermannsteered vehicles can only range from −30◦ to +30◦ .

cretizing the action space. However, this method has several drawbacks. If the discretization is coarse, the resulting output will not be smooth; if it is ﬁne, the number
of discretized actions may be intractably high. This issue
is compounded in scenarios with high degrees of freedom
(e.g., robotic manipulators and humanoid robots), due to
the curse of dimensionality (Bellman, 1956).
There has been much recent progress in model-free continuous control with reinforcement learning. Asynchronous
Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) allows
neural network policies to be trained and updated asynchronously with multiple CPU cores in parallel. Value
Iteration Networks (Tamar et al., 2016), provide a differentiable module that can learn to plan. Exciting results
have been shown on highly challenging 3D locomotion and
manipulation tasks (Heess et al., 2015; Schulman et al.,
2015b;a), including real-world robotics problems where
the inputs is raw visual data (Watter et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016). Derivative-free black
box optimization like evolution strategies (Salimans et al.,
2017) have also been proven to be very successful in wide
variety of tasks.
Despite recent successes, most reinforcement learning algorithms still require large amounts of training episodes
and huge computational resources. This limits their applicability to richer, more complex, and higher dimensional

