Tight Bounds for Approximate Carathéodory and Beyond
Vahab Mirrokni * 1 Renato Paes Leme * 1 Adrian Vladu * 2 Sam Chiu-wai Wong * 3

Abstract
We present a deterministic nearly-linear time algorithm for approximating any point inside a convex
polytope with a sparse convex combination of the
polytope’s vertices. Our result provides a constructive proof for the Approximate Carathéodory
Problem (Barman, 2015), which states that any
point inside a polytope contained in the `p ball
of radius D can be approximated to within ✏ in
`p norm by a convex combination of O D2 p/✏2
vertices of the polytope for p 2. While for the
particular case of p = 2, this can be achieved by
the well-known Perceptron algorithm, we follow a
more principled approach which generalizes to arbitrary p 2; furthermore, this naturally extends
to domains with more complicated geometry, as it
is the case for providing an approximate Birkhoffvon Neumann decomposition. Secondly, we show
that the sparsity bound is tight for `p norms, using an argument based on anti-concentration for
the binomial distribution, thus resolving an open
question posed by Barman. Experimentally, we
verify that our deterministic optimization-based
algorithms achieve in practice much better sparsity than previously known sampling-based algorithms. We also show how to apply our techniques
to SVM training and rounding fractional points in
matroid and flow polytopes.

1. Introduction
The (exact) Carathéodory Theorem is a fundamental
result in convex geometry which states that any point
u in a polytope P ✓ Rn can be expressed as a convex
combination of n + 1 vertices of P . The approximate
*

1

Equal contribution Google Research, New York, NY, USA
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Vahab Mirrokni <mirrokni@google.com>,
Renato Paes Leme <renatoppl@google.com>, Adrian
Vladu <avladu@mit.edu>, Sam Chiu-wai Wong <samcwong@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

version states that if one is willing to tolerate an error of
✏ in `p norm, O D2 p/✏2 vertices suffice to approximate
u, where D is the radius of the smallest `p ball enclosing
P . The key significance of the approximate Carathéodory
Theorem is that the bound it provides is dimension-free, and
consequently allows us to approximate any point inside the
polytope with a sparse convex combination of vertices.
The Approximate Carathéodory Problem Given a polytope P contained inside the `p ball of radius D, and u 2 P ,
find vertices v1 , . . . , vk of P such that k = O D2 p/✏2
Pk
and k1 i=1 vi u  ✏.
p

The `2 version of this result is quite an old observation.
The earliest record is perhaps due to Novikoff (1962) who
showed that the `2 version of Approximate Carathéodory
can be obtained as a byproduct of the analyis of the Perceptron Algorithm (as pointed out by (Blum et al., 2016)). The
fact that a sparse approximation can be obtained by a very
simple and efficient algorithms found many applications in
Machine Learning. Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2010) use it to
minimize the loss of a linear predictor using a small number of features. Garber & Hazan (2013) use it to speed up
conditional grandient methods.

The results described above focus on the `2 norm. The
interest for approximate Caratheodory in higher `p -norms
was sparked by a recent result of Barman (2015) who used
it to improve algorithms for computing Nash equilibria in
game theory and algorithms for the k-densest subgraph in
combinatorial optimization. Another area where higher
norms are widely applied is in functional analysis where
the approximate Caratheodory Theorem is often referred as
Maurey’s Lemma (Pisier, 1980).
Both Barman’s P
proof and Maurey’s original proof start from
n+1
a solution u = i=1 i vi of the exact Carathéodory problem, interpret the coefficients i of the convex combination
as a probability distribution and generate a sparse solution
by sampling from the distribution induced by . Concentration inequalities are then applied to argue that the average
sampled solution is close to u in `p -norm. The proof is clean
and elegant, but is computationally expensive since it involves first computing a solution to the exact Carathéodory

