High Dimensional Bayesian Optimization with Elastic Gaussian Process

Santu Rana * 1 Cheng Li * 1 Sunil Gupta 1 Vu Nguyen 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is an efficient way to optimize expensive black-box functions such as designing a new product with highest quality or
tuning hyperparameter of a machine learning algorithm. However, it has a serious limitation
when the parameter space is high-dimensional
as Bayesian optimization crucially depends on
solving a global optimization of a surrogate utility function in the same sized dimensions. The
surrogate utility function, known commonly as
acquisition function is a continuous function but
can be extremely sharp at high dimension - having only a few peaks marooned in a large terrain of almost flat surface. Global optimization algorithms such as DIRECT are infeasible at
higher dimensions and gradient-dependent methods cannot move if initialized in the flat terrain. We propose an algorithm that enables local
gradient-dependent algorithms to move through
the flat terrain by using a sequence of gross-tofiner Gaussian process priors on the objective
function as we leverage two underlying facts a) there exists a large enough length-scales for
which the acquisition function can be made to
have a significant gradient at any location in the
parameter space, and b) the extrema of the consecutive acquisition functions are close although
they are different only due to a small difference in
the length-scales. Theoretical guarantees are provided and experiments clearly demonstrate the
utility of the proposed method on both benchmark test functions and real-world case studies.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization method has established itself as an
efficient way to optimize black-box functions (Jones et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data
Analytics (PRaDA), Deakin University, Australia. Correspondence to: Santu Rana <santu.rana@deakin.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

1998) which are also expensive to evaluate. Examples include experimental design to optimize the quality of a physical product (Brochu et al., 2010) or hyperparameter tuning
of machine learning algorithms (Bardenet et al., 2013). In
both cases the response functions are unknown and each
evaluation of either making the product to test the quality
or training a model from large data can be time-consuming.
Likewise, it has found applications in a variety of domains
including computer vision (Denil et al., 2012) and sensor
set selection (Garnett et al., 2010).
Bayesian optimization is a sequential procedure where a
probabilistic form of the unknown function is maintained
using a Gaussian process (GP). A GP is specified by a mean
function and a covariance function. A popular choice of
covariance function is the squared exponential kernel (Rasmussen and Williams, 2005). A crucial parameter of the
kernel is the length-scale which dictates prior belief about
the smoothness of the objective function. The posterior of
a Gaussian process is analytically tractable and is used to
estimate both the mean and the variance of the estimation
at unobserved locations. Next, a cheap surrogate function
is built that seeks the location where lies the highest possibility of obtaining a higher response. The possibility is
expressed through a variety of acquisition functions which
trade-off exploitation of the predicted best mean and exploration around high predicted variance. Typical acquisition
functions include Expected Improvement (EI) (Mockus,
1994) and GP-UCB (Srinivas et al., 2010).
Acquisition functions are continuous functions, yet they
may be extremely sharp functions at higher dimensions,
especially when the size of observed data is small. Generally, they have some peaks and a large area of mostly
flat surface. For this reason, the global optimization of
high-dimensional acquisition functions is hard and can be
prohibitively expensive. This makes it difficult to scale
Bayesian optimization to high dimensions. Generic global
optimization algorithms such as DIRECT (Jones et al.,
1993) or simplex-based methods such as Nelder-Mead
(Olsson and Nelson, 1975) or genetic algorithm based
methods (Runarsson and Yao, 2005; Beyer and Schwefel,
2002) perform reasonably when the dimension is low, but
at higher dimensions they can become extremely inefficient
and actually become infeasible within the practical limitation of resource and time. Multi-start based method start

