Stochastic Gradient MCMC Methods for Hidden Markov Models
Yi-An Ma 1 Nicholas J. Foti 1 Emily B. Fox 1

Abstract
Stochastic gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC) algorithms have proven useful in scaling Bayesian
inference to large datasets under an assumption of i.i.d data. We instead develop an SGMCMC algorithm to learn the parameters of hidden Markov models (HMMs) for time-dependent
data. There are two challenges to applying SGMCMC in this setting: The latent discrete states,
and needing to break dependencies when considering minibatches. We consider a marginal likelihood representation of the HMM and propose an
algorithm that harnesses the inherent memory decay of the process. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on synthetic experiments
and an ion channel recording data, with runtimes
significantly outperforming batch MCMC.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient based algorithms have proven crucial
in numerous areas for scaling inference algorithms to large
datasets. The key idea is to employ noisy estimates of the
gradient based on minibatches of data, avoiding a costly
gradient computation using the full dataset (Robbins &
Monro, 1951). Assuming the data are i.i.d. and the minibatches are properly scaled, the stochastic gradient is an
unbiased estimate of the true gradient. In the context of
Bayesian inference, such approaches have proven useful in
scaling variational inference (Hoffman et al., 2013; Bryant
& Sudderth, 2012; Broderick et al., 2013; Foti et al., 2014)
and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Welling & Teh,
2011; Patterson & Teh, 2013; Chen et al., 2014; Ding et al.,
2014; Shang et al., 2015). For the latter, a primary focus
has been on the influence of the stochastic gradient noise
on the MCMC iterates; in contrast to many optimizationbased procedures, it is non-trivial to show that the underlying (stochastic) dynamics maintain the correct stationary
1
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Yi-An Ma <yianma@uw.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

distribution in the presence of such noise. Significant headway has been made in developing such correct SG-MCMC
procedures. These algorithms have shown great practical
benefits and have gained significant traction.
A separate challenge, however, is the important and often
overlooked question of whether such stochastic gradient
techniques can be applied to massive amounts of sequential
or otherwise non-i.i.d. data. In such cases, crucial dependencies must be broken to form the necessary minibatches.
This question received some attention in the stochastic variational inference (SVI) algorithm of Foti et al. (2014) for
hidden Markov models (HMMs). In this work, we also focus in on HMMs as a simple example of a sequential data
model, but turn our attention to SG-MCMC algorithms.
There are many existing algorithms for inferring
the model parameters of an HMM including Monte
Carlo methods (Scott, 2002), expectation-maximization
(EM) (Bishop, 2006), and variational algorithms (Beale,
2003). All of these ideas operate by iterating between a
local update for the latent states, followed by a global
update of the model parameters. The local update is
usually performed using the forward-backward algorithm
that allows computation of any marginal, or pair-wise
marginal, in time linear in the length of the sequence.
In the variational context, recent work has focused on scaling these local-global inference schemes to settings with
a large number of replicates of short sequences (Johnson
& Willsky, 2014; Hughes et al., 2015). These methods
utilize the fact that independent replicates of the observation sequence can be used to compute unbiased gradient estimates (Johnson & Willsky, 2014), and can be used
to incrementally update sufficient statistics (Hughes et al.,
2015). In contrast, the SVI-HMM algorithm of Foti et al.
(2014) examines how to deal with extremely long observation sequences. The algorithm heuristically breaks the
dependence between observations and performs local updates on short subsequences of observations using a limited forward-backward algorithm. These existing methods
suffer from a number of drawbacks. The variational approaches must use an approximate posterior distribution
for both the state- and model-parameters, which may not
be representative of the true distributions. The methods are
also limited to conjugate prior distributions over the parameters, which can severely limit the expressiveness of the

