meProp: Sparsified Back Propagation for Accelerated Deep Learning
with Reduced Overfitting

Xu Sun 1 2 Xuancheng Ren 1 2 Shuming Ma 1 2 Houfeng Wang 1 2

Abstract
We propose a simple yet effective technique for
neural network learning. The forward propagation is computed as usual. In back propagation,
only a small subset of the full gradient is computed to update the model parameters. The gradient vectors are sparsified in such a way that
only the top-k elements (in terms of magnitude)
are kept. As a result, only k rows or columns
(depending on the layout) of the weight matrix
are modified, leading to a linear reduction (k divided by the vector dimension) in the computational cost. Surprisingly, experimental results demonstrate that we can update only 1–4% of the
weights at each back propagation pass. This does
not result in a larger number of training iterations. More interestingly, the accuracy of the resulting models is actually improved rather than
degraded, and a detailed analysis is given.

1. Introduction
Neural network learning is typically slow, where back propagation usually dominates the computational cost during
the learning process. Back propagation entails a high computational cost because it needs to compute full gradients
and update all model parameters in each learning step. It
is not uncommon for a neural network to have a massive
number of model parameters.
In this study, we propose a minimal effort back propagation method, which we call meProp, for neural network
learning. The idea is that we compute only a very small
but critical portion of the gradient information, and update
only the corresponding minimal portion of the parameters
in each learning step. This leads to sparsified gradients,
1

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science,
Peking University, China 2 MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, China. Correspondence to:
Xu Sun <xusun@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

such that only highly relevant parameters are updated and
other parameters stay untouched. The sparsified back propagation leads to a linear reduction in the computational
cost.
To realize our approach, we need to answer two questions.
The first question is how to find the highly relevant subset
of the parameters from the current sample in stochastic learning. We propose a top-k search method to find the most
important parameters. Interestingly, experimental results
demonstrate that we can update only 1–4% of the weights
at each back propagation pass. This does not result in a
larger number of training iterations. The proposed method
is general-purpose and it is independent of specific models
and specific optimizers (e.g., Adam and AdaGrad).
The second question is whether or not this minimal effort
back propagation strategy will hurt the accuracy of the trained models. We show that our strategy does not degrade
the accuracy of the trained model, even when a very small
portion of the parameters is updated. More interestingly,
our experimental results reveal that our strategy actually
improves the model accuracy in most cases. Based on our
experiments, we find that it is probably because the minimal effort update does not modify weakly relevant parameters in each update, which makes overfitting less likely,
similar to the dropout effect.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
• We propose a sparsified back propagation technique
for neural network learning, in which only a small
subset of the full gradient is computed to update the
model parameters. Experimental results demonstrate
that we can update only 1–4% of the weights at each
back propagation pass. This does not result in a larger
number of training iterations.
• Surprisingly, our experimental results reveal that the
accuracy of the resulting models is actually improved, rather than degraded. We demonstrate this effect
by conducting experiments on different deep learning
models (LSTM and MLP), various optimization methods (Adam and AdaGrad), and diverse tasks (natural
language processing and image recognition).

