Self-Paced Co-training

Fan Ma 1 Deyu Meng * 1 Qi Xie 1 Zina Li 1 Xuanyi Dong 2

Abstract
Co-training is a well-known semi-supervised
learning approach which trains classifiers on two
different views and exchanges labels of unlabeled instances in an iterative way. During cotraining process, labels of unlabeled instances in
the training pool are very likely to be false especially in the initial training rounds, while the
standard co-training algorithm utilizes a “draw
without replacement” manner and does not remove these false labeled instances from training.
This issue not only tends to degenerate its performance but also hampers its fundamental theory. Besides, there is no optimization model to
explain what objective a co-training process optimizes. To these issues, in this study we design a
new co-training algorithm named self-paced cotraining (SPaCo) with a “draw with replacement”
learning mode. The rationality of SPaCo can be
proved under theoretical assumptions utilized in
traditional co-training research, and furthermore,
the algorithm exactly complies with the alternative optimization process for an optimization
model of self-paced curriculum learning, which
can be finely explained in robust learning manner. Experimental results substantiate the superiority of the proposed method as compared with
current state-of-the-art co-training methods.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to implement learning on both labeled and unlabeled data through fully
considering the supervised knowledge delivered by labeled data and unsupervised data structure under unlabeled
ones (Zhu, 2011). Co-training (Blum & Mitchell, 1998) is
one of the most classical and well known SSL approaches
that train classifiers on two views and exchanges labels of
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 2 University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to: Deyu
Meng <dymeng@xjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

unlabeled instances in an iterative way. In the recent years,
co-training has been attracting much attention attributed
to both its wide applications, like web classification and
visual detection (Xu et al., 2009), and rational theoretical supports (Blum & Mitchell, 1998; Balcan et al., 2004;
Wang & Zhou, 2010; 2013).
However, there are still some limitations existing in current co-training investigation. Specifically, although there
are multiple theoretical results to support the rationality
of the co-training regimes, most of them require a strong
pre-assumption that the false pseudo-labeled instances can
be correctly recognized during training by classifiers or
pseudo labels of unlabeled instances predicted in each iteration are of a high confidence extent. Based on such
high-confidence assumption, most of current co-training
algorithms add pseudo-labeled samples into training without replacement. Nevertheless, in most real cases such assumption is too subjective to be satisfied, especially in the
early learning stage of a co-training algorithm. The learned
classifiers might be not able to confidently distinguish certain samples, or precisely pseudo-annotate them with an
expected accuracy requirement. This not only inclines
to degenerate the performance of co-training since those
false pseudo-labeled involved in training have no chance
to be rectified in the latter training process on account of
such “draw without replacement” manner, but also might
make the basic assumption under theoretical support of cotraining incorrect.
Another critical issue in most of current co-training methods is on their absence of an optimization model that can
measure the performance and explain the intrinsic mechanism under the co-training implementation. As formally
defined in (Mitchell, 1997), the performance measure is
one of the necessary elements for a machine learning
method. It is thus meaningful to explore whether there exists such an optimization model, which can finely interpret
the co-training implementation as the process of solving
this model. Such model also should be helpful in revealing
more insights underlying co-training.
To address the aforementioned issues, a new co-training
method, called self-paced co-training (SPaCo) is proposed
in this study. The method differs from the previous cotraining regimes mainly in two aspects: Firstly, it utilizes a

