Cognitive Psychology for Deep Neural Networks:
A Shape Bias Case Study

Samuel Ritter * 1 David G.T. Barrett * 1 Adam Santoro 1 Matt M. Botvinick 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have advanced
performance on a wide range of complex tasks,
rapidly outpacing our understanding of the nature of their solutions. While past work sought
to advance our understanding of these models,
none has made use of the rich history of problem
descriptions, theories, and experimental methods
developed by cognitive psychologists to study
the human mind. To explore the potential value
of these tools, we chose a well-established analysis from developmental psychology that explains
how children learn word labels for objects, and
applied that analysis to DNNs. Using datasets
of stimuli inspired by the original cognitive psychology experiments, we find that state-of-the-art
one shot learning models trained on ImageNet
exhibit a similar bias to that observed in humans: they prefer to categorize objects according to shape rather than color. The magnitude
of this shape bias varies greatly among architecturally identical, but differently seeded models, and even fluctuates within seeds throughout training, despite nearly equivalent classification performance. These results demonstrate
the capability of tools from cognitive psychology
for exposing hidden computational properties of
DNNs, while concurrently providing us with a
computational model for human word learning.

1. Introduction
During the last half-decade deep learning has significantly
improved performance on a variety of tasks (for a review,
see LeCun et al. (2015)). However, deep neural network
(DNN) solutions remain poorly understood, leaving many
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Samuel Ritter <ritters@google.com>, David G.T. Barrett <barrett@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

to think of these models as black boxes, and to question
whether they can be understood at all (Bornstein, 2016;
Lipton, 2016). This opacity obstructs both basic research
seeking to improve these models, and applications of these
models to real world problems (Caruana et al., 2015).
Recent pushes have aimed to better understand DNNs:
tailor-made loss functions and architectures produce more
interpretable features (Higgins et al., 2016; Raposo et al.,
2017) while output-behavior analyses unveil previously
opaque operations of these networks (Karpathy et al.,
2015). Parallel to this work, neuroscience-inspired methods such as activation visualization (Li et al., 2015), ablation analysis (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) and activation maximization (Yosinski et al., 2015) have also been applied.
Altogether, this line of research developed a set of promising tools for understanding DNNs, each paper producing
a glimmer of insight. Here, we propose another tool for
the kit, leveraging methods inspired not by neuroscience,
but instead by psychology. Cognitive psychologists have
long wrestled with the problem of understanding another
opaque intelligent system: the human mind. We contend
that the search for a better understanding of DNNs may
profit from the rich heritage of problem descriptions, theories, and experimental tools developed in cognitive psychology. To test this belief, we performed a proof-ofconcept study on state-of-the-art DNNs that solve a particularly challenging task: one-shot word learning. Specifically, we investigate Matching Networks (MNs) (Vinyals
et al., 2016), which have state-of-the-art one-shot learning
performance on ImageNet and we investigate an Inception
Baseline model (Szegedy et al., 2015a).
Following the approach used in cognitive psychology, we
began by hypothesizing an inductive bias our model may
use to solve a word learning task. Research in developmental psychology shows that when learning new words,
humans tend to assign the same name to similarly shaped
items rather than to items with similar color, texture, or
size. To test the hypothesis that our DNNs discover this
same “shape bias”, we probed our models using datasets
and an experimental setup based on the original shape bias
studies (Landau et al., 1988).

