Automatic Discovery of the Statistical Types of Variables in a Dataset
Isabel Valera 1 Zoubin Ghahramani 1 2

Abstract
A common practice in statistics and machine
learning is to assume that the statistical data types
(e.g., ordinal, categorical or real-valued) of variables, and usually also the likelihood model, is
known. However, as the availability of realworld data increases, this assumption becomes
too restrictive. Data are often heterogeneous,
complex, and improperly or incompletely documented. Surprisingly, despite their practical
importance, there is still a lack of tools to automatically discover the statistical types of, as
well as appropriate likelihood (noise) models for,
the variables in a dataset. In this paper, we fill
this gap by proposing a Bayesian method, which
accurately discovers the statistical data types in
both synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
Data analysis problems often involve pre-processing raw
data, which is a tedious and time-demanding task due to
several reasons: i) raw data is often unstructured and largescale; ii) it contains errors and missing values; and iii)
documentation may be incomplete or not available. As a
consequence, as the availability of data increases, so does
the interest of the data science community to automate this
process. In particular, there are a growing body of work
which focuses on automating the different stages of data
pre-processing, including data cleaning (Hellerstein, 2008),
data wrangling (Kandel et al., 2011) and data integration
and fusion (Dong & Srivastava, 2013).
The outcome of data pre-processing is commonly a structured dataset, in which the objects are described by a set of
attributes. However, before being able to proceed with the
predictive analytics step of the data analysis process, the
data scientist often needs to identify which kind of variables (i.e., real-values, categorical, ordinal, etc.) these attributes represent. This labeling of the data is necessary
to select the appropriate machine learning approach to ex1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
Uber AI Labs, San Francisco, California, USA. Correspondence
to: Isabel Valera <miv24@cam.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

plore, find patterns or make predictions on the data. As an
example, a prediction task is solved differently depending
on the kind of data to be predicted—e.g., while prediction
on categorical variables is usually formulated as a classification task, in the case of ordinal variables it is formulated
as an ordinal regression problem (Agresti, 2010). Moreover, different data types should be pre-processed and input
differently in the predictive tool—e.g., categorical inputs
are often transformed into as many binary inputs (which
state whether the object belongs to a category or not) as
number of categories; positive real inputs might be logtransformed, etc.
Information on the statistical data types in a dataset becomes particularly important in the context of statistical
machine learning (Breiman, 2001), where the choice of a
likelihood model appears as a main assumption. Although
extensive work has focused on model selection (Ando,
2010; Burnham & Anderson, 2003), the likelihood model
is usually assumed to be known and fixed. As an example,
a common approach is to model continuous data as Gaussian variables, and discrete data as categorical variables.
However, while extensive work has shown the advantages
of capturing the statistical properties of the observed data in
the likelihood model (Chu & Ghahramani, 2005a; Schmidt
et al., 2009; Hilbe, 2011; Valera & Ghahramani, 2014),
there still exists a lack of tools to automatically perform
likelihood model selection, or equivalently to discover the
most plausible statistical type of the variables in the data,
directly from the data.
In this work, we aim to fill this gap by proposing a general and scalable Bayesian method to solve this task. The
proposed method exploits the latent structure in the data to
automatically distinguish among real-valued, positive realvalued and interval data as types of continuous variables,
and among categorical, ordinal and count data as types of
discrete variables. The proposed method is based on probabilistic modeling and exploits the following key ideas:
i) There exists a latent structure in the data that capture
the statistical dependencies among the different objects and attributes in the dataset. Here, as in standard
latent feature modeling, we assume that we can capture this structure by a low-rank representation, such
that conditioning on it, the likelihood model factorizes
for both number of objects and attributes.
ii) The observation model for each attribute can be ex-

