Multichannel End-to-end Speech Recognition

Tsubasa Ochiai 1 Shinji Watanabe 2 Takaaki Hori 2 John R. Hershey 2

Abstract
The field of speech recognition is in the midst
of a paradigm shift: end-to-end neural networks
are challenging the dominance of hidden Markov
models as a core technology. Using an attention
mechanism in a recurrent encoder-decoder architecture solves the dynamic time alignment problem, allowing joint end-to-end training of the
acoustic and language modeling components. In
this paper we extend the end-to-end framework
to encompass microphone array signal processing for noise suppression and speech enhancement within the acoustic encoding network. This
allows the beamforming components to be optimized jointly within the recognition architecture
to improve the end-to-end speech recognition objective. Experiments on the noisy speech benchmarks (CHiME-4 and AMI) show that our multichannel end-to-end system outperformed the
attention-based baseline with input from a conventional adaptive beamformer.

1. Introduction
Existing automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems are
based on a complicated hybrid of separate components, including acoustic, phonetic, and language models (Jelinek,
1976). Such systems are typically based on deep neural
network acoustic models combined with hidden Markov
models to represent the language and phonetic contextdependent state and their temporal alignment with the
acoustic signal (DNN-HMM) (Bourlard & Morgan, 1994;
Hinton et al., 2012). As a simpler alternative, end-to-end
speech recognition paradigm has attracted great research
interest (Chorowski et al., 2014; 2015; Chan et al., 2016;
Graves & Jaitly, 2014; Miao et al., 2015). This paradigm
simplifies the above hybrid architecture by subsuming it
1
Doshisha University, Kyoto, Japan 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Tsubasa Ochiai <eup1105@mail4.doshisha.ac.jp>,
Shinji Watanabe <watanabe@merl.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

into a single neural network. Specifically, an attentionbased encoder-decoder framework (Chorowski et al., 2014)
integrates all of those components using a set of recurrent
neural networks (RNN), which map from acoustic feature
sequences to character label sequences.
However, existing end-to-end frameworks have focused
on clean speech, and do not include speech enhancement,
which is essential to good performance in noisy environments. For example, recent industrial applications (e.g.,
Amazon echo) and benchmark studies (Barker et al., 2016;
Kinoshita et al., 2016) show that multichannel speech enhancement techniques, using beamforming methods, produce substantial improvements as a pre-processor for conventional hybrid systems, in the presence of strong background noise. In light of the above trends, this paper extends the existing attention-based encoder-decoder framework by integrating multichannel speech enhancement.
Our proposed multichannel end-to-end speech recognition
framework is trained to directly translate from multichannel acoustic signals to text.
A key concept of the multichannel end-to-end framework
is to optimize the entire inference procedure, including
the beamforming, based on the final ASR objectives, such
as word/character error rate (WER/CER). Traditionally,
beamforming techniques such as delay-and-sum and filterand-sum are optimized based on a signal-level loss function, independently of speech recognition task (Benesty
et al., 2008; Van Veen & Buckley, 1988). Their use in ASR
requires ad-hoc modifications such as Wiener post-filtering
or distortionless constraints, as well as steering mechanisms determine a look direction to focus the beamformer
on the target speech (Wölfel & McDonough, 2009). In contrast, our framework incorporates recently proposed neural beamforming mechanisms as a differentiable component to allow joint optimization of the multichannel speech
enhancement within the end-to-end system to improve the
ASR objective.
Recent studies on neural beamformers can be categorized
into two types: (1) beamformers with a filter estimation
network (Li et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2016a; Meng et al.,
2017) and (2) beamformers with a mask estimation network (Heymann et al., 2016; Erdogan et al., 2016). Both
methods obtain an enhanced signal based on the formal-

