Estimating individual treatment effect: generalization bounds and algorithms

Uri Shalit * 1 Fredrik D. Johansson * 2 David Sontag 2 3

Abstract
There is intense interest in applying machine
learning to problems of causal inference in fields
such as healthcare, economics and education.
In particular, individual-level causal inference
has important applications such as precision
medicine. We give a new theoretical analysis and family of algorithms for predicting individual treatment effect (ITE) from observational
data, under the assumption known as strong ignorability. The algorithms learn a “balanced”
representation such that the induced treated and
control distributions look similar, and we give
a novel and intuitive generalization-error bound
showing the expected ITE estimation error of a
representation is bounded by a sum of the standard generalization-error of that representation
and the distance between the treated and control distributions induced by the representation.
We use Integral Probability Metrics to measure
distances between distributions, deriving explicit
bounds for the Wasserstein and Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD) distances. Experiments on
real and simulated data show the new algorithms
match or outperform the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Making predictions about causal effects of actions is a central problem in many domains. For example, a doctor deciding which medication will cause better outcomes for a
patient; a government deciding who would benefit most
from subsidized job training; or a teacher deciding which
study program would most benefit a specific student. In
this paper we focus on the problem of making these predictions based on observational data. Observational data is
*

Equal contribution 1 CIMS, New York University, New
York, NY 10003 2 IMES, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142
3
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139.
Correspondence
to: Uri Shalit <shalit@cs.nyu.edu>, Fredrik D. Johansson
<fredrikj@mit.edu>, David Sontag <dsontag@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

data which contains past actions, their outcomes, and possibly more context, but without direct access to the mechanism which gave rise to the action. For example we might
have access to records of patients (context), their medications (actions), and outcomes, but we do not have complete
knowledge of why a specific action was applied to a patient.
The hallmark of learning from observational data is that
the actions observed in the data depend on variables which
might also affect the outcome, resulting in confounding:
For example, richer patients might better afford certain
medications, and job training might only be given to those
motivated enough to seek it. The challenge is how to untangle these confounding factors and make valid predictions.
Specifically, we work under the common simplifying assumption of “no-hidden confounding”, assuming that all
the factors determining which actions were taken are observed. In the examples above, it would mean that we have
measured a patient’s wealth or an employee’s motivation.
As a learning problem, estimating causal effects from observational data is different from classic learning in that in
our training data we never see the individual-level effect.
For each unit, we only see their response to one of the possible actions - the one they had actually received. This is
close to what is known in the machine learning literature as
“learning from logged bandit feedback” (Strehl et al., 2010;
Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015), with the distinction that
we do not have access to the model generating the action.
Our work differs from much work in causal inference in
that we focus on the individual-level causal effect (“cspecific treatment effects” Shpitser & Pearl (2006); Pearl
(2015)), rather than the average or population level. Our
main contribution is to give what is, to the best of our
knowledge, the first generalization-error1 bound for estimating individual-level causal effect, where each individual is identified by its features x. The bound leads naturally to a new family of representation-learning based algorithms (Bengio et al., 2013), which we show to match or
outperform state-of-the-art methods on several causal effect inference tasks.
1

Our use of the term generalization is different from its use in
the study of transportability, where the goal is to generalize causal
conclusion across distributions (Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016).

