PixelCNN Models with Auxiliary Variables for Natural Image Modeling

Alexander Kolesnikov 1 Christoph H. Lampert 1

Abstract
We study probabilistic models of natural images and extend the autoregressive family of
PixelCNN architectures by incorporating auxiliary variables. Subsequently, we describe two
new generative image models that exploit different image transformations as auxiliary variables:
a quantized grayscale view of the image or a
multi-resolution image pyramid. The proposed
models tackle two known shortcomings of existing PixelCNN models: 1) their tendency to focus
on low-level image details, while largely ignoring high-level image information, such as object
shapes, and 2) their computationally costly procedure for image sampling. We experimentally
demonstrate benefits of the proposed models, in
particular showing that they produce much more
realistically looking image samples than previous
state-of-the-art probabilistic models.

1. Introduction
Natural images are the main input to visual processing systems and, thus, understanding their structure is important
for building strong and accurate automatic vision systems.
Image modeling is also useful for a wide variety of key
computer vision tasks, such as visual representation learning, image inpainting, deblurring, super-resolution, image
compression, and others.
Natural image modeling is known to be a very challenging
statistical problem. Because the distribution over natural
images is highly complex, developing models that are both
accurate and computationally tractable is very challenging.
Until recently, most of the existing models were restricted
to modeling very small image patches, no bigger than, e.g.,
9x9 pixels. Recently, however, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have triggered noticeable advances
in probabilistic image modeling. Out of these, PixelCNN1

IST Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria. Correspondence to:
Alexander Kolesnikov <akolesnikov@ist.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

type models (van den Oord et al., 2016a;b; Salimans et al.,
2017), have shown to deliver the best performance, while
at the same time staying computationally tractable. However, PixelCNNs also have noticeable shortcomings: unless
conditioned on external input, the samples they produce
rarely reflect global structure of complex natural images,
see (van den Oord et al., 2016b; Salimans et al., 2017). This
raises concerns that current PixelCNN architectures might
also be more limited than originally presumed. Moreover,
PixelCNN’s image sampling procedure is relatively slow in
practice, as it requires to invoke a very deep neural network
for every single image pixel that is to be generated.
In this work we derive improved PixelCNN models that
address several of the aforementioned shortcomings. The
main idea is to augment PixelCNN with appropriate auxiliary variables in order to isolate and overcome these drawbacks. This step, at the same time, provides us with important insights into the task of modeling natural images.
Besides the above insight, we make two main technical
contributions in this paper. First, we show that uncertainty in low-level image details, such as texture patterns,
dominates the objective of ordinary probabilistic PixelCNN
models and, thus, these models may have little incentive
to capture visually essential high-level image information,
such as object shapes. We tackle this issue by deriving
Grayscale PixelCNNs that effectively decouple the tasks of
modeling low and high-level image details. This results
in image samples of substantially improved visual quality.
Second, we show that the sampling speed of PixelCNN models can be largely accelerated. We accomplish this by deriving Pyramid PixelCNNs that decompose the modeling of
the image pixel probabilities into a series of much simpler
steps. Employing a much lighter-weight PixelCNN architecture for each of them, globally coherent high-resolution
samples can be obtained at reduced computational cost.

2. Related Work
Probabilistic image modeling is a research area of long tradition that has attracted interest from many different disciplines (Ruderman & Bialek, 1994; Olshausen & Field,
1996; Hyvärinen et al., 2009). However, because of the
difficulty of the problem, until recently all existing models
were restricted to small image patches, typically between

