Sequence Tutor: Conservative Fine-Tuning of Sequence Generation Models
with KL-control
Natasha Jaques 1 2 Shixiang Gu 1 3 4 Dzmitry Bahdanau 1 5 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 3
Richard E. Turner 3 Douglas Eck 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a general method for improving the structure and quality of sequences
generated by a recurrent neural network (RNN),
while maintaining information originally learned
from data, as well as sample diversity. An RNN
is first pre-trained on data using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), and the probability distribution over the next token in the sequence
learned by this model is treated as a prior policy. Another RNN is then trained using reinforcement learning (RL) to generate higher-quality
outputs that account for domain-specific incentives while retaining proximity to the prior policy of the MLE RNN. To formalize this objective, we derive novel off-policy RL methods for
RNNs from KL-control. The effectiveness of the
approach is demonstrated on two applications; 1)
generating novel musical melodies, and 2) computational molecular generation. For both problems, we show that the proposed method improves the desired properties and structure of the
generated sequences, while maintaining information learned from data.

1. Introduction
The approach of training sequence generation models using
likelihood maximization suffers from known failure modes,
and it is notoriously difficult to ensure multi-step generated
sequences have coherent global structure. For example,
long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) networks trained to predict the next character in sequences of text may produce text that has correct
1

Google Brain, Mountain View, USA 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 3 University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK 4 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Stuttgart, Germany 5 Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
Correspondence to: Natasha Jaques <jaquesn@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

spelling, punctuation, and even a semblance of grammar,
but the generated text shifts so rapidly from topic to topic,
that it is almost completely nonsensical (see (Graves, 2013)
for an example). Similar networks trained to predict the
next note in a melody suffer from the same problem; the
generated music has no consistent theme or structure, and
appears wandering and random. In addition, these models
are prone to excessively repeating the same output token, a
problem that has also been noted in the context of recurrent
dialog generation models (Li et al., 2016).
To ameliorate these problems we propose Sequence Tutor,
a novel approach which uses RL to impose structure on a
sequence generation RNN via task-specific rewards, while
simultaneously ensuring that information learned from data
is retained. This is accomplished by maintaining a fixed
copy of a sequence generation RNN pre-trained on data,
which is termed the Reward RNN. Rather than simply using the Reward RNN to supply part of the rewards to
our model, we derive novel off-policy RL methods for sequence generation from KL-control that allow us to directly
penalize Kullback Leibler (KL) divergence from the policy
defined by the Reward RNN. As a byproduct of minimizing
KL our objective includes an entropy regularization term
that encourages high entropy in the distribution of the RL
model. This is ideal for sequence generation tasks such as
text, music, or molecule generation, in which maintaining
diversity in the samples generated by the model is critical.
Sequence Tutor effectively combines both data and taskrelated goals, without relying on either as a perfect metric of task success. This is an important novel direction
of research. Much previous work on combining RL and
MLE has used MLE training simply as a way to bootstrap
the training of an RL model (Ranzato et al., 2015; Bahdanau et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016), since training with RL
from scratch is difficult. However, this approach does not
encourage diversity of the generated samples, and can be
problematic when task-specific rewards are incomplete or
imperfect. Designing an appropriate reward definition is
highly non-trivial, and often the hand-crafted rewards cannot be fully trusted (Vedantam et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016).
And yet, relying on data alone can be insufficient when the
data itself contains biases, as has been shown for text data

