Automated Curriculum Learning for Neural Networks

Alex Graves 1 Marc G. Bellemare 1 Jacob Menick 1 Rémi Munos 1 Koray Kavukcuoglu 1

Abstract
We introduce a method for automatically selecting the path, or syllabus, that a neural network
follows through a curriculum so as to maximise
learning efficiency. A measure of the amount that
the network learns from each data sample is provided as a reward signal to a nonstationary multiarmed bandit algorithm, which then determines a
stochastic syllabus. We consider a range of signals derived from two distinct indicators of learning progress: rate of increase in prediction accuracy, and rate of increase in network complexity. Experimental results for LSTM networks on
three curricula demonstrate that our approach can
significantly accelerate learning, in some cases
halving the time required to attain a satisfactory
performance level.

1. Introduction
Over two decades ago, in The importance of starting small,
Elman put forward the idea that a curriculum of progressively harder tasks could significantly accelerate a neural
network’s training (Elman, 1993). However curriculum
learning has only recently become prevalent in the field
(e.g., Bengio et al., 2009), due in part to the greater complexity of problems now being considered. In particular,
recent work on learning programs with neural networks
has relied on curricula to scale up to longer or more complicated tasks (Sutskever and Zaremba, 2014; Reed and
de Freitas, 2015; Graves et al., 2016). We expect this trend
to continue as the scope of neural networks widens, with
deep reinforcement learning providing fertile ground for
structured learning.
One reason for the slow adoption of curriculum learning
is that it’s effectiveness is highly sensitive to the mode of
progression through the tasks. One popular approach is to
define a hand-chosen performance threshold for advance1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Alex Graves
<gravesa@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ment to the next task, along with a fixed probability of returning to earlier tasks, to prevent forgetting (Sutskever and
Zaremba, 2014). However, as well as introducing hard-totune parameters, this poses problems for curricula where
appropriate thresholds may be unknown or variable across
tasks. More fundamentally, it presupposes that the tasks
can be ordered by difficulty, when in reality they may vary
along multiple axes of difficulty, or have no predefined order at all.
We propose to instead treat the decision about which task
to study next as a stochastic policy, continuously adapted to
optimise some notion of what Oudeyer et al. (2007) termed
learning progress. Doing so brings us into contact with
the intrinsic motivation literature (Barto, 2013), where various indicators of learning progress have been used as reward signals to encourage exploration, including compression progress (Schmidhuber, 1991), information acquisition (Storck et al., 1995), Bayesian surprise (Itti and Baldi,
2009), prediction gain (Bellemare et al., 2016) and variational information maximisation (Houthooft et al., 2016).
We focus on variants of prediction gain, and also introduce
a novel class of progress signals which we refer to as complexity gain. Derived from minimum description length
principles, complexity gain equates acquisition of knowledge with an increase in effective information encoded in
the network weights.
Given a progress signal that can be evaluated for each
training example, we use a multi-armed bandit algorithm
to find a stochastic policy over the tasks that maximises
overall progress. The bandit is nonstationary because the
behaviour of the network, and hence the optimal policy,
evolves during training. We take inspiration from a previous work that modelled an adaptive student with a multiarmed bandit in the context of developmental learning
(Lopes and Oudeyer, 2012; Clement et al., 2015). Another
related area is the field of active learning, where similar
gain signals have been used to guide decisions about which
data point to label next (Settles, 2010). Lastly, there are
parallels with recent work on using Bayesian optimisation
to find the best order in which to train a word embedding
network on a language corpus (Tsvetkov, 2016); however
this differs from our work in that the ordering was entirely
determined before each training run, rather than adaptively
altered in response to the model’s progress.

