Deep IV: A Flexible Approach for Counterfactual Prediction

Jason Hartford 1 Greg Lewis 2 Kevin Leyton-Brown 1 Matt Taddy 2

Abstract
Counterfactual prediction requires understanding
causal relationships between so-called treatment
and outcome variables. This paper provides a
recipe for augmenting deep learning methods to
accurately characterize such relationships in the
presence of instrument variables (IVs)—sources
of treatment randomization that are conditionally
independent from the outcomes. Our IV specification resolves into two prediction tasks that can
be solved with deep neural nets: a first-stage network for treatment prediction and a second-stage
network whose loss function involves integration
over the conditional treatment distribution. This
Deep IV framework1 allows us to take advantage
of off-the-shelf supervised learning techniques
to estimate causal effects by adapting the loss
function. Experiments show that it outperforms
existing machine learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Supervised machine learning (ML) provides many effective methods for tasks in which a model is learned based
on samples from some data generating process (DGP) and
then makes predictions about new samples from the same
distribution. However, decision makers would often like to
predict the effects of interventions into the DGP through policy changes. Such changes impact the relationship between
inputs and outcomes, making straightforward prediction approaches inappropriate. In order to accurately answer such
counterfactual questions it is necessary to model the structural (or causal) relationship between policy (or “treatment”)
and outcome variables.
For example, consider an airline that wants to use historical
1 University of British Columbia, Canada 2 Microsoft Research,

New England, USA. Correspondence to: Jason Hartford <jasonhar@cs.ubc.ca>, Matt Taddy <taddy@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).
1 Implementation with all simulation experiments is available
at https://github.com/jhartford/DeepIV

data to optimize the prices it charges its customers: in this
case, price is the treatment variable and the customer’s decision about whether to buy a ticket is the outcome. There are
two ways that a naive analysis could lead to incorrect counterfactual predictions. First, imagine that price varies in the
training data because the airline gradually increases prices
as a plane fills. Around holidays, more people want to fly
and hence planes become fuller leading to higher prices. So,
in our training set we observe examples with high prices and
high sales. A direct ML approach might incorrectly predict
that if the airline were to increase prices at other times in the
year they would also observe increased sales, whereas the
true relationship between price and sales is surely negative.
Typically we can observe holidays, and include them in the
model, so that we can correct for their effects. This case
where an observable feature (holidays) is correlated with
both the outcome and treatment variable is called “selection
on observables”.
But say there is also sometimes high demand because of
conferences, which the airline is not able to observe. This
presents a more challenging problem: even if price distortions due to holidays were taken into account, a naive
analysis could conclude that higher prices drive higher demand, whereas in fact high price is only correlated with
high demand via the latent conference variable. This is the
more challenging case of “selection on unobservables”.
The gold standard for establishing causal relationships is
to conduct “AB” experiments, with subjects randomly assigned to different values of the treatment variable. In the
airline example, this would mean assigning passengers random prices that do not depend on the number of seats sold.
Enough data collected in this way would make it straightforward to identify the true relationship between price and
demand even if the latent variable were never observed.
However, such a strategy would be exceedingly expensive
(the airline would sometimes turn away interested passengers for nearly-empty flights and offer steep discounts for
nearly-full flights). Depending on the timescale over which
such randomization were conducted, it could also hurt the
airline’s long-term interests (because it could be perceived
as unfair) and could fail if passengers were able to hide their
identities (e.g., by logging in from a different computer if
they didn’t like the price).

