Fake News Mitigation via Point Process Based Intervention
Mehrdad Farajtabar 1 Jiachen Yang 1 Xiaojing Ye 2 Huan Xu 3 Rakshit Trivedi 1 Elias Khalil 1 Shuang Li 3
Le Song 1 Hongyuan Zha 1

Abstract

We propose the first multistage intervention
framework that tackles fake news in social networks by combining reinforcement learning with
a point process network activity model. The
spread of fake news and mitigation events within
the network is modeled by a multivariate Hawkes
process with additional exogenous control terms.
By choosing a feature representation of states,
defining mitigation actions and constructing reward functions to measure the effectiveness of
mitigation activities, we map the problem of fake
news mitigation into the reinforcement learning framework. We develop a policy iteration
method unique to the multivariate networked
point process, with the goal of optimizing the
actions for maximal total reward under budget
constraints. Our method shows promising performance in real-time intervention experiments
on a Twitter network to mitigate a surrogate fake
news campaign, and outperforms alternatives on
synthetic datasets.

1. Introduction
The recent proliferation of malicious fake news in social
media has been a source of widespread concern. Given
that more than 62% of U.S. adults turn to social media for
news, with 18% doing so often, fake news can have potential real-world consequences on a large scale (Gottfried &
Shearer, 2016). For example, within the final three months
of the 2016 U.S. presidential election, news stories that favored either of the two nominees–later proved to be fake–
were shared over 37 million times on Facebook alone, and
over half of those who recalled seeing fake news stories
believed them (Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017). An analysis
by Buzzfeed News shows that the top 20 false election stories from hoax websites generated nearly 1.5 million more
user engagement activities on Facebook than the top 20 sto1

School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Tech. 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Georgia
State University. 3 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Tech.. Correspondence to: Mehrdad Farajtabar
<mehrdad@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ries from reputable major news outlets (Silverman, 2016).
Therefore, there is an urgent call to develop effective rectifying strategies to mitigate the impact of fake news.
Policies to counter fake news can be categorized by the
level of manual oversight and the aggressiveness of action
required. Aggressively acting on fake news has various
drawbacks. For example, Facebook’s strategy allows users
to report stories as potential fake news, sends these stories
to fact-checking organizations, and flags them as disputed
in users’ newsfeed (Mosseri, 2016). Such direct action on
the offending news requires a high degree of human oversight, which can be costly and slow and also may violate
civil rights. The report-and-flag mechanism is also open
to abuse by adversaries who maliciously report real news.
Given these disadvantages, we consider an alternative strategy: optimizing the performance of real news propagation
over the network. Intuitively, we want people’s exposure to
real news to match their exposure to fake news.
We face several key modeling and computational issues.
For example, how to quantify the uncertainty of user activities and news propagation within the network? How
to measure the effect of mitigation incentives and activities? Is it possible to steer the spontaneous user mitigation activities by an intervention strategy? To address these
questions, we model the temporal randomness of fake news
and mitigation events (“valid news”) as multivariate point
processes with self and mutual excitations, in which the
control incentivizes more spontaneous mitigation events
by contributing to the exogenous activity of campaigner
nodes. The influence of fake news and mitigation activities
is quantified using event exposure counts (i.e. the number
of times that a user is exposed to fake or real news posts
from other users whom she follows).
Our key contributions are as follows. We present the first
formulation of fake news mitigation as the problem of optimal point process intervention in a network. The goal is
to optimize the activity policy of a set of campaigner nodes
to mitigate a fake news process stemming from another set
of nodes. It creates opportunities for designing a variety
of objectives, e.g. minimizing the number of users who
see fake news but were not reached by real news. We give
the first derivation of second-order statistics of random exposure counts in the non-stationary case, which is essential in policy evaluation and improvement. By defining a

