Learning Algorithms for Active Learning

Philip Bachman * 1 Alessandro Sordoni * 1 Adam Trischler 1

Abstract
We introduce a model that learns active learning
algorithms via metalearning. For a distribution
of related tasks, our model jointly learns: a data
representation, an item selection heuristic, and
a prediction function. Our model uses the item
selection heuristic to construct a labeled support
set for training the prediction function. Using the
Omniglot and MovieLens datasets, we test our
model in synthetic and practical settings.

1. Introduction
For many real-world tasks, labeled data is scarce while
unlabeled data is abundant. It is often possible, at some cost,
to obtain labels for the unlabeled data. In active learning,
a model selects which instances to label so as to maximize
some combination of task performance and data efficiency.
Active learning is motivated by the observation that a model
may perform better while training on less labeled data if it
can choose the data on which it trains (Cohn et al., 1996).
E.g., in SVMs (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002) only the support
vectors affect the decision boundary. If one could identify
the support vectors in advance, the classifier trained on the
resulting set of examples would obtain the same decision
boundary with less data and computation.
Active learning can benefit a variety of practical scenarios.
For example, preference information for a new user in a
movie recommender system may be scarce, and recommendations for the new user could be improved by carefully
selecting several movies for her to rate (Sun et al., 2013b;
Houlsby et al., 2014; Aggarwal, 2016). Likewise, collecting
labels for a medical imaging task may be costly because it
requires a specialist (Hoi et al., 2006), and the cost could be
reduced by carefully selecting which images to label.
Various heuristics for selecting instances to label have been
proposed in the active learning literature, such as choos*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Maluuba, Montreal, Canada.
Correspondence to: P. Bachman <phbachma@microsoft.com>,
A. Sordoni <alsordon@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

ing the instance whose label the model is most uncertain
about, or the instance whose label is expected to maximally
reduce the model’s uncertainty about labels for other instances (Gilad-Bachrach et al., 2005; Settles, 2010; Houlsby
et al., 2011). We propose moving away from engineered
selection heuristics towards learning active learning algorithms end-to-end via metalearning. Our model interacts
with labeled items for many related tasks in order to learn
an active learning strategy for the task at hand. In recommendation systems, for example, ratings data for existing
users can inform a strategy that efficiently elicits preferences for new users who lack prior rating data, thus bootstrapping the system quickly out of the cold-start setting
(Golbandi et al., 2010; 2011; Sun et al., 2013a; Kawale et al.,
2015). A learned active learning strategy could outperform
task-agnostic heuristics by sharing experience across related tasks. In particular, the model’s (i) data representation,
(ii) strategy for selecting items to label, and (iii) prediction function could all co-adapt. Moving from pipelines of
independently-engineered components to end-to-end learning has lead to rapid improvements in, e.g., computer vision,
speech recognition, and machine translation (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Hannun et al., 2014; He et al., 2016; Wu et al.,
2016).
We base our model on the Matching Networks (MN) introduced by Vinyals et al. (2016). We extend the MN’s
one-shot learning ability to settings where labels are not
available a priori. We cast active learning as a sequential
decision problem: at each step the model requests the label
for a particular item in a pool of unlabeled items, then adds
this item to a labeled support set, which is used for MN-style
prediction. We train our model end-to-end with backprop
and reinforcement learning. We expedite the training process by allowing our model to observe and mimic a strong
selection policy with oracle knowledge of the labels.
We demonstrate empirically that our proposed model learns
effective active learning algorithms in an end-to-end fashion.
We evaluate the model on “active” variants of existing oneshot learning tasks for Omniglot (Lake et al., 2015; Vinyals
et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2016), and show that it can
learn efficient label querying strategies. We also test the
model’s ability to learn an algorithm for bootstrapping a
recommender system using the MovieLens dataset, showing
it holds promise for application in more practical settings.

