Prox-PDA: The Proximal Primal-Dual Algorithm for Fast Distributed
Nonconvex Optimization and Learning Over Networks

Mingyi Hong 1 Davood Hajinezhad 1 Ming-Min Zhao 2

Abstract

2016); 3) nonconvex utility functions used in applications
such as resource allocation (Bjornson & Jorswieck, 2013).
Recently, a number of works in machine learning community have been focused on designing fast algorithms for
solving problem (1) in centralized setting; e.g., SAG (Defazio et al., 2014), SAGA (Schmidt et al., 2013), and SVRG
(Johnson & Zhang, 2013) for convex problems, and (Reddi
et al., 2016; Allen-Zhu & Hazan, 2016; Hajinezhad et al.,
2016b; Rahimpour et al., 2016) for nonconvex problems.

In this paper we consider nonconvex optimization and learning over a network of distributed
nodes. We develop a Proximal Primal-Dual Algorithm (Prox-PDA), which enables the network
nodes to distributedly and collectively compute
the set of first-order stationary solutions in a
global sublinear manner [with a rate of O(1/r),
where r is the iteration counter]. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm that
enables distributed nonconvex optimization with
global sublinear rate guarantees. Our numerical
experiments also demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
We consider the following optimization problem
min g(z) :=

z∈RM

N
X

fi (z),

(1)

i=1

where each fi , i ∈ {1, · · · , N } := [N ] is a nonconvex cost
function, and we assume that it is smooth and has Lipschitz
continuous gradient.
Such a finite sum problem plays a central role in machine
learning and signal/information processing (Cevher et al.,
2014; Hong et al., 2016). In particular, in the class of empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem, z represents the
feature vectors to be learned, and each fi can represent: 1)
a mini-batch of (possibly nonconvex) loss functions modeling data fidelity (Antoniadis et al., 2009); 2) nonconvex activation functions of neural networks (Allen-Zhu & Hazan,
1

Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
2
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China.
Correspondence
to:
Mingyi Hong <mingyi@iastate.edu>, Davood Hajinezhad <dhaji@iastate.edu>, Ming-Min Zhao <zmmblack@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In this work, we are interested in designing algorithms
that solve problem (1) in a distributed manner. In particular, we focus on the scenario where each fi (or equivalently, each subset of data points in the ERM problem) is
available locally at a given computing node i ∈ [N ], and
the nodes are connected via a network. Clearly, such distributed optimization and learning scenario is important for
machine learning, because in contemporary applications
such as document topic modeling and/or social network
data analysis, oftentimes data corporas are stored in geographically distributed locations without any central controller managing the entire network of nodes; see (Forero
et al., 2010; Yan et al., 2013; Rahmani & Atia, 2015; Aybat
& Hamedani, 2016).
Related Works. Distributed convex optimization and
learning has been thoroughly investigated in the literature.
In (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009b), the authors propose a distributed subgradient algorithm (DSG), which allows the
agents to jointly optimize problem (1). Subsequently, many
variants of DSG have been proposed, either with special assumptions on the underlying graph, or having additional
structures of the problem; see, e.g., (Lobel & Ozdaglar,
2011; Lobel et al., 2011; Nedic & Olshevsky,
√ 2015). The
rate of convergence for DSG is O(log(r)/ r) under certain diminishing stepsize rules. Recently, a number of algorithms such as the exact first-order algorithm (EXTRA)
(Shi et al., 2014) and DLM (Ling et al., 2015) have been
proposed, which use constant stepsize and achieve faster
O(1/r) rate for convex problems. Recent works that apply distributed optimization algorithms to machine learning applications include (Scardapane et al., 2016; Aybat &
Hamedani, 2016; Scardapane & Lorenzo, 2016).
On the other hand, there has been little work for dis-

