Dynamic Word Embeddings

Robert Bamler 1 Stephan Mandt 1

Abstract
We present a probabilistic language model for
time-stamped text data which tracks the semantic evolution of individual words over time.
The model represents words and contexts by
latent trajectories in an embedding space. At
each moment in time, the embedding vectors
are inferred from a probabilistic version of
word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013b). These embedding vectors are connected in time through
a latent diffusion process. We describe two
scalable variational inference algorithms—skipgram smoothing and skip-gram filtering—that allow us to train the model jointly over all times;
thus learning on all data while simultaneously allowing word and context vectors to drift. Experimental results on three different corpora demonstrate that our dynamic model infers word embedding trajectories that are more interpretable
and lead to higher predictive likelihoods than
competing methods that are based on static models trained separately on time slices.

1. Introduction
Language evolves over time and words change their meaning due to cultural shifts, technological inventions, or political events. We consider the problem of detecting shifts
in the meaning and usage of words over a given time span
based on text data. Capturing these semantic shifts requires
a dynamic language model.
Word embeddings are a powerful tool for modeling semantic relations between individual words (Bengio et al.,
2003; Mikolov et al., 2013a; Pennington et al., 2014; Mnih
& Kavukcuoglu, 2013; Levy & Goldberg, 2014; Vilnis &
McCallum, 2014; Rudolph et al., 2016). Word embed1
Disney Research, 4720 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA. Correspondence to:
Robert Bamler
<Robert.Bamler@disneyresearch.com>,
Stephan
Mandt
<Stephan.Mandt@disneyresearch.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

dings model the distribution of words based on their surrounding words in a training corpus, and summarize these
statistics in terms of low-dimensional vector representations. Geometric distances between word vectors reflect
semantic similarity (Mikolov et al., 2013a) and difference
vectors encode semantic and syntactic relations (Mikolov
et al., 2013c), which shows that they are sensible representations of language. Pre-trained word embeddings are useful for various supervised tasks, including sentiment analysis (Socher et al., 2013b), semantic parsing (Socher et al.,
2013a), and computer vision (Fu & Sigal, 2016). As unsupervised models, they have also been used for the exploration of word analogies and linguistics (Mikolov et al.,
2013c).
Word embeddings are currently formulated as static models, which assumes that the meaning of any given word is
the same across the entire text corpus. In this paper, we
propose a generalization of word embeddings to sequential
data, such as corpora of historic texts or streams of text in
social media.
Current approaches to learning word embeddings in a dynamic context rely on grouping the data into time bins
and training the embeddings separately on these bins (Kim
et al., 2014; Kulkarni et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2016).
This approach, however, raises three fundamental problems. First, since word embedding models are non-convex,
training them twice on the same data will lead to different
results. Thus, embedding vectors at successive times can
only be approximately related to each other, and only if the
embedding dimension is large (Hamilton et al., 2016). Second, dividing a corpus into separate time bins may lead to
training sets that are too small to train a word embedding
model. Hence, one runs the risk of overfitting to few data
whenever the required temporal resolution is fine-grained,
as we show in the experimental section. Third, due to the
finite corpus size the learned word embedding vectors are
subject to random noise. It is difficult to disambiguate this
noise from systematic semantic drifts between subsequent
times, in particular over short time spans, where we expect
only minor semantic drift.
In this paper, we circumvent these problems by introducing
a dynamic word embedding model. Our contributions are
as follows:

