Latent LSTM Allocation
Joint Clustering and Non-Linear Dynamic Modeling of Sequential Data

Manzil Zaheer 1 Amr Ahmed 2 Alexander J Smola 1

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks, such as long-short
term memory (LSTM) networks, are powerful tools for modeling sequential data like user
browsing history (Tan et al., 2016; Korpusik
et al., 2016) or natural language text (Mikolov
et al., 2010). However, to generalize across different user types, LSTMs require a large number of parameters, notwithstanding the simplicity of the underlying dynamics, rendering it uninterpretable, which is highly undesirable in user
modeling. The increase in complexity and parameters arises due to a large action space in
which many of the actions have similar intent or
topic. In this paper, we introduce Latent LSTM
Allocation (LLA) for user modeling combining
hierarchical Bayesian models with LSTMs. In
LLA, each user is modeled as a sequence of actions, and the model jointly groups actions into
topics and learns the temporal dynamics over the
topic sequence, instead of action space directly.
This leads to a model that is highly interpretable,
concise, and can capture intricate dynamics. We
present an efficient Stochastic EM inference algorithm for our model that scales to millions of
users/documents. Our experimental evaluations
show that the proposed model compares favorably with several state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. LLA has better perplexity (lower is better) than LDA
but much fewer parameters than LSTMs, as shown in a language
modeling task on Wikipedia.

activity of the user given the history. Accurate user activity
modeling is very important for serving relevant, personalized, and useful contents to the user. A good model of sequential data should be accurate, sparse, and interpretable.
Unfortunately, none of the existing techniques for user or
language modeling satisfy all of these requirements.
The state-of-the-art for modeling sequential data is to employ recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Lipton et al., 2015),
such as LSTMs (Long-Short Term Memory) (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997). Such RNNs have been shown to
be effective at capturing long and short patterns in data,
e.g. token-level semantic as well as syntactic regularities
in language (Jozefowicz et al., 2016). However, the neural
network representations are generally uninterpretable and
inaccessible to humans (Strobelt et al., 2016). Moreover,
the number of parameters of the model is proportional to
the number of observed word types or action types, which
can grow to tens or hundreds of millions. Note that for user
modeling task, character level RNN is not feasible because
user actions are often not words but hash indices or URLs.

1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA – work done
while at Google 2 Google Inc, Mountain View CA. Correspondence to: Manzil Zaheer <manzil@cmu.edu>.

On the other hand of the spectrum, latent variable models
with multi-task learning, such as LDA (Blei et al., 2002)
and other topic model variants, which are strictly not sequence models, proved to be powerful tools for uncovering
latent structure in both text and user data (Aly et al., 2012)
with good commercial success (Hu et al., 2014). Topic
models are popular for their ability to organize the data into
a smaller set of prominent themes or topics through statistical strength sharing across users or documents. These topic
representations are generally accessible to humans and easily lend themselves to being interpreted.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose Latent LSTM Allocation (LLA),
a model that bridges the gap between the sequential
RNN’s and the non-sequential LDA. LLA borrows graph-

Sequential data prediction is an important problem in machine learning spanning over a diverse set of applications
ranging from text (Mikolov et al., 2010) to user behavior
(Köck & Paramythis, 2011). For example, when applied to
statistical language modeling, the goal is to predict the next
word in textual data given context, very similar to that in
user activity modeling where the aim is to predict the next

