Convexified Convolutional Neural Networks
Yuchen Zhang 1 Percy Liang 1 Martin J. Wainwright 2

Abstract
We describe the class of convexified convolutional neural networks (CCNNs), which capture
the parameter sharing of convolutional neural
networks in a convex manner. By representing
the nonlinear convolutional filters as vectors in a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space, the CNN parameters can be represented in terms of a lowrank matrix, and the rank constraint can be relaxed so as to obtain a convex optimization problem. For learning two-layer convolutional neural networks, we prove that the generalization
error obtained by a convexified CNN converges
to that of the best possible CNN. For learning
deeper networks, we train CCNNs in a layerwise manner. Empirically, we find that CCNNs achieve competitive or better performance
than CNNs trained by backpropagation, SVMs,
fully-connected neural networks, stacked denoising auto-encoders, and other baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al.,
1998) have proven successful across many tasks including
image classification (LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), face recognition (Lawrence et al., 1997), speech
recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), text classification (Wang
et al., 2012), and game playing (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2016). There are two principal advantages of a CNN
over a fully-connected neural network: (i) sparsity—each
nonlinear convolutional filter acts only on a local patch of
the input, and (ii) parameter sharing—the same filter is applied to each patch.
However, as with most neural networks, the standard approach to training CNNs is based on solving a nonconvex
optimization problem that is known to be NP-hard (Blum
1

Stanford University, CA, USA 2 University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yuchen Zhang
<zhangyuc@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

& Rivest, 1992). In practice, researchers use some flavor
of stochastic gradient method, in which gradients are computed via backpropagation (Bottou, 1998). This approach
has two drawbacks: (i) the rate of convergence, which is at
best only to a local optimum, can be slow due to nonconvexity (for instance, see the paper (Fahlman, 1988)), and
(ii) its statistical properties are very difficult to understand,
as the actual performance is determined by some combination of the CNN architecture along with the optimization
algorithm.
In this paper, with the goal of addressing these two challenges, we propose a new model class known as convexified convolutional neural networks (CCNNs). These models have two desirable features. First, training a CCNN
corresponds to a convex optimization problem, which can
be solved efficiently and optimally via a projected gradient algorithm. Second, the statistical properties of CCNN
models can be studied in a precise and rigorous manner. We
obtain CCNNs by convexifying two-layer CNNs; doing so
requires overcoming two challenges. First, the activation
function of a CNN is nonlinear. In order to address this
issue, we relax the class of CNN filters to a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). This approach is inspired by
the paper (Zhang et al., 2016a), which put forth a relaxation
for fully-connected neural networks. Second, the parameter sharing induced by CNNs is crucial to its effectiveness
and must be preserved. We show that CNNs with RKHS
filters can be parametrized by a low-rank matrix. Relaxing
this low-rank constraint to a nuclear norm constraint leads
to our final formulation of CCNNs.
On the theoretical front, we prove an oracle inequality on
the generalization error achieved by our class of CCNNs,
showing that it is upper bounded by the best possible performance achievable by a two-layer CNN given infinite
data—a quantity to which we refer as the oracle risk—plus
a model complexity term that decays to zero polynomially
in the sample size. Our results suggest that the sample complexity for CCNNs is significantly lower than that of the
convexified fully-connected neural network (Zhang et al.,
2016a), highlighting the importance of parameter sharing.
For models with more than one hidden layer, our theory
does not apply, but we provide encouraging empirical results using a greedy layer-wise training heuristic. Finally,
we apply CCNNs to the MNIST handwritten digit dataset

