Tensor-Train Recurrent Neural Networks for Video Classification
Yinchong Yang 1 2 Denis Krompass 2 Volker Tresp 1 2

Abstract
The Recurrent Neural Networks and their variants have shown promising performances in sequence modeling tasks such as Natural Language
Processing. These models, however, turn out to
be impractical and difficult to train when exposed
to very high-dimensional inputs due to the large
input-to-hidden weight matrix. This may have
prevented RNNs’ large-scale application in tasks
that involve very high input dimensions such as
video modeling; current approaches reduce the
input dimensions using various feature extractors. To address this challenge, we propose a
new, more general and efficient approach by factorizing the input-to-hidden weight matrix using
Tensor-Train decomposition which is trained simultaneously with the weights themselves. We
test our model on classification tasks using multiple real-world video datasets and achieve competitive performances with state-of-the-art models, even though our model architecture is orders of magnitude less complex. We believe
that the proposed approach provides a novel and
fundamental building block for modeling highdimensional sequential data with RNN architectures and opens up many possibilities to transfer
the expressive and advanced architectures from
other domains such as NLP to modeling highdimensional sequential data.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), especially its more advanced variants such as the LSTM and
the GRU, belong to the most successful machine learning
approaches when it comes to sequence modeling. Especially in Natural Language Processing (NLP), great improvements have been achieved by exploiting these Neu1

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Germany
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology, Germany. Correspondence
to: Yinchong Yang <yinchong.yang@siemens.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ral Network architectures. This success motivates efforts
to also apply these RNNs to video data, since a video clip
could be seen as a sequence of image frames. However,
plain RNN models turn out to be impractical and difficult to
train directly on video data due to the fact that each image
frame typically forms a relatively high-dimensional input,
which makes the weight matrix mapping from the input to
the hidden layer in RNNs extremely large. For instance,
in case of an RGB video clip with a frame size of say
160×120×3, the input vector for the RNN would already
be 57, 600 at each time step. In this case, even a small hidden layer consisting of only 100 hidden nodes would lead
to 5,760,000 free parameters, only considering the inputto-hidden mapping in the model.
In order to circumvent this problem, state-of-the-art approaches often involve pre-processing each frame using
Convolution Neural Networks (CNN), a Neural Network
model proven to be most successful in image modeling.
The CNNs do not only reduce the input dimension, but
can also generate more compact and informative representations that serve as input to the RNN. Intuitive and tempting as it is, training such a model from scratch in an endto-end fashion turns out to be impractical for large video
datasets. Thus, many current works following this concept
focus on the CNN part and reduce the size of RNN in term
of sequence length (Donahue et al., 2015; Srivastava et al.,
2015), while other works exploit pre-trained deep CNNs as
pre-processor to generate static features as input to RNNs
(Yue-Hei Ng et al., 2015; Donahue et al., 2015; Sharma
et al., 2015). The former approach neglects the capability of RNNs to handle sequences of variable lengths and
therefore does not scale to larger, more realistic video data.
The second approach might suffer from suboptimal weight
parameters by not being trained end-to-end (Fernando &
Gould, 2016). Furthermore, since these CNNs are pretrained on existing image datasets, it remains unclear how
well the CNNs can generalize to video frames that could be
of totally different nature from the image training sets.
Alternative approaches were earlier applied to generate image representations using dimension reductions such as
PCA (Zhang et al., 1997; Kambhatla & Leen, 1997; Ye
et al., 2004) and Random Projection (Bingham & Mannila,
2001). Classifiers were built on such features to perform
object and face recognition tasks. These models, however,

