An Analytical Formula of Population Gradient for two-layered ReLU network
and its Applications in Convergence and Critical Point Analysis

Yuandong Tian 1

Abstract
In this paper, we explore theoretical properties of training a Ptwo-layered ReLU netK
⊺
work g(x; w) =
j=1 σ(wj x) with centered d-dimensional spherical Gaussian input x
(σ=ReLU). We train our network with gradient
descent on w to mimic the output of a teacher
network with the same architecture and fixed parameters w∗ . We show that its population gradient has an analytical formula, leading to interesting theoretical analysis of critical points and
convergence behaviors. First, we prove that critical points outside the hyperplane spanned by the
teacher parameters (“out-of-plane“) are not isolated and form manifolds, and characterize inplane critical-point-free regions for two ReLU
case. On the other hand, convergence to w∗ for
one ReLU node is guaranteed with at least (1 −
ǫ)/2 probability, if weights are initialized randomly√with standard deviation upper-bounded by
O(ǫ/ d), consistent with empirical practice. For
network with many ReLU nodes, we prove that
an infinitesimal perturbation of weight initialization results in convergence towards w∗ (or its
permutation), a phenomenon known as spontaneous symmetric-breaking (SSB) in physics. We
assume no independence of ReLU activations.
Simulation verifies our findings.

1. Introduction
Despite empirical success of deep learning (e.g., Computer
Vision (He et al., 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015;
Szegedy et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), Natural
Language Processing (Sutskever et al., 2014) and Speech
Recognition (Hinton et al., 2012)), it remains elusive how
1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Yuandong Tian
<yuandong@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

and why simple methods like gradient descent can solve
the complicated non-convex optimization during training.
In this paper, we focus on a two-layered ReLU network:
g(x; w) =

K
X

σ(wj⊺ x),

(1)

j=1

Here σ(x) = max(x, 0) is the ReLU nonlinearity. We consider the setting that a student network is optimized to minimize the l2 distance between its prediction and the supervision provided by a teacher network of the same architecture with fixed parameters w∗ . Note that although the
network prediction (Eqn. 1) is convex, when coupled with
loss (e.g., l2 loss Eqn. 2), the optimization becomes highly
non-convex and has exponential number of critical points.
To analyze it, we introduce a simple analytic formula for
population gradient in the case of l2 loss, when inputs x are
sampled from zero-mean spherical Gaussian. Using this
formula, critical point and convergence analysis follow.
For critical points, we show that critical points outside the
principal hyperplane (the subspace spanned by w∗ ) form
manifolds. We also characterize the region in the principal
hyperplane that has no critical points, in two ReLU case.
We also analyze the convergence behavior under the population gradient. Using Lyapunov method (LaSalle & Lefschetz, 1961), for single ReLU case we prove that gradient descent converges to w∗ with at least (1 − ǫ)/2
probability, if initialized√
randomly with standard deviation
upper-bounded by O(ǫ/ d), verifying common initialization techniques (Bottou, 1988; Glorot & Bengio, 2010; He
et al., 2015; LeCun et al., 2012). For multiple ReLU case,
when the teacher parameters {wj }K
j=1 form an orthonormal basis, we prove that (1) a symmetric weight initialization gets stuck at a saddle point and (2) a particular
infinitesimal perturbation of (1) leads to convergence towards w∗ or its permutation. The behavior that the population gradient field is invariant under certain symmetry but
the solution breaks it, is known as spontaneous symmetry
breaking in physics. Although such behaviors are known
practically, to our knowledge, we first formally characterize them in 2-layered ReLU network. Codes are available 1 .
1

github.com/yuandong-tian/ICML17_ReLU

