Soft-DTW: a Differentiable Loss Function for Time-Series
Marco Cuturi 1 Mathieu Blondel 2

Abstract
We propose in this paper a differentiable learning
loss between time series, building upon the celebrated dynamic time warping (DTW) discrepancy. Unlike the Euclidean distance, DTW can
compare time series of variable size and is robust to shifts or dilatations across the time dimension. To compute DTW, one typically solves
a minimal-cost alignment problem between two
time series using dynamic programming. Our
work takes advantage of a smoothed formulation of DTW, called soft-DTW, that computes the
soft-minimum of all alignment costs. We show
in this paper that soft-DTW is a differentiable
loss function, and that both its value and gradient can be computed with quadratic time/space
complexity (DTW has quadratic time but linear
space complexity). We show that this regularization is particularly well suited to average and
cluster time series under the DTW geometry, a
task for which our proposal significantly outperforms existing baselines (Petitjean et al., 2011).
Next, we propose to tune the parameters of a machine that outputs time series by minimizing its
fit with ground-truth labels in a soft-DTW sense.

1. Introduction
The goal of supervised learning is to learn a mapping that
links an input to an output objects, using examples of such
pairs. This task is noticeably more difficult when the output objects have a structure, i.e. when they are not vectors (Bakir et al., 2007). We study here the case where each
output object is a time series, namely a family of observations indexed by time. While it is tempting to treat time
as yet another feature, and handle time series of vectors
as the concatenation of all these vectors, several practical
1
CREST, ENSAE, Université Paris-Saclay, France 2 NTT
Communication Science Laboratories, Seika-cho, Kyoto, Japan.
Correspondence to: Marco Cuturi <marco.cuturi@ensae.fr>,
Mathieu Blondel <mathieu@mblondel.org>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Input

Output

Figure 1. Given the first part of a time series, we trained two
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to predict the entire second part.
Using the ShapesAll dataset, we used a Euclidean loss for the first
MLP and the soft-DTW loss proposed in this paper for the second
one. We display above the prediction obtained for a given test
instance with either of these two MLPs in addition to the ground
truth. Oftentimes, we observe that the soft-DTW loss enables us
to better predict sharp changes. More time series predictions are
given in Appendix F.

issues arise when taking this simplistic approach: Timeindexed phenomena can often be stretched in some areas
along the time axis (a word uttered in a slightly slower pace
than usual) with no impact on their characteristics; varying
sampling conditions may mean they have different lengths;
time series may not synchronized.
The DTW paradigm. Generative models for time series
are usually built having the invariances above in mind:
Such properties are typically handled through latent variables and/or Markovian assumptions (Lütkepohl, 2005,
Part I,§18). A simpler approach, motivated by geometry,
lies in the direct definition of a discrepancy between time
series that encodes these invariances, such as the Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) score (Sakoe & Chiba, 1971; 1978).
DTW computes the best possible alignment between two
time series (the optimal alignment itself can also be of interest, see e.g. Garreau et al. 2014) of respective length n
and m by computing first the n × m pairwise distance matrix between these points to solve then a dynamic program
(DP) using Bellman’s recursion with a quadratic (nm) cost.
The DTW geometry. Because it encodes efficiently a useful class of invariances, DTW has often been used in a discriminative framework (with a k-NN or SVM classifier) to
predict a real or a class label output, and engineered to run

