Robust Gaussian Graphical Model Estimation with Arbitrary Corruption
Lingxiao Wang 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating the highdimensional Gaussian graphical model where the
data are arbitrarily corrupted. We propose a robust estimator for the sparse precision matrix in
the high- dimensional regime. At the core of our
method is a robust covariance matrix estimator,
which is based on truncated inner product. We
establish the statistical guarantee of our estimator on both estimation error and model selection
consistency. In particular, we show that provided
that the number of corrupted
n2 for each
p
p samples
variable satisfies n2 . n/ log d, where n is
the sample size and d is the number of variables,
the proposed robust precision matrix estimator
attains the same statistical rate as the standard estimator for Gaussian graphical models. In addition, we propose a hypothesis testing procedure
to assess the uncertainty of our robust estimator.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
through extensive experiments on both synthetic
data and real-world genomic data.

1 Introduction
Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) have attracted increasing attention in recent years, especially in the field
of high-dimensional statistical learning. In Gaussian
graphical models, a d-dimensional random vector X =
(X1 , . . . , Xd )> follows a multivariate normal distribution
Nd (0, ⌃⇤ ). It corresponds to the vertex set V = {1, . . . , d}
of an undirected graph G = (V, E), where the edge set
E describes the conditional independence relationships between nodes X1 , . . . , Xd . It is well-known that the graph
G is encoded by the sparsity pattern of the precision matrix
⇥⇤ = ⌃⇤ 1 . More specifically, no edge connects Xi and
Xj if and only if ⇥⇤ij = 0. Consequently, estimation of
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qg5w@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the precision matrix ⇥⇤ corresponds to parameter estimation, and specifying the non-zero set of ⇥⇤ corresponds to
graphical model selection (Cox & Wermuth, 1996).
In the high-dimensional settings, where the number of
variables d can exceed the number of observations n, a
large body of literature has studied the problem of precision matrix estimation in Gaussian graphical models and
their variants (Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2006; Yuan &
Lin, 2007; Friedman et al., 2008; Banerjee et al., 2008;
Yuan, 2010; Cai et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2016; Xu &
Gu, 2016; Xu et al., 2016; 2017). For instance, Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2006) developed a neighborhood
pursuit approach for estimating conditional independence
relationship separately for each node in the graph. This
method estimates the precision matrix by solving a collection of sparse regression problems using Lasso in parallel. Yuan & Lin (2007); Friedman et al. (2008); Banerjee
et al. (2008) proposed a `1 norm regularized Gaussian negative log-likelihood method, which called Graphical Lasso
(GLasso), to directly estimate the precision matrix. More
recently, Yuan (2010); Cai et al. (2011) proposed the graphical Dantzig selector and CLIME, respectively. Both of
these methods can be solved by linear programming and
have more favorable theoretical properties than GLasso.
Note that most of the aforementioned methods rely on the
assumption that the observations follow a Gaussian distribution. There also exists some work, such as Ravikumar
et al. (2011), studied sub-Gaussian data under bounded
higher order moments. However, in many real-word applications, the data can follow a heavy-tailed distribution,
or may even be corrupted arbitrarily. In such cases, conventional methods yield inaccurate graph estimation even
if there are only a few contaminated observations due to
the lack of robustness. In order to address this issue, a large
body of literature (Liu et al., 2012; Finegold & Drton, 2011;
Hirose & Fujisawa, 2015; Sun & Li, 2012; Yang & Lozano,
2015; Balmand & Dalalyan, 2015; Öllerer & Croux, 2015;
Loh & Tan, 2015; Chen et al., 2015; Tarr et al., 2016) has
focused on providing more robust estimators for precision
matrices in the past years. However, most of these estimators were established under some specific contamination
models, thus they are not good at dealing with the situation
when data are arbitrarily corrupted.

