Multilabel Classification with Group Testing and Codes

Shashanka Ubaru 1 Arya Mazumdar 2

Abstract
In recent years, the multiclass and mutlilabel
classification problems we encounter in many applications have very large (103 − 106 ) number
of classes. However, each instance belongs to
only one or few classes, i.e., the label vectors
are sparse. In this work, we propose a novel approach based on group testing to solve such large
multilabel classification problems with sparse label vectors. We describe various group testing
constructions, and advocate the use of concatenated Reed Solomon codes and unbalanced bipartite expander graphs for extreme classification problems. The proposed approach has several advantages theoretically and practically over
existing popular methods. Our method operates on the binary alphabet and can utilize the
well-established binary classifiers for learning.
The error correction capabilities of the codes are
leveraged for the first time in the learning problem to correct prediction errors. Even if a linearly
growing number of classifiers mis-classify, these
errors are fully corrected. We establish Hamming
loss error bounds for the approach. More importantly, our method utilizes a simple prediction algorithm and does not require matrix inversion or
solving optimization problems making the algorithm very inexpensive. Numerical experiments
with various datasets illustrate the superior performance of our method.

1. Introduction
In the multilabel classification problem, we are given a set
of labeled training data {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , where xi ∈ Rp are
the input features for each data instances and yi ∈ {0, 1}d
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota at Twin Cities, MN USA. 2 College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA.. Correspondence to: Shashanka
Ubaru <ubaru001@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

are vectors indicating the corresponding labels (classes) the
data instances belong to. The vector yi has a one in the jth
coordinate if the ith data point belongs to jth class. We
wish to learn a mapping (prediction rule) between the features and the labels, such that, we can predict the class label vector y of a new data point x correctly. Such multilabel classification problems occur in many domains such
as text mining, computer vision, music, and bioinformatics (Barutcuoglu et al., 2006; Trohidis, 2008; Tai & Lin,
2012), and modern applications involve large number of
labels. Popular applications with many labels include image and video annotation (Wang et al., 2009), web page
categorization (Agrawal et al., 2013), text and document
categorization (Tsoumakas et al., 2008), and others (Bhatia
et al., 2015). In most of these applications, the label vectors
yi are sparse (with average sparsity of k  d), i.e., each
data point belongs to a few (average k out of d) classes.
The multiclass classification is an instance of the multilabel classification, where all data points belong to only one
of the d classes (k = 1).
The simple binary classification problem, where d = 2 and
k = 1 is well-studied, and several efficient algorithms have
been proposed in the literature. A natural approach used
to solve the multiclass (d > 2, k = 1) classification problem is to reduce the problem into a set of binary classification problem, and then employ the efficient binary classifiers to solve the individual problems. Popular methods
based on this approach are: one-vs-all, all-pairs, and the
error-correcting output code (ECOC) (Dietterich & Bakiri,
1995) methods. In ECOC method, m-dimensional binary
vectors (typically codewords from an error correcting code
with m ≤ d) are assigned to each class, and m binary classifiers are learned. For the jth classification, the jth coordinate of the corresponding codeword is used as the binary
label for each class. In the modern applications, where d
is typically very large, this approach is found to be very
efficient due to the reduction of the class dimension.
The idea of ECOC approach has been extended to the multilabel classification (MLC) problem. In the multiclass
classification, using codewords for each class in ECOC is
equivalent to multiplying the code matrix to the label vectors (since the label vectors are basis vectors). Hence, in
the multilabel setting, the reduction from d dimensional label vectors to m dimensional can be achieved by multiply-

