Efficient softmax approximation for GPUs

Édouard Grave 1 Armand Joulin 1 Moustapha Cissé 1 David Grangier 1 Hervé Jégou 1

Abstract
We propose an approximate strategy to efficiently
train neural network based language models over
very large vocabularies. Our approach, called
adaptive softmax, circumvents the linear dependency on the vocabulary size by exploiting the
unbalanced word distribution to form clusters that
explicitly minimize the expectation of computation time. Our approach further reduces the
computational time by exploiting the specificities of modern architectures and matrix-matrix
vector operations, making it particularly suited
for graphical processing units. Our experiments
carried out on standard benchmarks, such as EuroParl and One Billion Word, show that our approach brings a large gain in efficiency over standard approximations while achieving an accuracy
close to that of the full softmax. The code of our
method is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/adaptive-softmax.

1. Introduction
This paper considers strategies to learn parametric models
for language modeling with very large vocabularies. This
problem is key to natural language processing, with applications in machine translation (Schwenk et al., 2012;
Sutskever et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2013) or automatic
speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013; Hinton et al.,
2012). In particular, Neural Network Language Models
(NNLMs) have received a renewed interest in recent years,
by achieving state of the art performance on standard benchmarks (Jozefowicz et al., 2016; Mikolov et al., 2010). These
approaches are more computationally intensive but generalize better than traditional non-parametric models (Bahl
et al., 1983; Kneser & Ney, 1995).
Statistical language models assign a probability to words
given their history (Bahl et al., 1983). They are evaluated
1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Édouard Grave
<egrave@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

by objective criteria such as perplexity (ppl), which directly
measures the ability of the system to determine proper probabilities for all the words. This potentially makes parametric models prohibitively slow to train on corpora with
very large vocabulary. For instance, the vocabulary of the
One Billion Word benchmark (Chelba et al., 2013) contains around 800K words. In standard NNLMs, such as
feedforward networks (Bengio et al., 2003a) or recurrent
networks (Mikolov et al., 2010), computing this probability
over the whole vocabulary is the bottleneck. Many solutions have been proposed to reduce the complexity of this
expensive step (Bengio et al., 2003b; Goodman, 2001a; Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010). We distinguish (i) the methods
that consider the original distribution and aim at providing approximations of the probabilities, or of a subset of
them (Bengio et al., 2003b; Ji et al., 2015), from (ii) the
approaches that compute exact probabilities for an approximate model yielding a lower computational time, such as
the popular hierarchical softmax (Goodman, 2001a; Mnih
& Hinton, 2009; Morin & Bengio, 2005).
Our approach, called adaptive softmax, belongs to the second category. More specifically, it is inspired by the hierarchical softmax and its subsequent variants. In contrast to
previous works and motivated by the trend that GPUs are
comparatively more and more performant than CPUs, our
design is oriented towards efficient processing on GPUs. In
this context, our paper makes the following points:
• We define a strategy to produce an approximate hierarchical model. It departs from previous ones in that it
explicitly takes into account the computation time of
matrix-matrix multiplications on modern architectures,
which is not trivially linear in the dimensions of the
matrices.
• We conduct an empirical analysis of this model on
recent GPUs. This leads us to define a realistic computation time model that is incorporated in the proposed
optimization;
• Our approach provides a significant acceleration factor compared to the regular softmax, i.e., 2× to 10×
speed-ups. Equivalently we improve the accuracy under computational constraints. Importantly, on the
largest corpus, this higher efficiency empirically comes

