Bidirectional Learning for Time-series Models with Hidden Units

Takayuki Osogami 1 Hiroshi Kajino 1 Taro Sekiyama 1

Abstract
Hidden units can play essential roles in modeling
time-series having long-term dependency or nonlinearity but make it difficult to learn associated
parameters. Here we propose a way to learn such
a time-series model by training a backward model
for the time-reversed time-series, where the backward model has a common set of parameters as
the original (forward) model. Our key observation
is that only a subset of the parameters is hard to
learn, and that subset is complementary between
the forward model and the backward model. By
training both of the two models, we can effectively learn the values of the parameters that are
hard to learn if only either of the two models is
trained. We apply bidirectional learning to a dynamic Boltzmann machine extended with hidden
units. Numerical experiments with synthetic and
real datasets clearly demonstrate advantages of
bidirectional learning.

1. Introduction
Learning from time-series data is of paramount importance
for prediction, anomaly detection, classification, and other
critical tasks that appear in business and society. Various
models of time-series have been studied in the literature to
better learn from time-series data. These include vector autoregressive (VAR) models (Lütkepohl, 2005), hidden Markov
models (HMM) (Baum & Petrie, 1966), and recurrent neural
networks (RNN) (Rumelhart et al., 1986), including long
short term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) and echo state networks (ESN) (Jaeger & Haas, 2004).
With these models of time-series, one seeks to learn the
relation between past values and future values.
In some of these models of time-series, hidden units (or
latent variables) play essential roles in taking into account
long term dependency or non-linearity in time-series. Hid1
IBM Research - Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Takayuki Osogami <osogami@jp.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

den units, however, make it difficult to learn the parameters
of those models. For example, the Baum-Welch algorithm
(Baum & Petrie, 1966) learns the parameters of an HMM
by iteration of expectation and maximization (i.e., an EM
algorithm). An RNN, including LSTM, is trained via back
propagation through time (Rumelhart et al., 1986). These
algorithms are time-consuming and do not necessarily find
optimal values of the parameters.
This difficulty in learning a model with hidden units partly
stems from the fact that the values of hidden units can only
be reliably estimated after observing future values of target
time-series. It then requires iteration or back propagation to
learn the relation between the hidden values and preceding
values. An ESN, on the other hand, gives up learning the
hard-to-learn parameters between hidden values and preceding (visible or hidden) values and set those parameters
randomly. The ESN only learns the relation between visible
values and preceding (hidden) values (Jaeger & Haas, 2004).
We study a model of time-series whose parameters can be
represented as a matrix M or a set of such matrices. An
element Mi,j of the matrix may, for example, represent the
weight between a past value of a unit i and a future value of
a unit j. In a VAR model, each matrix corresponds to the
coefficients for a particular lag. In an RNN, a matrix corresponds to the weight between hidden units. We consider a
situation where it is hard to estimate an appropriate value
of Mi,j for some of the units j ∈ H (in particular, H may
denote the set of hidden units).
We propose a method of training a time-series model with
hidden units in a bidirectional manner, one from the past
and the other from the future. From a time-series model
with parameter M, we construct a backward model, whose
parameters are represented by the transposed matrix M>
or a set of such transposed matrices. The (i, j)-th element
of M> is Mj,i , which represents the weight between a
preceding value of a unit j and a succeeding value of a
unit i. Our key idea is to let the preceding value represent a
future value and the succeeding value represent a past value
in the backward model. Then an intuitive meaning of Mj,i
in the backward model matches that in the original (forward)
model. We use a common matrix M both in the forward
model and in the backward model. Namely, the parameters
are shared between the two models.

