RobustFill: Neural Program Learning under Noisy I/O

Jacob Devlin * 1 Jonathan Uesato * 2 Surya Bhupatiraju * 2 Rishabh Singh 1 Abdel-rahman Mohamed 1
Pushmeet Kohli 1

Abstract
The problem of automatically generating a computer program from some specification has been
studied since the early days of AI. Recently, two
competing approaches for automatic program
learning have received significant attention: (1)
neural program synthesis, where a neural network is conditioned on input/output (I/O) examples and learns to generate a program, and (2)
neural program induction, where a neural network generates new outputs directly using a latent program representation. Here, for the first
time, we directly compare both approaches on a
large-scale, real-world learning task and we additionally contrast to rule-based program synthesis, which uses hand-crafted semantics to guide
the program generation. Our neural models use
a modified attention RNN to allow encoding of
variable-sized sets of I/O pairs, which achieve
92% accuracy on a real-world test set, compared
to the 34% accuracy of the previous best neural
synthesis approach. The synthesis model also
outperforms a comparable induction model on
this task, but we more importantly demonstrate
that the strength of each approach is highly dependent on the evaluation metric and end-user
application. Finally, we show that we can train
our neural models to remain very robust to the
type of noise expected in real-world data (e.g.,
typos), while a highly-engineered rule-based system fails entirely.

1. Introduction
The problem of program learning, i.e. generating a program consistent with some specification, is one of the oldest problems in machine learning and artificial intelligence
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA 2 MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Jacob Devlin <jdevlin@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Input String
Output String
john Smith
Smith, Jhn
DOUG Q. Macklin
Macklin, Doug
Frank Lee (123)
LEe, Frank
Laura Jane Jones
Jones, Laura
Steve P. Green (9)
?
Program
GetToken(Alpha, -1) | ‘,’ | ‘ ’ |
ToCase(Proper, GetToken(Alpha, 1))

Figure 1. An anonymized example from FlashFillTest with noise
(typos). The goal of the task is to fill in the blank (i.e., ‘?’ =
‘Green, Steve’). Synthesis approaches achieve this by generating
a program like the one shown. Induction approaches generate the
new output string directly, conditioned on the the other examples.

Waldinger & Lee (1969); Manna & Waldinger (1975). The
classical approach has been that of rule-based program
synthesis (Manna & Waldinger, 1980), where a formal
grammar is used to derive a program from a well-defined
specification. Providing a formal specification is often
more difficult than writing the program itself, so modern
program synthesis methods generally rely on input/output
examples (I/O examples) to act as an approximate specification. Modern rule-based synthesis methods are typically
centered around hand-crafted function semantics and pruning rules to search for programs consistent with the I/O examples (Gulwani et al., 2012; Alur et al., 2013).
These hand-engineered systems are often difficult to extend
and fragile to noise, so statistical program learning methods have recently gained popularity, with a particular focus on neural network models. This work has fallen into
two overarching categories: (1) neural program synthesis,
where the program is generated by a neural network conditioned on the I/O examples (Balog et al., 2016; Parisotto
et al., 2017; Gaunt et al., 2016; Riedel et al., 2016), and (2)
neural program induction, where network learns to generate the output directly using a latent program representation
(Graves et al., 2014; 2016; Kurach et al., 2016; Kaiser &
Sutskever, 2015; Joulin & Mikolov, 2015; Reed & de Freitas, 2016; Neelakantan et al., 2016). Although many of
these papers have achieved impressive results on a variety of tasks, none have thoroughly compared induction and
synthesis approaches on a real-world test set. In this work,
we not only demonstrate strong empirical results compared

