Understanding Black-box Predictions via Influence Functions
Pang Wei Koh 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
How can we explain the predictions of a blackbox model? In this paper, we use influence functions — a classic technique from robust statistics — to trace a model’s prediction through the
learning algorithm and back to its training data,
thereby identifying training points most responsible for a given prediction. To scale up influence
functions to modern machine learning settings,
we develop a simple, efficient implementation
that requires only oracle access to gradients and
Hessian-vector products. We show that even on
non-convex and non-differentiable models where
the theory breaks down, approximations to influence functions can still provide valuable information. On linear models and convolutional neural networks, we demonstrate that influence functions are useful for multiple purposes: understanding model behavior, debugging models, detecting dataset errors, and even creating visuallyindistinguishable training-set attacks.

1. Introduction
A key question often asked of machine learning systems
is “Why did the system make this prediction?” We want
models that are not just high-performing but also explainable. By understanding why a model does what it does, we
can hope to improve the model (Amershi et al., 2015), discover new science (Shrikumar et al., 2016), and provide
end-users with explanations of actions that impact them
(Goodman & Flaxman, 2016).
However, the best-performing models in many domains —
e.g., deep neural networks for image and speech recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) — are complicated, blackbox models whose predictions seem hard to explain. Work
on interpreting these black-box models has focused on understanding how a fixed model leads to particular predictions, e.g., by locally fitting a simpler model around the test
1

Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to:
Pang Wei Koh <pangwei@cs.stanford.edu>, Percy Liang <pliang@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

point (Ribeiro et al., 2016) or by perturbing the test point to
see how the prediction changes (Simonyan et al., 2013; Li
et al., 2016b; Datta et al., 2016; Adler et al., 2016). These
works explain the predictions in terms of the model, but
how can we explain where the model came from?
In this paper, we tackle this question by tracing a model’s
predictions through its learning algorithm and back to the
training data, where the model parameters ultimately derive from. To formalize the impact of a training point on a
prediction, we ask the counterfactual: what would happen
if we did not have this training point, or if the values of this
training point were changed slightly?
Answering this question by perturbing the data and retraining the model can be prohibitively expensive. To overcome
this problem, we use influence functions, a classic technique from robust statistics (Cook & Weisberg, 1980) that
tells us how the model parameters change as we upweight
a training point by an infinitesimal amount. This allows us
to “differentiate through the training” to estimate in closedform the effect of a variety of training perturbations.
Despite their rich history in statistics, influence functions
have not seen widespread use in machine learning; to the
best of our knowledge, the work closest to ours is Wojnowicz et al. (2016), which introduced a method for approximating a quantity related to influence in generalized
linear models. One obstacle to adoption is that influence functions require expensive second derivative calculations and assume model differentiability and convexity,
which limits their applicability in modern contexts where
models are often non-differentiable, non-convex, and highdimensional. We address these challenges by showing that
we can efficiently approximate influence functions using
second-order optimization techniques (Pearlmutter, 1994;
Martens, 2010; Agarwal et al., 2016), and that they remain
accurate even as the underlying assumptions of differentiability and convexity degrade.
Influence functions capture the core idea of studying models through the lens of their training data. We show that
they are a versatile tool that can be applied to a wide variety
of seemingly disparate tasks: understanding model behavior, debugging models, detecting dataset errors, and creating visually-indistinguishable adversarial training examples that can flip neural network test predictions, the training set analogue of Goodfellow et al. (2015).

