Diameter-Based Active Learning
Christopher Tosh 1 Sanjoy Dasgupta 1

Abstract
To date, the tightest upper and lower-bounds for
the active learning of general concept classes
have been in terms of a parameter of the learning problem called the splitting index. We provide, for the first time, an efficient algorithm that
is able to realize this upper bound, and we empirically demonstrate its good performance.

1. Introduction
In many situations where a classifier is to be learned, it is
easy to collect unlabeled data but costly to obtain labels.
This has motivated the pool-based active learning model,
in which a learner has access to a collection of unlabeled
data points and is allowed to ask for individual labels in an
adaptive manner. The hope is that choosing these queries
intelligently will rapidly yield a low-error classifier, much
more quickly than with random querying. A central focus
of active learning is developing efficient querying strategies
and understanding their label complexity.
Over the past decade or two, there has been substantial progress in developing such rigorously-justified active
learning schemes for general concept classes. For the most
part, these schemes can be described as mellow: rather than
focusing upon maximally informative points, they query
any point whose label cannot reasonably be inferred from
the information received so far. It is of interest to develop
more aggressive strategies with better label complexity.
An exception to this general trend is the aggressive strategy
of (Dasgupta, 2005), whose label complexity is known to
be optimal in its dependence on a key parameter called the
splitting index. However, this strategy has been primarily
of theoretical interest because it is difficult to implement
algorithmically. In this paper, we introduce a variant of the
methodology that yields efficient algorithms. We show that
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Christopher Tosh <ctosh@cs.ucsd.edu>, Sanjoy Dasgupta <dasgupta@cs.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

it admits roughly the same label complexity bounds as well
as having promising experimental performance.
As with the original splitting index result, we operate in
the realizable setting, where data can be perfectly classified by some function h⇤ in the hypothesis class H. At any
given time during the active learning process, the remaining candidates—that is, the elements of H consistent with
the data so far—are called the version space. The goal of
aggressive active learners is typically to pick queries that
are likely to shrink this version space rapidly. But what is
the right notion of size? Dasgupta (2005) pointed out that
the diameter of the version space is what matters, where the
distance between two classifiers is taken to be the fraction
of points on which they make different predictions. Unfortunately, the diameter is a difficult measure to work with
because it cannot, in general, be decreased at a steady rate.
Thus the earlier work used a procedure that has quantifiable
label complexity but is not conducive to implementation.
We take a fresh perspective on this earlier result. We start
by suggesting an alternative, but closely related, notion of
the size of a version space: the average pairwise distance
between hypotheses in the version space, with respect to
some underlying probability distribution ⇡ on H. This distribution ⇡ can be arbitrary—that is, there is no requirement that the target h⇤ is chosen from it—but should be
chosen so that it is easy to sample from. When H consists
of linear separators, for instance, a good choice would be a
log-concave density, such as a Gaussian.
At any given time, the next query x is chosen roughly as
follows:
• Sample a collection of classifiers h1 , h2 , . . . , hm from
⇡ restricted to the current version space V .
• Compute the distances between them; this can be done
using just the unlabeled points.
• Any candidate query x partitions the classifiers {hi }
into two groups: those that assign it a + label (call
these Vx+ ) and those that assign it a label (call these
Vx ). Estimate the average-diameter after labeling
x by the sum of the distances between classifiers hi
within Vx+ , or those within Vx , whichever is larger.
• Out of the pool of unlabeled data, pick the x for which

