Improving Viterbi is Hard:
Better Runtimes Imply Faster Clique Algorithms

Arturs Backurs 1 Christos Tzamos 1

Abstract
The classic algorithm of Viterbi computes the
most likely path in a Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) that results in a given sequence of observations. It runs in time O(T n2 ) given a sequence of T observations from a HMM with n
states. Despite significant interest in the problem and prolonged effort by different communities, no known algorithm achieves more than a
polylogarithmic speedup. In this paper, we explain this difficulty by providing matching conditional lower bounds. Our lower bounds are based
on assumptions that the best known algorithms
for the All-Pairs Shortest Paths problem (APSP)
and for the Max-Weight k-Clique problem in
edge-weighted graphs are essentially tight. Finally, using a recent algorithm by Green Larsen
and Williams for online
Boolean matrix-vector
√
multiplication, we get a 2Ω( log n) speedup for
the Viterbi algorithm when there are few distinct
transition probabilities in the HMM.

1. Introduction
A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is a simple model that
describes a random process for generating a sequence of
observations. A random walk is performed on an underlying graph (Markov Chain) and, at each step, an observation
is drawn from a probability distribution that depends only
on the current state (the node in the graph).
HMMs are a fundamental statistical tool and one of the
most important questions in the applications of HMMs is
computing the most likely sequence of states visited by the
random walk in the HMM given the sequence of observations. Andrew Viterbi proposed an algorithm (Viterbi,
1967) for this problem that computes the solution in
1
Authors ordered alphabetically.
MIT, US. Correspondence to: Arturs Backurs <backurs@mit.edu>, Christos Tzamos
<tzamos@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

O(T n2 ) time for any HMM with n states and an observation sequence of length T . This algorithm is known as the
Viterbi algorithm and the problem of computing the most
likely sequence of states is also known as the Viterbi Path
problem.
The Viterbi algorithm has found wide applicability in machine learning. It is an important tool for structured prediction, used e.g., for structured perceptrons (Collins, 2002).
Other applications include speech recognition (Rabiner,
1989; Nefian et al., 2002; Bengio, 2003), part-of-speech
tagging (Collins, 2002), action planning (Attias, 2003),
emotion recognition (Cohen et al., 2000), human activity
classification (Mannini & Sabatini, 2010), and waveform
classification (Kim & Smyth, 2006). Furthermore, it is often combined with other methods. For example, a combination of the Viterbi algorithm and neural networks is
used for speech recognition (Mohamed et al., 2012; AbdelHamid et al., 2012; Bourlard & Morgan, 2012), handwriting recognition and protein secondary structure prediction (Lin et al., 2005; Peng et al., 2009). It also can be combined with Support Vector Machines (Altun et al., 2003).
Finally, the Viterbi algorithm is used as a module in Graph
Transformer Networks, with applications to speech recognition (LeCun et al., 1998; Collobert, 2011).
The quadratic dependence of the algorithm’s runtime on
the number of states is a long-standing bottleneck that limits its applicability to problems with large state spaces,
particularly when the number of observations is large. A
lot of effort has been put into improving the Viterbi algorithm to lower either the time or space complexity. Many
works achieve speedups by requiring structure in the input, either explicitly by considering restricted classes of
HMMs (Felzenszwalb et al., 2004; Siddiqi & Moore, 2005)
or implicitly by using heuristics that improve runtime in
certain cases (Esposito & Radicioni, 2009; Kaji et al.,
2010). For the general case, in (Lifshits et al., 2009; Mahmud & Schliep, 2011) it is shown how to speed up the
Viterbi algorithm by O(log n) when the number of distinct
observations is constant using the Four Russians method
or similar ideas. More recently, in (Cairo et al., 2016),
the same logarithmic speed-up was shown to be possible
for the general case. Despite significant effort, only log-

