Variational Policy for Guiding Point Processes
Yichen Wang 1 Grady Williams 2 Evangelos Theodorou 2 Le Song 1

Abstract
Temporal point processes have been widely applied to model event sequence data generated by
online users. In this paper, we consider the problem of how to design the optimal control policy
for point processes, such that the stochastic system driven by the point process is steered to a
target state. In particular, we exploit the key insight to view the stochastic optimal control problem from the perspective of optimal measure and
variational inference. We further propose a convex optimization framework and an efficient algorithm to update the policy adaptively to the
current system state. Experiments on synthetic
and real-world data show that our algorithm can
steer the user activities much more accurately and
efficiently than other stochastic control methods.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, user generated event data are becoming increasingly available. Each user is typically logged in the database
with the precise time-stamp of the event, together with additional context such as tag, text, image, and video. Furthermore, these data are generated in an asynchronous fashion
since any user can generate an event at any time and there
may not be any coordination or synchronization between
two events. Among different representations of user behaviors, temporal point processes have been widely applied to
model the complex dynamics of online user behaviors (Zhou
et al., 2013; Du et al., 2015; Lian et al., 2014; 2015; He et al.,
2015; 2016; Dai et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016a;b;c).
In spite of the broad applicability of point processes, there
is little work in the area of controlling these processes to influence user behaviors. In this paper, we study the problem
of designing the best intervention policy to influence the intensity function of point processes, such that user behaviors
can be influenced towards a target state.
1

College of Computing, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA, USA
School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Tech. Correspondence
to: Yichen Wang <yichen.wang@gatech.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Our work

Find optimal measure 6 ∗
min %7 [( ) ] + 89: (6||<)
7

6 ∗ in closed form

Optimal measure
perspective

Variational Inference
min 89: (6 ∗ ||6(-)]
$

Simple solution

Previous works
Direct optimization:
min %&[( ) + +(-)]
$

• Not scalable
• Need approximation
• Proper control cost?

Optimal Policy
- ∗ 1 , 1 ∈ [0, 5]

Figure 1. Illustration of the measure-theoretic view and benefit of
our framework compared with existing approaches.

A framework for doing this is critically important. For example, government agents may want to effectively suppress
the spread of terrorist propaganda, which is important for
understanding the vulnerabilities of social networks and
increasing their resilience to rumor and false information;
online merchants may want to promote users’ frequency
of visiting the website to increase sales; administrators of
Q&A sites such as StackOverflow design various badges to
motivate users to answer questions and provide feedbacks
to increase the online engagement (Anderson et al., 2013);
to gain more attention, a broadcaster on Twitter may want to
design a smart tweeting strategy such that his posts always
remain on top of his followers’ feeds (Karimi et al., 2016).
Interestingly, the social science setting also introduces
new challenges. Previous stochastic optimal control methods (Boel & Varaiya, 1977; Pham, 1998; Oksendal & Sulem,
2005; Hanson, 2007) in robotics are not applicable for four
reasons: (i) they mostly focus on the cases where the policy
is in the drift part of the system, which is quite different from
our case where the policy is on the intensity function; (ii)
they require linear approximations of the nonlinear system
and quadratic approximations of the objective function; (iii)
to obtain a feedback control policy, these methods require
the solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) Partial
Differential Equation, which have severe limitations in scalability and feasibility to the nonlinear systems, especially in
social applications where the system’s dimension is huge;
(iv) the systems they study are driven by Wiener processes
and Poisson processes. However, social sciences require

