End-to-End Differentiable Adversarial Imitation Learning

Nir Baram 1 Oron Anschel 1 Itai Caspi 1 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
been successfully applied to the problem of policy imitation in a model-free setup. However,
the computation graph of GANs, that include
a stochastic policy as the generative model, is
no longer differentiable end-to-end, which requires the use of high-variance gradient estimation. In this paper, we introduce the Modelbased Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
(MGAIL) algorithm. We show how to use a forward model to make the computation fully differentiable, which enables training policies using
the exact gradient of the discriminator. The resulting algorithm trains competent policies using
relatively fewer expert samples and interactions
with the environment. We test it on both discrete
and continuous action domains and report results
that surpass the state-of-the-art.

1991). By providing constant supervision (dense reward
signal in Reinforcement Learning (RL) terminology), BC
overcomes fundamental difficulties of RL such as the credit
assignment problem (Sutton, 1984). However, BC has its
downsides as well. Contrary to temporal difference methods (Sutton, 1988) that integrate information over time,
BC methods are trained using single time-step state-action
pairs {st , at }. Therefore, an agent trained using BC is unaware of how his choice of actions affects the future state
distribution, which makes it susceptible to compounding
errors (Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Ross et al., 2011). On top of
that, the sample complexity of BC methods is usually high,
requiring a significant amount of expert data that could be
expensive to obtain.
The second approach to imitation is comprised of two
stages. First, recovering a reward signal under which the
expert is uniquely optimal (often called inverse RL, for instance see Ng, Russell, et al.):
X t

X t

E
γ r̂(st , at )|πE ≥ E
γ r̂(st , at )|π ∀π.
t

1. Introduction
Learning a policy from scratch is often difficult. However, in many problems, there exists an expert policy that
achieves satisfactory performance. We are interested in the
scenario of imitating an expert. Imitation is needed for several reasons: Automation (in case the expert is human), distillation (e.g., if the expert is too expensive to run in realtime (Rusu et al., 2015)), and initialization (using an expert
policy as an initial solution). In our setting, we assume that
trajectories {s0 , a0 , s1 , ...}N
i=0 of an expert policy πE are
given. Our goal is to train a new policy π which imitates
πE without access to the original reward signal rE that was
used by the expert.
There are two main approaches to solve imitation problems. The first, known as Behavioral Cloning (BC), directly learns the conditional distribution of actions over
states p(a|s) in a supervised learning fashion (Pomerleau,
1
Technion Institute of Technology, Israel. Correspondence to:
Nir Baram <nirb@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

t

(1)
After reconstructing a reward signal r̂, the second step is
to train a policy that maximizes P
the discounted
 cumulative
T
t
expected reward: Eπ R = Eπ
t=0 γ r̂t . The problem
with this approach stems from the fact that restoring an informative reward signal, solely based on state-action observations, is an ill-posed problem (Ziebart et al., 2008). A different strategy could be to recover a sparser reward signal
(a more well-defined problem) and enrich it by hand. However, this requires extensive domain knowledge (Dorigo &
Colombetti, 1998).
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) is a recent method for training generative models. It uses a second neural network (D) to guide the generative model (G) towards producing patterns similar to those
of the expert (see illustration in Figure 1).
The elegance of GANs has made it popular among a variety of problems other than creating generative models, such
as image captioning (Mirza & Osindero, 2014) and video
prediction (Mathieu et al., 2015). More recently, a work
named Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL)
(Ho & Ermon, 2016), has successfully applied the ideas of
GANs to imitate an expert in a model-free setup. It showed

