Selective Inference for Sparse High-Order Interaction Models

Shinya Suzumura 1 Kazuya Nakagawa 1 Yuta Umezu 1 Koji Tsuda 2 3 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 3

Abstract
Finding statistically significant high-order interactions in predictive modeling is important but
challenging task because the possible number of
high-order interactions is extremely large (e.g.,
> 1017 ). In this paper we study feature selection and statistical inference for sparse highorder interaction models. Our main contribution
is to extend recently developed selective inference framework for linear models to high-order
interaction models by developing a novel algorithm for efficiently characterizing the selection
event for the selective inference of high-order interactions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed algorithm by applying it to an HIV
drug response prediction problem.

1. Introduction
Finding statistically reliable high-order interaction features
in predictive modeling has been important challenging task.
For example, in a biomedical study, co-occurrence of multiple mutations in multiple genes may have a significant influence on a response to a drug even if occurrence of single
mutation in each of these genes has no influence (Manolio & Collins, 2006; Cordell, 2009). A major challenge
in prediction modeling with high-order interaction features
is the exponentially expanded feature space. If one has a
dataset with d original variables and takes into account

Pr ind
teractions up to order r, the model has D :=
ρ=1 ρ
features (e.g., for d = 10, 000, r = 5, D > 1017 ). Unless
both d and r are fairly small, D is extremely large. Feature selection and statistical inference in such an extremely
high-dimensional model are challenging both computationally and statistically.
A common approach to high-dimensional modeling is to
consider a sparse model, i.e., a model only with a selected
1

Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, Japan 2 University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 3 RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Ichiro Takeuchi <takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Example of the tree structure among high-order interaction features when d = 4 and r = 3.

subset of features. In the past two decades, considerable
amount of studies have been done on sparse modeling and
feature selection in high-dimensional models. In these
studies, a variety of feature selection algorithms such as
marginal screening (Fan & Lv, 2008), orthogonal matching pursuit (Pati et al., 1993), LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996),
and their various extensions have been developed. On the
other hand, statistical inference for sparse models (hypothesis testing or confidence interval computation of the fitted coefficients) have not been deeply studied until very
recently. The main challenge in statistical inference of
sparse models is that, if the data is used for selecting a
subset of features, this selection event must be taken into
account in the following inference stage. Otherwise, the
inference results are distorted by so-called selection bias,
and false positive errors cannot be controlled at desired
levels. This problem is refereed to as selective inference
or post selection inference (Benjamini & Yekutieli, 2005;
Benjamini et al., 2009; Berk et al., 2013). After the seminal
work by Lee et al. (2016), significant progress has been recently made on selective inference for sparse linear models
(Fithian et al., 2014b; Lee & Taylor, 2014; Fithian et al.,
2015; Tian & Taylor, 2015; Taylor & Tibshirani, 2016;
Yang et al., 2016; Barber & Candès, 2016).
In this paper, we study feature selection and statistical inference for sparse high-order interaction models. Unfortunately, neither existing feature selection methods nor existing selective inference methods can be applied to sparse
high-order interaction models because the computational
costs of these existing methods at least linearly depend on
the number of features D. The main contribution in this
paper is to develop computationally efficient algorithms for
these two tasks when the original variables are represented
in [0, 1]d . Our main idea is to exploit the underlying tree
structure of high-order interaction features as depicted in

