Learning to Discover Sparse Graphical Models

Eugene Belilovsky 1 2 3 Kyle Kastner 4 Gael Varoquaux 2 Matthew B. Blaschko 1

Abstract
We consider structure discovery of undirected
graphical models from observational data. Inferring likely structures from few examples is a complex task often requiring the formulation of priors
and sophisticated inference procedures. Popular
methods rely on estimating a penalized maximum
likelihood of the precision matrix. However, in
these approaches structure recovery is an indirect
consequence of the data-fit term, the penalty can
be difficult to adapt for domain-specific knowledge, and the inference is computationally demanding. By contrast, it may be easier to generate training samples of data that arise from graphs
with the desired structure properties. We propose
here to leverage this latter source of information
as training data to learn a function, parametrized
by a neural network, that maps empirical covariance matrices to estimated graph structures.
Learning this function brings two benefits: it implicitly models the desired structure or sparsity
properties to form suitable priors, and it can be
tailored to the specific problem of edge structure
discovery, rather than maximizing data likelihood.
Applying this framework, we find our learnable
graph-discovery method trained on synthetic data
generalizes well: identifying relevant edges in
both synthetic and real data, completely unknown
at training time. We find that on genetics, brain
imaging, and simulation data we obtain performance generally superior to analytical methods.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models provide a powerful framework to describe the dependencies between a set of variables. Many applications infer the structure of a probabilistic graphical model from data to elucidate the relationships
1

KU Leuven 2 INRIA 3 University of Paris-Saclay 4 University
of Montreal. Correspondence to: Eugene Belilovsky <eugene.belilovsky@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

between variables. These relationships are often represented
by an undirected graphical model also known as a Markov
Random Field (MRF). We focus on a common MRF model,
Gaussian graphical models (GGMs). GGMs are used in
structure-discovery settings for rich data such as neuroimaging, genetics, or finance (Friedman et al., 2008; Ryali et al,
2012; Mohan et al., 2012; Belilovsky et al., 2016). Although
multivariate Gaussian distributions are well-behaved, determining likely structures from few examples is a difficult task
when the data is high dimensional. It requires strong priors,
typically a sparsity assumption, or other restrictions on the
structure of the graph, which now make the distribution
difficult to express analytically and use.
A standard approach to estimating structure with GGMs in
high dimensions is based on the classic result that the zeros
of a precision matrix correspond to zero partial correlation,
a necessary and sufficient condition for conditional independence (Lauritzen, 1996). Assuming only a few conditional
dependencies corresponds to a sparsity constraint on the
entries of the precision matrix, leading to a combinatorial
problem. Many popular approaches to learning GGMs can
be seen as leveraging the `1 -norm to create convex surrogates to this problem. Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2006)
use nodewise `1 penalized regressions, while other estimators penalize the precision matrix directly (Cai et al., 2011;
Friedman et al., 2008; Ravikumar et al., 2011), the most
popular being the graphical lasso
fgl (Σ̂) = arg min − log |Θ| + Tr (Σ̂Θ) + λkΘk1 (1)
Θ0

which can be seen as a penalized maximum-likelihood estimator. Here Θ and Σ̂ are the precision and sample covariance matrices, respectively. A large variety of alternative
penalties extend the priors of the graphical lasso (Danaher et al., 2014; Ryali et al, 2012; Varoquaux et al., 2010).
However, this strategy faces several challenges. Constructing novel surrogates for structured-sparsity assumptions on
MRF structures is difficult, as priors need to be formulated
and incorporated into a penalized maximum likelihood objective which then calls for the development of an efficient
optimization algorithm, often within a separate research effort. Furthermore, model selection in a penalized maximum
likelihood setting is difficult as regularization parameters
are often unintuitive.
We propose to learn the estimator. Rather than manually de-

