Learning the Structure of Generative Models without Labeled Data
Stephen H. Bach 1 Bryan He 1 Alexander Ratner 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Curating labeled training data has become the
primary bottleneck in machine learning. Recent frameworks address this bottleneck with
generative models to synthesize labels at scale
from weak supervision sources. The generative
model’s dependency structure directly affects the
quality of the estimated labels, but selecting a
structure automatically without any labeled data
is a distinct challenge. We propose a structure estimation method that maximizes the `1 regularized marginal pseudolikelihood of the observed data. Our analysis shows that the amount
of unlabeled data required to identify the true
structure scales sublinearly in the number of possible dependencies for a broad class of models. Simulations show that our method is 100⇥
faster than a maximum likelihood approach and
selects 1/4 as many extraneous dependencies.
We also show that our method provides an average of 1.5 F1 points of improvement over existing, user-developed information extraction applications on real-world data such as PubMed journal abstracts.

1. Introduction
Supervised machine learning traditionally depends on access to labeled training data, a major bottleneck in developing new methods and applications. In particular, deep
learning methods require tens of thousands or more labeled
data points for each specific task. Collecting these labels is
often prohibitively expensive, especially when specialized
domain expertise is required, and major technology companies are investing heavily in hand-curating labeled training
data (Metz, 2016; Eadicicco, 2017). Aiming to overcome
this bottleneck, there is growing interest in using generative models to synthesize training data from weak super1

Stanford University, Stanford, California. Correspondence
to: Stephen Bach <bach@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

vision sources such as heuristics, knowledge bases, and
weak classifiers trained directly on noisy sources. Rather
than treating training labels as gold-standard inputs, such
methods model training set creation as a process in order to
generate training labels at scale. The true class label for a
data point is modeled as a latent variable that generates the
observed, noisy labels. After fitting the parameters of this
generative model on unlabeled data, a distribution over the
latent, true labels can be inferred.
The structure of such generative models directly affects the
inferred labels, and prior work assumes that the structure
is user-specified (Alfonseca et al., 2012; Takamatsu et al.,
2012; Roth & Klakow, 2013b; Ratner et al., 2016). One
option is to assume that the supervision sources are conditionally independent given the latent class label. However,
statistical dependencies are common in practice, and not
taking them into account leads to misjudging the accuracy
of the supervision. We cannot rely in general on users to
specify the structure of the generative model, because supervising heuristics and classifiers might be independent
for some data sets but not others. We therefore seek an efficient method for automatically learning the structure of the
generative model from weak supervision sources alone.
While structure learning in the supervised setting is wellstudied (e.g., Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2006; Zhao & Yu,
2006; Ravikumar et al., 2010, see also Section 6), learning the structure of generative models for weak supervision is challenging because the true class labels are latent.
Although we can learn the parameters of generative models for a given structure using stochastic gradient descent
and Gibbs sampling, modeling all possible dependencies
does not scale as an alternative to model selection. For
example, estimating all possible correlations for a modestly sized problem of 100 weak supervision sources takes
over 40 minutes. (For comparison, our proposed approach
solves the same problem in 15 seconds.) As users develop
their supervision heuristics, rerunning parameter learning
to identify dependencies becomes a prohibitive bottleneck.
We propose an estimator to learn the dependency structure
of a generative model without using any labeled training
data. Our method maximizes the `1 -regularized marginal
pseudolikelihood of each supervision source’s output independently, selecting those dependencies that have nonzero

