Multi-Class Optimal Margin Distribution Machine

Teng Zhang 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Recent studies disclose that maximizing the minimum margin like support vector machines does
not necessarily lead to better generalization performances, and instead, it is crucial to optimize the margin distribution. Although it has
been shown that for binary classification, characterizing the margin distribution by the firstand second-order statistics can achieve superior
performance. It still remains open for multiclass classification, and due to the complexity
of margin for multi-class classification, optimizing its distribution by mean and variance can
also be difficult. In this paper, we propose
mcODM (multi-class Optimal margin Distribution Machine), which can solve this problem efficiently. We also give a theoretical analysis for
our method, which verifies the significance of
margin distribution for multi-class classification.
Empirical study further shows that mcODM always outperforms all four versions of multi-class
SVMs on all experimental data sets.

1. Introduction
Support vector machines (SVMs) and Boosting have
been two mainstream learning approaches during the past
decade. The former (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) roots in the
statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1995) with the central
idea of searching a large margin separator, i.e., maximizing the smallest distance from the instances to the classification boundary in a RKHS (reproducing kernel Hilbert
space). It is noteworthy that there is also a long history
of applying margin theory to explain the latter (Freund &
Schapire, 1995; Schapire et al., 1998), due to its tending to
be empirically resistant to over-fitting (Reyzin & Schapire,
2006; Wang et al., 2011; Zhou, 2012).
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Zhi-Hua Zhou <zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Recently, the margin theory for Boosting has finally been
defended (Gao & Zhou, 2013), and has disclosed that the
margin distribution rather than a single margin is more crucial to the generalization performance. It suggests that
there may still exist large space to further enhance for
SVMs. Inspired by this recognition, (Zhang & Zhou, 2014;
2016) proposed a binary classification method to optimize
margin distribution by characterizing it through the firstand second-order statistics, which achieves quite satisfactory experimental results. Later, (Zhou & Zhou, 2016) extends the idea to an approach which is able to exploit unlabeled data and handle unequal misclassification cost. A
brief summary of this line of early research can be found
in (Zhou, 2014).
Although it has been shown that for binary classification,
optimizing the margin distribution by maximizing the margin mean and minimizing the margin variance simultaneously can get superior performance, it still remains open for
multi-class classification. Moreover, the margin for multiclass classification is much more complicated than that for
binary class classification, which makes the resultant optimization be a difficult non-differentiable non-convex programming. In this paper, we propose mcODM (multi-class
Optimal margin Distribution Machine) to solve this problem efficiently. For optimization, we relax mcODM into a
series of convex quadratic programming (QP), and extend
the Block Coordinate Descent (BCD) algorithm (Tseng,
2001) to solve the dual of each QP. The sub-problem of
each iteration of BCD is also a QP. By exploiting its special
structure, we derive a sorting algorithm to solve it which is
much faster than general QP solvers. We further provide
a generalization error bound based on Rademacher complexity, and further present the analysis of the relationship
between generalization error and margin distribution for
multi-class classification. Extensive experiments on twenty
two data sets show the superiority of our method to all four
versions of multi-class SVMs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces some preliminaries. Section 3 formulates the
problem. Section 4 presents the proposed algorithm. Section 5 discusses some theoretical analyses. Section 6 reports on our experimental studies and empirical observations. Finally Section 7 concludes with future work.

