On the Sampling Problem for Kernel Quadrature

François-Xavier Briol 1 2 Chris J. Oates 3 4 Jon Cockayne 1 Wilson Ye Chen 5 Mark Girolami 2 4

Abstract

Carlo (MC) methods can be used to estimate the numerical
value of Eqn. 1. A classical research problem in computational statistics is to reduce the MC estimation error in this
context, where the integral can, for example, represent an
expectation or marginalisation over a random variable of
interest.

The standard Kernel Quadrature method for numerical integration with random point sets (also
called Bayesian Monte Carlo) is known to converge in root mean square error at a rate determined by the ratio s/d, where s and d encode the smoothness and dimension of the integrand. However, an empirical investigation
reveals that the rate constant C is highly sensitive to the distribution of the random points.
In contrast to standard Monte Carlo integration,
for which optimal importance sampling is wellunderstood, the sampling distribution that minimises C for Kernel Quadrature does not admit
a closed form. This paper argues that the practical choice of sampling distribution is an important open problem. One solution is considered; a
novel automatic approach based on adaptive tempering and sequential Monte Carlo. Empirical results demonstrate a dramatic reduction in integration error of up to 4 orders of magnitude can be
achieved with the proposed method.

The default MC estimator comprises of
n

Π̂MC (f ) =

where xj are sampled identically and independently (i.i.d.)
from Π. Then we have a root mean square error (RMSE)
bound
q
CMC (f ; Π)
√
,
E[Π̂MC (f ) − Π(f )]2 ≤
n
where CMC (f ; Π) = Std(f ; Π) and the expectation is with
respect to the joint distribution of the {xj }nj=1 . For settings where the Lebesgue density of Π is only known up to
normalising constant, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods can be used; the rate-constant CMC (f ; Π) is then
related to the asymptotic variance of f under the Markov
chain sample path.

1. INTRODUCTION
Consider approximation of the Lebesgue integral
Z
Π(f ) =
f dΠ

1X
f (xj ),
n j=1

(1)

X

where Π is a Borel measure defined over X ⊆ Rd and
f is Borel measurable. Define P(f ) to be the set of
0
that f ∈ L2 (Π0 ), meaning that
Borel measures
R Π 2 such
2
0
kf kL2 (Π0 ) = X f dΠ < ∞, and assume Π ∈ P(f ). In
situations where Π(f ) does not admit a closed-form, Monte
1

University of Warwick, Department of Statistics. 2 Imperial
College London, Department of Mathematics. 3 Newcastle University, School of Mathematics and Statistics 4 The Alan Turing Institute for Data Science 5 University of Technology Sydney,
School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Correspondence
to: François-Xavier Briol <f-x.briol@warwick.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Considerations of computational cost place emphasis on
methods to reduce the rate constant CMC (f ; Π). For the
MC estimator, this rate constant can be made smaller via
importance sampling (IS): f 7→ f · dΠ/dΠ0 where an
optimal choice Π0 ∈ P(f · dΠ/dΠ0 ), that minimises
Std(f · dΠ/dΠ0 ; Π0 ), is available in explicit closed-form
(see Robert and Casella, 2013, Thm. 3.3.4). However, the
RMSE remains asymptotically gated at O(n−1/2 ).
The default Kernel Quadrature (KQ) estimate comprises of
Π̂(f ) =

n
X

wj f (xj ),

(2)

j=1

where the xj ∼ Π0 are independent (or arise from
a Markov chain) and supp(Π) ⊆ supp(Π0 ). In contrast to MC, the weights {wj }nj=1 in KQ are in general
non-uniform, real-valued and depend on {xj }nj=1 . The
KQ nomenclature derives from the (symmetric, positivedefinite) kernel k : X × X P
→ R that is used to conn
struct an interpolant fˆ(x) =
j=1 βj k(x, xj ) such that

