Priv’IT: Private and Sample Efficient Identity Testing

Bryan Cai * 1 Constantinos Daskalakis * 1 Gautam Kamath * 1

Abstract
We develop differentially private hypothesis testing methods for the small sample regime. Given
a sample D from a categorical distribution p over
some domain Σ, an explicitly described distribution q over Σ, some privacy parameter ε, accuracy parameter α, and requirements βI and
βII for the type I and type II errors of our test,
the goal is to distinguish between p = q and
dTV (p, q) ≥ α. We provide theoretical bounds
for the sample size |D| so that our method both
satisfies (ε, 0)-differential privacy, and guarantees βI and βII type I and type II errors. We
show that differential privacy may come for free
in some regimes of parameters, and we always
beat the sample complexity resulting from running the χ2 -test with noisy counts, or standard
approaches such as repetition for endowing nonprivate χ2 -style statistics with differential privacy guarantees. We experimentally compare the
sample complexity of our method to that of recently proposed methods for private hypothesis
testing (Gaboardi et al., 2016; Kifer & Rogers,
2017).

1. Introduction
Hypothesis testing is the age-old problem of deciding
whether observations from an unknown phenomenon p
conform to a model q. Often p can be viewed as a distribution over some alphabet Σ, and the goal is to determine,
using samples from p, whether it is equal to some model
distribution q or not. This type of test is the lifeblood of
the scientific method and has received tremendous study in
statistics since its very beginnings. Naturally, the focus has
been on minimizing the number of observations from the
unknown distribution p that are needed to determine, with
*
1
Equal contribution
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence
to: Bryan Cai <bcai@mit.edu>, Constantinos Daskalakis
<costis@csail.mit.edu>, Gautam Kamath <g@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

confidence, whether p = q or p 6= q.
In several fields of research and application, however, samples may contain sensitive information about individuals;
consider for example, individuals participating in some
clinical study of a disease that carries social stigma. It may
thus be crucial to guarantee that operating on the samples
needed to test a statistical hypothesis protects sensitive information about the samples. This is not at odds with the
goal of hypothesis testing itself, since the latter is about
verifying a property of the population p from which the
samples are drawn, and not of the samples themselves.
Without care, however, sensitive information about the
sample might actually be divulged by statistical processing that is improperly designed. As recently exhibited, for
example, it may be possible to determine whether individuals participated in a study from data that would typically
be published in genome-wide association studies (Homer
et al., 2008). Motivated in part by this realization, there has
been increased recent interest in developing data sharing
techniques which are private (Johnson & Shmatikov, 2013;
Uhler et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014; Simmons et al., 2016).
Protecting privacy when computing on data has been extensively studied in several fields ranging from statistics to
diverse branches of computer science including algorithms,
cryptography, database theory, and machine learning; see,
e.g., (Dalenius, 1977; Adam & Worthmann, 1989; Agrawal
& Aggarwal, 2001; Dinur & Nissim, 2003; Dwork, 2008;
Dwork & Roth, 2014) and their references. A notion of privacy proposed by theoretical computer scientists which has
found a lot of traction is that of differential privacy (Dwork
et al., 2006). Roughly speaking, it requires that the output
of an algorithm on two neighboring datasets D and D0 that
differ in the value of one element be statistically close. For
a formal definition see Section 2.
Our goal in this paper is to develop tools for privately performing statistical hypothesis testing. In particular, we are
interested in studying the tradeoffs between statistical accuracy, power, significance, and privacy in the sample size.
To be precise, given samples from a categorical distribution
p over some domain Σ, an explicitly described distribution
q over Σ, some privacy parameter ε, accuracy parameter α,
and requirements βI and βII for the type I and type II errors of our test, the goal is to distinguish between p = q

