Rule-Enhanced Penalized Regression by Column Generation
using Rectangular Maximum Agreement

Jonathan Eckstein 1 Noam Goldberg 2 Ai Kagawa 3

Abstract
We describe a procedure enhancing L1 -penalized
regression by adding dynamically generated
rules describing multidimensional “box” sets.
Our rule-adding procedure is based on the
classical column generation method for highdimensional linear programming. The pricing
problem for our column generation procedure
reduces to the N P-hard rectangular maximum
agreement (RMA) problem of finding a box
that best discriminates between two weighted
datasets. We solve this problem exactly using a parallel branch-and-bound procedure. The
resulting rule-enhanced regression method is
computation-intensive, but has promising prediction performance.

1. Motivation and Overview
This paper considers the general learning problem in which
we have m observation vectors X1 , . . . , Xm ∈ Rn , with
matching response values y1 , . . . , ym ∈ R. Each response
yi is a possibly noisy evaluation of an unknown function
f : Rn → R at Xi , that is, yi = f (Xi ) + ei , where ei ∈
R represents the noise or measurement error. The goal is
to estimate f by some fˆ : Rn → R such that fˆ(Xi ) is
a good fit for yi , that is, |fˆ(Xi ) − yi | tends to be small.
The estimate fˆ may then be used to predict the response
value y corresponding to a newly encountered observation
x ∈ Rn through the prediction ŷ = fˆ(x). A classical
linear regression model is one simple example of the many
possible techniques one might employ for constructing fˆ.
The classical regression approach to this problem is to posit
1
Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ, USA 2 Department of Management, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel 3 Doctoral Program in Operations Research, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Jonathan Eckstein <jeckstei@business.rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a particular functional form for fˆ(x) (for example, an affine
function of x) and then use an optimization procedure to
estimate the parameters in this functional form.
Here, we are interested in cases in which a concise candidate functional form for fˆ is not readily apparent, and
we wish to estimate fˆ by searching over a very highdimensional space of parameters. For example, Breiman
(2001) proposed the method of random forests, which
constructs fˆ by training regression trees on multiple random subsamples of the data, and then averaging the resulting predictors. Another proposal is the RuleFit algorithm (Friedman & Popescu, 2008), which enhances L1 regularized regression by generating box-based rules to use
as additional explanatory variables. Given a, b ∈ Rn with
a ≤ b, the rule function r(a,b) : Rn → {0, 1} is given by

r(a,b) (x) = I ∧j∈{1,...,n} (aj ≤ xj ≤ bj ) ,

(1)

that is r(a,b) (x) = 1 if a ≤ x ≤ b (componentwise) and
r(a,b) (x) = 0 otherwise. RuleFit generates rules through a
two-phase procedure: first, it determines a regression tree
ensemble, and then decomposes these trees into rules and
determines the regression model coefficients (including for
the rules).
The approach of Dembczyński et al. (2008a) generates
rules more directly (without having to rely on an initial ensemble of decision trees) within gradient boosting (Friedman, 2001) for non-regularized regression. In this scheme,
a greedy procedure generates the rules within a gradient
descent method runs that for a predetermined number of iterations. Aho et al. (2012) extended the RuleFit method to
solve more general multi-target regression problems. For
the special case of single-target regression, however, their
experiments suggest that random forests and RuleFit outperform several other methods, including their own extended implementation and the algorithm of Dembczyński
et al. (2008a). Compared with random forests and other
popular learning approaches such as kernel-based methods
and neural networks, rule-based approaches have the advantage of generally being considered more accessible and
easier to interpret by domain experts. Rule-based methods
also have a considerable history in classification settings, as
in for example Weiss & Indurkhya (1993), Cohen & Singer

