Orthogonalized ALS: A Theoretically Principled Tensor Decomposition
Algorithm for Practical Use

Vatsal Sharan 1 Gregory Valiant 1

Abstract
The popular Alternating Least Squares (ALS) algorithm for tensor decomposition is efficient and
easy to implement, but often converges to poor
local optima—particularly when the weights of
the factors are non-uniform. We propose a modification of the ALS approach that is as efficient as standard ALS, but provably recovers
the true factors with random initialization under standard incoherence assumptions on the factors of the tensor. We demonstrate the significant practical superiority of our approach over
traditional ALS for a variety of tasks on synthetic data—including tensor factorization on exact, noisy and over-complete tensors, as well as
tensor completion—and for computing word embeddings from a third-order word tri-occurrence
tensor.

1. Introduction
From a theoretical perspective, tensor methods have become an incredibly useful and versatile tool for learning
a wide array of popular models, including topic modeling (Anandkumar et al., 2012), mixtures of Gaussians (Ge
et al., 2015), community detection (Anandkumar et al.,
2014a), learning graphical models with guarantees via
the method of moments (Anandkumar et al., 2014b; Chaganty & Liang, 2014) and reinforcement learning (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2016). The key property of tensors that enables these applications is that tensors have a
unique decomposition (decomposition here refers to the
most commonly used CANDECOMP/PARAFAC or CP
decomposition), under mild conditions on the factor matrices (Kruskal, 1977); for example, tensors have a unique
decomposition whenever the factor matrices are full rank.
As tensor methods naturally model three-way (or higherorder) relationships, it is not too optimistic to hope that
1
Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Vatsal Sharan
<vsharan@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

their practical utility will only increase, with the rise of
multi-modal measurements (e.g. measurements taken by
“Internet of Things” devices) and the numerous practical
applications involving high order dependencies, such as
those encountered in natural language processing or genomic settings. In fact, we are already seeing exciting
applications of tensor methods for analysis of high-order
spatiotemporal data (Yu & Liu, 2016), health data analysis
(Wang et al., 2015a) and bioinformatics (Colombo & Vlassis, 2015). Nevertheless, to truly realize the practical impact that the current theory of tensor methods portends, we
require better algorithms for computing decompositions—
practically efficient algorithms that are both capable of
scaling to large (and possibly sparse) tensors, and are robust to noise and deviations from the idealized “low-rank”
assumptions.
As tensor decomposition is NP-Hard in the worst-case
(Hillar & Lim, 2013; Håstad, 1990), one cannot hope for
algorithms which always produce the correct factorization.
Despite this worst-case impossibility, accurate decompositions can be efficiently computed in many practical settings. Early work from the 1970’s (Leurgans et al., 1993;
Harshman, 1970) established a simple algorithm for computing the tensor decomposition (in the noiseless setting)
provided that the factor matrices are full rank. This approach, based on an eigendecomposition, is very sensitive
to noise in the tensor (as we also show in our experiments),
and does not scale well for large, sparse tensors.
Since this early work, much progress has been made. Nevertheless, many of the tensor decomposition algorithms
hitherto proposed and employed have strong provable success guarantees but are computationally expensive (though
still polynomial time)—either requiring an expensive initialization phase, being unable to leverage the sparsity of
the input tensor, or not being efficiently parallelizable. On
the other hand, there are also approaches which are efficient to implement, but which fail to compute an accurate
decomposition in many natural settings. The Alternating
Least Squares (ALS) algorithm (either with random initialization or more complicated initializations) falls in this latter category and is, by far, the most widely employed decomposition algorithm despite its often poor performance

