Learning Hierarchical Features from Deep Generative Models

Shengjia Zhao 1 Jiaming Song 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been shown to be
very successful at learning feature hierarchies in
supervised learning tasks. Generative models, on
the other hand, have benefited less from hierarchical models with multiple layers of latent variables. In this paper, we prove that hierarchical
latent variable models do not take advantage of
the hierarchical structure when trained with some
existing variational methods, and provide some
limitations on the kind of features existing models can learn. Finally we propose an alternative
architecture that does not suffer from these limitations. Our model is able to learn highly interpretable and disentangled hierarchical features
on several natural image datasets with no taskspecific regularization.

1. Introduction
A key property of deep feed-forward networks is that they
tend to learn learn increasingly abstract and invariant representations at higher levels in the hierarchy (Bengio, 2009;
Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) In the context of image data, low
levels may learn features corresponding to edges or basic
shapes, while higher levels learn more abstract features,
such as object detectors (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014).
Generative models with a hierarchical structure, where
there are multiple layers of latent variables, have been
less successful compared to their supervised counterparts (Sønderby et al., 2016). In fact, the most successful generative models often use only a single layer of latent variables (Radford et al., 2015; van den Oord et al.,
2016), and those that use multiple layers only show modest
performance increases in quantitative metrics such as loglikelihood (Sønderby et al., 2016; Bachman, 2016). Because of the difficulties in evaluating generative models
1

Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Shengjia
Zhao
<zhaosj12@stanford.edu>,
Jiaming
Song
<tsong@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

insufficient for generation

sufficient for classification

Figure 1. Left: Body parts feature detectors only carry a small
amount of information about an underlying image, yet, it is sufficient for a confident classification as a face. Right: if a hierarchical generative model attempts to reconstruct an image based on
these high-level features, it could generate inconsistent images,
even when each part can be perfectly generated. Even though this
”face” is clearly absurd, Google cloud platform classification API
can identify with 93% confidence that this is a face.

(Theis et al., 2015), and the fact that adding network layers
increases the number of parameters, it is not always clear
whether the improvements truly come from the choice of
a hierarchical architecture. Furthermore, the capability of
learning a hierarchy of increasingly complex and abstract
features has only been demonstrated to a limited extent,
with feature hierarchies that are not nearly as rich as the
ones learned by feed-forward networks (Gulrajani et al.,
2016).
Part of the problem is inherent and unavoidable for any
generative model. The heart of the matter is that while
highly invariant and local features are often sufficient for
classification, generative modeling requires preservation of
details (as illustrated in Figure 1). In fact, most latent features in a generative model of images cannot even demonstrate scale and translation invariance. The size and location of a sub-part often has to be dependent on the other
sub-parts. For example, an eye should only be generated
with the same size as the other eye, at symmetric locations
with respect to the center of the face, with appropriate distance between them. The inductive biases that are directly
encoded into the architecture of convolutional networks is

