Bayesian inference on random simple graphs
with power law degree distributions

Juho Lee 1 Creighton Heaukulani 2 Zoubin Ghahramani 2 3 Lancelot F. James 4 Seungjin Choi 1

Abstract
We present a model for random simple graphs
with power law (i.e., heavy-tailed) degree distributions. To attain this behavior, the edge
probabilities in the graph are constructed from
Bertoin–Fujita–Roynette–Yor (BFRY) random
variables, which have been recently utilized in
Bayesian statistics for the construction of power
law models in several applications. Our construction readily extends to capture the structure
of latent factors, similarly to stochastic blockmodels, while maintaining its power law degree distribution. The BFRY random variables
are well approximated by gamma random variables in a variational Bayesian inference routine,
which we apply to several network datasets for
which power law degree distributions are a natural assumption. By learning the parameters of the
BFRY distribution via probabilistic inference, we
are able to automatically select the appropriate
power law behavior from the data. In order to
further scale our inference procedure, we adopt
stochastic gradient ascent routines where the gradients are computed on minibatches (i.e., subsets) of the edges in the graph.

1. Introduction
In statistical applications, random graphs serve as Bayesian
models for network data, that is, data consisting of objects
and the observed linkages between them. Here we will focus on models for random simple graphs (that is, graphs
with edges that take binary values), which are appropriate
for applications where we observe either the presence or
1
Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang,
South Korea 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Uber
AI Labs, San Francisco, CA, USA 4 Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, Hong Kong. Correspondence
to: Juho Lee <stonecold@postech.ac.kr>, Seungjin Choi <seungjin@postech.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

absence of links between objects in the network. For example, in social networks, nodes may represent individuals
and a link (i.e., a nonzero value of an edge) could represent
friendship. In a protein-protein interaction network, nodes
may represent proteins and links could represent an observed physical or chemical interaction between proteins.
Many domains involving network data (including social
and protein-protein interaction networks) have been shown
to exhibit power law, i.e., heavy-tailed, degree distributions
(Barabási & Albert, 1999). Models for random graphs with
power law degree distributions, also called scale-free random graphs, have therefore become one of the most actively studied areas of graph theory and network science
(Bollobás et al., 2001; Albert & Barabási, 2002; Dorogovtsev & Mendes, 2002). In this paper we present a model
for simple, scale-free random graphs, which we apply as a
probabilistic model for several network datasets.
The model we present in this paper is a special case of the
generalized random graph defined by Britton et al. (2006),
and studied further by van der Hofstad (2016, Ch. 6),
which outlines a framework for defining scale-free random
graphs, but does not provide practical constructions, much
less algorithms for performing statistical inference on the
model components given data. Here we provide one such
practical construction, along with a variational inference
routine (Jordan et al., 1999) for efficient posterior inference. What’s more, our construction readily generalizes to
include the structure of latent factors/clusters, as captured
by the popular stochastic blockmodels (Nowicki & Snijders, 2001; Airoldi et al., 2009), while maintaining power
law behavior in the graph.
Applying Bayesian inference algorithms on network
datasets is a challenge because likelihood computations,
in general, scale with the number of edges in the graph,
which is O(n2 ) in a network with n nodes. To help overcome these difficulties, we follow Hoffman et al. (2013)
and develop a stochastic variational inference algorithm in
which we approximate many likelihood computations on
only subsets of the data, called minibatches. In the case of
a network dataset, the minibatches are comprised of subsets
of edges in the graph.
We apply this inference procedure to several network

