A Laplacian Framework for Option Discovery in Reinforcement Learning
Marlos C. Machado 1 Marc G. Bellemare 2 Michael Bowling 1

Abstract
Representation learning and option discovery are
two of the biggest challenges in reinforcement
learning (RL). Proto-value functions (PVFs) are
a well-known approach for representation learning in MDPs. In this paper we address the option discovery problem by showing how PVFs
implicitly define options. We do it by introducing eigenpurposes, intrinsic reward functions derived from the learned representations. The options discovered from eigenpurposes traverse the
principal directions of the state space. They are
useful for multiple tasks because they are discovered without taking the environment’s rewards
into consideration. Moreover, different options
act at different time scales, making them helpful for exploration. We demonstrate features of
eigenpurposes in traditional tabular domains as
well as in Atari 2600 games.

1. Introduction
Two important challenges in reinforcement learning (RL)
are the problems of representation learning and of automatic discovery of skills. Proto-value functions (PVFs)
are a well-known solution for the problem of representation learning (Mahadevan, 2005; Mahadevan & Maggioni,
2007); while the problem of skill discovery is generally
posed under the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999;
Precup, 2000), which models skills as options.
In this paper, we tie together representation learning and
option discovery by showing how PVFs implicitly define
options. One of our main contributions is to introduce
the concepts of eigenpurpose and eigenbehavior. Eigenpurposes are intrinsic reward functions that incentivize the
agent to traverse the state space by following the principal
directions of the learned representation. Each intrinsic reward function leads to a different eigenbehavior, which is
1
University of Alberta 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Marlos C. Machado <machado@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the optimal policy for that reward function. In this paper we
introduce an algorithm for option discovery that leverages
these ideas. The options we discover are task-independent
because, as PVFs, the eigenpurposes are obtained without
any information about the environment’s reward structure.
We first present these ideas in the tabular case and then
show how they can be generalized to the function approximation case.
Exploration, while traditionally a separate problem from
option discovery, can also be addressed through the careful
construction of options (McGovern & Barto, 2001; Şimşek
et al., 2005; Solway et al., 2014; Kulkarni et al., 2016).
In this paper, we provide evidence that not all options capable of accelerating planning are useful for exploration.
We show that options traditionally used in the literature to
speed up planning hinder the agents’ performance if used
for random exploration during learning. Our options have
two important properties that allow them to improve exploration: (i) they operate at different time scales, and (ii) they
can be easily sequenced. Having options that operate at
different time scales allows agents to make finely timed actions while also decreasing the likelihood the agent will explore only a small portion of the state space. Moreover, because our options are defined across the whole state space,
multiple options are available in every state, which allows
them to be easily sequenced.

2. Background
We generally indicate random variables by capital letters
(e.g., Rt ), vectors by bold letters (e.g., ✓), functions by lowercase letters (e.g., v), and sets by calligraphic font (e.g., S).
2.1. Reinforcement Learning
In the RL framework (Sutton & Barto, 1998), an agent aims
to maximize cumulative reward by taking actions in an environment. These actions affect the agent’s next state and
the rewards it experiences. We use the MDP formalism
throughout this paper. An MDP is a 5-tuple hS, A, r, p, i.
At time t the agent is in state st 2 S where it takes action
at 2 A that leads to the next state st+1 2 S according to
the transition probability kernel p(s0 |s, a), which encodes
Pr(St+1 = s0 |St = s, At = a). The agent also observes
a reward Rt+1 ⇠ r(s, a). The agent’s goal is to learn a

