Optimal Algorithms for Smooth and Strongly Convex
Distributed Optimization in Networks

Kevin Scaman 1 Francis Bach 2 Sébastien Bubeck 3 Yin Tat Lee 3 Laurent Massoulié 1

Abstract
In this paper, we determine the optimal convergence rates for strongly convex and smooth distributed optimization in two settings: centralized and decentralized communications over a
network. For centralized (i.e. master/slave) algorithms, we show that distributing Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient descent is optimal and
√
achieves a precision ε > 0 in time O( κg (1 +
∆τ ) ln(1/ε)), where κg is the condition number of the (global) function to optimize, ∆ is
the diameter of the network, and τ (resp. 1)
is the time needed to communicate values between two neighbors (resp. perform local computations). For decentralized algorithms based
on gossip, we provide the first optimal algorithm,
called the multi-step dual accelerated (MSDA)
method, that achieves a precision ε > 0 in time
√
O( κl (1 + √τγ ) ln(1/ε)), where κl is the condition number of the local functions and γ is the
(normalized) eigengap of the gossip matrix used
for communication between nodes. We then verify the efficiency of MSDA against state-of-theart methods for two problems: least-squares regression and classification by logistic regression.

1. Introduction
Given the numerous applications of distributed optimization in machine learning, many algorithms have recently
emerged, that allow the minimization
of objective functions
Pn
f defined as the average n1 i=1 fi of functions fi which
are respectively accessible by separate nodes in a network
(Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Boyd et al., 2011; Duchi et al.,
2012; Shi et al., 2015). These algorithms typically alter1
MSR-INRIA Joint Center, Palaiseau, France 2 INRIA, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, Paris, France 3 Theory group, Microsoft Research, Redmond, United States. Correspondence to: Kevin Scaman <kevin.scaman@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

nate local incremental improvement steps (such as gradient
steps) with communication steps between nodes in the network, and come with a variety of convergence rates (see
for example Shi et al. (2014; 2015); Jakovetić et al. (2015);
Nedich et al. (2016)).
Two main regimes have been looked at: (a) centralized
where communications are precisely scheduled and (b) decentralized where communications may not exhibit a precise schedule. In this paper, we consider these two regimes
for objective functions which are smooth and stronglyconvex and for which algorithms are linearly (exponentially) convergent. The main contribution of this paper is
to propose new and matching upper and lower bounds of
complexity for this class of distributed problems.
The optimal complexity bounds depend on natural quantities in optimization and network theory. Indeed, (a) for
a single machine the optimal number of gradient steps to
optimize a function is proportional to the square root of
the condition number (Nesterov, 2004), and (b) for mean
estimation, the optimal number of communication steps is
proportional to the diameter of the network in centralized
problems or to the square root of the eigengap of the Laplacian matrix in decentralized problems (Boyd et al., 2006).
As shown in Section 3, our lower complexity bounds happen to be combinations of the two contributions above.
These lower complexity bounds are attained by two separate algorithms. In the centralized case, the trivial distribution of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient attains this rate,
while in the decentralized case, as shown in Section 4, the
rate is achieved by a dual algorithm. We compare favorably
our new optimal algorithms to existing work in Section 5.
Related Work. Decentralized optimization has been extensively studied and early methods such as decentralized gradient descent (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Jakovetić
et al., 2014) or decentralized dual averaging (Duchi et al.,
2012) exhibited sublinear convergence rates. More recently, a number of methods with provable linear convergence rates were developed, including EXTRA (Shi
et al., 2015; Mokhtari & Ribeiro, 2016), augmented Lagrangians (Jakovetić et al., 2015), and more recent approaches (Nedich et al., 2016). The most popular of

