Probabilistic Path Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Vu Dinh * 1 Arman Bilge * 1 2 Cheng Zhang * 1 Frederick A. Matsen IV 1

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is an efficient
and effective means of sampling posterior distributions on Euclidean space, which has been extended to manifolds with boundary. However,
some applications require an extension to more
general spaces. For example, phylogenetic (evolutionary) trees are defined in terms of both a
discrete graph and associated continuous parameters; although one can represent these aspects
using a single connected space, this rather complex space is not suitable for existing HMC algorithms. In this paper, we develop Probabilistic
Path HMC (PPHMC) as a first step to sampling
distributions on spaces with intricate combinatorial structure. We define PPHMC on orthant
complexes, show that the resulting Markov chain
is ergodic, and provide a promising implementation for the case of phylogenetic trees in opensource software. We also show that a surrogate
function to ease the transition across a boundary on which the log-posterior has discontinuous
derivatives can greatly improve efficiency.

date step, and thus has proved to be more effective than
standard MCMC methods in a variety of applications. The
method has gained a lot of interest from the scientific community and since then has been extended to tackle the problem of sampling on various geometric structures such as
constrained spaces (Lan et al., 2014; Brubaker et al., 2012;
Hartmann and Schütte, 2005), on general Hilbert space
(Beskos et al., 2011) and on Riemannian manifolds (Girolami and Calderhead, 2011; Wang et al., 2013).
However, these extensions are not yet sufficient to apply to
all sampling problems, such as in phylogenetics, the inference of evolutionary trees. Phylogenetics is the study of
the evolutionary history and relationships among individuals or groups of organisms. In its statistical formulation
it is an inference problem on hypotheses of shared history
based on observed heritable traits under a model of evolution. Phylogenetics is an essential tool for understanding
biological systems and is an important discipline of computational biology. The Bayesian paradigm is now commonly used to assess support for inferred tree structures
or to test hypotheses that can be expressed in phylogenetic
terms (Huelsenbeck et al., 2001).

Equal contribution 1 Program in Computational Biology,
Fred Hutchison Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA
2
Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, USA. Correspondence to: Frederick, A. Matsen IV <matsen@fredhutch.org>.

Although the last several decades have seen an explosion
of advanced methods for sampling from Bayesian posterior
distributions, including HMC, phylogenetics still uses relatively classical Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based
methods. This is in part because the number of possible tree
topologies (the labeled graphs describing the branching
structure of the evolutionary history) explodes combinatorially as the number of species increases. Also, to represent
the phylogenetic relation among a fixed number of species,
one needs to specify both the tree topology (a discrete object) and the branch lengths (continuous distances). This
composite structure has thus far limited sampling methods
to relatively classical Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
based methods. One path forward is to use a construction
of the set of phylogenetic trees as a single connected space
composed of Euclidean spaces glued together in a combinatorial fashion (Kim, 2000; Moulton and Steel, 2004;
Billera et al., 2001; Gavryushkin and Drummond, 2016)
and try to define an HMC-like algorithm thereupon.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Experts in HMC are acutely aware of the need to extend
HMC to such spaces with intricate combinatorial structure:
Betancourt (2017) describes the extension of HMC to dis-

1. Introduction
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is a powerful sampling algorithm which has been shown to outperform many existing MCMC algorithms, especially in problems with highdimensional and correlated distributions (Duane et al.,
1987; Neal, 2011). The algorithm mimics the movement of
a body balancing potential and kinetic energy by extending
the state space to include auxiliary momentum variables
and using Hamiltonian dynamics. By traversing long isoprobability contours in this extended state space, HMC is
able to move long distances in state space in a single up*

