Learning Continuous Semantic Representations of Symbolic Expressions

Miltiadis Allamanis 1 Pankajan Chanthirasegaran 2 Pushmeet Kohli 3 Charles Sutton 2 4

Abstract
Combining abstract, symbolic reasoning with continuous neural reasoning is a grand challenge of
representation learning. As a step in this direction, we propose a new architecture, called neural
equivalence networks, for the problem of learning continuous semantic representations of algebraic and logical expressions. These networks are
trained to represent semantic equivalence, even
of expressions that are syntactically very different. The challenge is that semantic representations must be computed in a syntax-directed manner, because semantics is compositional, but at
the same time, small changes in syntax can lead
to very large changes in semantics, which can be
difficult for continuous neural architectures. We
perform an exhaustive evaluation on the task of
checking equivalence on a highly diverse class of
symbolic algebraic and boolean expression types,
showing that our model significantly outperforms
existing architectures.

1. Introduction
Combining abstract, symbolic reasoning with continuous
neural reasoning is a grand challenge of representation learning. This is particularly important while dealing with exponentially large domains such as source code and logical
expressions. Symbolic notation allows us to abstractly represent a large set of states that may be perceptually very
different. Although symbolic reasoning is very powerful,
it also tends to be hard. For example, problems such as
the satisfiablity of boolean expressions and automated formal proofs tend to be NP-hard or worse. This raises the
exciting opportunity of using pattern recognition within
symbolic reasoning, that is, to learn patterns from datasets
of symbolic expressions that approximately represent seWork started when M. Allamanis was at Edinburgh. This work
was done while P. Kohli was at Microsoft. 1 Microsoft Research,
Cambridge, UK 2 University of Edinburgh, UK 3 DeepMind, London, UK 4 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Miltiadis Allamanis <t-mialla@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

mantic relationships. However, apart from some notable
exceptions (Alemi et al., 2016; Loos et al., 2017; Zaremba
et al., 2014), this area has received relatively little attention
in machine learning. In this work, we explore the direction
of learning continuous semantic representations of symbolic
expressions. The goal is for expressions with similar semantics to have similar continuous representations, even if their
syntactic representation is very different. Such representations have the potential to allow a new class of symbolic
reasoning methods based on heuristics that depend on the
continuous representations, for example, by guiding a search
procedure in a symbolic solver based on a distance metric
in the continuous space.
In this paper, we make a first essential step of addressing
the problem of learning continuous semantic representations (S EM V ECs) for symbolic expressions. Our aim is,
given access to a training set of pairs of expressions for
which semantic equivalence is known, to assign continuous
vectors to symbolic expressions in such a way that semantically equivalent, but syntactically diverse expressions are
assigned to identical (or highly similar) continuous vectors.
This is an important but hard problem; learning composable
S EM V ECs of symbolic expressions requires that we learn
about the semantics of symbolic elements and operators
and how they map to the continuous representation space,
thus encapsulating implicit knowledge about symbolic semantics and its recursive abstractive nature. As we show
in our evaluation, relatively simple logical and polynomial
expressions present significant challenges and their semantics cannot be sufficiently represented by existing neural
network architectures.
Our work in similar in spirit to the work of Zaremba et al.
(2014), who focus on learning expression representations to
aid the search for computationally efficient identities. They
use recursive neural networks (T REE NN)1 (Socher et al.,
2012) for modeling homogenous, single-variable polynomial expressions. While they present impressive results, we
find that the T REE NN model fails when applied to more
complex symbolic polynomial and boolean expressions. In
particular, in our experiments we find that T REE NNs tend
to assign similar representations to syntactically similar expressions, even when they are semantically very different.
The underlying conceptual problem is how to develop a con1

To avoid confusion, we use T REE NN for recursive neural
networks and RNN for recurrent neural networks.

