Toward Controlled Generation of Text
Zhiting Hu 1 2 Zichao Yang 1 Xiaodan Liang 1 2 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Eric P. Xing 1 2

Abstract
Generic generation and manipulation of text is
challenging and has limited success compared
to recent deep generative modeling in visual domain. This paper aims at generating plausible
text sentences, whose attributes are controlled by
learning disentangled latent representations with
designated semantics. We propose a new neural generative model which combines variational
auto-encoders (VAEs) and holistic attribute discriminators for effective imposition of semantic
structures. The model can alternatively be seen
as enhancing VAEs with the wake-sleep algorithm for leveraging fake samples as extra training data. With differentiable approximation to
discrete text samples, explicit constraints on independent attribute controls, and efficient collaborative learning of generator and discriminators, our model learns interpretable representations from even only word annotations, and produces short sentences with desired attributes of
sentiment and tenses. Quantitative experiments
using trained classifiers as evaluators validate the
accuracy of sentence and attribute generation.

1. Introduction
There is a surge of research interest in deep generative
models (Hu et al., 2017), such as Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013), Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and autoregressive models (van den Oord et al., 2016). Despite their
impressive advances in visual domain, such as image generation (Radford et al., 2015), learning interpretable image
representations (Chen et al., 2016), and image editing (Zhu
et al., 2016), applications to natural language generation
have been relatively less studied. Even generating realistic sentences is challenging as the generative models are
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Petuum, Inc.. Correspondence
to: Zhiting Hu <zhitingh@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

required to capture complex semantic structures underlying sentences. Previous work have been mostly limited
to task-specific applications in supervised settings, including machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014) and image
captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015). However, autoencoder
frameworks (Sutskever et al., 2014) and recurrent neural
network language models (Mikolov et al., 2010) do not apply to generic text generation from arbitrary hidden representations due to the unsmoothness of effective hidden
codes (Bowman et al., 2015). Very few recent attempts of
using VAEs (Bowman et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2016) and
GANs (Yu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016) have been made
to investigate generic text generation, while their generated
text is largely randomized and uncontrollable.
In this paper we tackle the problem of controlled generation
of text. That is, we focus on generating realistic sentences,
whose attributes can be controlled by learning disentangled
latent representations. To enable the manipulation of generated sentences, a few challenges need to be addressed.
A first challenge comes from the discrete nature of text
samples. The resulting non-differentiability hinders the use
of global discriminators that assess generated samples and
back-propagate gradients to guide the optimization of generators in a holistic manner, as shown to be highly effective
in continuous image generation and representation modeling (Chen et al., 2016; Larsen et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy &
Brox, 2016). A number of recent approaches attempt to address the non-differentiability through policy learning (Yu
et al., 2017) which tends to suffer from high variance during training, or continuous approximations (Zhang et al.,
2016; Kusner & Hernndez-Lobato, 2016) where only preliminary qualitative results are presented. As an alternative to the discriminator based learning, semi-supervised
VAEs (Kingma et al., 2014) minimize element-wise reconstruction error on observed examples and are applicable to
discrete visibles. This, however, loses the holistic view of
full sentences and can be inferior especially for modeling
global abstract attributes (e.g., sentiment).
Another challenge for controllable generation relates to
learning disentangled latent representations. Interpretability expects each part of the latent representation to govern
and only focus on one aspect of the samples. Prior methods (Chen et al., 2016; Odena et al., 2016) on structured
representation learning lack explicit enforcement of the in-

