Recurrent Highway Networks

Julian Georg Zilly * 1 Rupesh Kumar Srivastava * 2 Jan Koutník 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 2

Abstract
Many sequential processing tasks require complex nonlinear transition functions from one step
to the next. However, recurrent neural networks
with "deep" transition functions remain difficult
to train, even when using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks. We introduce a novel theoretical analysis of recurrent networks based on
Geršgorin’s circle theorem that illuminates several
modeling and optimization issues and improves
our understanding of the LSTM cell. Based on
this analysis we propose Recurrent Highway Networks, which extend the LSTM architecture to allow step-to-step transition depths larger than one.
Several language modeling experiments demonstrate that the proposed architecture results in powerful and efficient models. On the Penn Treebank
corpus, solely increasing the transition depth from
1 to 10 improves word-level perplexity from 90.6
to 65.4 using the same number of parameters. On
the larger Wikipedia datasets for character prediction (text8 and enwik8), RHNs outperform
all previous results and achieve an entropy of 1.27
bits per character.

1. Introduction
Network depth is of central importance in the resurgence of
neural networks as a powerful machine learning paradigm
(Schmidhuber, 2015). Theoretical evidence indicates that
deeper networks can be exponentially more efficient at representing certain function classes (see e.g. Bengio & LeCun (2007); Bianchini & Scarselli (2014) and references
therein). Due to their sequential nature, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs; Robinson & Fallside, 1987; Werbos,
1988; Williams, 1989) have long credit assignment paths
and so are deep in time. However, certain internal function
*
Equal contribution 1 ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 The Swiss AI
Lab IDSIA (USI-SUPSI) & NNAISENSE, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Julian Zilly <jzilly@ethz.ch>, Rupesh Srivastava
<rupesh@idsia.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

mappings in modern RNNs composed of units grouped in
layers usually do not take advantage of depth (Pascanu et al.,
2013). For example, the state update from one time step to
the next is typically modeled using a single trainable linear
transformation followed by a non-linearity.
Unfortunately, increased depth represents a challenge when
neural network parameters are optimized by means of error
backpropagation (Linnainmaa, 1970; 1976; Werbos, 1982).
Deep networks suffer from what are commonly referred to
as the vanishing and exploding gradient problems (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter et al., 2001), since
the magnitude of the gradients may shrink or explode exponentially during backpropagation. These training difficulties
were first studied in the context of standard RNNs where
the depth through time is proportional to the length of input
sequence, which may have arbitrary size. The widely used
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Gers et al., 2000) architecture was introduced
to specifically address the problem of vanishing/exploding
gradients for recurrent networks.
The vanishing gradient problem also becomes a limitation
when training very deep feedforward networks. Highway
Layers (Srivastava et al., 2015b) based on the LSTM cell
addressed this limitation enabling the training of networks
even with hundreds of stacked layers. Used as feedforward
connections, these layers were used to improve performance
in many domains such as speech recognition (Zhang et al.,
2016) and language modeling (Kim et al., 2015; Jozefowicz
et al., 2016), and their variants called Residual networks
have been widely useful for many computer vision problems
(He et al., 2015).
In this paper we first provide a new mathematical analysis of
RNNs which offers a deeper understanding of the strengths
of the LSTM cell. Based on these insights, we introduce
LSTM networks that have long credit assignment paths not
just in time but also in space (per time step), called Recurrent
Highway Networks or RHNs. Unlike previous work on deep
RNNs, this model incorporates Highway layers inside the
recurrent transition, which we argue is a superior method
of increasing depth. This enables the use of substantially
more powerful and trainable sequential models efficiently,
significantly outperforming existing architectures on widely
used benchmarks.

