Deciding How to Decide:
Dynamic Routing in Artificial Neural Networks

Mason McGill 1 Pietro Perona 1

Abstract
We propose and systematically evaluate three
strategies for training dynamically-routed artificial neural networks: graphs of learned transformations through which different input signals may take different paths. Though some approaches have advantages over others, the resulting networks are often qualitatively similar.
We find that, in dynamically-routed networks
trained to classify images, layers and branches
become specialized to process distinct categories
of images. Additionally, given a fixed computational budget, dynamically-routed networks
tend to perform better than comparable staticallyrouted networks.

Milner, 1992), and faces and other behaviorally-relevant
stimuli ellicit responses in anatomically distinct, specialized regions (Moeller et al., 2008; Kornblith et al., 2013).
However, state-of-the-art artificial neural networks (ANNs)
for visual inference are routed statically (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy et al., 2015;
Newell et al., 2016); every input triggers an identical sequence of operations.

Clearly Sticks
(Classify)

Clearly Insects
(Classify)
Ambiguous
(Inspect Further)

1. Introduction
Some decisions are easier to make than others—for example, large, unoccluded objects are easier to recognize. Additionally, different difficult decisions may require different
expertise—an avid birder may know very little about identifying cars. We hypothesize that complex decision-making
tasks like visual classification can be meaningfully divided
into specialized subtasks, and that a system designed to
perform a complex task should first attempt to identify the
subtask being presented to it, then use that information to
select the most suitable algorithm for its solution.
This approach—dynamically routing signals through an inference system, based on their content—has already been
incorporated into machine vision pipelines via methods
such as boosting (Viola et al., 2005), coarse-to-fine cascades (Zhou et al., 2013), and random decision forests (Ho,
1995). Dynamic routing is also performed in the primate
visual system: spatial information is processed somewhat
separately from object identity information (Goodale &
1

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA. Correspondence to: Mason McGill <mmcgill@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Motivation for dynamic routing. For a given data representation, some regions of the input space may be classified confidently, while other regions may be ambiguous.

With this in mind, we propose a mechanism for introducing
cascaded evaluation to arbitrary feedforward ANNs, focusing on the task of object recognition as a proof of concept.
Instead of classifying images only at the final layer, every
layer in the network may attempt to classify images in lowambiguity regions of its input space, passing ambiguous
images forward to subsequent layers for further consideration (see Fig. 1 for an illustration). We propose three approaches to training these networks, test them on small image datasets synthesized from MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998)
and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), and quantify
the accuracy/efficiency trade-off that occurs when the network parameters are tuned to yield more aggressive early
classification policies. Additionally, we propose and evaluate methods for appropriating regularization and optimization techniques developed for statically-routed networks.

2. Related Work
Since the late 1980s, researchers have combined artificial neural networks with decision trees in various

