Unsupervised Learning by Predicting Noise

Piotr Bojanowski 1 Armand Joulin 1

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks provide visual
features that perform well in many computer vision applications. However, training these networks requires large amounts of supervision; this
paper introduces a generic framework to train
such networks, end-to-end, with no supervision.
We propose to fix a set of target representations,
called Noise As Targets (NAT), and to constrain
the deep features to align to them. This domain
agnostic approach avoids the standard unsupervised learning issues of trivial solutions and collapsing of features. Thanks to a stochastic batch
reassignment strategy and a separable square loss
function, it scales to millions of images. The
proposed approach produces representations that
perform on par with state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods on ImageNet and PASCAL VOC.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks, or convnets (Fukushima, 1980; LeCun et al., 1989) have pushed
the limits of computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He
et al., 2016), leading to important progress in a variety of
tasks, like object detection (Girshick, 2015) or image segmentation (Pinheiro et al., 2015). Key to this success is
their ability to produce features that easily transfer to new
domains when trained on massive databases of labeled images (Razavian et al., 2014; Oquab et al., 2014) or weaklysupervised data (Joulin et al., 2016). However, human annotations may introduce unforeseen bias that could limit
the potential of learned features to capture subtle information hidden in a vast collection of images.
Several strategies exist to learn deep convolutional features
with no annotation (Donahue et al., 2016). They either
try to capture a signal from the source as a form of selfsupervision (Doersch et al., 2015; Wang & Gupta, 2015) or
1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Piotr Bojanowski
<bojanowski@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

learn the underlying distribution of images (Vincent et al.,
2010; Goodfellow et al., 2014). While some of these approaches obtain promising performance in transfer learning (Donahue et al., 2016; Wang & Gupta, 2015), they do
not explicitly aim to learn discriminative features. Some attempts were made with retrieval based approaches (Dosovitskiy et al., 2014) and clustering (Yang et al., 2016; Liao
et al., 2016), but they are hard to scale and have only been
tested on small datasets. Unfortunately, as in the supervised
case, a lot of data is required to learn good representations.
In this work, we propose a discriminative framework designed to learn deep architectures on large datasets. Our
approach is general, but we focus on convnets since they
require millions of images to produce good features. Similar to self-organizing maps (Kohonen, 1982; Martinetz &
Schulten, 1991), we map deep features to a set of predefined representations in a low dimensional space. As opposed to these approaches, we aim to learn the features in a
end-to-end fashion, which traditionally suffers from a feature collapsing problem. Our approach deals with this issue by fixing the target representations and aligning them to
our features. These representations are sampled from a uninformative distribution and we use this Noise As Targets
(NAT). Our approach also shares some similarities with
standard clustering approches like k-means (Lloyd, 1982)
or discriminative clustering (Bach & Harchaoui, 2007).
In addition, we propose an online algorithm able to scale
to massive image databases like ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009). Importantly, our approach is barely less efficient
to train than standard supervised approaches and can reuse any optimization procedure designed for them. This
is achieved by using a quadratic loss as in (Tygert et al.,
2017) and a fast approximation of the Hungarian algorithm. We show the potential of our approach by training
end-to-end on ImageNet a standard architecture, namely
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) with no supervision.
We test the quality of our features on several image classification problems, following the setting of Donahue et al.
(2016). We are on par with state-of-the-art unsupervised
and self-supervised learning approaches while being much
simpler to train and to scale.
The paper is organized as follows: after a brief review of
the related work in Section 2, we present our approach in

