Iterative Machine Teaching

Weiyang Liu 1 Bo Dai 1 Ahmad Humayun 1 Charlene Tay 2 Chen Yu 2
Linda B. Smith 2 James M. Rehg 1 Le Song 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of machine teaching, the inverse problem of machine
learning. Different from traditional machine
teaching which views the learners as batch algorithms, we study a new paradigm where the
learner uses an iterative algorithm and a teacher
can feed examples sequentially and intelligently
based on the current performance of the learner.
We show that the teaching complexity in the iterative case is very different from that in the batch
case. Instead of constructing a minimal training set for learners, our iterative machine teaching focuses on achieving fast convergence in the
learner model. Depending on the level of information the teacher has from the learner model,
we design teaching algorithms which can provably reduce the number of teaching examples and
achieve faster convergence than learning without
teachers. We also validate our theoretical findings with extensive experiments on different data
distribution and real image datasets.

1. Introduction
Machine teaching is the problem of constructing an optimal (usually minimal) dataset according to a target concept such that a student model can learn the target concept
based on this dataset. Recently, there is a surge of interests
in machine teaching which has found diverse applications in model compression (Bucila et al., 2006; Han et al.,
2015; Ba & Caruana, 2014; Romero et al., 2014), transfer
learning (Pan & Yang, 2010) and cyber-security problems (Alfeld et al., 2016; 2017; Mei & Zhu, 2015). Furthermore, machine teaching is also closely related to other subjects of interests, such as curriculum learning (Bengio et al.,
2009) and knowledge distilation (Hinton et al., 2015).
1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Indiana University. Correspondence to: Weiyang Liu <wyliu@gatech.edu>, Le Song <lsong@cc.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Passive
Learning

Prov
Dataset

ide tr
ainin
g

set

Sample query

Active
Learning
Oracle
Machine
Teaching
Teacher
Iterative
Machine
Teaching

Sample labeled by oracle

ation
Learner
e inform
Provid ct only once
t
e
ra
s
te
g
In
ainin
imal tr
uct min
Constr
Provide information
Interact iteratively

Teacher

Provide samples
for this iteration

Iterative
Learner

Figure 1. Comparison between iterative machine teaching and the
other learning paradigms.

In the traditional machine learning paradigm, a teacher will
typically construct a batch set of examples, and provide
them to a learning algorithm in one shot; then the learning
algorithm will work on this batch dataset trying to learn the
target concept. Thus, many research work under this topic try to construct the smallest such dataset, or characterize
the size of of such dataset, called the teaching dimension of
the student model (Zhu, 2013; 2015). There are also many
seminal theory work on analyzing the teaching dimension
of different models (Shinohara & Miyano, 1991; Goldman
& Kearns, 1995; Doliwa et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2016).
However, in many real world applications, the student model is typically updated via an iterative algorithm, and we get
the opportunity to observe the performance of the student
model as we feed examples to it. For instance,
• In model compression where we want to transfer a target “teacher model” to a destination “student model”,
we can constantly observe student model’s prediction
on current training points. Intuitively, such observations
will allow us to get a better estimate where the student
model is and pick examples more intelligently to better
guide the student model to convergence.
• In cyber-security setting where an attack wants to mislead a recommendation system that learns online, the attacker can constantly generate fake clicks and observe
the system’s response. Intuitively, such feedback will allow the attacker to figure out the state of the learning
system, and design better strategy to mislead the system.
From the aspects of both faster model compression and bet-

