Active Learning for Cost-Sensitive Classification
Akshay Krishnamurthy 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Tzu-Kuo Huang 3 Hal Daumé III 4 John Langford 2

Abstract
We design an active learning algorithm for
cost-sensitive multiclass classification: problems
where different errors have different costs. Our
algorithm, COAL, makes predictions by regressing to each label’s cost and predicting the smallest. On a new example, it uses a set of regressors
that perform well on past data to estimate possible costs for each label. It queries only the labels
that could be the best, ignoring the sure losers.
We prove COAL can be efficiently implemented
for any regression family that admits squared loss
optimization; it also enjoys strong guarantees
with respect to predictive performance and labeling effort. Our experiment with COAL show significant improvements in labeling effort and test
cost over passive and active baselines.

1. Introduction
The field of active learning studies how to efficiently elicit
relevant information so learning algorithms can make good
decisions. Almost all active learning algorithms are designed for binary classification problems, leading to the
natural question: How can active learning address more
complex prediction problems? Multiclass and importanceweighted classification require only minor modifications
but we know of no active learning algorithms that enjoy
theoretical guarantees for more complex problems.
One such problem is cost-sensitive multiclass classification
(CSMC). In CSMC with K classes, passive learners receive
input examples x and cost vectors c 2 RK , where c(y)
is the cost of predicting label y on x.1 A natural design
for an active CSMC learner then is to adaptively query the
1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 2 Microsoft Research, New York, NY 3 Uber Advanced Technology Center, Pittsburgh, PA 4 University of Maryland, College Park, MD. Correspondence to: Akshay Krishnamurthy <akshay@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
1
Cost here refers to prediction cost and not labeling effort or
the cost of acquiring different labels.

costs of only a (possibly empty) subset of labels on each
x. Since measuring label complexity is more nuanced in
CSMC (e.g., is it more expensive to query three costs on a
single example or one cost on three examples?), we track
both the number of examples for which at least one cost is
queried, along with the total number of cost queries issued.
The first corresponds to a fixed human effort for inspecting
x. The second captures the additional effort for judging the
cost of each prediction, which depends on the number of
labels queried. (By querying a label, we mean querying the
cost of predicting that label given an example.)
In this setup, we develop a new active learning algorithm for CSMC called Cost Overlapped Active Learning (COAL). COAL assumes access to a set of regression functions, and, when processing an example x, it uses
the functions with good past performance to compute the
range of possible costs that each label might take. Naturally, COAL only queries labels with large cost range, but
furthermore, it only queries y’s that could possibly have the
smallest cost, avoiding the uncertain, but surely suboptimal
labels. The key algorithmic innovation is an efficient way
to compute the cost range realized by good regressors. This
computation, and COAL as a whole, only requires that the
regression set admits efficient squared loss optimization,
in contrast with prior algorithms that require 0/1 loss optimization (Beygelzimer et al., 2009; Hanneke, 2014).
Among our results, we prove that when processing n (unlabeled) examples with K classes and N regressors,
1. The algorithm needs to solve O(Kn2 log n) regression
problems over the function class (Cor. 2), which can be
done in polynomial time for convex regression sets.
2. With no assumptions on the noise in the problem,
p the algorithm achieves generalization
p error
requests
Õ(n✓
K ln N )
Õ( K ln N/n) and
2
p
costs from Õ(n✓1 K ln N ) examples (Thms. 3
and 5) where ✓1 , ✓2 are the disagreement coefficients
(Def. 1)2 . The worst case offers minimal improvement
over passive learning, akin to binary classification.
3. With a favorable noise assumption (As. 2), the algorithm achieves generalization error Õ(K ln N/n)
while requesting Õ(Kc1/ n ✓2 ln N ) labels from
Õ(c1/ n ✓1 K ln N ) examples (Cor. 4, Thm. 6), where
2

Õ(·) suppresses logarithmic dependence on n and K.

