Global optimization of Lipschitz functions

Cédric Malherbe 1 Nicolas Vayatis 1

Abstract
The goal of the paper is to design sequential
strategies which lead to efficient optimization of
an unknown function under the only assumption
that it has a finite Lipschitz constant. We first
identify sufficient conditions for the consistency
of generic sequential algorithms and formulate
the expected minimax rate for their performance.
We introduce and analyze a first algorithm called
LIPO which assumes the Lipschitz constant to
be known. Consistency, minimax rates for LIPO
are proved, as well as fast rates under an additional Hölder like condition. An adaptive version
of LIPO is also introduced for the more realistic
setup where the Lipschitz constant is unknown
and has to be estimated along with the optimization. Similar theoretical guarantees are shown
to hold for the adaptive algorithm and a numerical assessment is provided at the end of the paper to illustrate the potential of this strategy with
respect to state-of-the-art methods over typical
benchmark problems for global optimization.

1. Introduction
In many applications such as complex system design or
hyperparameter calibration for learning systems, the goal
is to optimize the output value of an unknown function
with as few evaluations as possible. Indeed, in such contexts, evaluating the performance of a single set of parameters often requires numerical simulations or crossvalidations with significant computational cost and the operational constraints impose a sequential exploration of the
solution space with small samples. Moreover, it can generally not be assumed that the function has good properties such as linearity or convexity. This generic problem of sequentially optimizing the output of an unknown
and potentially nonconvex function is often referred to as
1

CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, 94235,
Cachan, France. Correspondence to:
<name@cmla.enscachan.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

global optimization (Pintér, 1991), black-box optimization
(Jones et al., 1998) or derivative-free optimization (Rios &
Sahinidis, 2013). There is a large number of algorithms
based on various heuristics which have been introduced
in order to solve this problem such as genetic algorithms,
model-based methods or Bayesian optimization. We focus
here on the smoothness-based approach to global optimization. This approach is based on the simple observation that,
in many applications, the system presents some regularity
with respects to the input. In particular, the use of the Lipschitz constant, first proposed in the seminal works of (Shubert, 1972; Piyavskii, 1972), initiated an active line of research and played a major role in the development of many
efficient global optimization algorithms such as DIRECT
(Jones et al., 1993), MCS (Huyer & Neumaier, 1999) or
SOO (Preux et al., 2014). Convergence properties of global
optimization methods have been developed in the works of
(Valko et al., 2013; Munos, 2014) under local smoothness
assumptions, but, up to our knowledge, such properties
have not been considered in the case where only the global
smoothness of the function can be specified. An interesting question is how much global assumptions on regularity
which cover in some sense local assumptions may improve
the convergence of the latter. In this work, we address the
following questions: (i) find the limitations and the best
performance that can be achieved by any algorithm over the
class of Lipschitz functions and (ii) design efficient and optimal algorithms for this class of problems. Our contribution with regards to the above mentioned works is twofold.
First, we introduce two novel algorithms for global optimization which exploit the global smoothness of the function and display good performance in typical benchmarks
for optimization. Second, we show that these algorithms
can achieve faster rates of convergence on globally smooth
problems than the previously known methods which only
exploit the local smoothness of the function. The rest of the
paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce
the framework and give generic results about the convergence of sequential algorithms. In Section 3, we introduce
and analyze the LIPO algorithm which requires the knowledge of the Lipschitz constant. In Section 4, the algorithm
is extended to the case where the Lipschitz constant is unknown and the adaptive algorithm is compared to existing
methods in Section 5. All proofs can be found in the Supplementary Material provided as a separate document.

