Dual Supervised Learning

Yingce Xia 1 Tao Qin 2 Wei Chen 2 Jiang Bian 2 Nenghai Yu 1 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
Many supervised learning tasks are emerged in
dual forms, e.g., English-to-French translation
vs. French-to-English translation, speech recognition vs. text to speech, and image classification
vs. image generation. Two dual tasks have intrinsic connections with each other due to the probabilistic correlation between their models. This
connection is, however, not effectively utilized
today, since people usually train the models of
two dual tasks separately and independently. In
this work, we propose training the models of two
dual tasks simultaneously, and explicitly exploiting the probabilistic correlation between them to
regularize the training process. For ease of reference, we call the proposed approach dual supervised learning. We demonstrate that dual supervised learning can improve the practical performances of both tasks, for various applications
including machine translation, image processing,
and sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
Deep learning brings state-of-the-art results to many artificial intelligence tasks, such as neural machine translation
(Wu et al., 2016), image classification (He et al., 2016b;c),
image generation (van den Oord et al., 2016b;a), speech
recognition (Graves et al., 2013; Amodei et al., 2016), and
speech generation/synthesis (Oord et al., 2016).
Interestingly, we find that many of the aforementioned AI
tasks are emerged in dual forms, i.e., the input and output
of one task are exactly the output and input of the other
task respectively. Examples include translation from language A to language B vs. translation from language B to
A, image classification vs. image generation, and speech
1
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Tao
Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

recognition vs. speech synthesis. Even more interestingly
(and somehow surprisingly), this natural duality is largely
ignored in the current practice of machine learning. That is,
despite the fact that two tasks are dual to each other, people usually train them independently and separately. Then
a question arises: Can we exploit the duality between two
tasks, so as to achieve better performance for both of them?
In this work, we give a positive answer to the question.
To exploit the duality, we formulate a new learning scheme,
which involves two tasks: a primal task and its dual task.
The primal task takes a sample from space X as input and
maps to space Y, and the dual task takes a sample from space Y as input and maps to space X . Using the language
of probability, the primal task learns a conditional distribution P (y|x; θxy ) parameterized by θxy , and the dual task
learns a conditional distribution P (x|y; θyx ) parameterized
by θyx , where x ∈ X and y ∈ Y. In the new scheme,
the two dual tasks are jointly learned and their structural
relationship is exploited to improve the learning effectiveness. We name this new scheme as dual supervised learning (briefly, DSL).
There could be many different ways of exploiting the duality in DSL. In this paper, we use it as a regularization term to govern the training process. Since the joint probability P (x, y) can be computed in two equivalent
ways: P (x, y) = P (x)P (y|x) = P (y)P (x|y), for any
x ∈ X , y ∈ Y, ideally the conditional distributions of the
primal and dual tasks should satisfy the following equality:
P (x)P (y|x; θxy ) = P (y)P (x|y; θyx ).

(1)

However, if the two models (conditional distributions) are
learned separately by minimizing their own loss functions
(as in the current practice of machine learning), there is no
guarantee that the above equation will hold. The basic idea
of DSL is to jointly learn the two models θxy and θyx by
minimizing their loss functions subject to the constraint of
Eqn.(1). By doing so, the intrinsic probabilistic connection
between θyx and θxy are explicitly strengthened, which is
supposed to push the learning process towards the right direction. To solve the constrained optimization problem of
DSL, we convert the constraint Eqn.(1) to a penalty term
by using the method of Lagrange multipliers (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). Note that the penalty term could also be
seen as a data-dependent regularization term.

