Discovering Discrete Latent Topics with Neural Variational Inference

Yishu Miao 1 Edward Grefenstette 2 Phil Blunsom 1 2

Abstract
Topic models have been widely explored as probabilistic generative models of documents. Traditional inference methods have sought closedform derivations for updating the models, however as the expressiveness of these models grows,
so does the difficulty of performing fast and
accurate inference over their parameters. This
paper presents alternative neural approaches to
topic modelling by providing parameterisable
distributions over topics which permit training
by backpropagation in the framework of neural variational inference. In addition, with the
help of a stick-breaking construction, we propose a recurrent network that is able to discover a notionally unbounded number of topics, analogous to Bayesian non-parametric topic
models. Experimental results on the MXM
Song Lyrics, 20NewsGroups and Reuters News
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of these neural topic models.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic models for inducing latent topics from documents are one of the great success stories of unsupervised
learning. Starting with latent semantic analysis (LSA (Landauer et al., 1998)), models for uncovering the underlying semantic structure of a document collection have been
widely applied in data mining, text processing and information retrieval. Probabilistic topic models (e.g. PLSA (Hofmann, 1999), LDA (Blei et al., 2003) and HDPs (Teh et al.,
2006)) provide a robust, scalable, and theoretically sound
foundation for document modelling by introducing latent
variables for each token to topic assignment.
For the traditional Dirichlet-Multinomial topic model, efficient inference is available by exploiting conjugacy with
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 DeepMind,
London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Yishu Miao
<yishu.miao@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

either Monte Carlo or Variational techniques (Jordan et al.,
1999; Attias, 2000; Beal, 2003)). However, as topic models have grown more expressive, in order to capture topic
dependencies or exploit conditional information, inference
methods have become increasingly complex. This is especially apparent for non-conjugate models (Carlin & Polson,
1991; Blei & Lafferty, 2007; Wang & Blei, 2013).
Deep neural networks are excellent function approximators
and have shown great potential for learning complicated
non-linear distributions for unsupervised models. Neural
variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014) approximates the posterior of a generative model with a variational distribution
parameterised by a neural network. This allows both the
generative model and the variational network to be jointly
trained with backpropagation. For models with continuous latent variables associated with particular distributions,
such as Gaussians, there exist reparameterisations (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) of the distribution
permitting unbiased and low-variance estimates of the gradients with respect to the parameters of the inference network. For models with discrete latent variables, MonteCarlo estimates of the gradient must be employed. Recently, algorithms such as REINFORCE have been used effectively to decrease variance and improve learning (Mnih
& Gregor, 2014; Mnih et al., 2014).
In this work we propose and evaluate a range of topic models parameterised with neural networks and trained with
variational inference. We introduce three different neural
structures for constructing topic distributions: the Gaussian
Softmax distribution (GSM), the Gaussian Stick Breaking
distribution (GSB), and the Recurrent Stick Breaking process (RSB), all of which are conditioned on a draw from
a multivariate Gaussian distribution. The Gaussian Softmax topic model constructs a finite topic distribution with a
softmax function applied to the projection of the Gaussian
random vector. The Gaussian Stick Breaking model also
constructs a discrete distribution from the Gaussian draw,
but this time employing a stick breaking construction to
provide a bias towards sparse topic distributions. Finally,
the Recurrent Stick Breaking process employs a recurrent
neural network, again conditioned on the Gaussian draw, to
progressively break the stick, yielding a neural analog of a
Dirichlet Process topic model (Teh et al., 2006).

