Regularising Non-linear Models Using Feature Side-information
Amina Mollaysa * 1 Pablo Strasser * 1 Alexandros Kalousis 1

Abstract
Very often features come with their own vectorial
descriptions which provide detailed information
about their properties. We refer to these vectorial descriptions as feature side-information. In
the standard learning scenario, input is represented as a vector of features and the feature sideinformation is most often ignored or used only
for feature selection prior to model fitting. We
believe that feature side-information which carries information about features intrinsic property
will help improve model prediction if used in a
proper way during learning process. In this paper, we propose a framework that allows for the
incorporation of the feature side-information during the learning of very general model families
to improve the prediction performance. We control the structures of the learned models so that
they reflect features’ similarities as these are defined on the basis of the side-information. We
perform experiments on a number of benchmark
datasets which show significant predictive performance gains, over a number of baselines, as a
result of the exploitation of the side-information.

1. Introduction
Side-information in machine learning is a very general term
used in very different learning scenarios with quite different connotations. Nevertheless, generally it is understood as any type of information, other than the learning instances, which can be used to support the learning
process; typically such information will live in a different
space than the learning instances. Examples include learning with privileged information (Vapnik & Izmailov, 2015)
in which during training a teacher provides additional in*

Equal contribution 1 University of Applied Sciences, Western
Switzerland; University of Geneva. Correspondence to: Amina
Mollaysa <maolaaisha.aminanmu@hesge.ch>, Pablo Strasser
<pablo.strasser@hesge.ch>, Alexandros Kalousis <Alexandros.Kalousis@hesge.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

formation for the learning instances; this information is not
available in testing. In metric learning and clustering, it
has been used to denote the availability of additional similarity information on instances, i.e. pairs of similar and
dissimilar instances, (Xing et al., 2002). In this paper we
focus on side-information describing the features. We will
consider learning problems in which we have additional information describing the properties and/or the relations of
the features. The features will have their own vectorial descriptions in some space in which we will describe their
properties.
Real world problems with such properties are very common. For example in drug efficiency prediction problems,
and more general in chemical formulae property prediction problems, drugs/formulae are collections of molecules.
Each molecule comes with its own description, for example
in terms of its physio-chemical properties, and/or its molecular structure. In language modeling, words are features
and the words’ semantic and syntactic properties are their
side-information. In image recognition, pixels are features
and their position is the side-information, and so on. Similar ideas also appear in tasks such as matrix completion, robust PCA and collaborative filtering (Rao et al., 2015; Chiang et al., 2016; 2015). There one seeks low rank matrix
decompositions in which the component matrices are constrained to follow relationships given by side-information
matrices, typically matrices which contain user and item
descriptors.
Despite the prevalence of such problems, there has been
surprisingly limited work on learning with feature sideinformation. Krupka et al., 2008, used the feature sideinformation to perform feature selection as a preprocessing step prior to any modelling or learning. More interestingly (Krupka & Tishby, 2007) exploit the feature sideinformation directly within the learning process, by forcing features that have similar side-information to have a
similar weight within a SVM model. One can think of
this as a model regularisation technique in which we force
the model structure, i.e. the feature parameters, to reflect
the feature manifold as this is given by the feature sideinformation. In the same work the authors also provide
an ad-hoc way to apply the same idea for non-linear models, more precisely polynomials of low degree. However
the solution that they propose requires an explicit construc-

