Gradient Projection Iterative Sketch for Large-Scale Constrained
Least-Squares

Junqi Tang 1 Mohammad Golbabaee 1 Mike E. Davies 1

Abstract
We propose a randomized first order optimization algorithm Gradient Projection Iterative
Sketch (GPIS) and an accelerated variant for efficiently solving large scale constrained Least
Squares (LS). We provide the first theoretical
convergence analysis for both algorithms. An
efficient implementation using a tailored linesearch scheme is also proposed. We demonstrate
our methods’ computational efficiency compared
to the classical accelerated gradient method, and
the variance-reduced stochastic gradient methods
through numerical experiments in various large
synthetic/real data sets.

1. Introduction
We are now in an era of boosting knowledge and large data.
In our daily life we have various signal processing and machine learning applications which involve the problem of
tackling a huge amount of data. These applications vary
from Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) for statistical
inference, to medical imaging such as the Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),
channel estimation and adaptive filtering in communications, and in machine learning problems where we need to
train a neural network or a classifier from a large amount of
data samples or images. Many of these applications involve
solving constrained optimization problems. In a large data
setting a desirable algorithm should be able to simultaneously address high accuracy of the solutions, small amount
of computations and high speed data storage.
Recent advances in the field of randomized algorithms have
provided us with powerful tools for reducing the computation for large scale optimizations. From the latest literature we can clearly see two streams of randomized al1

Institute for Digital Communications, the University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. Correspondence to: Junqi Tang
<J.Tang@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

gorithms, the first stream is the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variance-reduced variants (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013)(Konečnỳ & Richtárik, 2013)(Defazio et al.,
2014)(Allen-Zhu, 2016). The stochastic gradient techniques are based on the computationally cheap unbiased
estimate of the true gradients with progressively reduced
estimation variance. Although there has been several works
on SGD techniques for performing constrained optimization (Xiao & Zhang, 2014)(Konečnỳ et al., 2016), to the
best of our knowledge, there are no results highlighting the
computational speed up one could achieve by exploiting the
data structure promoted by the constraint set.
This paper follows a second line of research and
uses sketching techniques, the crux of which is reducing the dimensionality of a large scale problem by
random projections (e.g., sub-Gaussian matrices, Fast
Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transforms (FJLT) (Ailon & Liberty, 2008)(Ailon & Chazelle, 2009), the Count Sketch
(Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013), the Count-Gauss Sketch
(Kapralov et al., 2016) or random sub-selection) so that
the resulting sketched problem becomes computationally tractable. The meta-algorithms Classical Sketch
(CS)(Mahoney, 2011)(Drineas et al., 2011)(Pilanci &
Wainwright, 2015) and the Iterative Hessian Sketch (IHS)
(Pilanci & Wainwright, 2016) have been recently introduced for solving efficiently large scale constrained LS
problems which utilize the random sketching idea combined with the fact that solutions have low-dimensional
structures such as sparsity in a properly-chosen dictionary,
low-rank, etc.
1.1. Main Contributions
• Novel first order solvers based on iterative sketches
for constrained Least-squares
We propose a basic first order algorithm Gradient Projection Iterative Sketch (GPIS) based on the combination of the Classical Sketch (Pilanci & Wainwright, 2015) and Iterative Hessian Sketch (Pilanci
& Wainwright, 2016) for efficiently solving the constrained Least-squares, and also an accelerated variant by applying Nesterov’s acceleration scheme (Nesterov, 2007)(Nesterov, 2013a).

