Deep Bayesian Active Learning with Image Data

Yarin Gal 1 2 Riashat Islam 1 Zoubin Ghahramani 1 3

Abstract
Even though active learning forms an important
pillar of machine learning, deep learning tools
are not prevalent within it. Deep learning poses
several difficulties when used in an active learning setting. First, active learning (AL) methods
generally rely on being able to learn and update
models from small amounts of data. Recent advances in deep learning, on the other hand, are notorious for their dependence on large amounts of
data. Second, many AL acquisition functions rely
on model uncertainty, yet deep learning methods
rarely represent such model uncertainty. In this
paper we combine recent advances in Bayesian
deep learning into the active learning framework
in a practical way. We develop an active learning framework for high dimensional data, a task
which has been extremely challenging so far, with
very sparse existing literature. Taking advantage
of specialised models such as Bayesian convolutional neural networks, we demonstrate our active
learning techniques with image data, obtaining a
significant improvement on existing active learning approaches. We demonstrate this on both the
MNIST dataset, as well as for skin cancer diagnosis from lesion images (ISIC2016 task).

1. Introduction
A big challenge in many machine learning applications
is obtaining labelled data. This can be a long, laborious,
and costly process, often making the deployment of ML
systems uneconomical. A framework where a system could
learn from small amounts of data, and choose by itself what
data it would like the user to label, would make machine
learning much more widely applicable. Such frameworks
for learning are referred to as active learning (Cohn et al.,
1996) (also known as “experiment design” in the statistics
literature), and have been used successfully in fields such as
1
University of Cambridge, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute, UK 3 Uber AI Labs. Correspondence to: Yarin Gal
<yg279@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

medical diagnosis, microbiology, and manufacturing (Tong,
2001). In active learning, a model is trained on a small
amount of data (the initial training set), and an acquisition
function (often based on the model’s uncertainty) decides
which data points to ask an external oracle for a label. The
acquisition function selects one or more points from a pool
of unlabelled data points, with the pool points lying outside
of the training set. An oracle (often a human expert) labels
the selected data points, these are added to the training set,
and a new model is trained on the updated training set. This
process is then repeated, with the training set increasing
in size over time. The advantage of such systems is that
they often result in dramatic reductions in the amount of
labelling required to train an ML system (and therefore cost
and time).
Even though existing techniques for active learning have
proven themselves useful in a variety of tasks, a major remaining challenge in active learning is its lack of scalability
to high-dimensional data (Tong, 2001). This data appears often in image form, with a physician classifying MRI scans to
diagnose Alzheimer’s for example (Marcus et al., 2010), or
an expert clinician diagnosing skin cancer from dermoscopic
lesion images. To perform active learning, a model has to
be able to learn from small amounts of data and represent
its uncertainty over unseen data. This severely restricts the
class of models that can be used within the active learning
framework. As a result most approaches to active learning
have focused on low dimensional problems (Tong, 2001;
Hernandez-Lobato & Adams, 2015), with only a handful
of exceptions (Zhu et al., 2003; Holub et al., 2008; Joshi
et al., 2009) relying on kernel or graph-based approaches to
handle high-dimensional data.
In recent years, with the increased availability of data in
some domains, attention within the machine learning community has shifted from small data problems to big data
problems (Sundermeyer et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Kalchbrenner & Blunsom, 2013; Sutskever et al.,
2014). And with the increased interest in big data problems,
new tools were developed and existing tools were refined
for handling high dimensional data within such regimes.
Deep learning, and convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Rumelhart et al., 1985; LeCun et al., 1989) in particular, are
an example of such tools. Originally developed in 1989 to
parse handwritten zip codes, these tools have flourished and
were adapted to a point where a CNN is able to beat a human on object recognition tasks (given enough training data)

