Stochastic Bouncy Particle Sampler

Ari Pakman * 1 Dar Gilboa * 1 David Carlson 2 Liam Paninski 1

Abstract
We introduce a stochastic version of the nonreversible, rejection-free Bouncy Particle Sampler (BPS), a Markov process whose sample trajectories are piecewise linear, to efficiently sample Bayesian posteriors in big datasets. We prove
that in the BPS no bias is introduced by noisy
evaluations of the log-likelihood gradient. On the
other hand, we argue that efficiency considerations favor a small, controllable bias, in exchange
for faster mixing. We introduce a simple method
that controls this trade-off. We illustrate these
ideas in several examples which outperform previous approaches.

1. Introduction
The advent of the Big Data era presents special challenges to practitioners of Bayesian modeling because typical sampling-based inference methods have a computational cost per sample linear in the size of the dataset. This
computational burden has been addressed in recent years
through two major approaches (see (Bardenet et al., 2015)
for a recent overview): (i) split the data into batches and
combine posterior samples obtained in parallel from each
batch, or (ii) use variants of the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithm that only query a subset of the data at
every iteration. Our interest in the paper is in the latter approach, where many methods are based on modifying both
steps of the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm: in the
proposal step, only a mini-batch of the data is used, and the
accept-reject step is either ignored or approximated (Korattikara et al., 2013; Bardenet et al., 2014). This strategy has
been explored using proposals from Langevin (Welling &
Teh, 2011), Riemannian Langevin (Patterson & Teh, 2013),
Hamiltonian (Chen et al., 2014) and Riemannian Hamiltonian (Ma et al., 2015) dynamics. Other relevant works
*
Equal contribution 1 Statistics Department and Grossman
Center for the Statistics of Mind, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10027, USA 2 Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
Correspondence to: Ari Pakman <aripakman@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

include (Ahn et al., 2012; Ding et al., 2014).
Despite the success of the above approach, the partial
accept-reject step is a source of bias, the precise size of
which is difficult to control, and which tends to be amplified by the noisy evaluation of the gradient. This has motivated the search for unbiased stochastic samplers, such
as the Firefly MCMC algorithm (Maclaurin & Adams,
2014), the debiased pseudolikelihood approach of (Quiroz
et al., 2016), and the quasi-stationary distribution approach
of (Pollock et al., 2016).
The present work is motivated by the idea that the bias
could be reduced by starting from a rejection-free MCMC
algorithm, avoiding thus the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm altogether. Two similar algorithms of this type
have been recently proposed: the Bouncy Particle Sampler (BPS) (Peters & de With, 2012; Bouchard-Côté et al.,
2015), and Zig-Zag Monte Carlo (Bierkens & Roberts,
2015; Bierkens et al., 2016). These algorithms sample
from the target distribution through non-reversible, piecewise linear Markov processes. Non-reversibility (i.e., the
failure to satisfy detailed balance) has been shown in many
cases to yield faster mixing rates (Neal, 2004; Vucelja,
2014; Bouchard-Côté et al., 2015).
Our contributions in this paper are twofold. Firstly, we
show that the BPS algorithm is particularly well suited to
sample from posterior distributions of big datasets, because
the target distribution is invariant under zero-mean noisy
perturbations of the log-likelihood gradient, such as those
introduced by using mini-batches of the full dataset in each
iteration.
Stochastic variants of BPS or Zig-Zag that preserve exactly the target distribution have been proposed, such as
Local BPS (Bouchard-Côté et al., 2015) or Zig-Zag with
subsampling (ZZ-SS) (Bierkens et al., 2016), but they lead
to extremely slow mixing because are based on overly
conservative bounds (which moreover must be derived on
a case-by-case basis, and in many cases may not hold
at all). This leads us to our second contribution, the
Stochastic Bouncy Particle Sampler (SBPS), a stochastic
version of the BPS algorithm which trades a small amount
of bias for significantly reduced variance, yielding superior performance (and requiring no parameter tuning or
derivation of problem-specific bounds) compared to exist-

