Learning to Learn without Gradient Descent
by Gradient Descent

Yutian Chen 1 Matthew W. Hoffman 1 Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo 1 Misha Denil 1 Timothy P. Lillicrap 1
Matt Botvinick 1 Nando de Freitas 1

Abstract
We learn recurrent neural network optimizers
trained on simple synthetic functions by gradient descent. We show that these learned optimizers exhibit a remarkable degree of transfer in that
they can be used to efficiently optimize a broad
range of derivative-free black-box functions, including Gaussian process bandits, simple control
objectives, global optimization benchmarks and
hyper-parameter tuning tasks. Up to the training horizon, the learned optimizers learn to tradeoff exploration and exploitation, and compare
favourably with heavily engineered Bayesian optimization packages for hyper-parameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Findings in developmental psychology have revealed that
infants are endowed with a small number of separable
systems of core knowledge for reasoning about objects,
actions, number, space, and possibly social interactions
(Spelke and Kinzler, 2007). These systems enable infants
to learn many skills and acquire knowledge rapidly. The
most coherent explanation of this phenomenon is that the
learning (or optimization) process of evolution has led to
the emergence of components that enable fast and varied
forms of learning. In psychology, learning to learn has a
long history (Ward, 1937; Harlow, 1949; Kehoe, 1988).
Inspired by this, many researchers have attempted to build
agents capable of learning to learn (Schmidhuber, 1987;
Naik and Mammone, 1992; Thrun and Pratt, 1998; Hochreiter et al., 2001; Santoro et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2016; Ravi and Larochelle, 2017; Li and Malik, 2017). The scope of research under the umbrella of
learning to learn is very broad. The learner can implement
and be trained by many different algorithms, including gra1
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Yutian Chen <yutianc@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

dient descent, evolutionary strategies, simulated annealing,
and reinforcement learning.
For instance, one can learn to learn by gradient descent by
gradient descent, or learn local Hebbian updates by gradient descent (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Bengio et al.,
1992). In the former, one uses supervised learning at the
meta-level to learn an algorithm for supervised learning,
while in the latter, one uses supervised learning at the metalevel to learn an algorithm for unsupervised learning.
Learning to learn can be used to learn both models and
algorithms. In Andrychowicz et al. (2016) the output of
meta-learning is a trained recurrent neural network (RNN),
which is subsequently used as an optimization algorithm to
fit other models to data. In contrast, in Zoph and Le (2017)
the output of meta-learning can also be an RNN model, but
this new RNN is subsequently used as a model that is fit to
data using a classical optimizer. In both cases the output
of meta-learning is an RNN, but this RNN is interpreted
and applied as a model or as an algorithm. In this sense,
learning to learn with neural networks blurs the classical
distinction between models and algorithms.
In this work, the goal of meta-learning is to produce an
algorithm for global black-box optimization. Specifically,
we address the problem of finding a global minimizer of an
unknown (black-box) loss function f . That is, we wish to
compute x? = arg minx∈X f (x) , where X is some search
space of interest. The black-box function f is not available
to the learner in simple closed form at test time, but can be
evaluated at a query point x in the domain. This evaluation
produces either deterministic or stochastic outputs y ∈ R
such that f (x) = E[y | f (x)]. In other words, we can only
observe the function f through unbiased noisy point-wise
observations y.
Bayesian optimization is one of the most popular black-box
optimization methods (Brochu et al., 2009; Snoek et al.,
2012; Shahriari et al., 2016). It is a sequential modelbased decision making approach with two components.
The first component is a probabilistic model, consisting of
a prior distribution that captures our beliefs about the behavior of the unknown objective function and an observation model that describes the data generation mechanism.

