Latent Intention Dialogue Models

Tsung-Hsien Wen 1 * Yishu Miao 2 * Phil Blunsom 2 Steve Young 1

Abstract
Developing a dialogue agent that is capable of
making autonomous decisions and communicating by natural language is one of the long-term
goals of machine learning research. Traditional
approaches either rely on hand-crafting a small
state-action set for applying reinforcement learning that is not scalable or constructing deterministic models for learning dialogue sentences that
fail to capture natural conversational variability.
In this paper, we propose a Latent Intention Dialogue Model (LIDM) that employs a discrete latent variable to learn underlying dialogue intentions in the framework of neural variational inference. In a goal-oriented dialogue scenario, these
latent intentions can be interpreted as actions
guiding the generation of machine responses,
which can be further refined autonomously by reinforcement learning. The experimental evaluation of LIDM shows that the model out-performs
published benchmarks for both corpus-based and
human evaluation, demonstrating the effectiveness of discrete latent variable models for learning goal-oriented dialogues.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have shown impressive results in modeling generation tasks that have a sequential structured output form, such as machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015), caption
generation (Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015; Xu et al., 2015),
and natural language generation (Wen et al., 2015; Kiddon et al., 2016). These discriminative models are trained
to learn only a conditional output distribution over strings
and despite the sophisticated architectures and condition*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Tsung-Hsien Wen <thw28@cam.ac.uk>,
Yishu Miao <yishu.miao@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ing mechanisms used to ensure salience, they are not able
to model the underlying actions needed to generate natural
dialogues. As a consequence, these sequence-to-sequence
models are limited in their ability to exhibit the intrinsic
variability and stochasticity of natural dialogue. For example both goal-oriented dialogue systems (Wen et al., 2017;
Bordes & Weston, 2017) and sequence-to-sequence learning chatbots (Vinyals & Le, 2015; Shang et al., 2015; Serban et al., 2015) struggle to generate diverse yet causal responses (Li et al., 2016a; Serban et al., 2016). In addition,
there is often insufficient training data for goal-oriented dialogues which results in over-fitting and prevents deterministic models from learning effective and scalable interactions. In this paper, we propose a latent variable model –
Latent Intention Dialogue Model (LIDM) – for learning the
complex distribution of communicative intentions in goaloriented dialogues. Here, the latent variable representing
dialogue intention can be considered as the autonomous
decision-making center of a dialogue agent for composing
appropriate machine responses.
Recent advances in neural variational inference (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014) have sparked a
series of latent variable models applied to NLP (Bowman
et al., 2015; Serban et al., 2016; Miao et al., 2016; Cao &
Clark, 2017). For models with continuous latent variables,
the reparameterisation trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014) is
commonly used to build an unbiased and low-variance gradient estimator for updating the models. However, since a
continuous latent space is hard to interpret, the major benefits of these models are the stochasticity and the regularisation brought by the latent variable. In contrast, models with
discrete latent variables are able to not only produce interpretable latent distributions but also provide a principled
framework for semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al.,
2014). This is critical for NLP tasks, especially where additional supervision and external knowledge can be utilized
for bootstrapping (Faruqui et al., 2015; Miao & Blunsom,
2016; Kočiský et al., 2016). However, variational inference
with discrete latent variables is relatively difficult due to the
problem of high variance during sampling. Hence we introduce baselines, as in the REINFORCE (Williams, 1992)
algorithm, to mitigate the high variance problem, and carry
out efficient neural variational inference (Mnih & Gregor,
2014) for the latent variable model.

