Differentially Private Clustering in High-Dimensional Euclidean Spaces

Maria-Florina Balcan 1 Travis Dick 1 Yingyu Liang 2 Wenlong Mou 3 Hongyang Zhang 1

Abstract

the quality of many different areas of private data analysis.

We study the problem of clustering sensitive
data while preserving the privacy of individuals represented in the dataset, which has broad
applications in practical machine learning and
data analysis tasks. Although the problem has
been widely studied in the context of lowdimensional, discrete spaces, much remains unknown concerning private clustering in highdimensional Euclidean spaces Rd .
In this
work, we give differentially private and efficient algorithms achieving strong guarantees for
k-means and k-median clustering when d =
Ω(polylog(n)). Our algorithm achieves clustering loss at most log3 (n)OPT + poly(log
√ n, d, k),
advancing the state-of-the-art result of dOPT+
poly(log n, dd , k d ). We also study the case where
the data points are s-sparse and show that the
clustering loss can scale logarithmically with d,
i.e., log3 (n)OPT + poly(log n, log d, k, s). Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Formally, we consider the following problem: Given a set
of points x1 , . . . , xn in Rd , privately find a set of k centers
z1 , . . . , zk in Rd that approximately minimize one of the
following clustering objectives:

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider the problem of clustering sensitive data while preserving the privacy of individuals represented in the dataset. In particular, we consider k-means
and k-median clustering under the constraint of differential privacy, which is a popular information-theoretic notion of privacy (Dwork et al., 2014; 2006) that roughly requires the output of algorithm to be insensitive to changes
in an individual’s data. Clustering is an important building block for many data processing tasks with applications in recommendation systems (McSherry & Mironov,
2009), database systems (Ester et al., 1996), image processing (Zhang et al., 2014; 2015; Pappas, 1992), and data mining (Berkhin, 2006). Improved privacy-preserving clustering algorithms have the potential to significantly improve
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Wenlong Mou <mouwenlong@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

n
X
i=1

min kxi − zj k2
j

{z
}
|
k-means objective

or

n
X
i=1

min kxi − zj k .
j

(1)

{z
}
|
k-median objective

Minimizing these objectives exactly is NP-hard (Dasgupta,
2008), so we instead seek to find approximate solutions
whose clustering objective is at most α × OPT + β, where
OPT denotes the optimal objective. Unlike the non-private
setting, any differentially private clustering algorithm must
have β > 0 (Bassily et al., 2014).
Despite a large amount of work on private clustering, many
fundamental problems remain open. One of the longstanding challenges is to design polynomial-time private
k-means and k-median clustering algorithms with small
clustering loss for the high-dimensional, big-data setting.
There is significant evidence to indicate that even without
the requirement on privacy, exact optimization of these objective function in Euclidean spaces might be computationally infeasible (Dasgupta, 2008; Aloise et al., 2009): The
best-known result in this line of research is (9 + ) × OPT
by the local search algorithm (Kanungo et al., 2002). When
the space is discrete, there exists a private algorithm that
provides slightly better loss guarantee 6 × OPT (Gupta
et al., 2010). However, this problem becomes notoriously hard in the context of differential privacy in Euclidean spaces, as one typically needs to preserve privacy
for each point in the much larger Euclidean space. While
there exist algorithms in this setting with clustering loss
polylog(k)
× OPT + O(n/ log2 n) (Nock et al., 2016), or
√
d × OPT + poly(dd , k d , log n) when d is a small constant (Feldman et al., 2009) (See Table 1), the problem is
left unresolved in the big-data (large n), high-dimensional
(d = Ω(polylogn)) scenarios if we require both α and β to
be as small as polylog(n). Note that running the algorithm
of Feldman et al. (2009) after projecting to O(log n) dimensional space gives O(log(n)log(n) ) error, and the algorithm
of Nock et al. (2016) has Õ(n) additive loss. Moreover,
brute-force discretization in O(log n) dimensional space

