Curiosity-driven Exploration by Self-supervised Prediction

Deepak Pathak 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1 Alexei A. Efros 1 Trevor Darrell 1

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, rewards extrinsic
to the agent are extremely sparse, or absent altogether. In such cases, curiosity can serve as
an intrinsic reward signal to enable the agent
to explore its environment and learn skills that
might be useful later in its life. We formulate
curiosity as the error in an agent’s ability to predict the consequence of its own actions in a visual feature space learned by a self-supervised
inverse dynamics model. Our formulation scales
to high-dimensional continuous state spaces like
images, bypasses the difficulties of directly predicting pixels, and, critically, ignores the aspects
of the environment that cannot affect the agent.
The proposed approach is evaluated in two environments: VizDoom and Super Mario Bros.
Three broad settings are investigated: 1) sparse
extrinsic reward, where curiosity allows for far
fewer interactions with the environment to reach
the goal; 2) exploration with no extrinsic reward,
where curiosity pushes the agent to explore more
efficiently; and 3) generalization to unseen scenarios (e.g. new levels of the same game) where
the knowledge gained from earlier experience
helps the agent explore new places much faster
than starting from scratch.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning algorithms aim at learning policies
for achieving target tasks by maximizing rewards provided
by the environment. In some scenarios, these rewards are
supplied to the agent continuously, e.g. the running score
in an Atari game (Mnih et al., 2015), or the distance between a robot arm and an object in a reaching task (Lillicrap et al., 2016). However, in many real-world scenarios,
rewards extrinsic to the agent are extremely sparse or miss1
University of California, Berkeley.
Deepak Pathak <pathak@berkeley.edu>.

Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

(a) learn to explore in Level-1

(b) explore faster in Level-2

Figure 1. Discovering how to play Super Mario Bros without rewards. (a) Using only curiosity-driven exploration, the agent
makes significant progress in Level-1. (b) The gained knowledge
helps the agent explore subsequent levels much faster than when
starting from scratch. Watch the video at http://pathak22.
github.io/noreward-rl/

ing altogether, and it is not possible to construct a shaped
reward function. This is a problem as the agent receives
reinforcement for updating its policy only if it succeeds in
reaching a pre-specified goal state. Hoping to stumble into
a goal state by chance (i.e. random exploration) is likely to
be futile for all but the simplest of environments.
As human agents, we are accustomed to operating with rewards that are so sparse that we only experience them once
or twice in a lifetime, if at all. To a three-year-old enjoying
a sunny Sunday afternoon on a playground, most trappings
of modern life – college, good job, a house, a family – are
so far into the future, they provide no useful reinforcement
signal. Yet, the three-year-old has no trouble entertaining
herself in that playground using what psychologists call intrinsic motivation (Ryan, 2000) or curiosity (Silvia, 2012).
Motivation/curiosity have been used to explain the need to
explore the environment and discover novel states. More
generally, curiosity is a way of learning new skills which
might come handy for pursuing rewards in the future.
Similarly, in reinforcement learning, intrinsic motivation/rewards become critical whenever extrinsic rewards
are sparse. Most formulations of intrinsic reward can be
grouped into two broad classes: 1) encourage the agent
to explore “novel” states (Bellemare et al., 2016; Lopes
et al., 2012; Poupart et al., 2006) or, 2) encourage the agent
to perform actions that reduce the error/uncertainty in the
agent’s ability to predict the consequence of its own actions (i.e. its knowledge about the environment) (Houthooft

