Multilevel Clustering via Wasserstein Means

Nhat Ho 1 XuanLong Nguyen 1 Mikhail Yurochkin 1 Hung Hai Bui 2 Viet Huynh 3 Dinh Phung 3

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to the problem of
multilevel clustering, which aims to simultaneously partition data in each group and discover
grouping patterns among groups in a potentially
large hierarchically structured corpus of data.
Our method involves a joint optimization formulation over several spaces of discrete probability
measures, which are endowed with Wasserstein
distance metrics. We propose a number of variants of this problem, which admit fast optimization algorithms, by exploiting the connection to
the problem of finding Wasserstein barycenters.
Consistency properties are established for the estimates of both local and global clusters. Finally,
experiment results with both synthetic and real
data are presented to demonstrate the flexibility
and scalability of the proposed approach. 1

1. Introduction
In numerous applications in engineering and sciences, data
are often organized in a multilevel structure. For instance,
a typical structural view of text data in machine learning
is to have words grouped into documents, documents are
grouped into corpora. A prominent strand of modeling and
algorithmic works in the past couple decades has been to
discover latent multilevel structures from these hierarchically structured data. For specific clustering tasks, one may
be interested in simultaneously partitioning the data in each
group (to obtain local clusters) and partitioning a collection
of data groups (to obtain global clusters). Another concrete
example is the problem of clustering images (i.e., global
clusters) where each image contains partions of multiple
annotated regions (i.e., local clusters) (Oliva and Torralba,
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, USA.
Adobe Research. 3 Center for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics (PRaDA), Deakin University, Australia. Correspondence
to: Nhat Ho <minhnhat@umich.edu>.

2001). While hierachical clustering techniques may be employed to find a tree-structed clustering given a collection
of data points, they are not applicable to discovering the
nested structure of multilevel data. Bayesian hierarchical
models provide a powerful approach, exemplified by influential works such as (Blei et al., 2003; Pritchard et al.,
2000; Teh et al., 2006). More specific to the simultaneous and multilevel clustering problem, we mention the paper of (Rodriguez et al., 2008). In this interesting work, a
Bayesian nonparametric model, namely the nested Dirichlet process (NDP) model, was introduced that enables the
inference of clustering of a collection of probability distributions from which different groups of data are drawn.
With suitable extensions, this modeling framework has
been further developed for simultaneous multilevel clustering, see for instance, (Wulsin et al., 2016; Nguyen et al.,
2014; Huynh et al., 2016).
The focus of this paper is on the multilevel clustering problem motivated in the aforementioned modeling works, but
we shall take a purely optimization approach. We aim to
formulate optimization problems that enable the discovery
of multilevel clustering structures hidden in grouped data.
Our technical approach is inspired by the role of optimal
transport distances in hierarchical modeling and clustering
problems. The optimal transport distances, also known as
Wasserstein distances (Villani, 2003), have been shown to
be the natural distance metric for the convergence theory
of latent mixing measures arising in both mixture models
(Nguyen, 2013) and hierarchical models (Nguyen, 2016).
They are also intimately connected to the problem of clustering — this relationship goes back at least to the work of
(Pollard, 1982), where it is pointed out that the well-known
K-means clustering algorithm can be directly linked to the
quantization problem — the problem of determining an optimal finite discrete probability measure that minimizes its
second-order Wasserstein distance from the empirical distribution of given data (Graf and Luschgy, 2000).

2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
moonfolk/Multilevel-Wasserstein-Means

If one is to perform simultaneous K-means clustering for
hierarchically grouped data, both at the global level (among
groups), and local level (within each group), then this can
be achieved by a joint optimization problem defined with
suitable notions of Wasserstein distances inserted into the
objective function. In particular, multilevel clustering requires the optimization in the space of probability mea-

