Parallel and Distributed Thompson Sampling for
Large-scale Accelerated Exploration of Chemical Space

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato * 1 James Requeima * 1 2 Edward O. Pyzer-Knapp 3 4 Alán Aspuru-Guzik 3

Abstract
Chemical space is so large that brute force
searches for new interesting molecules are infeasible.
High-throughput virtual screening
via computer cluster simulations can speed up
the discovery process by collecting very large
amounts of data in parallel, e.g., up to hundreds
or thousands of parallel measurements. Bayesian
optimization (BO) can produce additional acceleration by sequentially identifying the most useful simulations or experiments to be performed
next. However, current BO methods cannot scale
to the large numbers of parallel measurements
and the massive libraries of molecules currently
used in high-throughput screening. Here, we
propose a scalable solution based on a parallel and distributed implementation of Thompson
sampling (PDTS). We show that, in small scale
problems, PDTS performs similarly as parallel
expected improvement (EI), a batch version of
the most widely used BO heuristic. Additionally, in settings where parallel EI does not scale,
PDTS outperforms other scalable baselines such
as a greedy search, -greedy approaches and a
random search method. These results show that
PDTS is a successful solution for large-scale parallel BO.

1. Introduction
Chemical space is huge: it is estimated to contain over 1060
molecules. Among these, fewer than 100 million compounds can be found in public repositories or databases
(Reymond et al., 2012). This discrepancy between known
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 2 Invenia Labs, Cambridge, UK 3 Harvard University, Cambridge, USA 4 IBM Research, UK. Correspondence to: José
Miguel Hernández-Lobato <jmh233@cam.ac.uk>, Edward O.
Pyzer-Knapp <epyzerk3@uk.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

compounds and possible compounds indicates the potential
for discoverying many new compounds with highly desirable functionality (e.g., new energy materials, pharmaceuticals, dyes, etc.). While the vast size of chemical space
makes this an enormous opportunity, it also presents a significant difficulty in the identification of new relevant compounds among the many unimportant ones. This challenge
is so great that any discovery process relying purely on the
combination of scientific intuition with trial and error experimentation is slow, tedious and in many cases infeasible.
To accelerate the search, high-throughput approaches can
be used in a combinatorial exploration of small specific
areas of chemical space (Rajan, 2008). These have led
to the development of high-throughput virtual screening
(Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2015; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2016)
in which large libraries of molecules are created and then
analyzed using theoretical and computational techniques,
typically by running a large number of parallel simulations
in a computer cluster. The objective is to reduce an initially
very large library of molecules to a small set of promising
leads for which expensive experimental evaluation is justified. However, even though these techniques only search
a tiny drop in the ocean of chemical space, they can result
in massive libraries whose magnitude exceeds traditional
computational capabilities. As a result, at present, there
is an urgent need to accelerate high-throughput screening
approaches.
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Jones et al., 1998) can speed
up the discovery process by using machine learning to
guide the search and make improved decisions about what
molecules to analyze next given the data collected so far.
However, current BO methods cannot scale to the large
number of parallel measurements and the massive libraries
of candidate molecules currently used in high-throughput
screening (Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2015). While there are BO
methods that allow parallel data collection, these methods
have typically been limited to tens of data points per batch
(Snoek et al., 2012; Shahriari et al., 2014; Gonzlez et al.,
2016). In contrast, high-throughput screening may allow
the simultaneous collection of thousands of data points via
large-scale parallel computation. This creates a need for
new scalable methods for parallel Bayesian optimization.

