Why is Posterior Sampling Better than Optimism for Reinforcement Learning?
Ian Osband 1 2 Benjamin Van Roy 1

Abstract
Computational results demonstrate that posterior
sampling for reinforcement learning (PSRL)
dramatically outperforms existing algorithms
driven by optimism, such as UCRL2. We provide insight into the extent of this performance
boost and the phenomenon that drives pit. We
leverage this insight to establish an Õ(H SAT )
Bayesian regret bound for PSRL in finite-horizon
episodic Markov decision processes. This improves upon the p
best previous Bayesian regret
bound of Õ(HS AT ) for any reinforcement
learning algorithm. Our theoretical results are
supported by extensive empirical evaluation.

1. Introduction
We consider the reinforcement learning problem in which
an agent interacts with a Markov decision process with the
aim of maximizing expected cumulative reward (Burnetas
& Katehakis, 1997; Sutton & Barto, 1998). Key to performance is how the agent balances between exploration
to acquire information of long-term benefit and exploitation to maximize expected near-term rewards. In principle, dynamic programming can be applied to compute the
Bayes-optimal solution to this problem (Bellman & Kalaba, 1959). However, this is computationally intractable
for anything beyond the simplest of toy problems and direct approximations can fail spectacularly poorly (Munos,
2014). As such, researchers have proposed and analyzed a
number of heuristic reinforcement learning algorithms.
The literature on efficient reinforcement learning offers statistical efficiency guarantees for computationally tractable
algorithms. These provably efficient algorithms (Kearns
& Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002) predominantly address the exploration-exploitation trade-off via
optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU): at any state, the
agent assigns to each action an optimistically biased esti1
Stanford University, California, USA 2 Deepmind, London,
UK. Correspondence to: Ian Osband <ian.osband@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

mate of future value and selects the action with the greatest
estimate. If a selected action is not near-optimal, the estimate must be overly optimistic, in which case the agent
learns from the experience. Efficiency relative to less sophisticated exploration arises as the agent avoids actions
that can neither yield high value nor informative data.
An alternative approach, based on Thompson sampling
(Thompson, 1933), involves sampling a statistically plausibly set of action values and selecting the maximizing
action. These values can be generated, for example, by
sampling from the posterior distribution over MDPs and
computing the state-action value function of the sampled
MDP. This approach, originally proposed in Strens (2000),
is called posterior sampling for reinforcement learning
(PSRL). Computational results from Osband et al. (2013)
demonstrate that PSRL dramatically outperforms existing
algorithms based on OFU. The primary aim of this paper is
to provide insight into the extent of this performance boost
and the phenomenon that drives it.
We show that, in Bayesian expectation and up to constant
factors, PSRL matches the statistical efficiency of any standard algorithm for OFU-RL. We highlight two key shortcomings of existing state of the art algorithms for OFU
(Jaksch et al., 2010) and demonstrate that PSRL does not
suffer from these p
inefficiencies. We leverage this insight
to produce an Õ(H SAT ) bound for the Bayesian regret
of PSRL in finite-horizon episodic Markov decision processes where H is the horizon, S is the number of states,
A is the number of actions and T is the time elapsed.
p This
improves upon the best previous bound of Õ(HS AT ) for
any RL algorithm.pWe discuss why we believe PSRL satisfies a tighter Õ( HSAT ), though we have not proved
that. We complement our theory with computational experiments that highlight the issues we raise; empirical results
match our theoretical predictions.
More importantly, we highlights a tension in OFU RL between statistical efficiency and computational tractability.
We argue that any OFU algorithm that matches PSRL in
statistical efficiency would likely be computationally intractable. We provide proof of this claim in a restricted
setting. Our key insight, and the potential benefits of exploration guided by posterior sampling, are not restricted
to the simple tabular MDPs we analyze.

