Convex Phase Retrieval without Lifting via PhaseMax

Tom Goldstein * 1 Christoph Studer * 2

Abstract
Semidefinite relaxation methods transform a variety of non-convex optimization problems into
convex problems, but square the number of variables. We study a new type of convex relaxation
for phase retrieval problems, called PhaseMax,
that convexifies the underlying problem without
lifting. The resulting problem formulation can
be solved using standard convex optimization
routines, while still working in the original, lowdimensional variable space. We prove, using a random spherical distribution measurement model,
that PhaseMax succeeds with high probability for
a sufficiently large number of measurements. We
compare our approach to other phase retrieval
methods and demonstrate that our theory accurately predicts the success of PhaseMax.

1. Introduction
Semidefinite relaxation is the technique of replacing a broad
range of non-convex optimization problems involving a vector of (possibly discrete) variables with convex problems
involving matrices. The relaxed convex problem is then
solved to global optimality, and the solution is used to extract a global minimizer of the original non-convex problem.
Unfortunately, convexity comes at a steep cost: semidefinite
relaxation squares the dimensionality of the problem, resulting in formulations that are convex but computationally
intractable in many situations. In fact, the increase in dimensionality, which is called lifting, often prevents the use
of this technique in machine learning and computer vision
applications involving thousands to millions of variables.
This article studies convex relaxation for phase retrieval,
a canonical non-convex problem that can be solved via
semidefinite relaxation. We present a relaxation approach
that convexifies the problem without lifting, i.e., it solves
the problem in its original, low-dimensional space.
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland 2 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Tom Goldstein <tomg at cs.umd.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

2. Phase Retrieval Problems
Phase retrieval deals with the recovery of an n-dimensional
signal x0 ∈ Hn , with H either R or C, from m ≥ n
magnitude measurements of the form (Candès et al., 2013)
bi = |hai , x0 i|,

i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(1)

where ai ∈ Hn , and i = 1, 2, . . . , m are the (known) measurement vectors. Because of the nonlinearity caused by
measuring the magnitude of the linear terms in (1), the phase
retrieval problem is non-convex.
A variety of algorithms exist for finding x0 in (1). Classical
methods, such as the Gerchberg-Saxton and Feinup algorithms, search for a solution via alternating least-squares
steps that are efficient when the measurement ensemble {ai }
forms a tight frame (e.g., a collection of Fourier matrices).
More recently, there has been significant interest in convex methods for phase retrieval that provably find global
solutions without the danger of getting trapped in local minima. These methods, including PhaseLift (Candès et al.,
2013) and its dual formulation PhaseCut (Waldspurger et al.,
2015), rely on semidefinite relaxation and replace the unknown n-dimensional vector x with a (much larger) n × n
matrix of unknowns that is recovered using semi-definite
programming. While such methods come with strong theoretical guarantees and do not get trapped in local minima,
they require lifting (semidefinite relaxation squares the number of unknowns), which makes this approach intractable
for real-world image processing applications involving thousands or millions of variables. As a result, there has been
a flurry of interest in global convergence properties of nonconvex solvers that operate in the original feature space,
such as the methods in (Netrapalli et al., 2013; Schniter &
Rangan, 2015; Candès et al., 2015; Chen & Candès, 2015;
Wang et al., 2016). While these methods come with theoretical guarantees, non-convexity makes it difficult to combine
them with commonly used regularizers, and typically precludes the use of sophisticated optimization methods that
can handle constraints, non-differentiable terms, etc.
We note that the PhaseMax formulation has also been proposed by (Bahmani & Romberg, 2016) and was recently
analyzed by (Hand & Voroninski, 2016). We discuss and
compare these results in Section 8.2.

