Clustering by Sum of Norms: Stochastic Incremental Algorithm, Convergence
and Cluster Recovery

Ashkan Panahi 1 Devdatt Dubhashi 2 Fredrik D. Johansson 3 Chiranjib Bhattacharyya 4

Abstract
Standard clustering methods such as K–means,
Gaussian mixture models, and hierarchical clustering, are beset by local minima, which are
sometimes drastically suboptimal. Moreover the
number of clusters K must be known in advance.
The recently introduced sum–of–norms (SON)
or Clusterpath convex relaxation of k-means and
hierarchical clustering shrinks cluster centroids
toward one another and ensure a unique global
minimizer. We give a scalable stochastic incremental algorithm based on proximal iterations to
solve the SON problem with convergence guarantees. We also show that the algorithm recovers clusters under quite general conditions which
have a similar form to the unifying proximity
condition introduced in the approximation algorithms community (that covers paradigm cases
such as Gaussian mixtures and planted partition
models). We give experimental results to confirm
that our algorithm scales much better than previous methods while producing clusters of comparable quality.

1. Introduction
Clustering is perhaps the most fundamental problem in unsupervised learning. Many clustering algorithms have been
proposed in the literature (Jain et al., 1999), including Kmeans, spectral clustering, Gaussian mixture models and
hierarchical clustering, to solve problems with respect to
a wide range of cluster shapes. However, much research
has pointed out that these methods all suffer from instabilities. For example, the formulation of K-means is NP-hard
and the typical way to solve it is the Lloyds method, which
1
ECE, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 2 CSE,
Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden 3 IMES,
MIT, Cambridge, MA 4 CSA, IISc, Bangalore, India. Correspondence to: Ashkan Panahi <panahi1986@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

requires randomly initializing the clusters. However, one
needs to know the number of clusters in advance and different initializations may lead to significantly different final
cluster results.
Lindsten et al. (2011) and Hocking et al. (2011) proposed
the following convex optimization procedure for clustering,
called SON (“Sum of norms” clustering) by the former and
Clusterpath by the latter;
n
X
1X
kxi − ui k22 + λ
kui − uj k2
{ui ∈R } 2
i=1
i<j

minm

(1)

The main idea of the formulation is that if input data points
xi and xj belong to the same cluster, then their corresponding centroids ui and uj should be forced to be the same.
Intuitively, this is due to the fact that the second term is a
regularization term that enforces zeroes in the vector consisting of entries kui − uj k and can be seen as a generalization of the fused Lasso penalty. From another point of
view, the regularization term can be seen as an `1,2 norm,
i.e., the sum of `2 norms. Such a group norm is known to
encourage block sparse solutions (Bach et al., 2012). Thus
for many pairs (i, j), we expect to enforce ui = uj .
Lindsten et al. (2011) used an off–the–shelf convex solver,
CVX to generate solution paths. Hocking et al. (2011) introduced three distinct algorithms for the three most commonly encountered norms. For the `1 norm, the objective function separates, and they solve the convex clustering problem by the exact path following method designed
for the fused lasso. For the `1 and `2 norms, they employ
subgradient descent in conjunction with active sets. Recently, Chi & Lange (2015); Chen et al. (2015) introduce
two similar generic frameworks for minimizing the convex
clustering objective function with an arbitrary norm. One
approach solves the problem by the alternating direction
method of multipliers (ADMM), while the other solves it
by the alternating minimization algorithm (AMA). However both algorithms have issues with scalablity.
Moreover, none of these papers provide any theoretical
guarantees about the cluster recovery property of the algorithm. The first theoretical result on cluster recovery was
shown by Zhu et al. (2010): if the samples are drawn from

