An Alternative Softmax Operator for Reinforcement Learning

Kavosh Asadi 1 Michael L. Littman 1

Abstract
A softmax operator applied to a set of values
acts somewhat like the maximization function
and somewhat like an average. In sequential
decision making, softmax is often used in
settings where it is necessary to maximize utility
but also to hedge against problems that arise
from putting all of one’s weight behind a single
maximum utility decision.
The Boltzmann
softmax operator is the most commonly used
softmax operator in this setting, but we show
that this operator is prone to misbehavior. In
this work, we study a differentiable softmax
operator that, among other properties, is a
non-expansion ensuring a convergent behavior in
learning and planning. We introduce a variant
of SARSA algorithm that, by utilizing the new
operator, computes a Boltzmann policy with
a state-dependent temperature parameter. We
show that the algorithm is convergent and that it
performs favorably in practice.

1. Introduction
There is a fundamental tension in decision making
between choosing the action that has highest expected
utility and avoiding “starving” the other actions. The issue
arises in the context of the exploration–exploitation
dilemma (Thrun, 1992),
non-stationary decision
problems (Sutton, 1990), and when interpreting observed
decisions (Baker et al., 2007).
In reinforcement learning, an approach to addressing the
tension is the use of softmax operators for value-function
optimization, and softmax policies for action selection.
Examples include value-based methods such as SARSA
(Rummery & Niranjan, 1994) or expected SARSA (Sutton
& Barto, 1998; Van Seijen et al., 2009), and policy-search
methods such as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992).
1
Brown University, USA. Correspondence to: Kavosh Asadi
<kavosh@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

An ideal softmax operator is a parameterized set of
operators that:
1. has parameter settings that allow it to approximate
maximization arbitrarily accurately to perform
reward-seeking behavior;
2. is a non-expansion for all parameter settings ensuring
convergence to a unique fixed point;
3. is differentiable to make it possible to improve via
gradient-based optimization; and
4. avoids the starvation of non-maximizing actions.
Let X = x1 , . . . , xn be a vector of values. We define the
following operators:
max(X) =

max

i∈{1,...,n}

xi ,

n

mean(X) =

1 X
xi ,
n i=1

eps (X) =  mean(X) + (1 − ) max(X) ,
Pn
βxi
i=1 xi e
boltzβ (X) = P
.
n
βxi
i=1 e

The first operator, max(X), is known to be a
non-expansion (Littman & Szepesvári, 1996). However,
it is non-differentiable (Property 3), and ignores
non-maximizing selections (Property 4).
The next operator, mean(X), computes the average of its
inputs. It is differentiable and, like any operator that takes a
fixed convex combination of its inputs, is a non-expansion.
However, it does not allow for maximization (Property 1).
The third operator eps (X), commonly referred to as
epsilon greedy (Sutton & Barto, 1998), interpolates
between max and mean. The operator is a non-expansion,
because it is a convex combination of two non-expansion
operators. But it is non-differentiable (Property 3).
The Boltzmann operator boltzβ (X) is differentiable. It
also approximates max as β → ∞, and mean as β →
0. However, it is not a non-expansion (Property 2), and
therefore, prone to misbehavior as will be shown in the next
section.

