Adaptive Consensus ADMM for Distributed Optimization

Zheng Xu 1 Gavin Taylor 2 Hao Li 1 Mário A. T. Figueiredo 3 Xiaoming Yuan 4 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
The alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) is commonly used for distributed model fitting problems, but its performance and reliability depend strongly on userdefined penalty parameters. We study distributed
ADMM methods that boost performance by using different fine-tuned algorithm parameters on
each worker node. We present a O(1/k) convergence rate for adaptive ADMM methods with
node-specific parameters, and propose adaptive
consensus ADMM (ACADMM), which automatically tunes parameters without user oversight.

1. Introduction
The alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM)
is a popular tool for solving problems of the form,
min
f (u) + g(v),
n
m

u∈R ,v∈R

subject to Au + Bv = b, (1)

where f : Rn → R and g : Rm → R are convex functions,
A ∈ Rp×n , B ∈ Rp×m , and b ∈ Rp . ADMM was first
introduced in (Glowinski & Marroco, 1975) and (Gabay &
Mercier, 1976), and has found applications in many optimization problems in machine learning, distributed computing and many other areas (Boyd et al., 2011).
Consensus ADMM (Boyd et al., 2011) solves minimization
P problems involving a composite objective f (v) =
i fi (v), where worker i stores the data needed to compute fi , and so is well suited for distributed model fitting
problems (Boyd et al., 2011; Zhang & Kwok, 2014; Song
et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2016; Goldstein et al., 2016;
Taylor et al., 2016). To distribute this problem, consensus methods assign a separate copy of the unknowns, ui , to
1
University of Maryland, College Park; 2 United States Naval
Academy, Annapolis; 3 Instituto de Telecomunicações, IST, ULisboa, Portugal; 4 Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Zheng Xu <xuzhustc@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

each worker, and then apply ADMM to solve
min

ui ∈Rd ,v∈Rd

N
X

fi (ui ) + g(v),

subject to ui = v, (2)

i=1

where v is the “central” copy of the unknowns, and g(v)
is a regularizer. The consensus problem (2) coincides with
(1) by defining u = (u1 ; . . . ; uN ) ∈ RdN , A = IdN ∈
RdN ×dN , and B = −(Id ; . . . ; Id ) ∈ RdN ×d , where Id
represents the d × d identity matrix.
ADMM methods rely on a penalty parameter (stepsize) that
is chosen by the user. In theory, ADMM converges for any
constant penalty parameter (Eckstein & Bertsekas, 1992;
He & Yuan, 2012; Ouyang et al., 2013). In practice, however, the efficiency of ADMM is highly sensitive to this
parameter choice (Nishihara et al., 2015; Ghadimi et al.,
2015), and can be improved via adaptive penalty selection methods (He et al., 2000; Song et al., 2016; Xu et al.,
2017a).
One such approach, residual balancing (RB) (He et al.,
2000), adapts the penalty parameter so that the residuals (derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect to primal
and dual variables) have similar magnitudes. When the
same penalty parameter is used across nodes, RB is known
to converge, although without a known rate guarantee.
A more recent approach, AADMM (Xu et al., 2017a),
achieves impressive practical convergence speed on many
applications, including consensus problems, with adaptive
penalty parameters by estimating the local curvature of the
dual functions. However, the dimension of the unknown
variables in consensus problems grows with the number of
distributed nodes, causing the curvature estimation to be
inaccurate and unstable. AADMM uses the same convergence analysis as RB. Consensus residual balancing (CRB)
(Song et al., 2016) extends residual balancing to consensusbased ADMM for distributed optimization by balancing the
local primal and dual residuals on each node. However,
convergence guarantees for this method are fairly weak,
and adaptive penalties need to be reset after several iterations to guarantee convergence.
We study the use of adaptive ADMM in the distributed setting, where different workers use different local algorithm
parameters to accelerate convergence. We begin by studying the theory and provide convergence guarantees when

