Coherence Pursuit: Fast, Simple, and Robust Subspace Recovery

Mostafa Rahmani 1 George Atia 1

Abstract
A remarkably simple, yet powerful, algorithm
termed Coherence Pursuit for robust Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) is presented. In the
proposed approach, an outlier is set apart from an
inlier by comparing their coherence with the rest
of the data points. As inliers lie in a low dimensional subspace, they are likely to have strong
mutual coherence provided there are enough inliers. By contrast, outliers do not typically admit
low dimensional structures, wherefore an outlier is unlikely to bear strong resemblance with
a large number of data points. As Coherence
Pursuit only involves one simple matrix multiplication, it is significantly faster than the stateof-the-art robust PCA algorithms. We provide a
mathematical analysis of the proposed algorithm
under a random model for the distribution of the
inliers and outliers. It is shown that the proposed
method can recover the correct subspace even if
the data is predominantly outliers. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first provable robust PCA algorithm that is simultaneously noniterative, can tolerate a large number of outliers
and is robust to linearly dependent outliers.

1. Introduction
Standard tools such as Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) have been instrumental in reducing dimensionality by finding linear projections of high-dimensional data
along the directions where the data is most spread out to
minimize information loss. These techniques are widely
applicable in a broad range of data analysis problems, including computer vision, image processing, machine learning and bioinformatics (Basri & Jacobs, 2003; Costeira &
Kanade, 1998; Hosseini et al., 2014).
Given a data matrix D ∈ Rm×n , PCA finds an r1
University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA. Correspondence to: Mostafa Rahmani <mostafa@knights.ucf.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

dimensional subspace by solving
minkD − ÛÛT DkF

subject to ÛT Û = I,

(1)

Û

where Û ∈ Rm×r is an orthonormal basis for the rdimensional subspace, I denotes the identity matrix and
k.kF the Frobenius norm. Despite its notable impact on
exploratory data analysis and multivariate analyses, PCA
is notoriously sensitive to outliers that prevail much of the
real world data since the solution to (1) can arbitrarily deviate from the true subspace in presence of a small number
of outlying data points that do not conform with the low dimensional model (Hauberg et al., 2016; Lerman & Zhang,
2014; Maronna, 2005; McCoy et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2010a;
Zhang, 2012) .
As a result, much research work was devoted to investigate
PCA algorithms that are robust to outliers. The corrupted
data can be expressed as
D=L+C,

(2)

where L is a low rank matrix whose columns span a
low-dimensional subspace, and the matrix C models the
data corruption, and is referred to as the outlier matrix.
There are two main models for the outlier matrix that
were considered in the literature, and these two models
are mostly incomparable in theory, practice and analysis
techniques. The first corruption model is the element-wise
model in which C is a sparse matrix with arbitrary support, whose entries can have arbitrarily large magnitudes
(Chandrasekaran et al., 2011; Candès et al., 2011; Netrapalli et al., 2014; Yi et al., 2016). In view of the arbitrary
support of C, any of the columns of L may be affected by
the non-zero elements of C. We do not consider this model
in this paper. The second model, which is the focus of our
paper, is a column-wise model wherein only a fraction of
the columns of C are non-zero, wherefore a portion of the
columns of L (the so-called inliers) remain unaffected by
C (Lerman & Maunu, 2014; Xu et al., 2010b; Chen et al.,
2011; Rahmani & Atia, 2017). Next, we formally describe
the data model adopted in this paper, which only focuses
on the column-wise outlier model.
Data Model 1. The given data matrix D satisfies the following.

