Fractional Langevin Monte Carlo: Exploring Lévy Driven Stochastic
Differential Equations for Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Umut Şimşekli 1

Abstract
Along with the recent advances in scalable
Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, sampling
techniques that are based on Langevin diffusions have started receiving increasing attention.
These so called Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC)
methods are based on diffusions driven by a
Brownian motion, which gives rise to Gaussian
proposal distributions in the resulting algorithms.
Even though these approaches have proven successful in many applications, their performance
can be limited by the light-tailed nature of the
Gaussian proposals. In this study, we extend
classical LMC and develop a novel Fractional
LMC (FLMC) framework that is based on a family of heavy-tailed distributions, called α-stable
Lévy distributions. As opposed to classical approaches, the proposed approach can possess
large jumps while targeting the correct distribution, which would be beneficial for efficient exploration of the state space. We develop novel
computational methods that can scale up to largescale problems and we provide formal convergence analysis of the proposed scheme. Our experiments support our theory: FLMC can provide superior performance in multi-modal settings, improved convergence rates, and robustness to algorithm parameters.

1. Introduction
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques that are
based on continuous diffusions have become increasingly
popular due to their success in large-scale Bayesian machine learning. In these techniques, the goal is to generate
samples from a target distribution π, by forming a contin1

LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay,
75013, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@telecom-paristech.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

uous diffusion which has π as a stationary distribution. In
practice, π is usually known up to a normalization constant,
i.e. π(X) ∝ φ(X) = exp(−U (X)) for X ∈ RD , where
φ is called the unnormalized target density and U is called
the potential energy function.
Originated in statistical physics (Rossky et al., 1978),
Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) is constructed upon the
Langevin diffusion that is defined by the following stochastic differential equation (SDE) (Roberts & Stramer, 2002):
√
(1)
dXt = −∇U (Xt )dt + 2dBt ,
where Bt denotes the standard D-dimensional Brownian
motion. Under certain regularity conditions on U , the solution process (Xt )t≥0 can be shown to be ergodic with
π (Roberts & Stramer, 2002), which allows us to generate samples from π by simulating the continuous-time process (1) in discrete-time. This approach paves the way
for the celebrated Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA)
(Roberts & Stramer, 2002), that is given as follows:
p
X̄n+1 = X̄n − ηn+1 ∇U (X̄n ) + 2ηn+1 ∆Bn+1 , (2)
where n denotes the iterations, (ηn )n is a sequence of
step-sizes, and (∆Bn )n is a sequence of independent and
identically-distributed (i.i.d.) standard Gaussian random
variables. Convergence properties of ULA have been studied in (Lamberton & Pages, 2003).
In a statistical physics context, Xt often represents the position of a particle (at time t) that is under the influence of a
random force. In this case, the Langevin equation (1) is motivated by the hypothesis that this random force is the sum
of many i.i.d. random ‘pulses’, whose variance is assumed
to be finite (Yanovsky et al., 2000). Then, by the central
limit theorem (CLT), the sum of these pulses converges to
a Gaussian random variable, which justify the choice of the
Brownian motion in the Langevin equation (1).
A natural question arises if we relax the finite variance assumption and allow the random pulses to have infinite variance. In such circumstances, the ‘usual’ CLT would not
hold; however, one can still show that the sum of these
pulses converges to a broader class of heavy-tailed distributions called α-stable (or Lévy-stable) distributions (Lévy,

