On Relaxing Determinism in Arithmetic Circuits

Arthur Choi 1 Adnan Darwiche 1

Abstract
The past decade has seen a significant interest in learning tractable probabilistic representations. Arithmetic circuits (ACs) were among
the first proposed tractable representations, with
some subsequent representations being instances
of ACs with weaker or stronger properties. In
this paper, we provide a formal basis under which
variants on ACs can be compared, and where the
precise roles and semantics of their various properties can be made more transparent. This allows
us to place some recent developments on ACs in
a clearer perspective and to also derive new results for ACs. This includes an exponential separation between ACs with and without determinism; completeness and incompleteness results;
and tractability results (or lack thereof) when
computing most probable explanations (MPEs).

1. Introduction
Arithmetic circuits (ACs) were introduced into the AI literature more than fifteen years ago as a tractable representation of probability distributions. The original work
on these circuits proposed the compilation of such circuits
from Bayesian networks, while identifying and assuming
three circuit properties, called determinism, decomposability and smoothness (Darwiche, 2001a;b; 2003). Since then,
the literature on using arithmetic circuits for probabilistic
reasoning has seen two key developments. The first is the
proposal made by (Lowd & Domingos, 2008) to learn these
circuits directly from data—instead of just compiling them
from models—therefore creating two distinct construction
modes for these circuits. The second development, reported by (Poon & Domingos, 2011), amounted to proposing a class of arithmetic circuits that does not satisfy determinism, under the name of sum-product networks (SPNs).
1

University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to: Arthur Choi <aychoi@cs.ucla.edu>, Adnan
Darwiche <darwiche@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

An examination of the literature surrounding arithmetic circuits and their variants suggests that the implications of
relaxing determinism are not very well understood, even
leading to conflicting claims in some cases. The treatment
of smoothness has also not been very consistent as far as its
necessity for certain operations on arithmetic circuits, and
the complexity of enforcing it. Our goal in this paper is to
address some of these issues by providing a systematic and
formal treatment of arithmetic circuits, while focusing on
the precise roles and semantics of their various properties
and the implications of relaxing determinism.
We make several contributions in this paper. We start by
reconstructing the original definition of arithmetic circuits
given in (Darwiche, 2002; 2003), while assuming that these
circuits represent arbitrary factors, instead of just distributions induced by Bayesian networks (a particular class of
factors). We then provide definitions for decomposability,
smoothness and determinism in the context of this reconstruction, while isolating precisely the role that each one
of these properties play. Some of what we report on this
has already been observed in the literature, but we provide
alternate or more formal proofs for the sake of a systematic and inclusive treatment. We also derive new results.
The first of these is a separation theorem showing that relaxing determinism can lead to exponentially smaller arithmetic circuits, while preserving the ability of these circuits
to compute marginals in linear time. This begs the question of whether anything is lost from relaxing determinism.
On this front, we highlight a finding that has already been
reported in the literature and introduce new ones. In particular, we provide an expanded proof for the observation
that relaxing determinism deprives arithmetic circuits from
the ability to compute MPE in linear time. We also add
a new result showing that enforcing decomposability has
the power of solving MPE, even though the MPE query
is not tractable for decomposable circuits. Moreover, we
show that relaxing determinism leads to a type of incompleteness that we call parametric incompleteness, with important implications on the compilability of circuits from
models. Our final contribution is a formal correctness proof
of the linear-time MPE algorithm, originally proposed by
(Chan & Darwiche, 2006), but with respect to the reconstructed definition of arithmetic circuits satisfying decomposability, determinism and smoothness.

