Counterfactual Data-Fusion for Online Reinforcement Learners
Andrew Forney 1 Judea Pearl 1 Elias Bareinboim 2

Abstract
The Multi-Armed Bandit problem with Unobserved Confounders (MABUC) considers
decision-making settings where unmeasured
variables can influence both the agent’s decisions and received rewards (Bareinboim et al.,
2015). Recent findings showed that unobserved
confounders (UCs) pose a unique challenge to algorithms based on standard randomization (i.e.,
experimental data); if UCs are naively averaged
out, these algorithms behave sub-optimally, possibly incurring infinite regret. In this paper, we
show how counterfactual-based decision-making
circumvents these problems and leads to a coherent fusion of observational and experimental
data. We then demonstrate this new strategy in
an enhanced Thompson Sampling bandit player,
and support our findings’ efficacy with extensive
simulations.

1. Introduction
Active learning agents are becoming increasingly integrated into complex environments, where a number of heterogeneous sources of information are available for use
(4; 6; 10). These agents have the ability to both intervene in
their environments (choosing actions, receiving feedback
on the quality of their choices, and then modifying future
actions accordingly), as well as observe other agents interacting. With the opportunity to learn from data collected
from different sources other than personal experimentation
come new challenges of “transfer” in learning. In particular, agents should know that actions that are desirable for
populations may not be desirable for all individuals, and as
such, should be wary of how observed behavior generalizes
(i.e., transfers) to them and how these observations should
be combined with the agent’s own experience.

In this work, we study the conditions under which data collected under heterogeneous conditions (to be defined) can
be combined by an online agent to improve performance in
a reinforcement learning task. This challenge is not without precedent, as recent works have investigated dataset
transportability (when source and target differ structurally),
though in offline domains (3; 4). Others have studied scenarios in which agents learn from expert teachers in the
inverse reinforcement learning problems (1; 8). Recent
work from causal analysis has addressed data-fusion for
interventional quantities in reinforcement learning tasks
(18). However, this work addresses data-fusion in domains
where counterfactual quantities are sought, as for personalized decision-making (2; 17).
Environments for which an agent possesses fully labelled
data and a fully specified model (in which all factors relating contexts, actions, and their associated rewards are
known) are trivial from a learning transfer perspective; in
such scenarios, collected data is homogeneous because all
factors that may introduce bias between samples can be
controlled. Conversely, in this paper, we focus on the challenges that arise due to unobserved confounders (UCs),
namely, unmeasured and unlabelled variables that influence
an agent’s natural action choice as well as the outcome of
that action. Such factors are particularly subtle when left
uncontrolled due to their invisible nature and emergence of
what is known as confounding bias (12).
Our agent’s goal is to quickly learn about its environment by consolidating data collected from observing other
agents and data collected through its own experience, so
UCs pose a fundamental challenge: the results from seeing
another agent performing an action are not always qualitatively the same as doing the action itself. As such, throughout this paper, we will differentiate three classes of data
that may be employed by an autonomous agent to inform
its decision-making:

University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to: Andrew Forney <forns@cs.ucla.edu>.

1. Observational data is gathered through passive examination of the actions and rewards of agents other
than the actor, but for whom the actor is assumed to
be exchangeable.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2. Experimental data is gathered through randomization (e.g., standard MAB exploration), or from a fixed,
non-reactive policy.

1

2

