Lost Relatives of the Gumbel Trick
Matej Balog 1 2 Nilesh Tripuraneni 3 Zoubin Ghahramani 1 4 Adrian Weller 1 5

Abstract
The Gumbel trick is a method to sample from a
discrete probability distribution, or to estimate its
normalizing partition function. The method relies on repeatedly applying a random perturbation to the distribution in a particular way, each
time solving for the most likely configuration.
We derive an entire family of related methods,
of which the Gumbel trick is one member, and
show that the new methods have superior properties in several settings with minimal additional
computational cost. In particular, for the Gumbel trick to yield computational benefits for discrete graphical models, Gumbel perturbations on
all configurations are typically replaced with socalled low-rank perturbations. We show how a
subfamily of our new methods adapts to this setting, proving new upper and lower bounds on the
log partition function and deriving a family of sequential samplers for the Gibbs distribution. Finally, we balance the discussion by showing how
the simpler analytical form of the Gumbel trick
enables additional theoretical results.

1. Introduction
In this work we are concerned with the fundamental problem of sampling from a discrete probability distribution and
evaluating its normalizing constant. A probability distribution p on a discrete sample space X is provided in terms
of its potential function : X ! [ 1, 1), corresponding to log-unnormalized probabilities via p(x) = e (x) /Z,
where the normalizing constant Z is the partition function.
In this context, p is the Gibbs distribution on X associated
with the potential function . The challenges of sampling
from such a discrete probability distribution and estimating
the partition function are fundamental problems with ubiq1
University of Cambridge, UK 2 MPI-IS, Tübingen, Germany
UC Berkeley, USA 4 Uber AI Labs, USA 5 Alan Turing Institute,
UK. Correspondence to: Matej Balog <first.last@gmail.com>.
Code: https://github.com/matejbalog/gumbel-relatives.
3

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

uitous applications in machine learning, classical statistics
and statistical physics (see, e.g., Lauritzen, 1996).
Perturb-and-MAP methods (Papandreou & Yuille, 2010)
constitute a class of randomized algorithms for estimating
partition functions and sampling from Gibbs distributions,
which operate by randomly perturbing the corresponding
potential functions and employing maximum a posteriori
(MAP) solvers on the perturbed models to find a maximum
probability configuration. This MAP problem is NP-hard
in general; however, substantial research effort has led to
the development of solvers which can efficiently compute
or estimate the MAP solution on many problems that occur
in practice (e.g., Boykov et al., 2001; Kolmogorov, 2006;
Darbon, 2009). Evaluating the partition function is a harder
problem, containing for instance #P-hard counting problems. The general aim of perturb-and-MAP methods is
to reduce the problem of partition function evaluation, or
the problem of sampling from the Gibbs distribution, to repeated instances of the MAP problem (where each instance
is on a different random perturbation of the original model).
The Gumbel trick (Papandreou & Yuille, 2011) relies on
adding Gumbel-distributed noise to each configuration’s
potential (x). We derive a wider family of perturb-andMAP methods that can be seen as perturbing the model in
different ways – in particular using the Weibull and Fréchet
distributions alongside the Gumbel. We show that the new
methods can be implemented with essentially no additional
computational cost by simply averaging existing Gumbel
MAP perturbations in different spaces, and that they can
lead to more accurate estimators of the partition function.
Evaluating or perturbing each configuration’s potential
with i.i.d. Gumbel noise can be computationally expensive.
One way to mitigate this is to cleverly prune computation
in regions where the maximum perturbed potential is unlikely to be found (Maddison et al., 2014; Chen & Ghahramani, 2016). Another approach exploits the product structure of the sample space in discrete graphical models, replacing i.i.d. Gumbel noise with a “low-rank” approximation. Hazan & Jaakkola (2012); Hazan et al. (2013) showed
that from such an approximation, upper and lower bounds
on the partition function and a sequential sampler for the
Gibbs distribution can still be recovered. We show that a
subfamily of our new methods, consisting of Fréchet, Exponential and Weibull tricks, can also be used with low-

