Geometry of Neural Network Loss Surfaces via Random Matrix Theory

Jeffrey Pennington 1 Yasaman Bahri 1

Abstract
Understanding the geometry of neural network
loss surfaces is important for the development of
improved optimization algorithms and for building a theoretical understanding of why deep
learning works. In this paper, we study the geometry in terms of the distribution of eigenvalues
of the Hessian matrix at critical points of varying
energy. We introduce an analytical framework
and a set of tools from random matrix theory that
allow us to compute an approximation of this distribution under a set of simplifying assumptions.
The shape of the spectrum depends strongly on
the energy and another key parameter, φ, which
measures the ratio of parameters to data points.
Our analysis predicts and numerical simulations
support that for critical points of small index, the
number of negative eigenvalues scales like the 3/2
power of the energy. We leave as an open problem an explanation for our observation that, in
the context of a certain memorization task, the
energy of minimizers is well-approximated by
the function 21 (1 − φ)2 .

2014; Choromanska et al., 2015; Neyshabur et al., 2015),
architecture design, and generalization (Keskar et al.).
1.1. Related work
There is no shortage of prior work focused on the loss
surfaces of neural networks. Choromanska et al. (2015)
and Dauphin et al. (2014) highlighted the prevalence of
saddle points as dominant critical points that plague optimization, as well as the existence of many local minima
at low loss values. Dauphin et al. (2014) studied the distribution of critical points as a function of the loss value
empirically and found a trend which is qualitatively similar to predictions for random Gaussian landscapes (Bray
& Dean, 2007). Choromanska et al. (2015) argued that the
loss function is well-approximated by a spin-glass model
studied in statistical physics, thereby predicting the existence of local minima at low loss values and saddle points
at high loss values as the network increases in size. Goodfellow et al. observed that loss surfaces arising in practice tend to be smooth and seemingly convex along lowdimensional slices. Subsequent works (Kawaguchi, 2016;
Safran & Shamir, 2016; Freeman & Bruna, 2016) have furthered these and related ideas empirically or analytically,
but it remains safe to say that we have a long way to go
before a full understanding is achieved.

1. Introduction
1.2. Our contributions
Neural networks have witnessed a resurgence in recent
years, with a smorgasbord of architectures and configurations designed to accomplish ever more impressive tasks.
Yet for all the successes won with these methods, we have
managed only a rudimentary understanding of why and in
what contexts they work well. One difficulty in extending our understanding stems from the fact that the neural
network objectives are generically non-convex functions
in high-dimensional parameter spaces, and understanding
their loss surfaces is a challenging task. Nevertheless, an
improved understanding of the loss surface could have a
large impact on optimization (Saxe et al.; Dauphin et al.,
1
Google Brain. Correspondence to: Jeffrey Pennington <jpennin@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

One shortcoming of prior theoretical results is that they are
often derived in contexts far removed from practical neural network settings – for example, some work relies on
results for generic random landscapes unrelated to neural
networks, and other work draws on rather tenuous connections to spin-glass models. While there is a lot to be gained
from this type of analysis, it leaves open the possibility that
characteristics of loss surfaces specific to neural networks
may be lost in the more general setting. In this paper, we
focus narrowly on the setting of neural network loss surfaces and propose an analytical framework for studying the
spectral density of the Hessian matrix in this context.
Our bottom-up construction assembles an approximation
of the Hessian in terms of blocks derived from the weights,
the data, and the error signals, all of which we assume to

