Practical Gauss-Newton Optimisation for Deep Learning

Aleksandar Botev 1 Hippolyt Ritter 1 David Barber 1 2

Abstract
We present an efficient block-diagonal approximation to the Gauss-Newton matrix for feedforward neural networks. Our resulting algorithm
is competitive against state-of-the-art first-order
optimisation methods, with sometimes significant improvement in optimisation performance.
Unlike first-order methods, for which hyperparameter tuning of the optimisation parameters is
often a laborious process, our approach can provide good performance even when used with default settings. A side result of our work is that for
piecewise linear transfer functions, the network
objective function can have no differentiable local maxima, which may partially explain why
such transfer functions facilitate effective optimisation.

1. Introduction
First-order optimisation methods are the current workhorse
for training neural networks. They are easy to implement
with modern automatic differentiation frameworks, scale
to large models and datasets and can handle noisy gradients such as encountered in the typical mini-batch setting
(Polyak, 1964; Nesterov, 1983; Kingma & Ba, 2014; Duchi
et al., 2011; Zeiler, 2012). However, a suitable initial learning rate and decay schedule need to be selected in order for
them to converge both rapidly and towards a good local
minimum. In practice, this usually means many separate
runs of training with different settings of those hyperparameters, requiring access to either ample compute resources
or plenty of time. Furthermore, pure stochastic gradient
descent often struggles to escape ‘valleys’ in the error surface with largely varying magnitudes of curvature, as the
first derivative does not capture this information (Dauphin
et al., 2014; Martens & Sutskever, 2011). Modern alternatives, such as ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014), combine
1

University College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Alan
Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Aleksandar Botev <a.botev@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the gradients at the current setting of the parameters with
various heuristic estimates of the curvature from previous
gradients.
Second-order methods, on the other hand, perform updates
of the form δ = H −1 g, where H is the Hessian or some approximation thereof and g is the gradient of the error function. Using curvature information enables such methods to
make more progress per step than techniques relying solely
on the gradient. Unfortunately, for modern neural networks, explicit calculation and storage of the Hessian matrix is infeasible. Nevertheless, it is possible to efficiently
calculate Hessian-vector products Hg by use of extended
Automatic Differentiation (Schraudolph, 2002; Pearlmutter, 1994); the linear system g = Hv can then be solved
for v, e.g. by using conjugate gradients (Martens, 2010;
Martens & Sutskever, 2011). Whilst this can be effective,
the number of iterations required makes this process uncompetitive against simpler first-order methods (Sutskever
et al., 2013).
In this work, we make the following contributions:
– We develop a recursive block-diagonal approximation of the Hessian, where each block corresponds to the
weights in a single feedforward layer. These blocks are
Kronecker factored and can be efficiently computed and inverted in a single backward pass.
– As a corollary of our recursive calculation of the Hessian, we note that for networks with piecewise linear transfer functions the error surface has no differentiable strict
local maxima.
– We discuss the relation of our method to KFAC
(Martens & Grosse, 2015), a block-diagonal approximation to the Fisher matrix. KFAC is less generally applicable since it requires the network to define a probabilistic
model on its output. Furthermore, for non-exponential family models, the Gauss-Newton and Fisher approaches are in
general different.
– On three standard benchmarks we demonstrate that
(without tuning) second-order methods perform competitively, even against well-tuned state-of-the-art first-order
methods.

