Scalable Multi-Class Gaussian Process Classification
using Expectation Propagation

Carlos Villacampa-Calvo * 1 Daniel Hernández-Lobato * 1

Abstract
This paper describes an expectation propagation
(EP) method for multi-class classification with
Gaussian processes that scales well to very large
datasets. In such a method the estimate of the
log-marginal-likelihood involves a sum across
the data instances. This enables efficient training using stochastic gradients and mini-batches.
When this type of training is used, the computational cost does not depend on the number of
data instances N . Furthermore, extra assumptions in the approximate inference process make
the memory cost independent of N . The consequence is that the proposed EP method can be
used on datasets with millions of instances. We
compare empirically this method with alternative
approaches that approximate the required computations using variational inference. The results
show that it performs similar or even better than
these techniques, which sometimes give significantly worse predictive distributions in terms of
the test log-likelihood. Besides this, the training
process of the proposed approach also seems to
converge in a smaller number of iterations.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are non-parametric models that
can be used to address multi-class classification problems
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). These models become
more expressive as the number of data instances N grows.
They are also very useful to introduce prior knowledge in
the learning problem, as many properties of the model are
specified by a covariance function. Moreover, GPs provide an estimate of the uncertainty in the predictions made
which may be critical in some applications. Neverthe*

Equal contribution 1 Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain. Correspondence to: Carlos Villacampa-Calvo
<carlos.villacampa@uam.es>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

less, in spite of these advantages, GPs scale poorly to large
datasets because their training cost is O(N 3 ), where N is
the number of instances. An additional challenge is that
exact inference in these models is generally intractable and
one has to resort to approximate methods in practice.
Traditionally, GP classification has received more attention
in the binary case than in the multi-class setting (Kuss &
Rasmussen, 2005; Nickisch & Rasmussen, 2008). The reason is that approximate inference is more challenging in
the multi-class case where there is one latent function per
class. To this one has to add more complicated likelihood
factors, which often have the form of softmax functions or
intractable Gaussian integrals. In spite of these difficulties,
there have been several works addressing multi-class GP
classification (Williams & Barber, 1998; Kim & Ghahramani, 2006; Girolami & Rogers, 2006; Chai, 2012; Riihimäki et al., 2013). Nevertheless, most of the proposed
methods do not scale well with the size of the training set.
In the literature there have been some efforts to scale up
GPs. These techniques often introduce a set of M  N
inducing points whose location is learnt alongside with the
other model hyper-parameters. The use of inducing points
in the model can be understood as an approximate GP prior
with a low-rank covariance structure (Quiñonero-Candela
& Rasmussen, 2005). When inducing points are considered, the training cost can be reduced to O(N M 2 ). This
allows to address datasets with several thousands of instances, but not millions. The reason is the difficulty of estimating the model hyper-parameters, which is often done
by maximizing an estimate of the log-marginal-likelihood.
Because such an estimate does not involve a sum across the
data instances, one cannot rely on efficient methods for optimization based on stochastic gradients and mini-batches.
A notable exception is the work of (Hensman et al., 2015a)
which uses variational inference to approximate the calculations. Such a method allows for stochastic optimization and can address datasets with millions of instances. In
this work we propose an alternative based on expectation
propagation (EP) (Minka, 2001) and recent advances on
binary GP classification (Hernández-Lobato & HernándezLobato, 2016). The proposed approach also allows for efficient training using mini-batches. This leads to a training

