Dictionary Learning Based on Sparse Distribution Tomography

Pedram Pad * 1 Farnood Salehi * 2 Elisa Celis 2 Patrick Thiran 2 Michael Unser 1

Abstract

the entries of x are statistically independent, which results
in a class of methods refered to as independent component
analysis (ICA) (Hyvärinen et al., 2004). A more recent
trend is to assume that the vector x is sparse, so that the
recovery can be recast as a deterministic dictionary learning
problem, the prototypical example being sparse component
analysis (SCA) (Gribonval & Lesage, 2006; Aharon et al.,
2006; Spielman et al., 2012). Extensive research has been
conducted on these problems in the past three decades.

We propose a new statistical dictionary learning
algorithm for sparse signals that is based on an
α-stable innovation model. The parameters of
the underlying model—that is, the atoms of the
dictionary, the sparsity index α and the dispersion of the transform-domain coefficients—are
recovered using a new type of probability distribution tomography. Specifically, we drive our
estimator with a series of random projections of
the data, which results in an efficient algorithm.
Moreover, since the projections are achieved using linear combinations, we can invoke the generalized central limit theorem to justify the use
of our method for sparse signals that are not necessarily α-stable. We evaluate our algorithm by
performing two types of experiments: image inpainting and image denoising. In both cases, we
find that our approach is competitive with stateof-the-art dictionary learning techniques. Beyond
the algorithm itself, two aspects of this study are
interesting in their own right. The first is our statistical formulation of the problem, which unifies
the topics of dictionary learning and independent
component analysis. The second is a generalization of a classical theorem about isometries of
`p -norms that constitutes the foundation of our
approach.

Prior work: In the literature, ICA precedes SCA and can
be traced back to (Herault & Jutten, 1986). In fact, ICA constitutes the non-Gaussian generalization of the much older
principal component analysis (PCA), which is widely used
in classical signal processing. ICA is usually formalized
as an optimization problem involving a cost function that
measures the independence of the estimated xi (i.e., the
entries of the vector x). A common measure of independence, which is inspired by information theory, is the mutual
information of the entries of x. However, due to its computational complexity, other measures such as the kurtosis,
which measures the non-Gaussianity of the components, are
often used (Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000; Naik & Kumar, 2011)
(except in special cases such as the analysis of stable AR(1)
processes by (Pad & Unser, 2015)). The main drawback of
ICA is that the system (1) needs to be determined; i.e., A
should be square—otherwise the complexity is so high that
the methods can only be implemented for small problems
(Lathauwer et al., 2007; Lathauwer & Castaing, 2008).

1. Introduction
The problem of finding the mixing matrix A from a set of
observation vectors y in the model
y = Ax

(1)

is only solvable if one can benefit from strong hypotheses
on the signal vector x. For instance, one may assume that
*
Equal contribution 1 Biomedical Imaging Group, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Computer Communications and Applications
Laboratory 3, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Pedram Pad <pedram.pad@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

SCA, on the other hand, is usually achieved by putting
constraints on the sparsity of the representation or by optimizing a sparsity-promoting cost function. Thanks to the
emergence of very efficient algorithms, SCA has found
wide use in different applications (see (Mairal et al., 2010;
Marvasti et al., 2012)). The underlying framework for
SCA is deterministic—this is the primary difference with
ICA, which aims to decouple signals that are realizations of
stochastic processes.
α-stable distributions: In this paper, we aim to achieve the
best of both worlds: the use of a statistical formulation—in
the spirit of ICA—with a restriction to a parametric class
of stochastic models that is well adapted to the notion of
sparsity. Specifically, we assume that the entries of the
vector x are random variables that are i.i.d. symmetric-α-

