Coordinated Multi-Agent Imitation Learning

Hoang M. Le 1 Yisong Yue 1 Peter Carr 2 Patrick Lucey 3

Abstract
We study the problem of imitation learning from
demonstrations of multiple coordinating agents.
One key challenge in this setting is that learning a good model of coordination can be difficult,
since coordination is often implicit in the demonstrations and must be inferred as a latent variable. We propose a joint approach that simultaneously learns a latent coordination model along
with the individual policies. In particular, our
method integrates unsupervised structure learning with conventional imitation learning. We illustrate the power of our approach on a difficult
problem of learning multiple policies for finegrained behavior modeling in team sports, where
different players occupy different roles in the coordinated team strategy. We show that having a
coordination model to infer the roles of players
yields substantially improved imitation loss compared to conventional baselines.

1. Introduction
The areas of multi-agent planning and control have witnessed a recent wave of strong interest due to the practical
desire to deal with complex real-world problems, such as
smart-grid control, autonomous vehicles planning, managing teams of robots for emergency response, among others.
From the learning perspective, (cooperative) multi-agent
learning is not a new area of research (Stone & Veloso,
2000; Panait & Luke, 2005). However, compared to the
progress in conventional supervised learning and singleagent reinforcement learning, the successes of multi-agent
learning have remained relatively modest. Most notably,
multi-agent learning suffers from extremely high dimensionality of both the state and actions spaces, as well as
relative lack of data sources and experimental testbeds.

Figure 1. Our motivating example of learning coordinating behavior policies for team sports from tracking data. Red is the
attacking team, blue is the defending team, and yellow is the ball.

The growing availability of data sources for coordinated multi-agent behavior, such as sports tracking data
(Bialkowski et al., 2014), now enables the possibility of
learning multi-agent policies from demonstrations, also
known as multi-agent imitation learning. One particularly
interesting aspect of domains such as team sports is that the
agents must coordinate. For example, in the professional
soccer setting depicted in Figure 1, different players must
coordinate to assume different roles (e.g., defend left field).
However, the roles and role assignment mechanism are unobserved from the demonstrations. Furthermore, the role
for a player may change during the same play sequence. In
the control community, this issue is known as “index-free”
multi-agent control (Kingston & Egerstedt, 2010).

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 2 Disney
Research, Pittsburgh, PA 3 STATS LLC, Chicago, IL. Correspondence to: Hoang M. Le <hmle@caltech.edu>.

Motivated by these challenges, we study the problem of
imitation learning for multiple coordinating agents from
demonstrations. Many realistic multi-agent settings require
coordination among collaborative agents to achieve some
common goal (Guestrin et al., 2002; Kok et al., 2003). Beyond team sports, other examples include learning policies
for game AI, controlling teams of multiple robots, or modeling collective animal behavior. As discussed above, we
are interested in settings where agents have access to the
outcome of actions from other agents, but the coordination
mechanism is neither clearly defined nor observed, which
makes the full state only partially observable.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

We propose a semi-supervised learning framework that integrates and builds upon conventional imitation learning
and unsupervised, or latent, structure learning. The latent

1

