Robust Submodular Maximization:
A Non-Uniform Partitioning Approach
Ilija Bogunovic 1 Slobodan Mitrović 2 Jonathan Scarlett 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We study the problem of maximizing a monotone
submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint k, with the added twist that a number of
items ⌧ from the returned set may be removed.
We focus on the worst-case setting considered in
(Orlin et al., 2016), in which a constant-factor
papproximation guarantee was given for ⌧ = o( k).
In this paper, we solve a key open problem
raised therein, presenting a new Partitioned Robust (PRO) submodular maximization algorithm
that achieves the same guarantee for more general ⌧ = o(k). Our algorithm constructs partitions consisting of buckets with exponentially
increasing sizes, and applies standard submodular optimization subroutines on the buckets in order to construct the robust solution. We numerically demonstrate the performance of PRO in
data summarization and influence maximization,
demonstrating gains over both the greedy algorithm and the algorithm of (Orlin et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Discrete optimization problems arise frequently in machine
learning, and are often NP-hard even to approximate. In the
case of a set function exhibiting submodularity, one can efficiently perform maximization subject to cardinality constraints with a 1 1e -factor approximation guarantee. Applications include influence maximization (Kempe et al.,
2003), document summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011),
sensor placement (Krause & Guestrin, 2007), and active
learning (Krause & Golovin, 2012), just to name a few.
1

LIONS, EPFL, Switzerland 2 LTHC, EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Ilija Bogunovic <ilija.bogunovic@epfl.ch>,
Slobodan Mitrović <slobodan.mitrovic@epfl.ch>, Jonathan
Scarlett
<jonathan.scarlett@epfl.ch>,
Volkan
Cevher
<volkan.cevher@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In many applications of interest, one requires robustness in
the solution set returned by the algorithm, in the sense that
the objective value degrades as little as possible when some
elements of the set are removed. For instance, (i) in influence maximization problems, a subset of the chosen users
may decide not to spread the word about a product; (ii)
in summarization problems, a user may choose to remove
some items from the summary due to their personal preferences; (iii) in the problem of sensor placement for outbreak
detection, some of the sensors might fail.
In situations where one does not have a reasonable prior
distribution on the elements removed, or where one requires robustness guarantees with a high level of certainty,
protecting against worst-case removals becomes important.
This setting results in the robust submodular function maximization problem, in which we seek to return a set of cardinality k that is robust with respect to the worst-case removal of ⌧ elements.
The robust problem formulation was first introduced in
(Krause et al., 2008), and was further studied in (Orlin
et al., 2016). In fact, (Krause et al., 2008) considers a more
general formulation where a constant-factor approximation
guarantee is impossible in general, but shows that one can
match the optimal (robust) objective value for a given set
size at the cost of returning a set whose size is larger by a
logarithmic factor. In contrast, (Orlin et al., 2016) designs
an algorithm that obtains the first constant-factor approxip
mation guarantee to the above problem when ⌧ = o( k).
A key difference between the two frameworks is that the
algorithm complexity is exponential in ⌧ in (Krause et al.,
2008), whereas the algorithm of (Orlin et al., 2016) runs in
polynomial time.
Contributions. In this paper, we solve a key open problem
posed in (Orlin et al., 2016), namely, whether a constantfactor approximation guarantee p
is possible for general ⌧ =
o(k), as opposed to only ⌧ = o( k). We answer this question in the affirmative, providing a new Partitioned Robust
(PRO) submodular maximization algorithm that attains a
constant-factor approximation guarantee; see Table 1 for
comparison of different algorithms for robust monotone
submodular optimization with a cardinality constraint.

