Gradient Boosted Decision Trees for High Dimensional Sparse Output

Si Si 1 Huan Zhang 2 S. Sathiya Keerthi 3 Dhruv Mahajan 4 Inderjit S. Dhillon 5 Cho-Jui Hsieh 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the gradient boosted
decision trees (GBDT) when the output space
is high dimensional and sparse. For example,
in multilabel classification, the output space is
a L-dimensional 0/1 vector, where L is number of labels that can grow to millions and beyond in many modern applications. We show
that vanilla GBDT can easily run out of memory or encounter near-forever running time in
this regime, and propose a new GBDT variant,
GBDT-S PARSE, to resolve this problem by employing L0 regularization. We then discuss in detail how to utilize this sparsity to conduct GBDT
training, including splitting the nodes, computing the sparse residual, and predicting in sublinear time. Finally, we apply our algorithm to
extreme multilabel classification problems, and
show that the proposed GBDT-S PARSE achieves
an order of magnitude improvements in model
size and prediction time over existing methods,
while yielding similar performance.

1. Introduction
Gradient boosted decision tree (GBDT) is a powerful
machine-learning technique that has a wide range of commercial and academic applications and produces state-ofthe-art results for many challenging data mining problems.
The algorithm builds one decision tree at a time to fit the
residual of the trees that precede it. GBDT has been widely
used recently mainly due to its high accuracy, fast training
and prediction time, and small memory footprint.
In this paper, we study the GBDT algorithm for problems
with high-dimension and sparse output space. Extreme
1

Google Research, Mountain View, USA 2 University of
California at Davis, Davis, USA 3 Microsoft, Mountain View,
USA 4 Facebook, Menlo Park, USA 5 University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, USA. Correspondence to: Cho-Jui Hsieh
<chohsieh@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

multi-label learning and multi-class classification belong
to this problem, where the goal is to automatically assign
one or a subset of relevant labels from a very large label
set. Dealing with problems with high dimensional output
leads to multiple computational challenges. In this paper
we mainly focus on two important issues that limit the application of the existing methods to real world applications:
prediction time and model size. As the output space size
increases, these dimensions become the bottleneck, both
during training and testing. As an example, if a one-versusall model is used on a classification problem with 1 million
labels, then we need to evaluate 1 million models for any
testing sample. If these models cannot be kept in memory,
reading them from disks will further increase the prediction time substantially. The linear dependency on number
of labels makes most of the existing approaches very slow
during testing, especially when we do not want to access
the cloud for every test point.
The computation of GBDT is also prohibitively expensive
for applications with high dimensional sparse output. At
each iteration, GBDT builds a regression tree that fits the
residuals from the previous trees. The density of the residual grows dramatically even after just one single iteration,
and it will soon become an L by N dense matrix where N
is number of samples and L is the number of labels (size
of output space). As a consequence, at least O(N L) time
and memory are required to build GBDT trees. This makes
GBDT infeasible for large scale applications where N and
L can be both large, e.g., several millions.
Our goal is to develop a new approach for problems with
high-dimensional and sparse output spaces that achieves
faster prediction time and smaller model size than existing algorithms, but has similar prediction accuracy and
training time. To this end, we develop the first Gradient
Boosted Decision Tree (GBDT) algorithm for high dimensional and sparse output, with applications in extreme multilabel learning problems. We make the crucial observation
that each data point has very few labels; based on that we
solve a L0 regularized optimization problem to enforce the
prediction of each leaf node in each tree to have only a
small number (k) of nonzero elements or labels. Hence, after T trees have been added during GBDT iterations, there
will be at most T k nonzero gradients for any data point.
Another important challenge discussed in this paper is pre-

