Ordinal Graphical Models: A Tale of Two Approaches
Arun Sai Suggala 1 Eunho Yang 2 3 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
Undirected graphical models or Markov random
fields (MRFs) are widely used for modeling multivariate probability distributions. Much of the
work on MRFs has focused on continuous variables, and nominal variables (that is, unordered
categorical variables). However, data from many
real world applications involve ordered categorical variables also known as ordinal variables,
e.g., movie ratings on Netflix which can be ordered from 1 to 5 stars. With respect to univariate ordinal distributions, as we detail in the
paper, there are two main categories of distributions; while there have been efforts to extend
these to multivariate ordinal distributions, the resulting distributions are typically very complex,
with either a large number of parameters, or with
non-convex likelihoods. While there have been
some work on tractable approximations, these do
not come with strong statistical guarantees, and
moreover are relatively computationally expensive. In this paper, we theoretically investigate
two classes of graphical models for ordinal data,
corresponding to the two main categories of univariate ordinal distributions. In contrast to previous work, our theoretical developments allow
us to provide correspondingly two classes of estimators that are not only computationally efficient
but also have strong statistical guarantees.

1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models, also know as Markov random fields (MRF), are very popular for modeling multivariate random variables. They use undirected graphs to
model the conditional independence structure among the
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
USA 2 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
3
AITrics, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Arun
Sai Suggala <asuggala@andrew.cmu.edu>, Eunho Yang <eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

variables. This conditional independence structure provides us with useful insights about how different variables
interact with each other. As a result MRFs are extensively
used in a variety of fields, including Natural Language Processing (Manning & Schütze, 1999), Biology (Friedman,
2004) and Medicine (Allen & Liu, 2012).
Popular parametric families in the general class of MRFs
are Gaussian graphical models (Speed & Kiiveri, 1986;
Rue & Held, 2005) for continuous (and bell-shaped) data,
Ising and discrete graphical models (Ising, 1925; Jalali
et al., 2011) for nominal data, and mixed cases of these two
instances (Lauritzen & Wermuth, 1989; Yang et al., 2014).
However, variables that occur in many real world applications have ordered categorical scales. For example, in
medical data, diseases are graded from mild to fatal, severity of an injury is rated from mild injury to death, stages of
a disease is rated from I to III. Ordinal variables also occur
very commonly in data collected from surveys. For example, each subject taking a survey could be asked to respond
to a question using categories such as strongly disagree,
disagree, undecided, agree, strongly agree. These examples clearly show that ordinal data is pervasive in many real
world applications.
It will be instructive at this juncture to review univariate
distributions for ordinal data, which fall into two main categories. The first category of distributions consists of parameterizing various odds ratios involving the ordinal variable, and include the cumulative ratio, continuation ratio,
and consecutive ratio logit models (Armstrong & Sloan,
1989; Agresti, 2010). In practice, cumulative ratio and continuation ratio models are know to work better than the consecutive ratio model (McCullagh, 1984), and as a consequence, the consecutive ratio model is relatively less well
considered among these three models. Some generalizations of the above models have been considered in literature (e.g., Partial Proportional Odds model (Peterson &
Harrell Jr., 1990)), which fall in between the simpler class
of models listed earlier and the multinomial logistic regression model in terms of their parametric complexity, but are
nonetheless not as popular as the simpler class of models.
The second category of univariate ordinal distributions are
based on the natural generative assumption that the ordinal variable is a quantization of a real-valued latent variable. Common distributions imposed on the latent variable

