A Distributional Perspective on Reinforcement Learning
Marc G. Bellemare * 1 Will Dabney * 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
In this paper we argue for the fundamental importance of the value distribution: the distribution
of the random return received by a reinforcement
learning agent. This is in contrast to the common approach to reinforcement learning which
models the expectation of this return, or value.
Although there is an established body of literature studying the value distribution, thus far it
has always been used for a specific purpose such
as implementing risk-aware behaviour. We begin
with theoretical results in both the policy evaluation and control settings, exposing a significant distributional instability in the latter. We
then use the distributional perspective to design
a new algorithm which applies Bellman’s equation to the learning of approximate value distributions. We evaluate our algorithm using the
suite of games from the Arcade Learning Environment. We obtain both state-of-the-art results and anecdotal evidence demonstrating the
importance of the value distribution in approximate reinforcement learning. Finally, we combine theoretical and empirical evidence to highlight the ways in which the value distribution impacts learning in the approximate setting.

1. Introduction
One of the major tenets of reinforcement learning states
that, when not otherwise constrained in its behaviour, an
agent should aim to maximize its expected utility Q, or
value (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Bellman’s equation succintly
describes this value in terms of the expected reward and expected outcome of the random transition (x, a) → (X 0 , A0 ):
Q(x, a) = E R(x, a) + γ E Q(X 0 , A0 ).

In this paper, we aim to go beyond the notion of value and
argue in favour of a distributional perspective on reinforce*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Marc G. Bellemare <bellemare@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ment learning. Specifically, the main object of our study is
the random return Z whose expectation is the value Q. This
random return is also described by a recursive equation, but
one of a distributional nature:
D

Z(x, a) = R(x, a) + γZ(X 0 , A0 ).
The distributional Bellman equation states that the distribution of Z is characterized by the interaction of three random
variables: the reward R, the next state-action (X 0 , A0 ), and
its random return Z(X 0 , A0 ). By analogy with the wellknown case, we call this quantity the value distribution.
Although the distributional perspective is almost as old
as Bellman’s equation itself (Jaquette, 1973; Sobel, 1982;
White, 1988), in reinforcement learning it has thus far been
subordinated to specific purposes: to model parametric uncertainty (Dearden et al., 1998), to design risk-sensitive algorithms (Morimura et al., 2010b;a), or for theoretical analysis (Azar et al., 2012; Lattimore & Hutter, 2012). By contrast, we believe the value distribution has a central role to
play in reinforcement learning.
Contraction of the policy evaluation Bellman operator.
Basing ourselves on results by Rösler (1992) we show that,
for a fixed policy, the Bellman operator over value distributions is a contraction in a maximal form of the Wasserstein
(also called Kantorovich or Mallows) metric. Our particular choice of metric matters: the same operator is not a
contraction in total variation, Kullback-Leibler divergence,
or Kolmogorov distance.
Instability in the control setting. We will demonstrate an
instability in the distributional version of Bellman’s optimality equation, in contrast to the policy evaluation case.
Specifically, although the optimality operator is a contraction in expected value (matching the usual optimality result), it is not a contraction in any metric over distributions.
These results provide evidence in favour of learning algorithms that model the effects of nonstationary policies.
Better approximations. From an algorithmic standpoint,
there are many benefits to learning an approximate distribution rather than its approximate expectation. The distributional Bellman operator preserves multimodality in value
distributions, which we believe leads to more stable learning. Approximating the full distribution also mitigates the
effects of learning from a nonstationary policy. As a whole,

