Sub-sampled Cubic Regularization for Non-convex Optimization

Jonas Moritz Kohler 1 Aurelien Lucchi 1

Abstract
We consider the minimization of non-convex
functions that typically arise in machine learning. Specifically, we focus our attention on a
variant of trust region methods known as cubic
regularization. This approach is particularly attractive because it escapes strict saddle points
and it provides stronger convergence guarantees
than first- and second-order as well as classical
trust region methods. However, it suffers from
a high computational complexity that makes it
impractical for large-scale learning. Here, we
propose a novel method that uses sub-sampling
to lower this computational cost. By the use of
concentration inequalities we provide a sampling
scheme that gives sufficiently accurate gradient
and Hessian approximations to retain the strong
global and local convergence guarantees of cubically regularized methods. To the best of our
knowledge this is the first work that gives global
convergence guarantees for a sub-sampled variant of cubic regularization on non-convex functions. Furthermore, we provide experimental results supporting our theory.

1. Introduction
In this paper we address the problem of minimizing an objective function of the form
#
"
n
1X
∗
fi (x) ,
(1)
x = arg min f (x) :=
n i=1
x∈Rd
where f (x) ∈ C 2 (Rd , R) is a not necessarily convex, (regularized) loss function over n datapoints. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a popular method to optimize this
type of objective especially in the context of large-scale
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Jonas Moritz Kohler
<jonas.kohler@student.kit.edu>, Aurelien Lucchi <aurelien.lucchi@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

learning when n is very large. Its convergence properties are well understood for convex functions, which arise
in many machine learning applications (Nesterov, 2004).
However, non-convex functions are also ubiquitous and
have recently drawn a lot of interest due to the growing
success of deep neural networks. Yet, non-convex functions are extremely hard to optimize due to the presence of
saddle points and local minima which are not global optima (Dauphin et al., 2014; Choromanska et al., 2015). In
fact, the work of (Hillar & Lim, 2013) showed that even
a degree four polynomial can be NP-hard to optimize. Instead of aiming for a global minimizer, we will thus seek
for a local optimum of the objective. In this regard, a lot of
attention has focused on a specific type of functions known
as strict saddle functions or ridable functions (Ge et al.,
2015; Sun et al., 2015). These functions are characterized
by the fact that the Hessian of every saddle point has a negative eigenvalue. Geometrically this means that there is a
direction of negative curvature where decreasing function
values can be found. Examples of strict saddle functions
include dictionary learning, orthogonal tensor decomposition and generalized phase retrieval (Ge et al., 2015; Sun
et al., 2015).
In this work, we focus our attention on trust region methods to optimize Eq. 1. These methods construct and optimize a local model of the objective function within a region
whose radius depends on how well the model approximates
the real objective. One of the keys for efficiency of these
methods is to pick a model that is comparably easy to optimize, such as a quadratic function (Conn et al., 2000).
Following the trust region paradigm, cubic regularization
methods (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006; Cartis et al., 2011a)
suggest finding the step sk that minimizes a cubic model of
the form
σk
1
3
ksk k ,
mk (sk ) := f (xk ) + s|k ∇f (xk ) + s|k Hk sk +
2
3
(2)
where Hk := ∇2 f (xk ) and σk > 0 1 .
(Nesterov & Polyak, 2006) were able to show that, if the
1

In the work of (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006), σk is assumed to
be the Lipschitz constant of the Hessian in which case the model
defined in Eq. 2 is a global overestimator of the objective, i.e.
f (x) ≤ m(x) ∀x ∈ Rd . We will elaborate on the role of σk
in (Cartis et al., 2011a) later on.

