On the Iteration Complexity of Support Recovery
via Hard Thresholding Pursuit

Jie Shen 1 Ping Li 1

Abstract

2010; Blumensath & Davies, 2009; Bouchot et al., 2016).

Recovering the support of a sparse signal from
its compressed samples has been one of the most
important problems in high dimensional statistics. In this paper, we present a novel analysis for
the hard thresholding pursuit (HTP) algorithm,
showing that it exactly recovers the support of
an arbitrary s-sparse signal within O (sκ log κ)
iterations via a properly chosen proxy function,
where κ is the condition number of the problem.
In stark contrast to the theoretical results in the
literature, the iteration complexity we obtained
holds without assuming the restricted isometry
property, or relaxing the sparsity, or utilizing the
optimality of the underlying signal. We further
extend our result to a more challenging scenario,
where the subproblem involved in HTP cannot be
solved exactly. We prove that even in this setting,
support recovery is possible and the computational complexity of HTP is established. Numerical study substantiates our theoretical results.

Compared to parameter estimation, i.e., bounding the ℓ2
distance between the solution and the desired sparse signal, support recovery is a much more challenging task and
it usually requires more stringent conditions. See Tropp
(2004); Zhao & Yu (2006); Yuan & Lin (2007); Zhang
(2009) for some early results and Nguyen & Tran (2013);
Loh & Wainwright (2014) for more recent developments.
Nevertheless, if the support of a signal can be predicted by
a method, then the solution returned by the method immediately enjoys the oracle property, i.e., with optimal statistical rate (Wainwright, 2009). Thereby, support recovery has
received broad attention in recent years (Osher et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2016; Bouchot et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
In the last two decades, pursuing a sparse representation
for high dimensional data has become one of the most significant problems in machine learning. To seek a sparse
solution, a large body of work is devoted to efficient methods, including the convex formulation, for instance, basis pursuit (Chen et al., 1998) and the Lasso (Tibshirani,
1996), as well as greedy pursuits, e.g., orthogonal matching pursuit (Pati et al., 1993), iterative hard thresholding (Daubechies et al., 2004) and hard thresholding pursuit (HTP) (Foucart, 2011), along with elegant theoretical
understanding on parameter estimation and support recovery in either ideal setting or noisy scenario (Candès & Tao,
2005; Wainwright, 2009; Tropp & Gilbert, 2007; Cai et al.,
1
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA. Jie Shen:
js2007@rutgers.edu, Ping Li: pingli@stat.rutgers.edu.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In this work, we follow the research line with a particular
interest in the hard thresholding pursuit algorithm, which
exhibits encouraging performance among many machine
learning applications. The algorithm was originally presented by Foucart (2011) for recovering the true signal in
compressed sensing (Donoho, 2006). Yuan et al. (2014)
suggested using the HTP algorithm for general sparsityconstrained machine learning problems, and they showed
that the solution obtained from HTP converges with a geometric rate. Very recently, a rigorous theoretical analysis on
when HTP guarantees support recovery was independently
carried out by Bouchot et al. (2016) and Yuan et al. (2016).
In Bouchot et al. (2016), they considered the compressed
sensing problem and illustrated that HTP recovers the support of the true signal in finite iterations if the restricted
isometry property (RIP) condition holds (Candès & Tao,
2005). Yuan et al. (2016) showed that in some situations,
HTP eventually terminates and guarantees support recovery without assuming the RIP condition.
Although these appealing theoretical results characterize
the behavior of HTP in particular regimes, it turns out
that a thorough understanding on when HTP identifies the
support of an arbitrary sparse signal is missing in the literature. To be more precise, the RIP condition used in
Bouchot et al. (2016) amounts to imposing a small condition number for the underlying problem, which may not be
practical for machine learning applications where the condition number usually grows with the sample size. To guar-

