Beyond Filters: Compact Feature Map for Portable Deep Model

Yunhe Wang 1 Chang Xu 2 Chao Xu 1 Dacheng Tao 2

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown extraordinary performance in a number of
applications, but they are usually of heavy design
for the accuracy reason. Beyond compressing the
filters in CNNs, this paper focuses on the redundancy in the feature maps derived from the large
number of filters in a layer. We propose to extract intrinsic representation of the feature maps
and preserve the discriminability of the features.
Circulant matrix is employed to formulate the
feature map transformation, which only requires
O(d log d) computation complexity to embed a
d-dimensional feature map. The filter is then reconfigured to establish the mapping from original input to the new compact feature map, and
the resulting network can preserve intrinsic information of the original network with significantly
fewer parameters, which not only decreases the
online memory for launching CNN but also accelerates the computation speed. Experiments on
benchmark image datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algorithm over state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Tremendous power of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have been well demonstrated in a wide variety
of computer vision applications, from image classification (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) and object detection (Ren et al., 2015) to image segmentation (Long et al.,
2015). Meanwhile, there is a recent consensus that there are
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE) and Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, School of EECS, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, P.R. China. 2 UBTech Sydney
AI Institute, School of IT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia.
Correspondence
to: Yunhe Wang <wangyunhe@pku.edu.cn>, Chang Xu
<c.xu@sydney.edu.au>, Chao Xu <xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn>,
Dacheng Tao <dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

significant redundancy in most of existing convolutional
neural networks. For instance, the ResNet-50 (He et al.,
2015) with some 50 convolutional layers needs over 95MB
memory for storage and over 3.8 × 109 times of floating
number multiplications for calculating each image, and after discarding more than 75% of its weights, the network
still works as usual (Wang et al., 2016).
Admittedly, a heavy neural network is extremely difficult
to train and to use in mobile terminal apps due to the limited memory and computational resource. Lots of methods
have been developed to reduce the amount of parameters in
CNNs (Liu et al., 2015) to obtain a considerable compression ratio. (Han et al., 2015) discarded subtle weights in
a pre-trained network and constructed a sparse neural network with less computational complexity. Subsequently,
(Wang et al., 2016) further studied the redundancy on all
weights and their underlying connections in the DCT frequency domain, which achieves higher compression and
speed-up ratios. (Wen et al., 2016) excavated subtle connections in different aspects and (Figurnov et al., 2016) refined the conventional convolution neurons as locally connection on the input data in order to reduce the computational cost. In addition, there are a variety of techniques for
compressing convolution filters, e.g., pruning (Han et al.,
2016; Hu et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016), quantization and binarization (Arora et al., 2014; Rastegari et al., 2016; Courbariaux & Bengio, 2016), matrix approximation (Cheng
et al., 2015), and matrix decomposition (Denton et al.,
2014).
Although these methods obtained promising performance
to reduce the storage of convolution filters, the memory usage introduced by filters is still huge in the stage of online
inference. This is because except convolution filters, we
have to store feature maps (output data) of different layers
for the subsequent processes, e.g., over 97MB memory is
required for storing feature maps of one single image when
running a ResNet-50 (He et al., 2015) without batch normalization layers, and a batch consisting of 32 instances
consumes some 3.2GB GPU memory. However, existing
compression methods tend to directly compress the filters
in one step and rarely consider the significant demand of
feature maps on the storage and computational cost.
In a CNN, the size of a convolution filter is usually much

