Neural Taylor Approximations:
Convergence and Exploration in Rectifier Networks
David Balduzzi 1 Brian McWilliams 2 Tony Butler-Yeoman 1

Abstract
Modern convolutional networks, incorporating
rectifiers and max-pooling, are neither smooth
nor convex; standard guarantees therefore do not
apply. Nevertheless, methods from convex optimization such as gradient descent and Adam are
widely used as building blocks for deep learning
algorithms. This paper provides the first convergence guarantee applicable to modern convnets,
which furthermore matches a lower bound for
convex nonsmooth functions. The key technical tool is the neural Taylor approximation – a
straightforward application of Taylor expansions
to neural networks – and the associated Taylor
loss. Experiments on a range of optimizers, layers, and tasks provide evidence that the analysis
accurately captures the dynamics of neural optimization. The second half of the paper applies
the Taylor approximation to isolate the main difficulty in training rectifier nets – that gradients
are shattered – and investigates the hypothesis
that, by exploring the space of activation configurations more thoroughly, adaptive optimizers
such as RMSProp and Adam are able to converge
to better solutions.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved impressive performance on a
range of tasks (LeCun et al., 2015). The workhorse underlying deep learning is gradient descent or backprop. Gradient descent has convergence guarantees in settings that
are smooth, convex or both. However, modern convnets
are neither smooth nor convex. Every winner of the ImageNet classification challenge since 2012 has used rectifiers which are not smooth (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Zeiler
1

Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand 2 Disney Research, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: David Balduzzi
<dbalduzzi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Fig. 1: Shattered gradients in a PL-function.

& Fergus, 2014; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy
et al., 2015; He et al., 2015). Even in convex settings,
convergence
for nonsmooth functions is lower-bounded by
p
1/ N (Bubeck, 2015).
The paper’s main contribution is the first convergence result for modern convnets, Theorem 2. The idea is simple: backprop constructs linear snapshots (gradients) of a
neural net’s landscape; section 2 introduces neural Taylor
approximations which are used to construct Taylor losses
as convex snapshots closely related to backprop. We then
use the online convex
p optimization framework (Zinkevich,
2003) to show 1/ N convergence to the Taylor optimum,
matching the lower bound in (Bubeck, 2015). Section 2.4
investigates the Taylor optimum and regret terms empirically. We observe
that convergence to the Taylor optimum
p
occurs at 1/ N in practice. The theorem applies to any
neural net with a loss convex in the output of the net (for
example, the cross-entropy loss is convex in the output but
not the parameters of a neural net).
The nonsmoothness of rectifier nets is perhaps underappreciated (Balduzzi et al., 2017). Fig. 1 shows a piecewiselinear (PL) function and its gradient. The gradient is discontinuous or shattered. Shattering is problematic for accelerated and Hessian-based methods which speed up convergence by exploiting the relationship between gradients
at nearby points (Sutskever et al., 2013). The success of
these methods on rectifier networks, where the number of
kinks grows exponentially with depth (Pascanu et al., 2014;
Telgarsky, 2016), requires explanation since gradients at
nearby points can be very different (Balduzzi et al., 2017).
Section 3 addresses the success of adaptive optimizers

