Connected Subgraph Detection with Mirror Descent on SDPs
Cem Aksoylar 1 Lorenzo Orecchia 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
We propose a novel, computationally efficient
mirror-descent based optimization framework for
subgraph detection in graph-structured data. Our
aim is to discover anomalous patterns present in
a connected subgraph of a given graph. This
problem arises in many applications such as detection of network intrusions, community detection, detection of anomalous events in surveillance videos or disease outbreaks. Since optimization over connected subgraphs is a combinatorial and computationally difficult problem, we
propose a convex relaxation that offers a principled approach to incorporating connectivity and
conductance constraints on candidate subgraphs.
We develop a novel efficient algorithm to solve
the relaxed problem, establish convergence guarantees and demonstrate its feasibility and performance with experiments on real and very large
simulated networks.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of connected subgraph detection, motivated by statistical anomaly detection on networks where the aim is to determine whether there exists
a set of connected nodes that exhibit anomalous signal values. One example of network anomaly detection is disease outbreak detection (Patil et al., 2003), where the nodes
are associated with counties that are linked by geographical
neighborhood and signal values on nodes depict the number of patients related to a disease. In the existence of a
disease outbreak that spreads geographically, higher signal
values would be present on certain counties that are neighbors of each other, therefore constituting a subgraph structure. Similar problems in different research areas also exist,
such as detection of intrusions in communication or sensor
networks, community detection or video surveillance.
*
Equal contribution 1 Boston University, Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence to: Venkatesh Saligrama <srv@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The detection or estimation of arbitrary connected subgraphs over graph-structured signals is an example of a
structured signal recovery problem and generalizes many
useful types of structures such as intervals or paths
(Addario-Berry et al., 2010; Arias-Castro et al., 2008).
While the existence of structure in terms of connectivity
leads to better statistical complexity in detecting or recovering the anomalous sets compared to arbitrary subsets, efficient characterization of sets obeying the connectivity constraint is important for obtaining practical algorithms for
detection and estimation. In this paper we aim to characterize the space of arbitrary connected subsets of nodes in
a graph via spectral relaxation and propose efficient optimization algorithms that exploit this characterization.
Related work and contributions: Subgraph detection is
a difficult problem since connected subgraphs represent a
combinatorial structure and systematic approaches to characterizing the space of connected subgraphs of a given
graph are relatively recent. Traditional approaches to this
problem usually consider parametric methods, which originate from the scan statistics literature (Glaz et al., 2001)
and consider scanning for specific shapes such as rectangles, circles or neighborhood balls on graphs (Patil et al.,
2003; Kulldorff et al., 2006; Priebe et al., 2005). More recently nonparametric approaches have been considered for
subgraphs with arbitrary shapes on general graphs such as
the simulated annealing approach of (Duczmal & Assuncao, 2004), however it is a heuristic method without statistical or computational guarantees. There is also a line
of work focused on statistical analysis with nonparametric shapes (Addario-Berry et al., 2010; Arias-Castro et al.,
2008; 2012) but are computationally intractable.
More recently, (Qian et al., 2014; Qian & Saligrama, 2014)
proposed linear matrix inequalities as a way to characterize the connectivity of subsets of nodes exactly. This approach is the similar to ours where we also consider an
SDP relaxation with LMI constraints, however we take a
different approach to formulating the problem and its relaxation, with the goal to obtain a convex optimization program that is amenable to efficient iterative methods. In
contrast, the aforementioned method is only applicable to
small problem sizes. Another notable work in this area is
the spectral scan statistic approach proposed by (Sharpnack
et al., 2016), which presents a computationally tractable al-

