High-Dimensional Structured Quantile Regression

Vidyashankar Sivakumar 1 Arindam Banerjee 1

Abstract
Quantile regression aims at modeling the conditional median and quantiles of a response variable given certain predictor variables. In this
work we consider the problem of linear quantile
regression in high dimensions where the number of predictor variables is much higher than
the number of samples available for parameter
estimation. We assume the true parameter to
have some structure characterized as having a
small value according to some atomic norm R(·)
and consider the norm regularized quantile regression estimator. We characterize the sample complexity for consistent recovery and give
non-asymptotic bounds on the estimation error.
While this problem has been previously considered, our analysis reveals geometric and statistical characteristics of the problem not available in
prior literature. We perform experiments on synthetic data which support the theoretical results.

2016; Vershynin, 2015). Such models have been extended
to generalized linear models (Banerjee et al., 2014; Negahban et al., 2012), matrix completion (Candès & Recht,
2009), vector auto-regressive models (Melnyk & Banerjee,
2016) among others.
In this paper, we consider the problem of structured quantile regression in high-dimensions, which can be posed as
follows: given the response variable yi and covariates xi
the τ th conditional quantile function of yi given xi is given
by: Fy−1
(τ |xi ) = hxi , θτ∗ i, τ ∈ (0, 1) for some structured
i |xi
θτ∗ whose structure can be captured by a suitable atomic
norm R(·), e.g., l1 -norm for sparsity, l1 /l2 norm for group
(·) is the inverse of the conditional
sparsity, etc. Here Fy−1
i |xi
distribution function of yi given xi . We consider the following regularized estimator for the structured quantile regression problem:
θ̂n := argminθ∈Rp Lτ (θ) + λn R(θ)
n
1X
:= argminθ∈Rp
ρτ (yi − hxi , θi) + λn R(θ) ,
n i=1
(1)

1

Introduction

Considerable advances have been made over the past
decade on fitting high-dimensional structured linear models when the number of samples n is much smaller than
the ambient dimensionality p (Banerjee et al., 2014; Negahban et al., 2012; Chandrasekaran et al., 2012). Most
of the advances have been made for linear models: yi =
hxi , θ∗ i + ωi , i = 1, . . . , n, where θ∗ ∈ Rp is assumed
to be structured, e.g., sparse, group sparse, etc. Estimation of such structured θ is usually done using Lasso-type
regularized estimators (Negahban et al., 2012; Banerjee
et al., 2014) or Dantzig-type constrained estimators (Chandrasekaran et al., 2012; Chatterjee et al., 2014); other related estimators have also been explored (Hsu & Sabato,
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities. Correspondence to: Vidyashankar
Sivakumar <sivak017@umn.edu>, Arindam Banerjee <banerjee@cs.umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

where ρτ (u) = (τ − I(u ≤ 0))u is the asymmetric absolute deviation function (Koenker, 2005), I(·) is the indicator function. The goal is to get nonasymptotic bounds on
the estimation error kθ̂ − θ∗ k2 .
Many previous papers analyze the asymptotic performance
of the estimator in (1) (Li & Zhu, 2008; Kai et al., 2011;
Wu & Liu, 2009; Zou & Yuan, 2008; Wang et al., 2012). In
the non-asymptotic setting of interest in this paper, special
cases of the estimator in (1) have been studied in recent literature (Belloni & Chernozhukov, 2011; Kato, 2011; Fan
et al., 2014a), primarily focusing on specific norms like
the l1 -norm and nonoverlapping group sparse norm. In
contrast, our formulation and analysis is applicable to any
atomic norm R(·) giving considerable flexibility in choosing a suitable structure for real world problems, e.g., hierarchical sparsity, k-support norm, OWL norm etc. More
recently (Alquier et al., 2017) consider the more general
problem of norm regularized regression with Lipschitz loss
functions which includes (1) as a special case. They derive
similar results to ours for bounds on the estimation error,
but their analysis differs significantly and, in our opinion,
does not leverage and highlight the key geometric and sta-

