Parseval Networks: Improving Robustness to Adversarial Examples

Moustapha Cisse 1 Piotr Bojanowski 1 Edouard Grave 1 Yann Dauphin 1 Nicolas Usunier 1

Abstract
We introduce Parseval networks, a form of deep
neural networks in which the Lipschitz constant
of linear, convolutional and aggregation layers
is constrained to be smaller than 1. Parseval
networks are empirically and theoretically motivated by an analysis of the robustness of the
predictions made by deep neural networks when
their input is subject to an adversarial perturbation. The most important feature of Parseval networks is to maintain weight matrices of linear
and convolutional layers to be (approximately)
Parseval tight frames, which are extensions of
orthogonal matrices to non-square matrices. We
describe how these constraints can be maintained
efficiently during SGD. We show that Parseval networks match the state-of-the-art in terms
of accuracy on CIFAR-10/100 and Street View
House Numbers (SVHN), while being more robust than their vanilla counterpart against adversarial examples. Incidentally, Parseval networks
also tend to train faster and make a better usage
of the full capacity of the networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve near-human accuracy on
many perception tasks (He et al., 2016; Amodei et al.,
2015). However, they lack robustness to small alterations
of the inputs at test time (Szegedy et al., 2014). Indeed
when presented with a corrupted image that is barely distinguishable from a legitimate one by a human, they can
predict incorrect labels, with high-confidence. An adversary can design such so-called adversarial examples, by
adding a small perturbation to a legitimate input to maximize the likelihood of an incorrect class under constraints
on the magnitude of the perturbation (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2015; Pa1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Moustapha Cisse
<moustaphacisse@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

pernot et al., 2016a). In practice, for a significant portion of
inputs, a single step in the direction of the gradient sign is
sufficient to generate an adversarial example (Goodfellow
et al., 2015) that is even transferable from one network to
another one trained for the same problem but with a different architecture (Liu et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2016).
The existence of transferable adversarial examples has two
undesirable corollaries. First, it creates a security threat
for production systems by enabling black-box attacks (Papernot et al., 2016a). Second, it underlines the lack of robustness of neural networks and questions their ability to
generalize in settings where the train and test distributions
can be (slightly) different as is the case for the distributions
of legitimate and adversarial examples.
Whereas the earliest works on adversarial examples already
suggested that their existence was related to the magnitude
of the hidden activations gradient with respect to their inputs (Szegedy et al., 2014), they also empirically assessed
that standard regularization schemes such as weight decay or training with random noise do not solve the problem (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Fawzi et al., 2016). The current mainstream approach to improving the robustness of
deep networks is adversarial training. It consists in generating adversarial examples on-line using the current network’s parameters (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Miyato et al.,
2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2014;
Kurakin et al., 2016) and adding them to the training data.
This data augmentation method can be interpreted as a robust optimization procedure (Shaham et al., 2015).
In this paper, we introduce Parseval networks, a layerwise
regularization method for reducing the network’s sensitivity to small perturbations by carefully controlling its global
Lipschitz constant. Since the network is a composition of
functions represented by its layers, we achieve increased
robustness by maintaining a small Lipschitz constant (e.g.,
1) at every hidden layer; be it fully-connected, convolutional or residual. In particular, a critical quantity governing the local Lipschitz constant in both fully connected and
convolutional layers is the spectral norm of the weight matrix. Our main idea is to control this norm by parameterizing the network with parseval tight frames (Kovačević &
Chebira, 2008), a generalization of orthogonal matrices.
The idea that regularizing the spectral norm of each weight

