Provable Alternating Gradient Descent for Non-negative Matrix Factorization
with Strong Correlations

Yuanzhi Li 1 Yingyu Liang 1

Abstract
Non-negative matrix factorization is a basic tool
for decomposing data into the feature and weight
matrices under non-negativity constraints, and in
practice is often solved in the alternating minimization framework. However, it is unclear
whether such algorithms can recover the groundtruth feature matrix when the weights for different features are highly correlated, which is common in applications. This paper proposes a simple and natural alternating gradient descent based
algorithm, and shows that with a mild initialization it provably recovers the ground-truth in the
presence of strong correlations. In most interesting cases, the correlation can be in the same order
as the highest possible. Our analysis also reveals
its several favorable features including robustness to noise. We complement our theoretical
results with empirical studies on semi-synthetic
datasets, demonstrating its advantage over several popular methods in recovering the groundtruth.

1. Introduction
Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is an important
tool in data analysis and is widely used in image processing, text mining, and hyperspectral imaging (e.g., (Lee &
Seung, 1997; Blei et al., 2003; Yang & Leskovec, 2013)).
Given a set of observations Y = {y (1) , y (2) , . . . , y (n) },
the goal of NMF is to find a feature matrix A =
{a1 , a2 , . . . , aD } and a non-negative weight matrix X =
{x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(n) } such that y (i) ≈ Ax(i) for any i, or
Y ≈ AX for short. The intuition of NMF is to write each
data point as a non-negative combination of the features.
1
Authors listed in alphabetic order.
Princeton University,
Princeton,
NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Yuanzhi Li <yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu>, Yingyu Liang
<yingyul@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

By doing so, one can avoid cancellation of different features and improve interpretability by thinking of each x(i)
as a (unnormalized) probability distribution over the features. It is also observed empirically that the non-negativity
constraint on the coefficients can lead to better features and
improved downstream performance of the learned features.
Unlike the counterpart which factorizes Y ≈ AX without assuming non-negativity of X, NMF is usually much
harder to solve, and can even by NP-hard in the worse
case (Arora et al., 2012b). This explains why, despite all
the practical success, NMF largely remains a mystery in
theory. Moreover, many of the theoretical results for NMF
were based on very technical tools such has algebraic geometry (e.g., (Arora et al., 2012b)) or tensor decomposition (e.g. (Anandkumar et al., 2012)), which undermine
their applicability in practice. Arguably, the most widely
used algorithms for NMF use the alternative minimization
scheme: In each iteration, the algorithm alternatively keeps
A or X as fixed and tries to minimize some distance between Y and AX. Algorithms in this framework, such
as multiplicative update (Lee & Seung, 2001) and alternative non-negative least square (Kim & Park, 2008), usually
perform well on real world data. However, alternative minimization algorithms are usually notoriously difficult to analyze. This problem is poorly understood, with only a few
provable guarantees known (Awasthi & Risteski, 2015; Li
et al., 2016). Most importantly, these results are only for
the case when the coordinates of the weights are from essentially independent distributions, while in practice they
are known to be correlated, for example, in correlated topic
models (Blei & Lafferty, 2006). As far as we know, there
exists no rigorous analysis of practical algorithms for the
case with strong correlations.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of a natural algorithm AND (Alternative Non-negative gradient
Descent) that belongs to the practical framework, and show
that it probably recovers the ground-truth given a mild initialization. It works under general conditions on the feature
matrix and the weights, in particular, allowing strong correlations. It also has multiple favorable features that are
unique to its success. We further complement our theoretical analysis by experiments on semi-synthetic data, demon-

