Tensor Balancing on Statistical Manifold

Mahito Sugiyama 1 2 Hiroyuki Nakahara 3 Koji Tsuda 4 5 6

Abstract
We solve tensor balancing, rescaling an N th order nonnegative tensor by multiplying N tensors of order N − 1 so that every fiber sums to
one. This generalizes a fundamental process of
matrix balancing used to compare matrices in a
wide range of applications from biology to economics. We present an efficient balancing algorithm with quadratic convergence using Newton’s method and show in numerical experiments
that the proposed algorithm is several orders of
magnitude faster than existing ones. To theoretically prove the correctness of the algorithm,
we model tensors as probability distributions in
a statistical manifold and realize tensor balancing as projection onto a submanifold. The key to
our algorithm is that the gradient of the manifold,
used as a Jacobian matrix in Newton’s method,
can be analytically obtained using the Möbius inversion formula, the essential of combinatorial
mathematics. Our model is not limited to tensor balancing, but has a wide applicability as it
includes various statistical and machine learning
models such as weighted DAGs and Boltzmann
machines.

1. Introduction
Matrix balancing is the problem of rescaling a given square
nonnegative matrix A ∈ Rn×n
≥0 to a doubly stochastic matrix RAS, where every row and column sums to one, by
multiplying two diagonal matrices R and S. This is a
fundamental process for analyzing and comparing matrices in a wide range of applications, including input-output
analysis in economics, called the RAS approach (Parikh,
1979; Miller & Blair, 2009; Lahr & de Mesnard, 2004),
seat assignments in elections (Balinski, 2008; Akartunalı &
1
National Institute of Informatics 2 JST PRESTO 3 RIKEN
Brain Science Institute 4 Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo 5 RIKEN AIP 6 NIMS. Correspondence
to: Mahito Sugiyama <mahito@nii.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Statistical manifold 𝓢
(dually flat Riemannian manifold)

Given tensor A

Probability
distribution P
Tensor balancing

Projection

Multistochastic tensor A’

Submanifold 𝓢(β)

Every fiber
sums to 1

Projected
distribution Pβ

Figure 1. Overview of our approach.

Knight, 2016), Hi-C data analysis (Rao et al., 2014; Wu &
Michor, 2016), the Sudoku puzzle (Moon et al., 2009), and
the optimal transportation problem (Cuturi, 2013; Frogner
et al., 2015; Solomon et al., 2015). An excellent review of
this theory and its applications is given by Idel (2016).
The standard matrix balancing algorithm is the SinkhornKnopp algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1964; Sinkhorn & Knopp,
1967; Marshall & Olkin, 1968; Knight, 2008), a special
case of Bregman’s balancing method (Lamond & Stewart,
1981) that iterates rescaling of each row and column until
convergence. The algorithm is widely used in the above
applications due to its simple implementation and theoretically guaranteed convergence. However, the algorithm
converges linearly (Soules, 1991), which is prohibitively
slow for recently emerging large and sparse matrices. Although Livne & Golub (2004) and Knight & Ruiz (2013)
tried to achieve faster convergence by approximating each
step of Newton’s method, the exact Newton’s method with
quadratic convergence has not been intensively studied yet.
Another open problem is tensor balancing, which is a generalization of balancing from matrices to higher-order multidimentional arrays, or tensors. The task is to rescale an
N th order nonnegative tensor to a multistochastic tensor,
in which every fiber sums to one, by multiplying (N − 1)th
order N tensors. There are some results about mathematical properties of multistochastic tensors (Cui et al., 2014;
Chang et al., 2016; Ahmed et al., 2003). However, there
is no result for tensor balancing algorithms with guaranteed convergence that transforms a given tensor to a multistochastic tensor until now.

