High-Dimensional Variance-Reduced Stochastic Gradient
Expectation-Maximization Algorithm

Rongda Zhu 1 Lingxiao Wang 2 Chengxiang Zhai 3 Quanquan Gu 2

Abstract
We propose a generic stochastic expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm for the estimation
of high-dimensional latent variable models. At the
core of our algorithm is a novel semi-stochastic
variance-reduced gradient designed for the Qfunction in the EM algorithm. Under a mild condition on the initialization, our algorithm is guaranteed to attain a linear convergence rate to the unknown parameter of the latent variable model, and
achieve an optimal statistical rate up to a logarithmic factor for parameter estimation. Compared
with existing high-dimensional EM algorithms,
our algorithm enjoys a better computational complexity and is therefore more efficient. We apply
our generic algorithm to two illustrative latent
variable models: Gaussian mixture model and
mixture of linear regression, and demonstrate the
advantages of our algorithm by both theoretical
analysis and numerical experiments. We believe
that the proposed semi-stochastic gradient is of
independent interest for general nonconvex optimization problems with bivariate structures.

1. Introduction
As a popular algorithm for the estimation of latent variable models, the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm
(Dempster et al., 1977; Wu, 1983) has been widely used
in machine learning and statistics (Jain et al., 1999; Tseng,
2004; Han et al., 2011; Little & Rubin, 2014). Although EM
is well-known to often converge to an empirically good local
estimator (Wu, 1983), finite sample theoretical guarantees
for its performance have not been established until recent
1

Facebook, Inc., Menlo Park, CA 94025 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801. Correspondence to:
Quanquan Gu <qg5w@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

studies (Balakrishnan et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Yi &
Caramanis, 2015). Specifically, the first local convergence
theory and finite sample statistical rates of convergence for
the conventional EM algorithm and its gradient ascent variant were established in Balakrishnan et al. (2014). Later
on, Wang et al. (2014) extended the conventional EM algorithm as well as gradient ascent EM algorithm to the
high-dimensional setting, where the number of parameters
is comparable to or even larger than the sample size. A
key idea used in their algorithms is an additional truncation
step after the maximization step (M-step), which is able to
exploit the intrinsic sparse structure of the high-dimensional
latent variable models. Yi & Caramanis (2015) also proposed a high-dimensional EM algorithm, which, instead
of using truncation, uses a regularized M-estimator in the
M-step. In the high-dimensional setting, the gradient EM
algorithm is especially appealing, because exact maximization based M-step can be very time consuming, or even
ill-posed. Nonetheless, gradient EM algorithms can still
be computationally prohibitive when the number of observations is also large, since they need to calculate the full
gradient at each iteration, whose time complexity is linear
in the sample size.
In this paper, we address the aforementioned computational
challenge in the large-scale high-dimensional setting, by
proposing a novel variance-reduced stochastic gradient EM
algorithm with theoretical guarantees. Our algorithm is
along the line of gradient EM algorithms (Balakrishnan
et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014), where the M-step is achieved
by one-step gradient ascent rather than (regularized) exact
maximization (Yi & Caramanis, 2015). Instead of using
a full gradient at each iteration as in existing gradient EM
algorithms, we significantly reduce the computational cost
by utilizing stochastic variance-reduced gradient, which
is inspired by recent advances in stochastic optimization
(Roux et al., 2012; Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Shalev Shwartz
& Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014; Zhang & Gu, 2016).
To accommodate the special bivariate structure of the Qfunction (i.e., the expected value of the log likelihood function, with respect to the conditional distribution of the latent
variable given the observed variable under the current estimate of the model parameter) in EM algorithm, we design a
novel semi-stochastic variance-reduced gradient which sets

