Meta Networks
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai 1 Hong Yu 1

Abstract
Neural networks have been successfully applied
in applications with a large amount of labeled
data. However, the task of rapid generalization
on new concepts with small training data while
preserving performances on previously learned
ones still presents a significant challenge to neural network models. In this work, we introduce a novel meta learning method, Meta Networks (MetaNet), that learns a meta-level knowledge across tasks and shifts its inductive biases via fast parameterization for rapid generalization. When evaluated on Omniglot and
Mini-ImageNet benchmarks, our MetaNet models achieve a near human-level performance and
outperform the baseline approaches by up to
6% accuracy. We demonstrate several appealing
properties of MetaNet relating to generalization
and continual learning.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown great success in several application domains when a large amount of labeled
data is available for training. However, the availability of
such large training data has generally been a prerequisite
in a majority of learning tasks. Furthermore, the standard
deep neural networks lack the ability to continuous learning or incrementally learning new concepts on the fly, without forgetting or corrupting previously learned patterns. In
contrast, humans can rapidly learn and generalize from a
few examples of the same concept. Humans are also very
good at incremental (i.e. continuous) learning. These abilities have been mostly explained by the meta learning (i.e.
learning to learn) process in the brain (Harlow, 1949).
Previous work on meta learning has formulated the problem as two-level learning, a slow learning of a meta-level
1

University of Massachusetts, MA, USA. Correspondence
to:
Tsendsuren
Munkhdalai
<tsendsuren.munkhdalai@umassmed.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Memory

Meta
learner

Memory access

Slow weights

Fast weights

Meta weights

Input

Base
Meta info
learner
Slow weights

Fast
parameterization

Fast
parameterization

Fast weights

Output

Figure 1. Overall architecture of Meta Networks.

model performing across tasks and a rapid learning of a
base-level model acting within each task (Mitchell et al.,
1993; Vilalta & Drissi, 2002). The goal of a meta-level
learner is to acquire generic knowledge of different tasks.
The knowledge can then be transferred to the base-level
learner to provide generalization in the context of a single
task. The base and meta-level models can be framed in a
single learner (Schmidhuber, 1987) or in separate learners
(Bengio et al., 1990; Hochreiter et al., 2001).
In this work we introduce a meta learning model called
MetaNet (for Meta Networks) that supports meta-level continual learning by allowing neural networks to learn and to
generalize a new task or concept from a single example on
the fly. The overall architecture of MetaNet is shown in
Figure 1. MetaNet consists of two main learning components, a base learner and a meta learner, and is equipped
with an external memory. Learning occurs at two levels
in separate spaces (i.e. meta space and task space). The
base learner performs in the input task space whereas the
meta learner operates in a task-agnostic meta space. By
operating in the abstract meta space, the meta learner supports continual learning and performs meta knowledge acquisition across different tasks. Towards this end, the base
learner first analyzes the input task. The base learner then
provides the meta learner with a feedback in the form of
higher order meta information to explain its own status in
the current task space. Based on the meta information,

