Bayesian Boolean Matrix Factorisation

Tammo Rukat 1 Chris C. Holmes 1 2 Michalis K. Titsias 3 Christopher Yau 4
N=10 observation of size D=17x10

Abstract
Boolean matrix factorisation aims to decompose
a binary data matrix into an approximate Boolean
product of two low rank, binary matrices: one
containing meaningful patterns, the other quantifying how the observations can be expressed as
a combination of these patterns. We introduce
the OrMachine, a probabilistic generative model
for Boolean matrix factorisation and derive a
Metropolised Gibbs sampler that facilitates efficient parallel posterior inference. On real world
and simulated data, our method outperforms all
currently existing approaches for Boolean matrix
factorisation and completion. This is the first
method to provide full posterior inference for
Boolean Matrix factorisation which is relevant
in applications, e.g. for controlling false positive rates in collaborative filtering and, crucially,
improves the interpretability of the inferred patterns. The proposed algorithm scales to large
datasets as we demonstrate by analysing single
cell gene expression data in 1.3 million mouse
brain cells across 11 thousand genes on commodity hardware.

n=0

n=1

n=2

n=3

n=4

Boolean matrix factorisation (BooMF) can infer interpretable decompositions of a binary data matrix
X ∈ {0, 1}N ×D into a pair of low-rank, binary matrices
Z ∈ {0, 1}N ×L and U ∈ {0, 1}D×L . The data generating
process is based on the Boolean product, a special case of
matrix product between binary matrices where all values
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK 2 Nuffield
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK 3 Department
of Informatics, Athens University of Economics and Business,
Greece 4 Centre for Computational Biology, Institute of Cancer
and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. Correspondence to: Tammo Rukat <tammo.rukat@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

n=6

n=7

n=8

1.0

0

≃

l=0

l=1

l=2

1

0.8

⊗ l2

0.6

3

0.4

4

0.2

5
l=3

l=4

n=9

Latent representations z

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

l=5

0.0

n

Figure 1. The observed images are 10 digits from 0 to 9 as they are
traditionally represented in calculators. The data is factorised into
matrices of rank 6, which is not sufficient for full error-free reconstruction. Every digit, except 7, can be constructed by Boolean
combination of the inferred codes. The OrMachine infers a posterior mean probability of 50% for using code l = 5 in constructing a 7. Note that there exist other equally valid solutions to this
problem with 6 latent dimensions. The pixels represent posterior
means. Codes and observations are arranged to 10×17 images for
interpretation.

larger than zero are set to one, i.e.
xnd =

1. Introduction

n=5

Codes u

L
_

znl ∧ uld .

(1)

l=1

Here, ∨ and ∧ encode the Boolean disjunction and conjunction, respectively. BooMF provides a framework for learning from binary data where the inferred codes U provide
a basis and the indicator variables Z encode the presence
or absence of these codes. This representation is illustrated
in the calculator digits example in Fig. 1. We can think of
BooMF as binary factor analysis or as clustering with joint
assignments, where each observation is assigned to a subset
of L cluster centroids or codes. The L-dimensional indicators provide a compact representation of which codes are
allocated to each observation. As stated in Eq. (1), a feature xnd takes a value of one if it equals one in any of the
assigned codes.
BooMF has many real-world applications ranging from
topic modelling (Blei, 2012) to collaborating filtering (Su

