Reinforcement Learning with Deep Energy-Based Policies

Tuomas Haarnoja * 1 Haoran Tang * 2 Pieter Abbeel 1 3 4 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
We propose a method for learning expressive
energy-based policies for continuous states and
actions, which has been feasible only in tabular
domains before. We apply our method to learning maximum entropy policies, resulting into a
new algorithm, called soft Q-learning, that expresses the optimal policy via a Boltzmann distribution. We use the recently proposed amortized Stein variational gradient descent to learn
a stochastic sampling network that approximates
samples from this distribution. The benefits of
the proposed algorithm include improved exploration and compositionality that allows transferring skills between tasks, which we confirm in
simulated experiments with swimming and walking robots. We also draw a connection to actorcritic methods, which can be viewed performing approximate inference on the corresponding
energy-based model.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) has emerged as a
promising direction for autonomous acquisition of complex behaviors (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016), due
to its ability to process complex sensory input (Jaderberg
et al., 2016) and to acquire elaborate behavior skills using
general-purpose neural network representations (Levine
et al., 2016). Deep reinforcement learning methods can
be used to optimize deterministic (Lillicrap et al., 2015)
and stochastic (Schulman et al., 2015a; Mnih et al., 2016)
policies. However, most deep RL methods operate on the
conventional deterministic notion of optimality, where the
optimal solution, at least under full observability, is always
a deterministic policy (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Although
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences 2 UC Berkeley, Department of Mathematics 3 OpenAI 4 International
Computer Science Institute.
Correspondence to: Haoran Tang <hrtang@math.berkeley.edu>, Tuomas Haarnoja
<haarnoja@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

stochastic policies are desirable for exploration, this exploration is typically attained heuristically, for example by
injecting noise (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015;
Mnih et al., 2015) or initializing a stochastic policy with
high entropy (Kakade, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015a; Mnih
et al., 2016).
In some cases, we might actually prefer to learn stochastic
behaviors. In this paper, we explore two potential reasons
for this: exploration in the presence of multimodal objectives, and compositionality attained via pretraining. Other
benefits include robustness in the face of uncertain dynamics (Ziebart, 2010), imitation learning (Ziebart et al., 2008),
and improved convergence and computational properties
(Gu et al., 2016a). Multi-modality also has application in
real robot tasks, as demonstrated in (Daniel et al., 2012).
However, in order to learn such policies, we must define an
objective that promotes stochasticity.
In which cases is a stochastic policy actually the optimal
solution? As discussed in prior work, a stochastic policy
emerges as the optimal answer when we consider the connection between optimal control and probabilistic inference
(Todorov, 2008). While there are multiple instantiations of
this framework, they typically include the cost or reward
function as an additional factor in a factor graph, and infer the optimal conditional distribution over actions conditioned on states. The solution can be shown to optimize
an entropy-augmented reinforcement learning objective or
to correspond to the solution to a maximum entropy learning problem (Toussaint, 2009). Intuitively, framing control
as inference produces policies that aim to capture not only
the single deterministic behavior that has the lowest cost,
but the entire range of low-cost behaviors, explicitly maximizing the entropy of the corresponding policy. Instead
of learning the best way to perform the task, the resulting policies try to learn all of the ways of performing the
task. It should now be apparent why such policies might
be preferred: if we can learn all of the ways that a given
task might be performed, the resulting policy can serve as
a good initialization for finetuning to a more specific behavior (e.g. first learning all the ways that a robot could
move forward, and then using this as an initialization to
learn separate running and bounding skills); a better exploration mechanism for seeking out the best mode in a multimodal reward landscape; and a more robust behavior in the

