Differentially Private Chi-squared Test by Unit Circle Mechanism
Kazuya Kakizaki 1 Kazuto Fukuchi 1 Jun Sakuma 1 2 3

Abstract
This paper develops differentially private mechanisms for χ2 test of independence. While existing works put their effort into properly controlling the type-I error, in addition to that, we investigate the type-II error of differentially private
mechanisms. Based on the analysis, we present
unit circle mechanism: a novel differentially private mechanism based on the geometrical property of the test statistics. Compared to existing
output perturbation mechanisms, our mechanism
improves the dominated term
√ of the type-II error from O(1) to O(exp(− N )) where N is the
sample size. Furthermore, we introduce novel
procedures for multiple χ2 tests by incorporating the unit circle mechanism into the sparse vector technique and the exponential mechanism.
These procedures can control the family-wise error rate (FWER) properly, which has never been
attained by existing mechanisms.

1. Introduction
Hypothesis testing is a statistical framework to ascertain
whether or not given samples follow a specific model or
not in a systematic manner. For this study, we presume that
highly sensitive information might be included in the samples. A typical situation is genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Homer et al. reported that a patient’s disease
status could be inferred from aggregate statistics collected
for GWAS (Homer et al., 2008).
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) is a recent notion
of privacy that is tailored to a privacy-preserving release
of aggregate statistics. As described in this paper, we give
specific consideration to the differential privacy of χ2 test
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennohdai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan 2 JST CREST
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project. Correspondence to: Kazuya Kakizaki <kazuya@mdl.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp>,
Kazuto Fukuchi <kazuto@mdl.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp>, Jun Sakuma
<jun@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

of independence. Two lines of studies exist in differentially
private χ2 -tests of independence: input perturbation and
output perturbation. The input perturbation method ensures
differential privacy by randomizing each count in the contingency table (Uhler et al., 2013; Johnson & Shmatikov,
2013; Wang et al., 2015; Gaboardi et al., 2016). The output
perturbation method randomizes the test statistic to satisfy
differential privacy (Fienberg et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2014;
Uhler et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2015). Also recently, there
is a study for the differential privacy of χ2 test of identity,
which ensures type-I and typ-II error (Cai et al., 2017).
The contribution of this study is three-fold. First, we analyze the type-II error of the differentially private mechanism for output perturbation. In principle, (non-privacypreserving) hypothesis test procedures are preferred to
achieve a greater power with keeping the significance at
a prescribed level. In the case of differentially private
hypothesis test, the same is required under the constraint
of differential privacy. Much efforts have been devoted
to controlling the significance level properly (Wang et al.,
2015; Gaboardi et al., 2016) whereas little attention has
been paid to the power analysis. We analyze the type-II
error of the differentially private mechanism for χ2 -test,
and show that it is upper-bounded by two terms which are
mechanism-dependent. The bound indicates that a mechanism with a lower sensitivity and lower γ error (defined in
Section 4) achieves a greater power.
Second, we investigate the geometrical property of the test
statistic of the χ2 -test. Then, we propose the unit circle
mechanism: a novel differentially private mechanism based
on the geometrical property. In existing mechanisms based
on output perturbation, the sensitivity is O(1) in terms
of N (Fienberg et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2014; Uhler et al.,
2013). We demonstrate√that the sensitivity of the unit circle mechanism is O(1/ N ), which achieves lower type-II
error (Theorem 7).
Third, we present two procedures for differentially private
multiple χ2 tests of independence that can control the familywise error rate (FWER). Actually, FWER can be controlled properly using existing DP mechanisms for χ2 -test
by repeatedly using (Uhler et al., 2013), for example. However, such a naive construction consumes the privacy budget, which is linear to the number of all the considered

