Strongly-Typed Agents are Guaranteed to Interact Safely
David Balduzzi 1

Abstract
As artificial agents proliferate, it is becoming increasingly important to ensure that their interactions with one another are well-behaved. In this
paper, we formalize a common-sense notion of
when algorithms are well-behaved: an algorithm
is safe if it does no harm. Motivated by recent
progress in deep learning, we focus on the specific case where agents update their actions according to gradient descent. The paper shows
that that gradient descent converges to a Nash
equilibrium in safe games. The main contribution is to define strongly-typed agents and show
they are guaranteed to interact safely, thereby
providing sufficient conditions to guarantee safe
interactions. A series of examples show that
strong-typing generalizes certain key features of
convexity, is closely related to blind source separation, and introduces a new perspective on classical multilinear games based on tensor decomposition.

1. Introduction

“First, do no harm”

Recent years have seen rapid progress on core problems
in artificial intelligence such as object and voice recognition (Hinton & et al, 2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
playing video and board games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016), and driving autonomous vehicles (Zhang
et al., 2016). As artificial agents proliferate, it is increasingly important to ensure their interactions with one another, with humans, and with their environment are safe.
Concretely, the number of neural networks being trained
and used is growing rapidly. There are enormous and increasing economies of scale that can likely be derived from
treating them as populations – rather than as isolated algorithms. How to ensure interacting neural networks cooperate effectively? When can weights trained on one problem
1
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. Correspondence to: David Balduzzi <dbalduzzi@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

be adapted to another without adverse effects? The problems fall under mechanism design, a branch of game theory
(Nisan et al., 2007). However, neural nets differ from humans in that they optimize clear objectives using gradient
descent. The setting is thus more structured than traditional
mechanism design.
Safety. The first contribution of the paper is formalize
safety as a criterion on how agents interact. We propose
a basic notion of safety based on the common-sense principle that agents should do no harm to one another. More
formally, each agent optimizes an objective whose value
depends on the actions of the agent and the actions of the
rest of the population. A game is safe if the actions chosen
by each agent do no (infinitesimal) harm to any other agent,
where harm is measured as increased loss.
The key simplifying assumption in the paper is to take gradient descent as a computational primitive (Balduzzi,
2016). Questions about mechanism design are sharpened under the assumption that agents use gradient descent. The assumption holds broadly since the key driver
of progress in artificial intelligence is deep learning, which
uses gradient descent to optimize complicated objective
functions composed from simple differentiable modules
(LeCun et al., 2015).
A weakness of the approach is that it conceives safety more
narrowly than, for example, Amodei et al. (2016) which is
concerned with societal risks arising from artificial intelligence. We argue that a necessary foundational component
of the broader AI-safety project is to clarify exactly what
safety entails when the objectives of the agents and the algorithms they employ are precisely specified.
Strongly-typed games. The second contribution is to introduce type systems suited to multi-agent optimization
problems (that is, games). We build on the typed linear
algebra introduced in Balduzzi & Ghifary (2016). The
nomenclature is motivated by an analogy with types in the
theory of programming. Type systems are used to prevent
untrapped errors (errors that go unnoticed and cause arbitrary behavior later on) when running a program (Cardelli,
1997). A program is safe if it does not cause untrapped errors. Type systems can enforce safety by statically rejecting
all programs that are potentially unsafe.

