Learning to Discover Cross-Domain Relations
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Taeksoo Kim 1 Moonsu Cha 1 Hyunsoo Kim 1 Jung Kwon Lee 1 Jiwon Kim 1

Abstract

Disco
GAN

INPUT

(a) Learning cross-domain relations without any extra label

OUTPUT

While humans easily recognize relations between data from different domains without any
supervision, learning to automatically discover
them is in general very challenging and needs
many ground-truth pairs that illustrate the relations. To avoid costly pairing, we address the
task of discovering cross-domain relations when
given unpaired data. We propose a method based
on generative adversarial networks that learns
to discover relations between different domains
(DiscoGAN). Using the discovered relations, our
proposed network successfully transfers style
from one domain to another while preserving key
attributes such as orientation and face identity.

(b) Handbag images (input) & Generated shoe images (output)
INPUT

1. Introduction

(c) Shoe images (input) & Generated handbag images (output)

Can machines also achieve a similar ability to relate two
different image domains? This question can be reformulated as a conditional image generation problem. In other
words, finding a mapping function from one domain to the
other can be thought as generating an image in one domain given another image in the other domain. While this
problem tackled by generative adversarial networks (GAN)
(Isola et al., 2016) has gained a huge attention recently,
most of today’s training approaches use explicitly paired
data, provided by human or another algorithm.

Figure 1. Our GAN-based model trains with two independently
collected sets of images and learns how to map two domains without any extra label. In this paper, we reduce this problem into generating a new image of one domain given an image from the other
domain. (a) shows a high-level overview of the training procedure
of our model with two independent sets (e.g. handbag images and
shoe images). (b) and (c) show results of our method. Our method
takes a handbag (or shoe) image as an input, and generates its
corresponding shoe (or handbag) image. Again, it is worth noting
that our method does not take any extra annotated supervision and
can self-discover relations between domains.

OUTPUT

Relations between two different domains, the way in which
concepts, objects, or people are connected, arise ubiquitously. Cross-domain relations are often natural to humans.
For example, we recognize the relationship between an English sentence and its translated sentence in French. We
also choose a suit jacket with pants or shoes in the same
style to wear.

This problem also brings an interesting challenge from a
1

SK T-Brain, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Taeksoo
Kim <jazzsaxmafia@sktbrain.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

learning point of view. Explicitly supervised data is seldom available and labeling can be labor intensive. Moreover, pairing images can become tricky if corresponding
images are missing in one domain or there are multiple best
candidates. Hence, we push one step further by discovering
relations between two visual domains without any explic-

