Efficient Nonmyopic Active Search

Shali Jiang 1 Gustavo Malkomes 1 Geoff Converse 2 Alyssa Shofner 3 Benjamin Moseley 1 Roman Garnett 1

Abstract
Active search is an active learning setting with the
goal of identifying as many members of a given
class as possible under a labeling budget. In this
work, we first establish a theoretical hardness of
active search, proving that no polynomial-time
policy can achieve a constant factor approximation ratio with respect to the expected utility of the
optimal policy. We also propose a novel, computationally efficient active search policy achieving
exceptional performance on several real-world
tasks. Our policy is nonmyopic, always considering the entire remaining search budget. It also automatically and dynamically balances exploration
and exploitation consistent with the remaining
budget, without relying on a parameter to control
this tradeoff. We conduct experiments on diverse
datasets from several domains: drug discovery,
materials science, and a citation network. Our
efficient nonmyopic policy recovers significantly
more valuable points with the same budget than
several alternatives from the literature, including
myopic approximations to the optimal policy.

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications, the process of analyzing
data incurs some cost; for example, obtaining a label may
require a laborious experiment, a human action, or depletion of some other expensive resource. In these scenarios,
carefully selecting data to label can often help us achieve
our goals more efficiently than, e.g., random sampling. This
is the motivation behind active learning.
Naturally, which data examples are the most useful to label might change according to our objective. Traditionally,
much of the active learning literature has focused on train1
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
Simpson College, Indianola, IA, USA 3 University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA. Correspondence to: Shali Jiang
<jiang.s@wustl.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

ing a model to have high generalization performance with
few training examples. Here, we consider a special and
atypical realization of active learning: the active search
problem (Garnett et al., 2012). In active search, we seek
to sequentially inspect data so as to discover members of a
rare, desired class. The labels are not known a priori but can
be revealed by querying a costly labeling oracle. The goal
is to design an policy to sequentially query points to find
as many valuable points as possible under a labeling budget. Several real-world problems can be naturally posed in
terms of active search; drug discovery, fraud detection, and
product recommendation are a few examples. A successful
active search policy faces the fundamental dilemma between
exploration and exploitation; i.e., whether to search for new
regions of valuable points (exploration) or take advantage
of the currently most-promising regions (exploitation).
Previous work developed policies for active search by appealing to Bayesian decision theory (Garnett et al., 2011;
2012). Garnett et al. (2012) derived the optimal policy in
this framework with a natural utility function. Not surprisingly, realizing this policy in the general case requires
exponential computation. To overcome this intractability,
the authors of that work proposed using myopic lookahead
policies in practice, which compute the optimal policy only
up to a limited number of steps into the future. This defines
a family of policies ranging in complexity from completely
greedy one-step lookahead to the optimal policy, which
looks ahead to the depletion of the entire budget. The authors demonstrated improved performance on active search
over the greedy policy even when looking just two steps into
the future, including in a drug-discovery setting (Garnett
et al., 2015). The main limitation of these strategies is that
they completely ignore what can happen beyond the chosen
horizon, which for typical problems is necessarily limited
to ` ≤ 3, even with aggressive pruning.
The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, we prove
that no polynomial time policy for active search can have
nontrivial approximation ratio with respect to the optimal
policy in terms of expected utility. This extends the result
by Garnett et al. (2012) that myopic approximations to the
optimal policy cannot approximate the optimal policy. The
proof of this theorem is constructive, creating a family of
explicitly difficult active search instances and showing that
no polynomial time algorithm can perform well compared

