Neural Optimizer Search with Reinforcement Learning

Irwan Bello * 1 Barret Zoph * 1 Vijay Vasudevan 1 Quoc V. Le 1

Abstract
We present an approach to automate the process
of discovering optimization methods, with a focus on deep learning architectures. We train a
Recurrent Neural Network controller to generate
a string in a specific domain language that describes a mathematical update equation based on
a list of primitive functions, such as the gradient, running average of the gradient, etc. The
controller is trained with Reinforcement Learning to maximize the performance of a model after a few epochs. On CIFAR-10, our method discovers several update rules that are better than
many commonly used optimizers, such as Adam,
RMSProp, or SGD with and without Momentum
on a ConvNet model. These optimizers can also
be transferred to perform well on different neural
network architectures, including Google’s neural
machine translation system.

1. Introduction
The choice of the right optimization method plays a major role in the success of training deep learning models.
Although Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) often works
well out of the box, more advanced optimization methods
such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) or Adagrad (Duchi
et al., 2011) can be faster, especially for training very deep
networks. Designing optimization methods for deep learning, however, is very challenging due to the non-convex
nature of the optimization problems.
In this paper, we consider an approach to automate the process of designing update rules for optimization methods,
especially for deep learning architectures. The key insight
is to use a controller in the form of a recurrent network to
generate an update equation for the optimizer. The recur*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain. Correspondence to:
Irwan Bello <ibello@google.com>, Barret Zoph <barretzoph@google.com>, Vijay Vasudevan <vrv@google.com>,
Quoc V. Le <qvl@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. An overview of Neural Optimizer Search.

rent network controller is trained with reinforcement learning to maximize the accuracy of a particular model architecture, being trained for a fixed number of epochs by the
update rule, on a held-out validation set. This process is
illustrated in Figure 1.
On CIFAR-10, our approach discovers several update rules
that are better than many commonly used optimizers such
as Adam, RMSProp, or SGD with and without Momentum
on a small ConvNet model. Many of the generated update
equations can be easily transferred to new architectures and
datasets. For instance, update rules found on a small ConvNet architecture, when applied to the Wide ResNet architecture (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016), improved accuracy over Adam, RMSProp, Momentum, and SGD by a
margin up to 2% on the test set. The same update rules also
work well for Google’s Neural Machine Translation system (Wu et al., 2016) giving an improvement of up to 0.7
BLEU on the WMT 2014 English to German task.

2. Related Work
Neural networks are difficult and slow to train, and
many methods have been designed to tackle this difficulty
(e.g., Riedmiller & Braun (1992); LeCun et al. (1998);
Schraudolph (2002); Martens (2010); Le et al. (2011);
Duchi et al. (2011); Zeiler (2012); Martens & Sutskever
(2012); Schaul et al. (2013); Pascanu & Bengio (2013);
Pascanu et al. (2013); Kingma & Ba (2014); Ba et al.
(2017)). More recent optimization methods combine insights from both stochastic and batch methods in that they
use a small minibatch, similar to SGD, yet they implement
many heuristics to estimate diagonal second-order informa-

