SplitNet: Learning to Semantically Split Deep Networks
for Parameter Reduction and Model Parallelization
Juyong Kim * 1 Yookoon Park * 1 Gunhee Kim 1 Sung Ju Hwang 2 3

Abstract
We propose a novel deep neural network that
is both lightweight and effectively structured for
model parallelization. Our network, which we
name as SplitNet, automatically learns to split
the network weights into either a set or a hierarchy of multiple groups that use disjoint sets
of features, by learning both the class-to-group
and feature-to-group assignment matrices along
with the network weights. This produces a treestructured network that involves no connection
between branched subtrees of semantically disparate class groups. SplitNet thus greatly reduces the number of parameters and required
computations, and is also embarrassingly modelparallelizable at test time, since the evaluation
for each subnetwork is completely independent
except for the shared lower layer weights that
can be duplicated over multiple processors, or
assigned to a separate processor. We validate
our method with two different deep network
models (ResNet and AlexNet) on two datasets
(CIFAR-100 and ILSVRC 2012) for image classification, on which our method obtains networks
with significantly reduced number of parameters
while achieving comparable or superior accuracies over original full deep networks, and accelerated test speed with multiple GPUs.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have shown impressive performances on a multitude of tasks, including visual recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), and
*

Equal contribution 1 Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea 2 UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea 3 AITrics, Seoul, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
Codes available at http://vision.snu.ac.kr/
projects/splitnet.

natural language processing (Bengio et al., 2003; Sutskever
et al., 2014). However, such remarkable performances are
achieved at the cost of increased computational complexity
at both training and test time compared to traditional machine learning models including shallow neural networks.
This increased complexity of deep networks can be problematic if the model and the task size becomes very large
(e.g. classifying tens of thousands of object classes), or the
application is time-critical (e.g. real-time object detection).
There exist various solutions to tackle this complexity issue. One way is to reduce the number of model parameters; this could be achieved either by training a new smaller
network while maintaining similar behavior as the original network (Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2014),
or by disconnecting unnecessary weights through pruning
or sparsity regularization (Reed, 1993; Han et al., 2015;
Collins & Kohli, 2014; Wen et al., 2016; Alvarez & Salzmann, 2016). Another approach to speed up deep networks
is distributed machine learning (Dean et al., 2012; Chilimbi
et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2015); however most research effort has been made on the systems and optimization sides,
without consideration of the ways to obtain network structure that is intrinsically scalable.
In this work, we aim to learn a deep neural network that
not only reduces the number of model parameters, but also
is effectively structured for model parallelization. How can
we then achieve these seemingly disjoint goals in a single,
unified learning framework? We focus on the observation
that as the number of classes increases, semantically disparate classes (or tasks) can be represented by largely disjoint sets of features. For example, features describing animals may be quite different from those describing vehicles,
whereas low-level features such as stripes, dots, and colors
are likely be shared across all classes. It implicates that we
can cluster classes into mutually exclusive groups based on
the features they use. Such grouping of concepts based on
semantic proximity also agrees with the way that our brain
stores semantic concepts, where semantically related concepts activate similar part of the brain (Huth et al., 2012),
in a highly localized manner.
Based on this intuition, we propose a novel deep network
architecture named SplitNet that automatically performs

