Coherent Probabilistic Forecasts for Hierarchical Time Series
Souhaib Ben Taieb 1 James W. Taylor 2 Rob J. Hyndman 1

Abstract
Many applications require forecasts for a hierarchy comprising a set of time series along with
aggregates of subsets of these series. Hierarchical forecasting require not only good prediction accuracy at each level of the hierarchy, but
also the coherency between different levels —
the property that forecasts add up appropriately
across the hierarchy. A fundamental limitation
of prior research is the focus on forecasting the
mean of each time series. We consider the situation where probabilistic forecasts are needed for
each series in the hierarchy, and propose an algorithm to compute predictive distributions rather
than mean forecasts only. Our algorithm has the
advantage of synthesizing information from different levels in the hierarchy through a sparse
forecast combination and a probabilistic hierarchical aggregation. We evaluate the accuracy of
our forecasting algorithm on both simulated data
and large-scale electricity smart meter data. The
results show consistent performance gains compared to state-of-the art methods.

1. Introduction
Producing forecasts that support decision-making in a hierarchical structure is a central problem for many organizations. For example, retail sales forecasts typically form
a hierarchy, with the inventory control system of a retail
outlet relying on forecasts for store-level demand, while
forecasts of regionally aggregated demand are needed for
managing inventory at a distribution centre (Kremer et al.,
2016). Another context where a hierarchy naturally arises
is electricity demand, where the bottom level might consist
of time series of the electricity consumption of individual
customers, while the top level could be the total load on
the grid. Forecasts of electricity consumption are needed at
1

Monash University, Melbourne, Australia 2 University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Souhaib Ben Taieb
<souhaib.bentaieb@monash.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

various levels of aggregation in order to operate the power
grid efficiently and securely (van Erven & Cugliari, 2015).
Producing accurate forecasts for these hierarchical structures is particularly challenging. First, the many time series
involved can interact in varying and complex ways. In particular, time series at different levels of the hierarchy can
contain very different patterns (see, for example, Figure
3); time series at the bottom level are typically very noisy
sometimes exhibiting intermittency, while aggregated series at higher levels are much smoother. As a result, a naive
bottom-up approach whereby forecasts of aggregates are
generated by summing the forecasts of the corresponding
series in the lower levels is unlikely to deliver accurate results when the aggregation involves a large number of series (Hyndman et al., 2011). Second, in order to ensure
coherent decision-making at the different levels of a hierarchy, it is essential that the forecast of each aggregated series
should equal the sum of the forecasts of the corresponding
disaggregated series. Unfortunately, independently forecasting each time series within each level is very unlikely
to deliver coherent forecasts. Finally, the bottom level can
consist of several thousand or even millions of time series,
which can induce a massive computational load.
Recent work in this area (Wickramasuriya et al., 2015; van
Erven & Cugliari, 2015) has focused on a two-stage approach in which base forecasts are first produced independently for each series in the hierarchy; these are then combined to generate coherent revised forecasts (see Section 2).
The rationale behind this approach is both to improve forecast accuracy due to the synthesis of information from different forecasts, as well as to produce coherent forecasts.
A fundamental limitation of actual research is that it has
looked only at the problem of forecasting the mean of each
time series. This contrasts with the shift in the forecasting
literature over the past two decades towards probabilistic
forecasting (Gneiting & Katzfuss, 2014). This form of prediction quantifies the uncertainty, which enables improved
decision making and risk management (see, for example,
Berrocal et al. (2010)).
We address the key problem of generating probabilistic
forecasts for large-scale hierarchical time series. This is
particularly challenging since it is requires the estimation
of the entire distribution of future observations, not only
the mean (Kneib, 2013; Hothorn et al., 2014). Furthermore,

