Doubly Greedy Primal-Dual Coordinate Descent
for Sparse Empirical Risk Minimization
Qi Lei 1 Ian E.H. Yen 2 Chao-yuan Wu 3 Inderjit S. Dhillon 1 3 4 Pradeep Ravikumar 2

Abstract
We consider the popular problem of sparse empirical risk minimization with linear predictors and
a large number of both features and observations.
With a convex-concave saddle point objective reformulation, we propose a Doubly Greedy PrimalDual Coordinate Descent algorithm that is able to
exploit sparsity in both primal and dual variables.
It enjoys a low cost per iteration and our theoretical analysis shows that it converges linearly
with a good iteration complexity, provided that
the set of primal variables is sparse. We then extend this algorithm further to leverage active sets.
The resulting new algorithm is even faster, and
experiments on large-scale Multi-class data sets
show that our algorithm achieves up to 30 times
speedup on several state-of-the-art optimization
methods.

1. Introduction
Regularized empirical risk minimization with linear predictors is a key workhorse in machine learning. It has the
following general form:
(
)
n
X
def 1
>
min P (x) =
(1)
i (ai x) + g(x)
n i=1
x2Rd

where ai 2 Rd is one of the n data samples with d features.
i : R ! R is a convex loss function of the linear predictor
d
a>
i x, for i = 1, · · · , n, and g : R ! R is a convex
regularization function for the coefficient vector x 2 Rd .
The loss function i assigns a cost to the difference between
the linear predictor a>
i x and the associated label bi .
With continuous and discrete bi , (1) captures regression and
classification problems respectively. As a popular instance,
1

Department of ICES, University of Texas, Austin 2 Department
of CS, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh 3 Department of
CS, University of Texas, Austin 4 Amazon/A9, Palo Alto. Correspondence to: Qi Lei <leiqi@ices.utexas.edu>, Ian E.H. Yen
<eyan@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

when i (z) = max{0, 1 bi z} and g(x) = µ/2kxk22 , (1)
reduces to the linear SVM (support vector machine) classification problem. While setting i (z) = log(1 + exp( bi z)),
we obtain the logistic regression problem.
We are interested in developing efficient algorithms for solving this general problem (1) for the setting where the coefficient vector x is assumed to be sparse. Applications
where such a sparsity is natural include large-scale multiclass/multi-label classification, low-degree polynomial data
mapping (Chang et al., 2010), n-gram feature mapping (Sonnenburg & Franc, 2010), and random feature kernel machines (Rahimi & Recht, 2007), specifically with a sparsity
constraint on the random features (Yen et al., 2014).
Our paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we review
existing algorithms to solve the primal, dual as well as
primal-dual formulations of the problem (1). In Section
3, we present our Doubly Greedy Primal-Dual Coordinate
Descent method for the convex-concave saddle point formulation of the problem (1). We propose an alternative method
that is more efficient in practice with the use of incrementally increased active sets in both primal and dual variables.
In Section 4 we show linear convergence for our proposed
algorithm, and demonstrate the advantages of greedy methods with sparse variables. Finally in Section 5 we compare
the performance of our method with other state-of-the-art
methods on some real-world datasets, both with respect to
time and iterations.

2. Formulation and related work
Notations: We use A to denote the data matrix, with rows
Ai = ai corresponding to samples, and the column Aj
corresponding to features. We use [n] to compactly denote
{1, 2, · · · n}. Throughout the paper, k · k denotes l2 -norm
unless otherwise specified.
Assumptions: In order to establish equivalence of the primal, dual problem and the convex-concave saddle point
formulation, we make the following assumptions.
• g, the regularization for primal variable, is assumed to
be µ-strongly convex, formally,
µ
g(y) g(x) + hrg(x), y xi + ky xk2 ,
2
for any sub-gradient rg(x) 2 @g(x), x, y 2 Rd . We

