Recursive Partitioning for Personalization using Observational Data

Nathan Kallus 1

Abstract
We study the problem of learning to choose from
m discrete treatment options (e.g., news item or
medical drug) the one with best causal effect for
a particular instance (e.g., user or patient) where
the training data consists of passive observations
of covariates, treatment, and the outcome of the
treatment. The standard approach to this problem is regress and compare: split the training data
by treatment, fit a regression model in each split,
and, for a new instance, predict all m outcomes
and pick the best. By reformulating the problem
as a single learning task rather than m separate
ones, we propose a new approach based on recursively partitioning the data into regimes where
different treatments are optimal. We extend this
approach to an optimal partitioning approach that
finds a globally optimal partition, achieving a
compact, interpretable, and impactful personalization model. We develop new tools for validating and evaluating personalization models on observational data and use these to demonstrate the
power of our novel approaches in a personalized
medicine and a job training application.

1. Introduction
Personalization is the problem of determining the best
treatment option for a given instance. A treatment can, for
example, be a movie recommendation (Zhou et al., 2008),
a display ad (Goldfarb & Tucker, 2011), or a pharmacological therapy (Lesko, 2007), and an instance is usually an
individual person. In this paper, we study the problem of
learning how to personalize from observational data, which
is an important problem in emergent contexts such as personalized medicine. In this and related contexts, experimentation can be prohibitively small-scale, costly, dangerous, and unethical in comparison to passive data collection,
1

School of Operations Research and Information Engineering
and Cornell Tech, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Nathan
Kallus <kallus@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

which can be potentially massive as in electronic medical records (EMRs) but, at the same time, lack experimental manipulation so that isolated causal effects of specific
treatments are hidden by confounding factors. We show
that standard approaches that pose the problem as multiple
supervised learning tasks fall short in this setting and propose new learning algorithms as well as evaluation methods
used for validation, selection, and tuning.
Specifically, we consider the problem of learning how to
assign the best of m treatments to an instance, given an
observation of associated baseline covariates x ∈ Rd . An
instance is characterized by the random variables X ∈ Rd
and Y (1), . . . , Y (m) ∈ R, which denote the covariates and
the m potential outcomes of applying each of the treatments (Imbens & Rubin, 2015, Chs. 1-2). We use the
convention that smaller outcome is better. A personalization model is a map τ : Rd → [m] = {1, . . . , m}
that, given an observation of covariates x, prescribes a
treatment τ (x). Its (out-of-sample) personalization risk
is its average causal effect in the population R(τ ) =
E [Y (τ (X))] (the expectation is taken with respect to the
joint distribution of X, Y (1), . . . , Y (m)). The Bayes optimal risk is R∗ = R(τ ∗ ), where τ ∗ (x) ∈ T ∗ (x) =
arg mint∈[m] E [Y (t) | X = x] is the Bayes optimal personalization model.
The learning task is to train a personalization model τ̂n (·)
on n data points: Sn = {(X1 , T1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Tn , Yn )} ,
where the observed outcome Yi = Yi (Ti ) corresponds only
to the treatment Ti administered. This data is observational: we may not control the historic administration of
treatment (as we would in a controlled experiment) and
the values Yi (t) for t 6= Ti are missing data. We assume
the data is independent and identically distributed (iid) and
let X, T, Y, Y (1), . . . , Y (m) represent a generic draw. Although the data is iid, the t-treated sample {i : Ti = t} differs systematically from the sample t0 -treated {i : Ti = t0 }
for t 6= t0 , i.e., not just by chance as in a randomized controlled trial (RCT). Our second assumption about the data
is unconfoundedness:
Assumption 1. For each t ∈ [m]: Y (t) is independent of
T given X and T = t is possible for almost every X, i.e.,
Y (t) ⊥
⊥ T | X and P (P (T = t | X) > 0) = 1.
The assumption is standard in causal effect estimation

