Dual Iterative Hard Thresholding: From Non-convex Sparse Minimization to
Non-smooth Concave Maximization
Bo Liu 1 Xiao-Tong Yuan 2 Lezi Wang 1 Qingshan Liu 2 Dimitris N. Metaxas 1

Abstract
Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT) is a class of
projected gradient descent methods for optimizing sparsity-constrained minimization models,
with the best known efficiency and scalability
in practice. As far as we know, the existing
IHT-style methods are designed for sparse minimization in primal form. It remains open to
explore duality theory and algorithms in such a
non-convex and NP-hard problem setting. In this
paper, we bridge this gap by establishing a duality theory for sparsity-constrained minimization
with `2 -regularized loss function and proposing
an IHT-style algorithm for dual maximization.
Our sparse duality theory provides a set of sufficient and necessary conditions under which the
original NP-hard/non-convex problem can be equivalently solved in a dual formulation. The
proposed dual IHT algorithm is a super-gradient
method for maximizing the non-smooth dual objective. An interesting finding is that the sparse
recovery performance of dual IHT is invariant to
the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP), which is
required by virtually all the existing primal IHT
algorithms without sparsity relaxation. Moreover, a stochastic variant of dual IHT is proposed
for large-scale stochastic optimization. Numerical results demonstrate the superiority of dual IHT algorithms to the state-of-the-art primal
IHT-style algorithms in model estimation accuracy and computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Sparse learning has emerged as an effective approach
to alleviate model overfitting when feature dimension
1
Department of CS, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ,
08854, USA. 2 B-DAT Lab, Nanjing University of Information
Science & Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210044, China. Correspondence to: Bo Liu <lb507@cs.rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

outnumbers training sample. Given a set of training
d
samples{(xi , yi )}N
i=1 in which xi ∈ R is the feature representation and yi ∈ R the corresponding label, the following sparsity-constrained `2 -norm regularized loss minimization problem is often considered in high-dimensional
analysis:
N

min P (w) :=

kwk0 ≤k

λ
1 X
l(w> xi , yi ) + kwk2 .
N i=1
2

(1)

Here l(·; ·) is a convex loss function, w ∈ Rd is the
model parameter vector and λ controls the regularization
strength. For example, the squared loss l(a, b) = (b − a)2
is used in linear regression and the hinge loss l(a, b) =
max{0, 1 − ab} in support vector machines. Due to the presence of cardinality constraint kwk0 ≤ k, the problem (1)
is simultaneously non-convex and NP-hard in general, and
thus is challenging for optimization. A popular way to address this challenge is to use proper convex relaxation, e.g.,
`1 norm (Tibshirani, 1996) and k-support norm (Argyriou
et al., 2012), as an alternative of the cardinality constraint. However, the convex relaxation based techniques tend to
introduce bias for parameter estimation.
In this paper, we are interested in algorithms that directly minimize the non-convex formulation in (1). Early efforts mainly lie in compressed sensing for signal recovery,
which is a special case of (1) with squared loss. Among
others, a family of the so called Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT) methods (Blumensath & Davies, 2009; Foucart,
2011) have gained significant interests and they have been
witnessed to offer the fastest and most scalable solutions in
many cases. More recently, IHT-style methods have been
generalized to handle generic convex loss functions (Beck
& Eldar, 2013; Yuan et al., 2014; Jain et al., 2014) as well
as structured sparsity constraints (Jain et al., 2016). The
common theme of these methods is to iterate between gradient descent and hard thresholding to maintain sparsity of
solution while minimizing the objective value.
Although IHT-style methods have been extensively studied,
the state-of-the-art is only designed for the primal formulation (1). It remains an open problem to investigate the
feasibility of solving the original NP-hard/non-convex formulation in a dual space that might potentially further im-

