iSurvive: An Interpretable, Event-time Prediction Model for mHealth
Walter H. Dempsey * 1 Alexander Moreno * 2 Christy K. Scott 3 Michael L. Dennis 3 David H. Gustafson 4
Susan A. Murphy 1 James M. Rehg 2

Abstract
An important mobile health (mHealth) task is the
use of multimodal data, such as sensor streams
and self-report, to construct interpretable timeto-event predictions of, for example, lapse to
alcohol or illicit drug use. Interpretability of
the prediction model is important for acceptance and adoption by domain scientists, enabling model outputs and parameters to inform
theory and guide intervention design. Temporal
latent state models are therefore attractive, and
so we adopt the continuous time hidden Markov
model (CT-HMM) due to its ability to describe irregular arrival times of event data. Standard CTHMMs, however, are not specialized for predicting the time to a future event, the key variable for
mHealth interventions. Also, standard emission
models lack a sufficiently rich structure to describe multimodal data and incorporate domain
knowledge. We present iSurvive, an extension
of classical survival analysis to a CT-HMM. We
present a parameter learning method for GLM
emissions and survival model fitting, and present
promising results on both synthetic data and an
mHealth drug use dataset.

1. Introduction
In the emerging field of mobile health (mHealth) an important problem is the use of collected multimodal data
– e.g., sensor streams along with self-report – to make
time-varying predictions of events like lapse (Chih et al.,
2014). Using latent state models for prediction is an attractive choice for three reasons: (1) States can be made
interpretable by representing behavioral constructs such as
stress and craving; (2) Emission models can handle noisy
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Michigan 2 Georgia Institute
of Technology 3 Lighthouse Institute 4 University of WisconsinMadison. Correspondence to: Alexander Moreno <alexander.f.moreno@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

measurements; and (3) Parameters can capture domain
knowledge. Moreover, an interpretable model can represent a theoretical relationship, such as the hypothesized
link between increased stress and risk of smoking lapse, in
a form which supports learning from data, simulation and
visualization, and hypothesis testing. Such models can be a
tool for data-driven design and testing of theoretical models
by domain scientists (Nahum-Shani et al., 2015). Further,
in the case of small sample sizes, the incorporation of domain knowledge may be critical for good performance. In
such cases, superior performance relative to an alternative
”black box” model can provide additional evidence for the
correctness of a behavioral theory.
Discrete time hidden Markov models (DT-HMMs) are a
standard tool for regularly-sampled sensor data, but many
important datatypes, such as EMAs or detected periods of
high stress, take the form of event data with irregular arrival
times. Fortunately, recent work (Wang et al., 2014; Rao &
Teh, 2013) makes it feasible to use continuous time HMMs
(CT-HMMs) to model irregularly-sampled data. This paper
builds on our prior work on efficient parameter learning algorithms for CT-HMMs (Liu et al., 2015).
In order to utilize CT-HMMs for mobile health interventions, however, two limitations with existing models must
be addressed: (1) A mechanism is needed for predicting the
time to future events; and (2) Emission models must go beyond the standard Gaussian and multinomial observations
to embrace general multimodal data models. The first limitation can be addressed via classical methods for time-toevent prediction from survival analysis. Prior work in joint
survival and longitudinal analysis has focused on sharedrandom effects models (Rizopoulos, 2012) or latent class
models (Proust-Lima et al., 2014) with Gaussian emissions.
Survival analysis has not been previously used in an interpretable hidden state setting with multimodal data. We
develop a method for using the states of a CT-HMM as interpretable, time-varying covariates in a survival model. In
prior work, Lian et al. (2014) developed an interpretable
latent event process model; interpretability, however, was
achieved post hoc rather than being a built-in feature of the
model as is the case here. We describe additional differences between this prior work and our current approach in
the supplementary material.

