Understanding Synthetic Gradients and Decoupled Neural Interfaces

Wojciech Marian Czarnecki 1 Grzegorz Swirszcz 1 Max Jaderberg 1 Simon Osindero 1 Oriol Vinyals 1
Koray Kavukcuoglu 1

Abstract
When training neural networks, the use of Synthetic Gradients (SG) allows layers or modules
to be trained without update locking – without
waiting for a true error gradient to be backpropagated – resulting in Decoupled Neural Interfaces (DNIs). This unlocked ability of being
able to update parts of a neural network asynchronously and with only local information was
demonstrated to work empirically in Jaderberg
et al. (2016). However, there has been very little demonstration of what changes DNIs and SGs
impose from a functional, representational, and
learning dynamics point of view. In this paper,
we study DNIs through the use of synthetic graLegend:underdients on feed-forward networks to better
Forward connection,
stand their behaviour and elucidate their
effect
differentiable
on optimisation. We show that the incorporaForward connection,
tion of SGs does not affect the representational
non-differentiable
strength of the learning system for a neural netError gradient,
work, and prove the convergence of the
learning
non-differentiable
system for linear and deep linear models.
On
Synthetic error
gradient, differentiable
practical problems we investigate the mechanism
by which synthetic gradient estimators
approxSynthetic error
nonimate the true loss, and, surprisingly,gradient,
how
that
differentiable
leads to drastically different layer-wise representations. Finally, we also expose the relationship
of using synthetic gradients to other error approximation techniques and find a unifying language for discussion and comparison.

1. Introduction
Neural networks can be represented as a graph of computational modules, and training these networks amounts to
optimising the weights associated with the modules of this
graph to minimise a loss. At present, training is usually performed with first-order gradient descent style algorithms,
1
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
WM Czarnecki <lejlot@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

L

L

LSG
Legend:

SG

h

h

Differentiable
Non-differentiable
Forward connection
Error gradient

x

y
(a)

x

y

Synthetic error gradient

(b)

Figure 1. Visualisation of SG-based learning (b) vs. regular backpropagation (a).

where the weights are adjusted along the direction of the
negative gradient of the loss. In order to compute the gradient of the loss with respect to the weights of a module,
one performs backpropagation (Williams & Hinton, 1986)
– sequentially applying the chain rule to compute the exact gradient of the loss with respect to a module. However,
this scheme has many potential drawbacks, as well as lacking biological plausibility (Marblestone et al., 2016; Bengio et al., 2015). In particular, backpropagation results in
locking – the weights of a network module can only be updated after a full forwards propagation of the data through
the network, followed by loss evaluation, then finally after waiting for the backpropagation of error gradients. This
locking constrains us to updating neural network modules
in a sequential, synchronous manner.
One way of overcoming this issue is to apply Synthetic
Gradients (SGs) to build Decoupled Neural Interfaces
(DNIs) (Jaderberg et al., 2016). In this approach, models of
error gradients are used to approximate the true error gradient. These models of error gradients are local to the network modules they are predicting the error gradient for, so
that an update to the module can be computed by using the
predicted, synthetic gradients, thus bypassing the need for
subsequent forward execution, loss evaluation, and backpropagation. The gradient models themselves are trained

