Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent with Delay Compensation

Shuxin Zheng 1 Qi Meng 2 Taifeng Wang 3 Wei Chen 3 Nenghai Yu 2 Zhi-Ming Ma 4 Tie-Yan Liu 3

Abstract

(Zhang et al., 2015; Chen & Huo, 2016; Chen et al., 2016).

With the fast development of deep learning, it
has become common to learn big neural networks
using massive training data. Asynchronous
Stochastic Gradient Descent (ASGD) is widely
adopted to fulfill this task for its efficiency, which
is, however, known to suffer from the problem of
delayed gradients. That is, when a local worker
adds its gradient to the global model, the global
model may have been updated by other workers
and this gradient becomes “delayed”. We propose a novel technology to compensate this delay,
so as to make the optimization behavior of ASGD
closer to that of sequential SGD. This is achieved
by leveraging Taylor expansion of the gradient
function and efficient approximation to the Hessian matrix of the loss function. We call the
new algorithm Delay Compensated ASGD (DCASGD). We evaluated the proposed algorithm on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate that DC-ASGD
outperforms both synchronous SGD and asynchronous SGD, and nearly approaches the performance of sequential SGD.

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a popular optimization algorithm to train neural networks (Bottou, 2012; Dean
et al., 2012; Kingma & Ba, 2014). As for the parallelization of SGD algorithms (suppose we use M machines for
the parallelization), one can choose to do it in either a
synchronous or asynchronous way. In synchronous SGD
(SSGD), local workers compute the gradients over their
own mini-batches of data, and then add the gradients to the
global model. By using a barrier, these workers wait for
each other, and will not continue their local training until
the gradients from all the M workers have been added to
the global model. It is clear that the training speed will be
dragged by the slowest worker1 . To improve the training
efficiency, asynchronous SGD (ASGD) (Dean et al., 2012)
has been adopted, with which no barrier is imposed, and
each local worker continues its training process right after its gradient is added to the global model. Although
ASGD can achieve faster speed due to no waiting overhead, it suffers from another problem which we call delayed gradient. That is, before a worker wants to add its
gradient g(wt ) (calculated based on the model snapshot
wt ) to the global model, several other workers may have already added their gradients and the global model has been
updated to wt+τ (here τ is called the delay factor). Adding
gradient of model wt to another model wt+τ does not make
a mathematical sense, and the training trajectory may suffer
from unexpected turbulence. This problem has been well
known, and some researchers have analyzed its negative
effect on the convergence speed (Lian et al., 2015; Avron
et al., 2015).

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have pushed the frontiers of
many applications, such as speech recognition (Sak et al.,
2014; Sercu et al., 2016), computer vision (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2016), and natural language processing (Mikolov et al., 2013; Bahdanau
et al., 2014; Gehring et al., 2017). Part of the success of
DNN should be attributed to the availability of big training
data and powerful computational resources, which allow
people to learn very deep and big DNN models in parallel
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 School
of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 3 Microsoft Research 4 Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Taifeng Wang, Wei
Chen <taifengw, wche@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a novel method, called Delay
Compensated ASGD (or DC-ASGD for short), to tackle the
problem of delayed gradients. For this purpose, we study
the Taylor expansion of the gradient function g(wt+τ ) at
wt . We find that the delayed gradient g(wt ) is just the
zero-order approximator of the correct gradient g(wt+τ ),
and we can leverage more items in the Taylor expansion
to achieve more accurate approximation of g(wt+τ ). However, this straightforward idea is practically non-trivial, be1

Recently, people proposed to use additional backup workers
(Chen et al., 2016) to tackle this problem. However, this solution requires redundant computation resources and relies on the
assumption that the majority of workers train almost equally fast.

