Learning Important Features Through Propagating Activation Differences

Avanti Shrikumar 1 Peyton Greenside 1 Anshul Kundaje 1

Abstract
The purported “black box” nature of neural
networks is a barrier to adoption in applications where interpretability is essential. Here
we present DeepLIFT (Deep Learning Important FeaTures), a method for decomposing the
output prediction of a neural network on a specific input by backpropagating the contributions
of all neurons in the network to every feature
of the input. DeepLIFT compares the activation of each neuron to its ‘reference activation’
and assigns contribution scores according to the
difference. By optionally giving separate consideration to positive and negative contributions,
DeepLIFT can also reveal dependencies which
are missed by other approaches. Scores can
be computed efficiently in a single backward
pass. We apply DeepLIFT to models trained
on MNIST and simulated genomic data, and
show significant advantages over gradient-based
methods. Video tutorial: http://goo.gl/
qKb7pL, code: http://goo.gl/RM8jvH.

1. Introduction
As neural networks become increasingly popular, their
black box reputation is a barrier to adoption when interpretability is paramount. Here, we present DeepLIFT
(Deep Learning Important FeaTures), a novel algorithm
to assign importance score to the inputs for a given output. Our approach is unique in two regards. First, it
frames the question of importance in terms of differences
from a ‘reference’ state, where the ‘reference’ is chosen
according to the problem at hand. In contrast to most
gradient-based methods, using a difference-from-reference
allows DeepLIFT to propagate an importance signal even
in situations where the gradient is zero and avoids artifacts
caused by discontinuities in the gradient. Second, by op1
Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. Correspondence to: A Kundaje <akundaje@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tionally giving separate consideration to the effects of positive and negative contributions at nonlinearities, DeepLIFT
can reveal dependencies missed by other approaches. As
DeepLIFT scores are computed using a backpropagationlike algorithm, they can be obtained efficiently in a single
backward pass after a prediction has been made.

2. Previous Work
This section provides a review of existing approaches to assign importance scores for a given task and input example.
2.1. Perturbation-Based Forward Propagation
Approaches
These approaches make perturbations to individual inputs
or neurons and observe the impact on later neurons in the
network. Zeiler & Fergus (Zeiler & Fergus, 2013) occluded
different segments of an input image and visualized the
change in the activations of later layers. “In-silico mutagenesis” (Zhou & Troyanskaya, 2015) introduced virtual
mutations at individual positions in a genomic sequence
and quantified the their impact on the output. Zintgraf et
al. (Zintgraf et al., 2017) proposed a clever strategy for
analyzing the difference in a prediction after marginalizing
over each input patch. However, such methods can be computationally inefficient as each perturbation requires a separate forward propagation through the network. They may
also underestimate the importance of features that have saturated their contribution to the output (Fig. 1).
2.2. Backpropagation-Based Approaches
Unlike perturbation methods, backpropagation approaches
propagate an importance signal from an output neuron
backwards through the layers to the input in one pass, making them efficient. DeepLIFT is one such approach.
2.2.1. G RADIENTS , D ECONVOLUTIONAL N ETWORKS
AND G UIDED BACKPROPAGATION
Simonyan et al. (Simonyan et al., 2013) proposed using
the gradient of the output w.r.t. pixels of an input image
to compute a “saliency map” of the image in the context
of image classification tasks. The authors showed that this
was similar to deconvolutional networks (Zeiler & Fergus,

