Measuring Sample Quality with Kernels
Jackson Gorham 1 Lester Mackey 2

Abstract
Approximate Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) offers the promise of more rapid sampling at the cost of more biased inference. Since
standard MCMC diagnostics fail to detect these
biases, researchers have developed computable
Stein discrepancy measures that provably determine the convergence of a sample to its
target distribution. This approach was recently
combined with the theory of reproducing kernels
to define a closed-form kernel Stein discrepancy
(KSD) computable by summing kernel evaluations across pairs of sample points. We develop
a theory of weak convergence for KSDs based
on Stein’s method, demonstrate that commonly
used KSDs fail to detect non-convergence even
for Gaussian targets, and show that kernels with
slowly decaying tails provably determine convergence for a large class of target distributions.
The resulting convergence-determining KSDs
are suitable for comparing biased, exact, and
deterministic sample sequences and simpler to
compute and parallelize than alternative Stein
discrepancies. We use our tools to compare biased samplers, select sampler hyperparameters,
and improve upon existing KSD approaches
to one-sample hypothesis testing and sample
quality improvement.

1. Introduction
When Bayesian inference and maximum likelihood estimation (Geyer, 1991) demand
R the evaluation of intractable expectations EP [h(Z)] = p(x)h(x)dx under a target distribution P , Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
(Brooks et al., 2011) are often employed to approximate
these integrals with asymptotically correct sample aver1
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA USA 2 Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge, MA USA. Correspondence
to: Jackson Gorham <jgorham@stanford.edu>, Lester Mackey
<lmackey@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Pn
ages EQn [h(X)] = n1 i=1 h(xi ). However, many exact
MCMC methods are computationally expensive, and recent
years have seen the introduction of biased MCMC procedures (see, e.g., Welling & Teh, 2011; Ahn et al., 2012; Korattikara et al., 2014) that exchange asymptotic correctness
for increased sampling speed.
Since standard MCMC diagnostics, like mean and trace
plots, pooled and within-chain variance measures, effective
sample size, and asymptotic variance (Brooks et al., 2011),
do not account for asymptotic bias, Gorham & Mackey
(2015) defined a new family of sample quality measures
– the Stein discrepancies – that measure how well EQn
approximates EP while avoiding explicit integration under
P . Gorham & Mackey (2015); Mackey & Gorham (2016);
Gorham et al. (2016) further showed that specific members of this family – the graph Stein discrepancies – were
(a) efficiently computable by solving a linear program and
(b) convergence-determining for large classes of targets P .
Building on the zero mean reproducing kernel theory of
Oates et al. (2016b), Chwialkowski et al. (2016) and Liu
et al. (2016) later showed that other members of the Stein
discrepancy family had a closed-form solution involving
the sum of kernel evaluations over pairs of sample points.
This closed form represents a significant practical advantage, as no linear program solvers are necessary, and the
computation of the discrepancy can be easily parallelized.
However, as we will see in Section 3.2, not all kernel Stein
discrepancies are suitable for our setting. In particular, in
dimension d 3, the kernel Stein discrepancies previously
recommended in the literature fail to detect when a sample is not converging to the target. To address this shortcoming, we develop a theory of weak convergence for the
kernel Stein discrepancies analogous to that of (Gorham &
Mackey, 2015; Mackey & Gorham, 2016; Gorham et al.,
2016) and design a class of kernel Stein discrepancies that
provably control weak convergence for a large class of target distributions.
After formally describing our goals for measuring sample quality in Section 2, we outline our strategy, based
on Stein’s method, for constructing and analyzing practical
quality measures at the start of Section 3. In Section 3.1,
we define our family of closed-form quality measures – the
kernel Stein discrepancies (KSDs) – and establish several

