Stochastic Convex Optimization:
Faster Local Growth Implies Faster Global Convergence

Yi Xu 1 Qihang Lin 2 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract
In this paper, a new theory is developed for firstorder stochastic convex optimization, showing
that the global convergence rate is sufficiently
quantified by a local growth rate of the objective function in a neighborhood of the optimal
solutions. In particular, if the objective function F (w) in the -sublevel set grows as fast as
1/θ
kw − w∗ k2 , where w∗ represents the closest
optimal solution to w and θ ∈ (0, 1] quantifies
the local growth rate, the iteration complexity
of first-order stochastic optimization for achieving an -optimal solution can be e
O(1/2(1−θ) ),
which is optimal at most up to a logarithmic factor. To achieve the faster global convergence,
we develop two different accelerated stochastic subgradient methods by iteratively solving
the original problem approximately in a local region around a historical solution with the size
of the local region gradually decreasing as the
solution approaches the optimal set. Besides
the theoretical improvements, this work also include new contributions towards making the proposed algorithms practical: (i) we present practical variants of accelerated stochastic subgradient methods that can run without the knowledge
of multiplicative growth constant and even the
growth rate θ; (ii) we consider a broad family
of problems in machine learning to demonstrate
that the proposed algorithms enjoy faster convergence than traditional stochastic subgradient
method. For example, when applied to the `1
regularized empirical polyhedral loss minimization (e.g., hinge loss, absolute loss), the proposed
stochastic methods have a logarithmic iteration
complexity.
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA 2 Department of Management Sciences, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in solving the following
stochastic optimization problem:
min F (w) , Eξ [f (w; ξ)],

w∈K

(1)

where ξ is a random variable, f (w; ξ) is a convex function
of w, Eξ [·] is the expectation over ξ and K is a convex domain. We denote by ∂f (w; ξ) a subgradient of f (w; ξ).
Let K∗ denote the optimal set of (1) and F∗ denote the optimal value.
Traditional stochastic subgradient (SSG) method updates
the solution according to
wt+1 = ΠK [wt − ηt ∂f (wt ; ξt )],

(2)

for t = 1, . . . , T , where ξt is a sampled value of ξ at t-th
iteration, ηt is a step size and ΠK [w] = arg minv∈K kw −
vk22 is a projection operator that projects a point into K.
Previous studies have shown that under the following assumptions i) k∂f (w; ξ)k2 ≤ G, ii) there exists w∗ ∈ K∗
such that kwt − w∗ k2 ≤ B for t = 1, . . . , T 1 , and by set√ in (2), with a high probability
ting the step size ηt = GB
T
1 − δ we have

p
√ 
b T ) − F∗ ≤ O GB(1 + log(1/δ))/ T , (3)
F (w
PT
bT =
where w
t=1 wt /T . The above convergence implies that in order to obtain an -optimal solution by
SSG, i.e., finding a w such that F (w) − F∗ ≤ 
with a high probability
1 − δ, one needs at least T =
p
O(G2 B 2 (1 + log(1/δ))2 /2 ) in the worst-case.
It is commonly known that the slow convergence of SSG
is due to the variance in the stochastic subgradient and
the non-smoothness nature of the problem as well, which
therefore requires a decreasing step size or a very small step
size. Recently, there emerges a stream of studies on various
variance reduction techniques to accelerate stochastic gradient method (Roux et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013; Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Xiao & Zhang, 2014; Defazio et al.,
1

This holds if we assume the domain K is bounded such that
maxw,v∈K kw − vk2 ≤ B or if assume dist(w1 , K∗ ) ≤ B/2
and project every solution wt into K ∩ B(w1 , B/2).

