Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry

Justin Gilmer 1 Samuel S. Schoenholz 1 Patrick F. Riley 2 Oriol Vinyals 3 George E. Dahl 1

Abstract
Supervised learning on molecules has incredible potential to be useful in chemistry, drug discovery, and materials science. Luckily, several promising and closely related neural network
models invariant to molecular symmetries have
already been described in the literature. These
models learn a message passing algorithm and
aggregation procedure to compute a function of
their entire input graph. At this point, the next
step is to find a particularly effective variant of
this general approach and apply it to chemical
prediction benchmarks until we either solve them
or reach the limits of the approach. In this paper, we reformulate existing models into a single common framework we call Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) and explore additional novel variations within this framework.
Using MPNNs we demonstrate state of the art results on an important molecular property prediction benchmark; these results are strong enough
that we believe future work should focus on
datasets with larger molecules or more accurate
ground truth labels.

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen remarkable success in the use
of deep neural networks to understand and translate natural language (Wu et al., 2016), generate and decode complex audio signals (Hinton et al., 2012), and infer features from real-world images and videos (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012). Although chemists have applied machine learning to many problems over the years, predicting the properties of molecules and materials using machine learning
(and especially deep learning) is still in its infancy. To
date, most research applying machine learning to chemistry
tasks (Hansen et al., 2015; Huang & von Lilienfeld, 2016;
1

Google Brain 2 Google 3 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Justin Gilmer <gilmer@google.com>, George E. Dahl
<gdahl@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

DFT

Targets

⇠ 103 seconds E,!0 , ...
Message Passing Neural Net

⇠ 10 2 seconds
Figure 1. A Message Passing Neural Network predicts quantum
properties of an organic molecule by modeling a computationally
expensive DFT calculation.

Rupp et al., 2012; Rogers & Hahn, 2010; Montavon et al.,
2012; Behler & Parrinello, 2007; Schoenholz et al., 2016)
has revolved around feature engineering. While neural networks have been applied in a variety of situations (Merkwirth & Lengauer, 2005; Micheli, 2009; Lusci et al., 2013;
Duvenaud et al., 2015), they have yet to become widely
adopted. This situation is reminiscent of the state of image
models before the broad adoption of convolutional neural
networks and is due, in part, to a dearth of empirical evidence that neural architectures with the appropriate inductive bias can be successful in this domain.
Recently, large scale quantum chemistry calculation and
molecular dynamics simulations coupled with advances in
high throughput experiments have begun to generate data
at an unprecedented rate. Most classical techniques do
not make effective use of the larger amounts of data that
are now available. The time is ripe to apply more powerful and flexible machine learning methods to these problems, assuming we can find models with suitable inductive
biases. The symmetries of atomic systems suggest neural networks that operate on graph structured data and are
invariant to graph isomorphism might also be appropriate
for molecules. Sufficiently successful models could someday help automate challenging chemical search problems
in drug discovery or materials science.
In this paper, our goal is to demonstrate effective machine learning models for chemical prediction problems

