Adversarial Variational Bayes:
Unifying Variational Autoencoders and Generative Adversarial Networks

Lars Mescheder 1

Sebastian Nowozin 2

Andreas Geiger 1 3

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are expressive
latent variable models that can be used to learn
complex probability distributions from training
data. However, the quality of the resulting model
crucially relies on the expressiveness of the inference model. We introduce Adversarial Variational Bayes (AVB), a technique for training
Variational Autoencoders with arbitrarily expressive inference models. We achieve this by introducing an auxiliary discriminative network
that allows to rephrase the maximum-likelihoodproblem as a two-player game, hence establishing a principled connection between VAEs and
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). We
show that in the nonparametric limit our method
yields an exact maximum-likelihood assignment
for the parameters of the generative model, as
well as the exact posterior distribution over the
latent variables given an observation. Contrary
to competing approaches which combine VAEs
with GANs, our approach has a clear theoretical
justification, retains most advantages of standard
Variational Autoencoders and is easy to implement.

1. Introduction
Generative models in machine learning are models that can
be trained on an unlabeled dataset and are capable of generating new data points after training is completed. As generating new content requires a good understanding of the
training data at hand, such models are often regarded as a
key ingredient to unsupervised learning.
In recent years, generative models have become more and
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI Tübingen 2 Microsoft
Research Cambridge 3 Computer Vision and Geometry
Group, ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Lars Mescheder
<lars.mescheder@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

f

Figure 1. We propose a method which enables neural samplers
with intractable density for Variational Bayes and as inference
models for learning latent variable models. This toy example demonstrates our method’s ability to accurately approximate
complex posterior distributions like the one shown on the right.

more powerful. While many model classes such as PixelRNNs (van den Oord et al., 2016b), PixelCNNs (van den
Oord et al., 2016a), real NVP (Dinh et al., 2016) and Plug
& Play generative networks (Nguyen et al., 2016) have
been introduced and studied, the two most prominent ones
are Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014) and Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
Both VAEs and GANs come with their own advantages
and disadvantages: while GANs generally yield visually
sharper results when applied to learning a representation
of natural images, VAEs are attractive because they naturally yield both a generative model and an inference model.
Moreover, it was reported, that VAEs often lead to better
log-likelihoods (Wu et al., 2016). The recently introduced
BiGANs (Donahue et al., 2016; Dumoulin et al., 2016) add
an inference model to GANs. However, it was observed
that the reconstruction results often only vaguely resemble
the input and often do so only semantically and not in terms
of pixel values.
The failure of VAEs to generate sharp images is often attributed to the fact that the inference models used during
training are usually not expressive enough to capture the
true posterior distribution. Indeed, recent work shows that
using more expressive model classes can lead to substantially better results (Kingma et al., 2016), both visually
and in terms of log-likelihood bounds. Recent work (Chen
et al., 2016) also suggests that highly expressive inference
models are essential in presence of a strong decoder to allow the model to make use of the latent space at all.

