A Unified View of Multi-Label Performance Measures
Xi-Zhu Wu 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Multi-label classification deals with the problem
where each instance is associated with multiple
class labels. Because evaluation in multi-label
classification is more complicated than singlelabel setting, a number of performance measures
have been proposed. It is noticed that an algorithm usually performs differently on different
measures. Therefore, it is important to understand which algorithms perform well on which
measure(s) and why. In this paper, we propose a unified margin view to revisit eleven performance measures in multi-label classification.
In particular, we define label-wise margin and
instance-wise margin, and prove that through
maximizing these margins, different corresponding performance measures are to be optimized.
Based on the defined margins, a max-margin approach called LIMO is designed and empirical
results validate our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification aims to build classification models for objects assigned with multiple labels simultaneously, which is a common learning paradigm in real-world
applications. In text categorization, a document may be
associated with a range of topics, such as science, entertainment, and news (Schapire & Singer, 2000); in image
classification, an image can have both field and mountain
tags (Boutell et al., 2004); in music information retrieval, a
piece of music can convey various messages such as classic, piano and passionate (Turnbull et al., 2008).
In traditional supervised classification, generalization performance of the learning system is usually evaluated by accuracy, or F-measure if misclassification costs are unequal.
In contrast to single-label classification, performance evaluation in multi-label classification is more complicated, as
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Zhi-Hua Zhou <zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

each instance can be associated with multiple labels simultaneously. For example, it is difficult to tell which mistake
of the following two cases is more serious: one instance
with three incorrect labels vs. three instances each with
one incorrect label. Therefore, a number of performance
measures focusing on different aspects have been proposed,
such as Hamming loss, ranking loss, one-error, average
precision, coverage (Schapire & Singer, 2000), micro-F1
and macro-F1 (Tsoumakas et al., 2011).
Multi-label learning algorithms usually perform differently
on different measures; however, there are only a few studies about multi-label performance measures. Dembczynski et al. (2010) showed that Hamming loss and subset
0/1 loss could not be optimized at the same time. Gao
& Zhou (2013) proposed to study the Bayes consistency
of surrogate losses for multi-label learning; they proved
that none of convex surrogate loss is consistent with ranking loss, and gave a consistent surrogate loss function for
Hamming loss in deterministic case. There are a number of
studies about F-measure, mostly focusing on single-label
tasks, including multi-label learning as application. For
example, Ye et al. (2012) gave justifications and connections about F-measure optimization using decision theoretic approaches (DTA) and empirical utility maximization
approaches (EUM). Later, Waegeman et al. (2014) studied
the F-measure optimality of inference algorithms from the
DTA perspective. Koyejo et al. (2015) devoted to study
of EUM optimal multi-label classifiers. These theoretical
studies offer much insight, though lacking a unified understanding of relation among a variety of multi-label performance measures. Moreover, some performance measures
which have been popularly used in evaluation (Zhang &
Wu, 2015) have not been theoretically studied.
In this paper, we try to disclose some shared properties among different measures and establish a unified understanding for multi-label performance evaluation. We
propose a margin view to revisit eleven commonly used
multi-label performance measures, including Hamming
loss, ranking loss, one-error, coverage, average precision,
macro-, micro- and instance-averaging F-measures and
AUCs. Specifically, we propose the concepts of labelwise margin and instance-wise margin, based on which the
corresponding effectiveness of multi-label classifiers is defined and then used as bridge to connect different perfor-

