MEC: Memory-efficient Convolution for Deep Neural Network

Minsik Cho 1 Daniel Brand 1

Abstract
Convolution is a critical component in modern
deep neural networks, thus several algorithms for
convolution have been developed. Direct convolution is simple but suffers from poor performance. As an alternative, multiple indirect
methods have been proposed including im2colbased convolution, FFT-based convolution, or
Winograd-based algorithm. However, all these
indirect methods have high memory-overhead,
which creates performance degradation and offers a poor trade-off between performance and
memory consumption. In this work, we propose a memory-efficient convolution or MEC
with compact lowering, which reduces memoryoverhead substantially and accelerates convolution process. MEC lowers the input matrix in
a simple yet efficient/compact way (i.e., much
less memory-overhead), and then executes multiple small matrix multiplications in parallel to
get convolution completed. Additionally, the reduced memory footprint improves memory subsystem efficiency, improving performance. Our
experimental results show that MEC reduces
memory consumption significantly with good
speedup on both mobile and server platforms,
compared with other indirect convolution algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) consists of many layers to perform a task such as image classification/recognition, speech recognition, natural language
translation, and so on. Among these layers, the convolution layer is one of the most important, but the slowest and most memory-intensive ones in advanced/modern
convolutional DNN (Abuzaid et al., 2015; Chen et al.,
2016; Cong & Xiao, 2014; Denton et al., 2014; Park et al.,
1
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Minsik Cho <minsikcho@us.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2016a; Vasilache et al., 2014). To address the performance
issues in convolutional layers, efficient/approximation algorithms have been proposed (Chellapilla et al., 2006;
Denton et al., 2014; Jaderberg et al., 2014; Jia, 2014;
Vasilache et al., 2014), tailed implementations for limited cases have been actively investigated (Lavin, 2015),
and industrial-strength libraries are offered (Chetlur et al.,
2014).
However, the previous approaches have not directly
addressed the memory consumption problem.
This
is becoming a critical issue as DNNs are getting
in end-point devices with limited memory (e.g., mobile/IOT devices) (Chen et al., 2015; Collins & Kohli,
2014; Gong et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2015; Lebedev et al.,
2014; Wang & Cheng, 2016) so as to minimize response
delay (e.g., better user experience) and network overhead (Han et al., 2015; Lane et al., 2016; 2015). On the
other hand, the reduced memory consumption leads to
smaller SRAM usage, which can save energy consumption (e.g., leakage current) on mobile devices (Park et al.,
2015). Moreover, memory footprint itself has critical impact on convolution computation efficiency (Li et al., 2016;
Park et al., 2016b). Therefore, minimizing memory footprint in convolution is critical for future deep-learning applications on wide variety of devices and platforms.
In this paper, we propose a new memory-efficient convolution algorithm, MEC which can reduce memory-overhead
and further improve the performance of computing convolution in DNN. MEC uses a simple yet novel way of lowering the input matrix in a highly compact way, while still
exploiting fast matrix-matrix multiplication available in a
highly-optimized package such as BLAS (Jia, 2014). The
reduced memory footprint improves memory sub-system
efficiency (i.e., improves cache locality), so that MEC accelerates the convolution computation itself without compromising accuracy. Through extensive experiments on
both mobile and server platforms with CPU/GPU, we show
that MEC can be a very generic/efficient algorithm suitable
to various platforms with memory constraints. Further, the
key ideas in MEC should be beneficial/complementary to
any variant of conventional im2col-based convolution by
reducing either memory consumption or memory-bus traffic (i.e., less traffic from global memory to shared memory
on GPU) (Chellapilla et al., 2006; Chetlur et al., 2014; Jia,

