Differentially Private Submodular Maximization:
Data Summarization in Disguise
Marko Mitrovic 1 Mark Bun 1 2 Andreas Krause 3 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
Many data summarization applications are captured by the general framework of submodular
maximization. As a consequence, a wide range
of efficient approximation algorithms have been
developed. However, when such applications involve sensitive data about individuals, their privacy concerns are not automatically addressed.
To remedy this problem, we propose a general and systematic study of differentially private
submodular maximization. We present privacypreserving algorithms for both monotone and
non-monotone submodular maximization under
cardinality, matroid, and p-extendible system
constraints, with guarantees that are competitive
with optimal solutions. Along the way, we analyze a new algorithm for non-monotone submodular maximization under a cardinality constraint,
which is the first (even non-privately) to achieve
a constant approximation ratio with a linear number of function evaluations. We additionally provide two concrete experiments to validate the efficacy of these algorithms.

1. Introduction
A set function f : 2V → R is said to be submodular if
for all sets S ⊆ T ⊆ V and every element v ∈ V we
have f (S ∪ {v}) − f (S) ≥ f (T ∪ {v}) − f (T ). That is,
the marginal contribution of any element v to the value of
the function f (S) diminishes as the input set S increases.
The theory of submodular maximization unifies and generalizes diverse problems in combinatorial optimization, including the Max-Cover, Max-Cut, and Facility Location
problems. In turn, this theory has recently found numerous
applications to problems in machine learning, data science,
and artificial intelligence. A few such applications include
exemplar-based clustering (Krause & Gomes, 2010), feature selection for classification (Krause & Guestrin, 2005),
document and corpus summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011;
1

Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 2 Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA 3 ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Marko Mitrovic <marko.mitrovic@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Kirchhoff & Bilmes, 2014; Sipos et al., 2012), crowd teaching (Singla et al., 2014), and influence maximization in social networks (Kempe et al., 2003).
Some of the most compelling use cases for these applications concern sensitive data about individuals (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016a;b). As a running example, let us
consider the specific problem of determining which of a
collection of features (e.g. age, height, weight, etc.) are
most relevant to a binary classification task (e.g. predicting whether an individual is likely to have diabetes). In
this problem, a sensitive training set takes the form D =
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 where each individual i’s data consists of features xi,1 , . . . , xi,m together with a class label yi . The goal
is to identify a small subset S ⊆ [m] of features which can
then be used to build a good classifier for y. Many techniques exist for feature selection, including one based on
maximizing a submodular function which captures the mutual information between a subset of features and the class
label of interest (Krause & Guestrin, 2005). However, for
both legal (e.g. compliance with HIPAA regulations) and
ethical reasons, it is important that the selection of relevant
features does not compromise the privacy of any individual
who has contributed to the training data set. Unfortunately,
the theory of submodular maximization does not in itself
accommodate such privacy concerns.
To this end, we propose a systematic study of differentially
private submodular maximization to enable these applications based on submodular maximization, while provably
guaranteeing individual-level privacy. The notion of differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) offers a strong protection of individual-level privacy. Nevertheless, differential
privacy has been shown to permit useful data analysis and
machine learning tasks. In a nutshell, the definition formalizes a guarantee that no individual’s data should have too
significant an effect on the outcome of a computation. We
provide the formal definition in Section 2. Such a privacy
guarantee is obtained through the introduction of random
noise, so private submodular maximization is conceptually
related to the problem of submodular maximization in the
presence of noise (Cheraghchi, 2012; Hassidim & Singer,
2016).
In this work, we study the following problem under various
conditions on the submodular objective function f (monotone vs. non-monotone), and various choices of the con-

