Reduced Space and Faster Convergence in
Imperfect-Information Games via Pruning

Noam Brown 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1

Abstract
Iterative algorithms such as Counterfactual Regret
Minimization (CFR) are the most popular way
to solve large zero-sum imperfect-information
games. In this paper we introduce Best-Response
Pruning (BRP), an improvement to iterative algorithms such as CFR that allows poorly-performing
actions to be temporarily pruned. We prove that
when using CFR in zero-sum games, adding BRP
will asymptotically prune any action that is not
part of a best response to some Nash equilibrium.
This leads to provably faster convergence and
lower space requirements. Experiments show that
BRP results in a factor of 7 reduction in space,
and the reduction factor increases with game size.

1. Introduction
Imperfect-information extensive-form games model strategic multi-step scenarios between agents with hidden information, such as auctions, security interactions (both physical
and virtual), negotiations, and military situations. Typically
in imperfect-information games, one wishes to find a Nash
equilibrium, which is a profile of strategies in which no
player can improve her outcome by unilaterally changing
her strategy. A linear program can find an exact Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games containing fewer
than about 108 nodes (Gilpin & Sandholm, 2007). For
larger games, iterative algorithms are used to converge to a
Nash equilibrium. There are a number of such iterative algorithms (Heinrich et al., 2015; Nesterov, 2005; Hoda et al.,
2010; Pays, 2014; Kroer et al., 2015), the most popular of
which is Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al., 2007). CFR minimizes regret independently at
each decision point in the game. CFR+, a variant of CFR,
1
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Noam
Brown <noamb@cs.cmu.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

was used to essentially solve Limit Texas Hold’em, the
largest imperfect-information game ever to be essentially
solved (Bowling et al., 2015).
Both computation time and storage space are difficult challenges when solving large imperfect-information games.
For example, solving Limit Texas Hold’em required nearly
8 million core hours and a complex, domain-specific streaming compression algorithm to store the 262 TiB of uncompressed data in only 10.9 TiB. This data had to be repeatedly
decompressed from disk into memory and then compressed
back to disk in order to run CFR+ (Tammelin et al., 2015).
In certain situations, pruning can be applied to speed up the
traversal of the game tree in iterative algorithms (Lanctot
et al., 2009; Brown & Sandholm, 2015a; Brown et al., 2017).
However, these past pruning techniques do not reduce the
space needed to solve a game and lack theoretical guarantees
for improved performance.
In this paper we introduce Best-Response Pruning (BRP)1 ,
a new form of pruning for iterative algorithms such as CFR
in large imperfect-information games. BRP leverages the
fact that in iterative algorithms we are typically interested in
performance against the opponent’s average strategy over all
iterations, and that the opponent’s average strategy cannot
change faster than a rate of 1t , where t is the number of iterations conducted so far. Thus, if part-way through a run one
of our actions has done very poorly relative to other available
actions against the opponent’s average strategy, then after
just a few more iterations the opponent’s average strategy
cannot change sufficiently for the poorly-performing action
to now be doing well against the opponent’s updated average
strategy. In fact, we can bound how much an action’s performance can improve over any number of iterations against
the opponent’s average strategy. So long as the upper bound
on that performance is still not competitive with the other
actions, then we can safely ignore the poorly-performing
action.
BRP provably reduces the computation time needed to solve
imperfect-information games. Additionally, a primary advantage of BRP is that in addition to faster convergence,
1

Earlier versions of this paper referred to Best-Response Pruning as Total Regret-Based Pruning (Total RBP)

