Breaking Locality Accelerates Block Gauss-Seidel

Stephen Tu 1 Shivaram Venkataraman 1 Ashia C. Wilson 1 Alex Gittens 2 Michael I. Jordan 1 Benjamin Recht 1

Abstract
Recent work by Nesterov and Stich (2016)
showed that momentum can be used to accelerate the rate of convergence for block GaussSeidel in the setting where a fixed partitioning of the coordinates is chosen ahead of time.
We show that this setting is too restrictive, constructing instances where breaking locality by
running non-accelerated Gauss-Seidel with randomly sampled coordinates substantially outperforms accelerated Gauss-Seidel with any fixed
partitioning. Motivated by this finding, we analyze the accelerated block Gauss-Seidel algorithm in the random coordinate sampling setting. Our analysis captures the benefit of acceleration with a new data-dependent parameter which is well behaved when the matrix subblocks are well-conditioned. Empirically, we
show that accelerated Gauss-Seidel with random
coordinate sampling provides speedups for large
scale machine learning tasks when compared to
non-accelerated Gauss-Seidel and the classical
conjugate-gradient algorithm.

1. Introduction
The randomized Gauss-Seidel method is a commonly used
iterative algorithm to compute the solution of an n × n linear system Ax = b by updating a single coordinate at a
time in a randomized order. While this approach is known
to converge linearly to the true solution when A is positive
definite (see e.g. (Leventhal & Lewis, 2010)), in practice
it is often more efficient to update a small block of coordinates at a time due to the effects of cache locality.
In extending randomized Gauss-Seidel to the block setting,
a natural question that arises is how one should sample the
next block. At one extreme a fixed partition of the coordi1

UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Stephen Tu <stephent@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

nates is chosen ahead of time. The algorithm is restricted
to randomly selecting blocks from this fixed partitioning,
thus favoring data locality. At the other extreme we break
locality by sampling a new set of random coordinates to
form a block at every iteration.
Theoretically, the fixed partition case is well understood
both for Gauss-Seidel (Qu et al., 2015; Gower & Richtárik,
2015) and its Nesterov accelerated variant (Nesterov &
Stich, 2016). More specifically, at most O(µ−1
part log(1/ε))
iterations of Gauss-Seidel are sufficient to reach a solution
with at most ε error, where µpart is a quantity which measures how well the A matrix is preconditioned by the block
diagonal matrix containing the sub-blocks corresponding
to the fixed partitioning. When acceleration is used, Nesterov
qand Stich (2016)
 show that the rate improves to
O

n −1
p µpart log(1/ε)

, where p is the partition size.

For the random coordinate selection model, the existing
literature is less complete. While it is known (Qu et al.,
2015; Gower & Richtárik, 2015) that the iteration complexity with random coordinate section is O(µ−1
rand log(1/ε))
for an ε error solution, µrand is another instance dependent
quantity which is not directly comparable to µpart . Hence
it is not obvious how much better, if at all, one expects
random coordinate selection to perform compared to fixed
partitioning.
Our first contribution in this paper is to show that, when
compared to the random coordinate selection model, the
fixed partition model can perform very poorly in terms of
iteration complexity to reach a pre-specified error. Specifically, we present a family of instances (similar to the matrices recently studied by Lee and Wright (2016)) where nonaccelerated Gauss-Seidel with random coordinate selection
performs arbitrarily faster than both non-accelerated and
even accelerated Gauss-Seidel, using any fixed partition.
Our result thus shows the importance of the sampling strategy and that acceleration cannot make up for a poor choice
of sampling distribution.
This finding motivates us to further study the benefits of
acceleration under the random coordinate selection model.
Interestingly, the benefits are more nuanced under this
model. We show that acceleration
improves 
the rate from
q
−1
−1
O(µrand log(1/ε)) to O
νµrand log(1/ε) , where ν is

