Variants of RMSProp and Adagrad with Logarithmic Regret Bounds

Mahesh Chandra Mukkamala 1 2 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract
Adaptive gradient methods have become recently
very popular, in particular as they have been
shown to be useful in the training of deep neural networks. In this paper we have analyzed
RMSProp, originally proposed for the training
of deep neural networks, in the √
context of online convex optimization and show T -type regret bounds. Moreover, we propose two variants SC-Adagrad and SC-RMSProp for which
we show logarithmic regret bounds for strongly
convex functions. Finally, we demonstrate in the
experiments that these new variants outperform
other adaptive gradient techniques or stochastic
gradient descent in the optimization of strongly
convex functions as well as in training of deep
neural networks.

1. Introduction
There has recently been a lot of work on adaptive gradient
algorithms such as Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSProp
(Hinton et al., 2012), ADADELTA (Zeiler, 2012), and
Adam (Kingma & Bai, 2015). The original idea of Adagrad to have a parameter specific learning rate by analyzing the gradients observed during the optimization turned
out to be useful not only in online convex optimization
but also for training deep neural networks. The original
analysis of Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011) was limited to the
case of all convex functions for which
√ it obtained a datadependent regret bound of order O( T ) which is known
to be optimal (Hazan, 2016) for this class. However, a lot
of learning problems have more structure in the sense that
one optimizes over the restricted class of strongly convex
functions. It has been shown in (Hazan et al., 2007) that
one can achieve much better logarithmic regret bounds for
the class of strongly convex functions.

The goal of this paper is twofold. First, we propose SCAdagrad which is a variant of Adagrad adapted to the
strongly convex case. We show that SC-Adagrad achieves
a logarithmic regret bound for the case of strongly convex
functions, which is data-dependent. It is known that such
bounds can be much better in practice than data independent bounds (Hazan et al., 2007),(McMahan, 2014). Second, we analyze RMSProp which has become one of the
standard methods to train neural networks beyond stochastic gradient descent. We show that under some conditions on the weighting scheme√of RMSProp, this algorithm
achieves a data-dependent O( T ) regret bound. In fact, it
turns out that RMSProp contains Adagrad as a special case
for a particular choice of the weighting scheme. Up to our
knowledge this is the first theoretical result justifying the
usage of RMSProp in online convex optimization and thus
can at least be seen as theoretical support for its usage in
deep learning. Similarly, we then propose the variant SCRMSProp for which we also show a data-dependent logarithmic regret bound similar to SC-Adagrad for the class of
strongly convex functions. Interestingly, SC-Adagrad has
been discussed in (Ruder, 2016), where it is said that “it
does not to work”. The reason for this is that SC-Adagrad
comes along with a damping factor which prevents potentially large steps in the beginning of the iterations. However, as our analysis shows this damping factor has to be
rather large initially to prevent large steps and should be
then monotonically decreasing as a function of the iterations in order to stay adaptive. Finally, we show in experiments on three datasets that the new methods are competitive or outperform other adaptive gradient techniques as
well as stochastic gradient descent for strongly convex optimization problem in terms of regret and training objective
but also perform very well in the training of deep neural
networks, where we show results for different networks and
datasets.

2. Problem Statement

1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saarland
University, Germany 2 IMPRS-CS, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany . Correspondence to: Mahesh
Chandra Mukkamala <mmahesh.chandra873@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

We first need some technical statements and notation and
then introduce the online convex optimization problem.

