Near-Optimal Design of Experiments via Regret Minimization
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu * 1 Yuanzhi Li * 2 Aarti Singh * 3 Yining Wang * 3

Abstract

one wishes to select k  n experimental settings from
X that are the most statistically efficient for establishing a
model that connects experimental parameters with synthesized material quality, y. The experimental design problem
is also related to many machine learning tasks, such as linear bandits (Deshpande & Montanari, 2012; Huang et al.,
2016), diversity sampling (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012) and
active learning (Ma et al., 2013; Chaudhuri et al., 2015;
Hazan & Karnin, 2015; Balcan & Long, 2013; Wang &
Singh, 2016).

We consider computationally tractable methods
for the experimental design problem, where k out
of n design points of dimension p are selected
so that certain optimality criteria are approximately satisfied. Our algorithm finds a (1 + ε)approximate optimal design when k is a linear
function of p; in contrast, existing results require
k to be super-linear in p. Our algorithm also handles all popular optimality criteria, while existing
ones only handle one or two such criteria. Numerical results on synthetic and real-world design problems verify the practical effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm.

Since statistical efficiency can be measured in various
ways, there exist a number of optimality criteria to guide
the selection of experiments. We review some optimality
criteria in Sec. 2 and interested readers are referred to Sec. 6
of (Pukelsheim, 2006) for a comprehensive review.

1. Introduction
Experimental design is an important problem in statistics
and machine learning research (Pukelsheim, 2006). Consider a linear regression model
y = Xβ 0 + w,

(1)

where X ∈ Rn×p is a pool of n design points, y is the response vector, β 0 is a p-dimensional unknown regression
model and w is a vector of i.i.d. noise variables satisfying
Ewi = 0 and Ewi2 < ∞. The experimental design problem is to select a small subset of rows (i.e., design points)
XS from the design pool X so that the statistical power of
estimating β 0 is maximized from noisy response y S on the
selected designs XS .
As an example, consider a material synthesis application
where p is the number of variables (e.g., temperature, pressure, duration) that are hypothesized to affect the quality of
the synthesized material and n is the total number of combinations of different parameters of experimental conditions. As experiments are expensive and time-consuming,
*
Author names listed in alphabetic order. 1 Microsoft Research,
Redmond, USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, USA 3 Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Yining
Wang <yiningwa@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Typically, an optimality criterion is a function f : S+
p →R
that maps from the p-dimensional positive definite cone to
a real number. The experimental design problem can then
be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem:
S ∗ (k) = arg min f (X>
S XS ),

(2)

S∈S(n,k)

where S is either a set or a multi-set of size k, and XS ∈
Rk×p is formed by stacking the rows of X that are in S.
The constraint set S1/2 (n, k) is defined as follows:

1. With replacement: S1 (n, k) = {S multi-set : S ⊆
[n], |S| ≤ k}. Under this setting, XS may contain duplicate rows of the design pool X;
2. Without replacement: S2 (n, k) = {S standard set :
S ⊆ [n], |S| ≤ k}. Under this setting, XS only contains distinct rows of the design pool X.

The “with replacement” setting is classical in statistics literature, where the multiple measurements in y with respect
to the same design point lead to different values with statistically independent noise. The “without replacement” setting, on the other hand, is more relevant in machine learning applications, because labels are not likely to change if
the same data point (e.g., the same image) is considered
twice. Finally, it is worth pointing out that the “with replacement” setting is easier, because it can be reduced (in
polynomial time) to the “without replacement” setting by
replicating each row of X for k times.
For many popular choices of f , the exact optimization

