Multiple Clustering Views from Multiple Uncertain Experts

Yale Chang 1 Junxiang Chen 1 Michael H. Cho 2 Peter J. Castaldi 2 Edwin K. Silverman 2 Jennifer G. Dy 1

Abstract
Expert input can improve clustering performance. In today’s collaborative environment, the
availability of crowdsourced multiple expert input is becoming common. Given multiple experts’ inputs, most existing approaches can only
discover one clustering structure. However, data
is multi-faceted by nature and can be clustered
in different ways (also known as views). In an
exploratory analysis problem where ground truth
is not known, different experts may have diverse
views on how to cluster data. In this paper, we
address the problem on how to automatically discover multiple ways to cluster data given potentially diverse inputs from multiple uncertain experts. We propose a novel Bayesian probabilistic model that automatically learns the multiple
expert views and the clustering structure associated with each view. The benefits of learning the experts’ views include 1) enabling the
discovery of multiple diverse clustering structures, and 2) improving the quality of clustering solution in each view by assigning higher
weights to experts with higher confidence. In
our approach, the expert views, multiple clustering structures and expert confidences are jointly
learned via variational inference. Experimental
results on synthetic datasets, benchmark datasets
and a real-world disease subtyping problem show
that our proposed approach outperforms competing baselines, including meta clustering, semisupervised clustering, semi-crowdsourced clustering and consensus clustering.

1. Introduction
As a cornerstone of unsupervised learning, clustering has
been widely used in knowledge discovery problems (Jain
1

Northeastern University, Boston, MA 2 Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Correspondence to: Yale Chang <ychang@coe.neu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 1999). Given data matrix and a notion of similarity between samples, clustering aims to categorize data
into different clusters so that samples in the same cluster
are similar and samples in different clusters are dissimilar.
Thus, depending on users’ notions of similarity, the same
dataset can be clustered in different ways, also known as
views (Niu et al., 2010). For example, face images can be
clustered based on pose or identity; marbles can be clustered based on shape or color. However, how to properly
define similarity between samples in a knowledge discovery problem is nontrivial. To help solve this challenge,
semi-supervised clustering utilizes expert supervision to
guide the clustering towards the right solution (Wagstaff &
Cardie, 2000; Basu et al., 2008). Supervision is usually in
the form of pairwise constraints between samples, including must-link (ML) and cannot-link (CL) constraints.
Instead of supervision from one expert, it is becoming more
common for supervision to be available from multiple experts as data can be shared and processed by increasingly
larger audiences (e.g., crowdsourcing (Howe, 2008) mechanisms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk and large collaborative consortiums (Zhang et al., 2011)). In an exploratory data analysis setting, where ground truths are not
known, different experts might provide supervision (pairwise contraints) with varying views in mind. For example, one expert might be thinking of similarity/clustering
based on pose and another expert might be providing inputs based on identity on the face image problem. Moreover, because experts are not oracles, their inputs are prone
to errors as well. In this paper, we address a new clustering paradigm: how to discover multiple clustering structures in the data given potentially diverse constraints
from multiple uncertain experts.
Our objective of finding multiple clustering structures
given inputs from multiple experts is motivated by discovering subtypes (clusters) of a complex lung disease called
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). COPD is
currently the third leading cause of death in the US (Murphy et al., 2013). Although traditionally being called one
disease, doctors believe there exist multiple disease subtypes and providing personalized clinical care to patients
according to their disease subtypes can lead to more effective treatments. We have collected constraints provided by
multiple experts in the consortium. The experts had var-

