Programming with a Differentiable Forth Interpreter
Matko Bošnjak 1 Tim Rocktäschel 2 Jason Naradowsky 3 Sebastian Riedel 1

Abstract
Given that in practice training data is scarce for all but a
small set of problems, a core question is how to incorporate
prior knowledge into a model. In this paper, we consider
the case of prior procedural knowledge for neural networks,
such as knowing how a program should traverse a sequence,
but not what local actions should be performed at each
step. To this end, we present an end-to-end differentiable
interpreter for the programming language Forth which
enables programmers to write program sketches with slots
that can be filled with behaviour trained from program
input-output data. We can optimise this behaviour directly
through gradient descent techniques on user-specified
objectives, and also integrate the program into any larger
neural computation graph. We show empirically that our
interpreter is able to effectively leverage different levels
of prior program structure and learn complex behaviours
such as sequence sorting and addition. When connected
to outputs of an LSTM and trained jointly, our interpreter
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for end-to-end reasoning
about quantities expressed in natural language stories.

1. Introduction
A central goal of Artificial Intelligence is the creation of
machines that learn as effectively from human instruction
as they do from data. A recent and important step towards
this goal is the invention of neural architectures that
learn to perform algorithms akin to traditional computers,
using primitives such as memory access and stack manipulation (Graves et al., 2014; Joulin & Mikolov, 2015;
Grefenstette et al., 2015; Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015; Kurach
et al., 2016; Graves et al., 2016). These architectures can
be trained through standard gradient descent methods,
and enable machines to learn complex behaviour from
input-output pairs or program traces. In this context, the
role of the human programmer is often limited to providing
training data. However, training data is a scarce resource
for many tasks. In these cases, the programmer may have
1

Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
Correspondence to: Matko Bošnjak <m.bosnjak@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

partial procedural background knowledge: one may know
the rough structure of the program, or how to implement
several subroutines that are likely necessary to solve the
task. For example, in programming by demonstration (Lau
et al., 2001) or query language programming (Neelakantan
et al., 2015a) a user establishes a larger set of conditions on
the data, and the model needs to set out the details. In all
these scenarios, the question then becomes how to exploit
various types of prior knowledge when learning algorithms.
To address the above question we present an approach that
enables programmers to inject their procedural background
knowledge into a neural network. In this approach, the
programmer specifies a program sketch (Solar-Lezama
et al., 2005) in a traditional programming language. This
sketch defines one part of the neural network behaviour. The
other part is learned using training data. The core insight
that enables this approach is the fact that most programming
languages can be formulated in terms of an abstract machine
that executes the commands of the language. We implement
these machines as neural networks, constraining parts of the
networks to follow the sketched behaviour. The resulting
neural programs are consistent with our prior knowledge
and optimised with respect to the training data.
In this paper, we focus on the programming language
Forth (Brodie, 1980), a simple yet powerful stack-based
language that facilitates factoring and abstraction. Underlying Forth’s semantics is a simple abstract machine. We
introduce @4, an implementation of this machine that is
differentiable with respect to the transition it executes at
each time step, as well as distributed input representations.
Sketches that users write define underspecified behaviour
which can then be trained with backpropagation.
For two neural programming tasks introduced in previous
work (Reed & de Freitas, 2015) we present Forth sketches
that capture different degrees of prior knowledge. For
example, we define only the general recursive structure of
a sorting problem. We show that given only input-output
pairs, @4 can learn to fill the sketch and generalise well
to problems of unseen size. In addition, we apply @4 to
the task of solving word algebra problems. We show that
when provided with basic algorithmic scaffolding and
trained jointly with an upstream LSTM (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), @4 is able to learn to read natural

