Depth-Width Tradeoffs in Approximating Natural Functions with Neural
Networks
Itay Safran 1 Ohad Shamir 1

Abstract
We provide several new depth-based separation
results for feed-forward neural networks, proving
that various types of simple and natural functions
can be better approximated using deeper networks than shallower ones, even if the shallower
networks are much larger. This includes indicators of balls and ellipses; non-linear functions
which are radial with respect to the L1 norm; and
smooth non-linear functions. We also show that
these gaps can be observed experimentally: Increasing the depth indeed allows better learning
than increasing width, when training neural networks to learn an indicator of a unit ball.

1. Introduction
Deep learning, in the form of artificial neural networks, has
seen a dramatic resurgence in the past recent years, achieving great performance improvements in various fields of
artificial intelligence such as computer vision and speech
recognition. While empirically successful, our theoretical
understanding of deep learning is still limited at best.
An emerging line of recent works has studied the expressive power of neural networks: What functions can and
cannot be represented by networks of a given architecture
(see related work section below). A particular focus has
been the trade-off between the network’s width and depth:
On the one hand, it is well-known that large enough networks of depth 2 can already approximate any continuous
d
target function on [0, 1] to arbitrary accuracy (Cybenko,
1989; Hornik, 1991). On the other hand, it has long been
evident that deeper networks tend to perform better than
shallow ones, a phenomenon supported by the intuition that
depth, providing compositional expressibility, is necessary
for efficiently representing some functions. Moreover, re1

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Itay Safran <itay.safran@weizmann.ac.il>, Ohad
Shamir <ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

cent empirical evidence suggests that standard feedforward
deep networks are harder to optimize than shallower networks which lead to worse training error and testing error
(He et al., 2015).
To demonstrate the power of depth in neural networks, a
clean and precise approach is to prove the existence of
functions which can be expressed (or well-approximated)
by moderately-sized networks of a given depth, yet cannot
be approximated well by shallower networks, even if their
size is much larger. However, the mere existence of such
functions is not enough: Ideally, we would like to show
such depth separation results using natural, interpretable
functions, of the type we may expect neural networks to
successfully train on. Proving that depth is necessary for
such functions can give us a clearer and more useful insight
into what various neural network architectures can and cannot express in practice.
In this paper, we provide several contributions to this
emerging line of work. We focus on standard, vanilla feedforward networks (using some fixed activation function,
such as the popular ReLU), and measure expressiveness
directly in terms of approximation error, defined as the expected squared loss with respect to some distribution over
the input domain. In this setting, we show the following:
• We prove that the indicator of the Euclidean unit ball,
x 7→ 1 (kxk ≤ 1) in Rd , which can be easily approximated to accuracy  using a 3-layer network with
O(d2 /) neurons, cannot be approximated to an accuracy higher than O(1/d4 ) using a 2-layer network,
unless its width is exponential in d. In fact, we show
the same result more generally, for any indicator of
an ellipsoid x 7→ 1 (kAx + bk ≤ r) (where A is a
non-singular matrix and b is a vector). The proof is
based on a reduction from the main result of (Eldan &
Shamir, 2016), which shows a separation between 2layer and 3-layer networks using a more complicated
and less natural radial function.
• We prove that any L1 radial function x 7→
f (kxk1 ), where x ∈ Rd and f : R → R is
piecewise-linear, cannot be approximated to accuracy
 by a depth 2 ReLU network of width less than

