Canopy — Fast Sampling with Cover Trees

Manzil Zaheer 1 2 * Satwik Kottur 1 * Amr Ahmed 3 José Moura 1 Alex Smola 1 2

Abstract
Hierarchical Bayesian models often capture distributions over a very large number of distinct atoms.
The need for these models arises when organizing
huge amount of unsupervised data, for instance,
features extracted using deep convnets that can
be exploited to organize abundant unlabeled images. Inference for hierarchical Bayesian models
in such cases can be rather nontrivial, leading to
approximate approaches. In this work, we propose
Canopy, a sampler based on Cover Trees that is
exact, has guaranteed runtime logarithmic in the
number of atoms, and is provably polynomial in
the inherent dimensionality of the underlying parameter space. In other words, the algorithm is as
fast as search over a hierarchical data structure.
We provide theory for Canopy and demonstrate its
effectiveness on both synthetic and real datasets,
consisting of over 100 million images.

1. Introduction
Fast nearest-neighbor algorithms have become a mainstay
of information retrieval (Beygelzimer et al., 2006; Liu et al.,
2007; Indyk & Motwani, 1998). Search engines are able to
perform virtually instantaneous lookup among sets containing billions of objects. In contrast, inference procedures for
latent variable models (Gibbs sampling, EM, or variational
methods) are often problematic even when dealing with
thousands of distinct objects. This is largely because, for
any inference methods, we potentially need to evaluate all
probabilities whereas search only needs the best instance.
While the above is admittedly an oversimplification of matters (after all, we can use Markov-Chain Monte Carlo methods for inference), it is nonetheless nontrivial to perform
exact sampling for large state spaces. In the current work,
we propose Canopy, an inference technique to address this
issue by marrying a fast lookup structure with an adaptive
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Amazon Web Services, USA 3 Google Inc, USA. Correspondence
to: Manzil Zaheer <manzil@cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Figure 1. Canopy is much faster yet as accurate as other methods
like EM or ESCA (Zaheer et al., 2016). The bar graph shows time
per iteration while line plots the likelihood on held-out test set.
Results shown are for inference of a Gaussian mixture model with
32 million points having 4096 clusters at 1024 dimensions.

rejection sampler. This leads to a surprisingly simple design for a plethora of sampling-based inference algorithms.
Moreover, we provide runtime guarantees for Canopy that
depend only on the inherent dimensionality of both parameter and data distributions. The expected depth for lookups is
never worse than logarithmic in the number of atoms and
the characteristic length scale at which models can be sufficiently well distinguished. Furthermore, we can parallelize
Canopy for hierarchical Bayesian models using stochastic
cellular automata (ESCA) (Zaheer et al., 2016), thus leading
to an extremely scalable and efficient system design.
Most latent variable models, e.g., Gaussian mixture models
(GMM), latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei et al., 2002), hidden
Markov models, Dirichlet process clustering (Neal, 1998),
or hierarchical generative models (Adams et al., 2010), have
the structure of the form:
X
p(x) =
p(z)p(x|θz )
(1)
z

where x denotes observed variables, z latent variables, and
θz parameters of the conditional. Often the conditional distribution p(x|θz ) belongs to the exponential family, which
we assume to be the case as well. The inference procedure
on these models using either Gibbs sampling, stochastic variation methods, or ESCA would require to draw z ∼ p(z|x)
repeatedly. Naı̈vely producing these draws would be expensive, especially when the number of latent classes is huge.
We aim to bring the per-iteration cost down from O(mn)
to Õ(m + n), where m, n are the number of latent classes
and data points, respectively. For example, on GMM, the
proposed method Canopy is much faster than EM or ESCA,
while achieving the same accuracy as shown in Fig. 1.

