Uniform Convergence Rates for Kernel Density Estimation

Heinrich Jiang 1

Abstract
Kernel density estimation (KDE) is a popular
nonparametric density estimation method. We
(1) derive finite-sample high-probability density
estimation bounds for multivariate KDE under
mild density assumptions which hold uniformly
in x ∈ Rd and bandwidth matrices. We apply these results to (2) mode, (3) density level
set, and (4) class probability estimation and attain optimal rates up to logarithmic factors. We
then (5) provide an extension of our results under the manifold hypothesis. Finally, we (6) give
uniform convergence results for local intrinsic dimension estimation.

1. Introduction
KDE (Rosenblatt, 1956; Parzen, 1962) is a foundational aspect of nonparametric statistics. It is a powerful method to
estimate the probability density function of a random variable. Moreover, it is simple to compute and has played
a significant role in a very wide range of practical applications. Its convergence properties have been studied for a
long time with most of the work dedicated to its asymptotic
behavior or mean-squared risk (Tsybakov, 2008). However, there is still a surprising amount not yet fully understood about its convergence behavior. In this paper, we
focus on the uniform finite-sample facet of KDE convergence theory. We handle the multivariate KDE setting in
Rd which allows a d × d bandwidth matrix H. This generalizes the scalar bandwidth h > 0 i.e. H = h2 I. Such
a generalization is significant to multivariate statistics e.g.
Silverman (1986); Simonoff (1996).
Our work begins by using VC-based Bernstein-type uniform convergence bounds to attain finite-sample rates for
a fixed unknown density f over Rd (Theorem 1). These
bounds hold with high-probability under general assumptions on f and the kernel i.e. we only require f to be
1
Google.
Correspondence to:
rich.jiang@gmail.com>.
th

Heinrich Jiang <hein-

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

bounded as well as decay assumptions on the kernel functions. Moreover, these bounds hold uniformly over Rd and
bandwidth matrices H.
We then show the versatility of our results by applying it to
the related areas of KDE rates under `∞ , mode estimation,
density level-set estimation, and class probability estimation. We then extend our analysis to the manifold setting.
Finally, we provide uniform finite-sample results for local
intrinsic dimension estimation. Each of these contributions
are significant on their own.

2. Contributions and Related Works
`∞ bounds for KDE: It must first be noted that bounding
|fbh − f |∞ where fbh is the KDE of f for scalar h > 0
is a more difficult problem than for example bounding the
mean-squared error Ef [(fbh − f )2 ]. Gine & Guillon (2002)
and Einmahl & Mason (2005) give asymptotic convergence
results on KDE for |fˆh − Ef fˆh |∞ . In their work about
density clustering, Rinaldo & Wasserman (2010) extends
the results of the former to obtain high-probability finitesample bounds. This is to our knowledge the strongest and
most general uniform finite-sample result about KDE thus
far.
b
We
p show a general bound of form |fh (x) − f (x)| . x +
d
log n/nh where x is a function of the kernel and the
smoothness of f at x which holds with probability 1 − 1/n
uniformly over x ∈ Rd and h (Theorem 1). An almost
direct consequence is that if we take f to be α-Hölder continuous then under the optimal choice for h ≈ n−1/(2α+d) ,
we have |fˆh − f |∞ . n−α/(2α+d) with probability 1 − 1/n
(Theorem 2). This matches the known lower bound (Tsybakov, 2008).
When comparing our finite-sample results to that of Rinaldo & Wasserman (2010), there are a few notable differences. Our results hold uniformly across bandwidths and
the probability that the bounds hold are independent of the
bandwidth (in fact, holds with probability 1 − 1/n). Our
results also extends to general bandwidth matrix H.
This can be significant to analyze KDE-based procedures
with adaptive bandwidths– i.e. when the bandwidths
change depending on the region. Then the need for bounds
which hold simultaneously over bandwidth choices be-

