Active Learning for Top-K Rank Aggregation from Noisy Comparisons

Soheil Mohajer 1 Changho Suh 2 Adel Elmahdy 1

Abstract
We explore an active top-K ranking problem
based on pairwise comparisons that are collected
possibly in a sequential manner as per our design choice. We consider two settings: (1) top-K
sorting in which the goal is to recover the top-K
items in order out of n items; (2) top-K partitioning where only the set of top-K items is desired.
Under a fairly general model which subsumes as
special cases various models (e.g., Strong Stochastic Transitivity model, BTL model and uniform
noise model), we characterize upper bounds on
the sample size required for top-K sorting as well
as for top-K partitioning. As a consequence, we
demonstrate that active ranking can offer significant multiplicative gains in sample complexity
over passive ranking. Depending on the underlying stochastic noise model, such gain varies from
n2 log n
around logloglogn n to log
log n . We also present an
algorithm that is applicable to both settings.

1. Introduction
Ranking is prevalent in a wide variety of applications: social choice (Caplin & Nalebuff, 1991; Azari Soufiani et al.,
2013), web search and information retrieval (Dwork et al.,
2001), recommendation systems (Baltrunas et al., 2010),
and crowd sourcing (Chen et al., 2013), to name a few. The
goal of the problem is to bring a consistent ordering to a
collection of items, given partial preference information.
The two main paradigms among a large volume of works
on ranking include spectral ranking algorithms (Negahban
et al., 2016; Dwork et al., 2001; Brin & Page, 1998) and
maximum likelihood estimation (Ford, 1957). These methods focus on finding the entire ordering, not being tailored
for many practical applications in which only a few signifi1
ECE, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, MN, USA. 2 EE,
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Soheil Mohajer <soheil@umn.edu>, Changho Suh <chsuh@kaist.ac.kr>, Adel
Elmahdy <adel@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

cant items, say top-K, are often desired to be retrieved.
In an effort to exploit the more practically relevant scenario, (Chen & Suh, 2015) investigated the top-K rank
aggregation which aims to recover the correct set of topranked items only. It characterized the minimax limit on
the sample size (i.e., sample complexity) under the BradleyTerry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce,
1959) where pairs of two items are compared. However, this
development is limited to a passive measurement setting in
which pairwise data are simply given prior to analysis.
Many applications of interest often admit interaction with
users. This enables us to select comparison pairs of items
in an adaptive manner. This way of ranking provides the
potential to reduce a large number of blindly collected measurements while maintaining a ranking accuracy (Tschopp
et al., 2011). This motivates us to examine an adaptive
measurement setting, in which pairwise comparisons are
gathered interacting with a ranker (termed active ranking).
In particular, we intend to address the following two questions: (a) how much can active ranking offer performance
improvements over passive ranking? (b) how does the limit
on the sample size for top-K ranking scale with K?
To answer this question, we consider a general model in
which the pairwise comparison probabilities are arbitrary
subject to a mild condition (see (5) in Section 2 for details)
and thus which includes as special cases various models
like the BTL model, Strong Stochastic Transitivity (SST)
model (Fishburn, 1973; Shah et al., 2016), and uniform
noise model (Braverman & Mossel, 2008). Two ranking
tasks are taken into consideration: (i) top-K sorting which
takes care of detailed ordering within top-K items; (ii) topK partitioning which concerns only the correct set of them.
Contribution. Our contributions are two-folded. The first
lies in deriving an upper bound on the sample size:


max(log log n, log K)
O (n + K log K)
(1)
∆K
where1
(
∆K =

∆K,S = min min (Pij −0.5)2 , Sorting;
i∈[K] j:j≥i

∆K,P = (PK,K+1 −0.5)2 , Partitioning.

(2)

1
Note that the notation ∆K here is defined slightly differently
from the one in (Chen & Suh, 2015).

