Second-Order Kernel Online Convex Optimization with Adaptive Sketching

Daniele Calandriello 1 Alessandro Lazaric 1 Michal Valko 1

Abstract
Kernel online convex optimization (KOCO) is a
framework combining the expressiveness of nonparametric kernel models with the regret guarantees of online learning. First-order KOCO methods such as functional gradient descent require
only O(t) time and space per iteration, and, when
the only information on the losses is their
√ convexity, achieve a minimax optimal O( T ) regret. Nonetheless, many common losses in kernel problems, such as squared loss, logistic loss,
and squared hinge loss posses stronger curvature
that can be exploited. In this case, second-order
KOCO methods achieve O(log(Det(K))) regret,
which we show scales as O(deff log T ), where
deff is the effective dimension of the
√ problem and
is usually much smaller than O( T ). The main
drawback of second-order methods is their much
higher O(t2 ) space and time complexity. In this
paper, we introduce kernel online Newton step
(KONS), a new second-order KOCO method that
also achieves O(deff log T ) regret. To address the
computational complexity of second-order methods, we introduce a new matrix sketching algorithm for the kernel matrix Kt , and show that for
a chosen parameter γ ≤ 1 our Sketched-KONS
reduces the space and time complexity by a factor of γ 2 to O(t2 γ 2 ) space and time per iteration,
while incurring only 1/γ times more regret.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) (Zinkevich, 2003) models the problem of convex optimization over Rd as a game
over t ∈ {1, . . . , T } time steps between an adversary and
the player. In its linear version, that we refer to as linearOCO (LOCO), the adversary chooses a sequence of arbitrary convex losses `t and points xt , and a player chooses
weights wt and predicts xTt wt . The goal of the player is to
1
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe. Correspondence
to: Daniele Calandriello <daniele.calandriello@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

minimize the regret, defined as the difference between the
losses of the predictions obtained using the weights played
by the player and the best fixed weight in hindsight given
all points and losses.
Gradient descent. For this setting, Zinkevich (2003)
showed that simple gradient descent (GD), combined with
a smart choice√
for the stepsize ηt of the gradient updates,
achieves a O( dT ) regret with a O(d) space and time
cost per iteration. When the only assumption on the losses
is simple convexity, this upper bound matches the corresponding lower bound (Luo et al., 2016), thus making
first-order methods (e.g., GD) essentially unimprovable in
a minimax sense. Nonetheless, when the losses have additional curvature properties, Hazan et al. (2006) show that
online Newton step (ONS), an adaptive method that exploits second-order (second derivative) information on the
losses, can achieve a logarithmic regret O(d log T ). The
downside of this adaptive method is the larger O(d2 ) space
and per-step time complexity, since second-order updates
require to construct, store, and invert Ht , a preconditioner
matrix related to the Hessian of the losses used to correct
the first-order updates.
Kernel gradient descent. For linear models, such as the
ones considered in LOCO, a simple way to create more expressive models is to map them in some high-dimensional
space, the feature space, and then use the kernel trick
(Schölkopf & Smola, 2001) to avoid explicitly computing their high-dimensional representation. Mapping to a
larger space allows the algorithm to better fit the losses
chosen by the adversary and reduce its cumulative loss.
As a drawback, the Kernel OCO (KOCO) problem1 is
fundamentally harder than LOCO, due to 1) the fact that
an infinite parametrization makes regret bounds scaling
with the dimension d meaningless and 2) the size of the
model, and therefore time and space complexities, scales
with t itself, making these methods even less performant
than LOCO algorithms. Kernel extensions of LOCO algorithms have been proposed for KOCO, such as functional
GD (e.g.,
√ NORMA, Kivinen et al., 2004) which achieves
a O( T ) regret with a O(t) space and time cost per iteration. For second-order methods, the Second-Order Per1
This setting is often referred to as online kernel learning or
kernel-based online learning in the literature.

