On The Projection Operator to A Three-view Cardinality Constrained Set
Haichuan Yang 1 Shupeng Gui 1 Chuyang Ke 1 Daniel Stefankovic 1 Ryohei Fujimaki 2 Ji Liu 1

Abstract
The cardinality constraint is an intrinsic way to
restrict the solution structure in many domains,
for example, sparse learning, feature selection,
and compressed sensing. To solve a cardinality constrained problem, the key challenge is
to solve the projection onto the cardinality constraint set, which is NP-hard in general when
there exist multiple overlapped cardinality constraints. In this paper, we consider the scenario
where the overlapped cardinality constraints satisfy a Three-view Cardinality Structure (TVCS),
which reflects the natural restriction in many applications, such as identification of gene regulatory networks and task-worker assignment problem. We cast the projection into a linear programming, and show that for TVCS, the vertex
solution of this linear programming is the solution for the original projection problem. We
further prove that such solution can be found
with the complexity proportional to the number
of variables and constraints. We finally use synthetic experiments and two interesting applications in bioinformatics and crowdsourcing to validate the proposed TVCS model and method.

where w is the optimization variable, g is an index subset
of [p] := {1, 2, · · · , p}, wg is the sub-vector of w indexed
by g. kwg k0 denotes the cardinality of the sub-vector, i.e.,
the number of nonzeros in wg , G is the hyper set of all
predefined groups, and s 2 R|G| is the upper bound vector - sg 2 R refers to the upper bound of the sparsity over
group g. Objective f is the loss function which could be
defined with different form according to the specific application. The problem (1) refers to a nonconvex optimization
(NP-hard) due to the cardinality constraint. Some efficient
iterative methods such as IHT (Yuan et al., 2014), CoSaMP
(Needell & Tropp, 2009), GradMP (Nguyen et al., 2012),
and their variants can guarantee to solve the original problem under some mild conditions. A key component in all
of these methods is the projection operator
P⌦(G,s) (v) := arg min
w2⌦(G,s)

subject to

(1a)

f (w)
kwg k0  sg

8g 2 G

(2)

In this paper, we consider the scenario where the overlapped cardinality constraints (1b) satisfy a Three-view
Cardinality Structure (TVCS):

The cardinality constraint is an intrinsic way to restrict
the solution structure in many real problems, for example,
sparse learning (Olshausen & Field, 1997), feature selection (Zhang, 2009), and compressed sensing (Candes et al.,
2006). The generic cardinality constrained optimization
can be expressed as
min

vk2

where ⌦(G, s) denotes the feasible set to the constraint (1b). While in some special case, for example,
G = {[p]}, the projection is trivial, it is quite challenging,
especially when G includes multiple overlapped index sets
(even NP-hard in some cases).

1. Introduction

w2Rp

kw

(1b)

1

University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA 2 NEC,
Cupertino, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Haichuan Yang
<h.yang@rochester.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Definition 1. (Three-view Cardinality Structure
(TVCS)) For ⌦(G, s), the hyper set G consisting of subsets
of [p] admits the TVCS structure if the following conditions
are satisfied:
• There exists a partition G0 , G1 and G2 such that G =
G0 [ G1 [ G2 ;
• G0 = {[p]};
• All element sets in G1 have no overlap;
• All element sets in G2 have no overlap.
This definition basically requires that G can be partitioned
into three hyper sets G0 , G1 , and G2 , and overlaps can only
happen between element sets in different hyper sets. G0 is

