Model-Independent Online Learning for Influence Maximization
Sharan Vaswani 1 Branislav Kveton 2 Zheng Wen 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3 Laks V.S. Lakshmanan 1
Mark Schmidt 1

Abstract
We consider influence maximization (IM) in social networks, which is the problem of maximizing the number of users that become aware of a
product by selecting a set of “seed” users to expose the product to. While prior work assumes
a known model of information diffusion, we propose a novel parametrization that not only makes
our framework agnostic to the underlying diffusion model, but also statistically efficient to learn
from data. We give a corresponding monotone,
submodular surrogate function, and show that it
is a good approximation to the original IM objective. We also consider the case of a new marketer looking to exploit an existing social network, while simultaneously learning the factors
governing information propagation. For this, we
propose a pairwise-influence semi-bandit feedback model and develop a LinUCB-based bandit algorithm. Our model-independent analysis
shows that our regret bound has a better (as compared to previous work) dependence on the size
of the network. Experimental evaluation suggests that our framework is robust to the underlying diffusion model and can efficiently learn a
near-optimal solution.

1. Introduction

The aim of viral marketing is to spread awareness about
a specific product via word-of-mouth information propagation over a social network. More precisely, marketers
(agents) aim to select a fixed number of influential users
(called seeds) and provide them with free products or discounts. They assume that these users will influence their
neighbours and, transitively, other users in the social network to adopt the product. This will thus result in information propagating across the network as more users adopt
or become aware of the product. The marketer has a budget on the number of free products and must choose seeds
1

University of British Columbia 2 Adobe Research 3 DeepMind
(The work was done when the author was with Adobe Research).
Correspondence to: Sharan Vaswani <sharanv@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

in order to maximize the influence spread which is the expected number of users that become aware of the product.
This problem is referred to as influence maximization (IM).
Existing solutions to the IM problem require as input, the
underlying diffusion model which describes how information propagates through the network. The IM problem has
been studied under various probabilistic diffusion models
such as independent cascade (IC) and linear threshold (LT)
models (Kempe et al., 2003). Under these common models, there has been substantial work on developing efficient
heuristics and approximation algorithms (Chen et al., 2009;
Leskovec et al., 2007; Goyal et al., 2011b;a; Tang et al.,
2014; 2015).
Unfortunately, knowledge of the underlying diffusion
model and its parameters is essential for the existing IM
algorithms to perform well. For example, Du et al. (2014)
empirically showed that misspecification of the diffusion
model can lead to choosing bad seeds and consequently to
a low spread. In practice, it is not clear how to choose from
amongst the increasing number of plausible diffusion models (Kempe et al., 2003; Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2012; Li
et al., 2013). Even if we are able to choose a diffusion
model according to some prior information, the number of
parameters for these models scales with the size of the network (for example, it is equal to the number of edges for
both the IC and LT models) and it is not clear how to set
these. Goyal et al. (2011a) showed that even when assuming the IC or LT model, correct knowledge of the model
parameters is critical to choosing good seeds that lead to
a large spread. Some papers try to learn these parameters
from past propagation data (Saito et al., 2008; Goyal et al.,
2010; Netrapalli & Sanghavi, 2012). However in practice,
such data is hard to obtain and the large number of parameters makes this learning challenging.
To overcome these difficulties, we propose a novel
parametrization for the IM problem in terms of pairwise
reachability probabilities (Section 2). This parametrization
depends only on the state of the network after the information diffusion has taken place. Since it does not depend on
how information diffuses, it is agnostic to the underlying
diffusion model. To select seeds based on these reachability probabilities, we propose a monotone and submodular
surrogate objective function based on the notion of maximum reachability (Section 3). Our surrogate function can
be optimized efficiently and is a a good approximation to

