Sequence Modeling via Segmentations

Chong Wang 1 Yining Wang 2 Po-Sen Huang 1 Abdelrahman Mohamed 3 Dengyong Zhou 1 Li Deng 4

Abstract
Segmental structure is a common pattern in many
types of sequences such as phrases in human
languages. In this paper, we present a probabilistic model for sequences via their segmentations. The probability of a segmented sequence
is calculated as the product of the probabilities
of all its segments, where each segment is modeled using existing tools such as recurrent neural networks. Since the segmentation of a sequence is usually unknown in advance, we sum
over all valid segmentations to obtain the final
probability for the sequence. An efficient dynamic programming algorithm is developed for
forward and backward computations without resorting to any approximation. We demonstrate
our approach on text segmentation and speech
recognition tasks. In addition to quantitative results, we also show that our approach can discover meaningful segments in their respective
application contexts.

1. Introduction
Segmental structure is a common pattern in many types of
sequences, typically, phrases in human languages and letter
combinations in phonotactics rules. For instances,
• Phrase structure. “Machine learning is part of artificial intelligence” → [Machine learning] [is] [part of]
[artificial intelligence].
• Phonotactics rules. “thought” → [th][ou][ght].
The words or letters in brackets “[ ]” are usually considered as meaningful segments for the original sequences. In
this paper, we hope to incorporate this type of segmental
structure information into sequence modeling.
Mathematically, we are interested in constructing a conditional probability distribution p(y|x), where output y is a
1

Microsoft Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Amazon
4
Citadel Securities LLC. Correspondence to: Chong Wang
<chowang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

sequence and input x may or may not be a sequence. Suppose we have a segmented sequence. Then the probability
of this sequence is calculated as the product of the probabilities of its segments, each of which is modeled using
existing tools such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
long-short term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), or gated recurrent units (GRU) (Chung et al.,
2014). When the segmentation for a sequence is unknown,
we sum over the probabilities from all valid segmentations.
In the case that the input is also a sequence, we further need
to sum over all feasible alignments between inputs and output segmentations. This sounds complicated. Fortunately,
we show that both forward and backward computations can
be tackled with a dynamic programming algorithm without
resorting to any approximations.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our mathematical model which constructs the probability distribution of a sequence via its segments, and discuss related work. In Section 3, we present an efficient dynamic programming algorithm for forward and backward
computations, and a beam search algorithm for decoding
the output. Section 4 includes two case studies to demonstrate the usefulness of our approach through both quantitative and qualitative results. We conclude this paper and
discuss future work in Section 5.

2. Sequence modeling via segmentations
In this section, we present our formulation of sequence
modeling via segmentations. In our model, the output is
always a sequence, while the input may or may not be a sequence. We first consider the non-sequence input case, and
then move to the sequence input case. We then show how
to carry over information across segments when needed.
Related work is also discussed here.
2.1. Case I: Mapping from non-sequence to sequence
Assume the input x is a fixed-length vector. Let the output
sequence be y1:T . We are interested in modeling the probability p(y1:T |x) via the segmentations of y1:T . Denote by
Sy the set containing all valid segmentations of y1:T . Then
for any segmentation a1:τa ∈ Sy , we have π(a1:τa ) = y1:T ,
where π(·) is the concatenation operator and τa is the number of segments in this segmentation. For example, let

