An Efficient, Sparsity-Preserving, Online Algorithm for Low-Rank
Approximation

David Anderson * 1 Ming Gu * 1

Abstract
Low-rank matrix approximation is a fundamental
tool in data analysis for processing large datasets,
reducing noise, and finding important signals.
In this work, we present a novel truncated LU
factorization called Spectrum-Revealing LU
(SRLU) for effective low-rank matrix approximation, and develop a fast algorithm to compute
an SRLU factorization. We provide both matrix
and singular value approximation error bounds
for the SRLU approximation computed by our
algorithm. Our analysis suggests that SRLU is
competitive with the best low-rank matrix approximation methods, deterministic or randomized, in both computational complexity and approximation quality. Numeric experiments illustrate that SRLU preserves sparsity, highlights important data features and variables, can be efficiently updated, and calculates data approximations nearly as accurately as possible. To the best
of our knowledge this is the first practical variant
of the LU factorization for effective and efficient
low-rank matrix approximation.

1. Introduction
Low-rank approximation is an essential data processing
technique for understanding large or noisy data in diverse
areas including data compression, image and pattern recognition, signal processing, compressed sensing, latent semantic indexing, anomaly detection, and recommendation
systems. Recent machine learning applications include
training neural networks (Jaderberg et al., 2014; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), second order online learning (Luo
et al., 2016), representation learning (Wang et al., 2016),
and reinforcement learning (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2010).
*

1
Equal contribution
University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: David Anderson <davidanderson@berkeley.edu>, Ming Gu <mgu@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Additionally, a recent trend in machine learning is to include an approximation of second order information for
better accuracy and faster convergence (Krummenacher
et al., 2016).
In this work, we introduce a novel low-rank approximation
algorithm called Spectrum-Revealing LU (SRLU) that can
be efficiently computed and updated. Furthermore, SRLU
preserves sparsity and can identify important data variables
and observations. Our algorithm works on any data matrix,
and achieves an approximation accuracy that only differs
from the accuracy of the best approximation possible for
any given rank by a constant factor.1
The major innovation in SRLU is the efficient calculation
of a truncated LU factorization of the form
k

Π1 AΠT2

=

m−k


≈
def

=



k

L11
L21

m−k

 

L11
L21

In−k

U11

U12



k

n−k

U11

U12
S





b U,
b
L

where Π1 and Π2 are judiciously chosen permutation matrices. The LU factorization is unstable, and in practice
is implemented by pivoting (interchanging) rows during
factorization, i.e. choosing permutation matrix Π1 . For
the truncated LU factorization to have any significance,
nevertheless, complete pivoting (interchanging rows and
b and
columns) is necessary to guarantee that the factors L
b are well-defined and that their product accurately repreU
sents the original data. Previously, complete pivoting was
impractical as a matrix factorization technique because it
requires accessing the entire data matrix at every iteration,
but SRLU efficiently achieves complete pivoting through
randomization and includes a deterministic follow-up procedure to ensure a hight quality low-rank matrix approximation, as supported by rigorous theory and numeric experiments.
1
The truncated SVD is known to provide the best low-rank
matrix approximation, but it is rarely used for large scale practical
data analysis. See a brief discussion of the SVD in supplemental
material.

