Equivariance Through Parameter-Sharing

Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 Jeff Schneider 1 Barnabás Póczos 1

Abstract
We propose to study equivariance in deep neural networks through parameter symmetries. In
particular, given a group G that acts discretely
on the input and output of a standard neural network layer φW ∶ RM → RN , we show that φW
is equivariant with respect to G-action iff G explains the symmetries of the network parameters
W. Inspired by this observation, we then propose two parameter-sharing schemes to induce
the desirable symmetry on W. Our procedure
for tying the parameters achieves G-equivariance
and, under some conditions on the action of G,
it guarantees sensitivity to all other permutation
groups outside G.

Given enough training data, a multi-layer perceptron would
eventually learn the domain invariances in a classification
task. Nevertheless, success of convolutional and recurrent
networks suggests that encoding the domain symmetries
through shared parameters can significantly boost the generalization of deep neural networks. The same observation
can be made in deep learning for semi-supervised and unsupervised learning in structured domains. This raises an
important question that is addressed in this paper: What
kind of priors on input/output structure can be encoded
through parameter-sharing?
This work is an attempt at answering this question, when
our priors are in the form discrete domain symmetries. To
formalize this type of prior, a family of transformations of
input and output to a neural layer are expressed as group
“action” on the input and output. The resulting neural network is invariant to this action, if transformations of the input within that particular family, does not change the output
(e.g., rotation-invariance). However, if the output is transformed, in a predictable way, as we transform the input,
the neural layer is equivariant to the action of the group.
1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15217. Correspondence
to: Siamak Ravanbakhsh <mravanba@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Our goal is to show that parameter-sharing can be used to
achieve equivariance to any discrete group action.
Application of group theory in machine learning has been
the topic of various works in the past (e.g., Kondor, 2008;
Bartók et al., 2010). In particular, many probabilistic inference techniques have been extended to graphical models
with known symmetry groups (Raedt et al., 2016; Kersting et al., 2009; Bui et al., 2012; Niepert, 2012). Deep and
hierarchical models have used a variety of techniques to
study or obtain representations that isolate transformations
from the “content” (e.g., Hinton et al., 2011; Jayaraman
& Grauman, 2015; Lenc & Vedaldi, 2015; Agrawal et al.,
2015). The simplest method of achieving equivariance is
through data-augmentation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Dieleman et al., 2015). Going beyond augmentation, several
methods directly apply the group-action, in one way or another, by transforming the data or its encodings using group
members (Jaderberg et al., 2015; Anselmi et al., 2013;
Dieleman et al., 2016). An alternative path to invariance via
harmonic analysis. In particular cascade of wavelet transforms is investigated in (Bruna & Mallat, 2013; Oyallon &
Mallat, 2015; Sifre & Mallat, 2013). More recently (Cohen
& Welling, 2016b) study steerable filters (e.g., Freeman
et al., 1991; Hel-Or & Teo, 1998) as a general mean for
achieving equivariance in deep networks. Invariance and
equivariance through parameter-sharing is also discussed
in several prior works (Cohen & Welling, 2016a; Gens &
Domingos, 2014).
The desirability of using parameter-sharing for this purpose
is mainly due to its simplicity and computational efficiency.
However, it also suggests possible directions for discovering domain symmetries through regularization schemes.
Following the previous work on the study of symmetry in
deep networks, we rely on group theory and group-actions
to formulate invariances and equivariances of a function.
Due to discrete nature of parameter-sharing, our treatment
here is limited to permutation groups. Action of a permutation group G can model discrete transformations of a set
of variables, such as translation and 90○ rotation of pixels
around any center in an image. If the output of a function
transforms with a G-action as we transform its input with a
different G-action, the function is equivariant with respect
to action of G. For example, in a convolution layer, as we
translate the input, the feature-maps are also translated. If

