Max-value Entropy Search for Efficient Bayesian Optimization

Zi Wang 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1

Abstract
Entropy Search (ES) and Predictive Entropy
Search (PES) are popular and empirically successful Bayesian Optimization techniques. Both
rely on a compelling information-theoretic motivation, and maximize the information gained
about the arg max of the unknown function; yet,
both are plagued by the expensive computation
for estimating entropies. We propose a new criterion, Max-value Entropy Search (MES), that instead uses the information about the maximum
function value. We show relations of MES to
other Bayesian optimization methods, and establish a regret bound. We observe that MES
maintains or improves the good empirical performance of ES/PES, while tremendously lightening the computational burden. In particular, MES
is much more robust to the number of samples
used for computing the entropy, and hence more
efficient for higher dimensional problems.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has become a popular and effective way for black-box optimization of nonconvex, expensive functions in robotics, machine learning, computer
vision, and many other areas of science and engineering
(Brochu et al., 2009; Calandra et al., 2014; Krause & Ong,
2011; Lizotte et al., 2007; Snoek et al., 2012; Thornton
et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017). In BO, a prior is posed on
the (unknown) objective function, and the uncertainty given
by the associated posterior is the basis for an acquisition
function that guides the selection of the next point to query
the function. The selection of queries and hence the acquisition function is critical for the success of the method.
Different BO techniques differ in this acquisition function.
1
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Zi Wang <ziw@csail.mit.edu>, Stefanie Jegelka
<stefje@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Among the most popular ones range the Gaussian process
upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) (Auer, 2002; Srinivas
et al., 2010), probability of improvement (PI) (Kushner,
1964), and expected improvement (EI) (Moc̆kus, 1974).
Particularly successful recent additions are entropy search
(ES) (Hennig & Schuler, 2012) and predictive entropy
search (PES) (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014), which aim
to maximize the mutual information between the queried
points and the location of the global optimum.
ES and PES are effective in the sense that they are queryefficient and identify a good point within competitively few
iterations, but determining the next query point involves
very expensive computations. As a result, these methods
are most useful if the black-box function requires a lot of
effort to evaluate, and are relatively slow otherwise. Moreover, they rely on estimating the entropy of the arg max of
the function. In high dimensions, this estimation demands
a large number of samples from the input space, which can
quickly become inefficient.
We propose a twist to the viewpoint of ES and PES that retains the information-theoretic motivation and empirically
successful query-efficiency of those methods, but at a much
reduced computational cost. The key insight is to replace
the uncertainty about the arg max with the uncertainty
about the maximum function value. As a result, we refer
to our new method as Max-value Entropy Search (MES).
As opposed to the arg max, the maximum function value
lives in a one-dimensional space, which greatly facilitates
the estimation of the mutual information via sampling. We
explore two strategies to make the entropy estimation efficient: an approximation by a Gumbel distribution, and a
Monte Carlo approach that uses random features.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) MES, a variant of
the entropy search methods, which enjoys efficient computation and simple implementation; (2) an intuitive analysis which establishes the first connection between ES/PES
and the previously proposed criteria GP-UCB, PI and
EST (Wang et al., 2016), where the bridge is formed by
MES; (3) a regret bound for a variant of MES, which, to
our knowledge, is the first regret bound established for any
variant of the entropy search methods; (4) an extension of
MES to the high dimensional settings via additive Gaussian processes; and (5) empirical evaluations which demon-

