Oracle Complexity of Second-Order Methods for Finite-Sum Problems

Yossi Arjevani 1 Ohad Shamir 1

Abstract

To study the complexity of this and other optimization
problems, it is common to consider an oracle model,
where the optimization algorithm has no a-priori information about the objective function, and obtains information
from an oracle which provides values and derivatives of the
function at various domain points (Nemirovsky and Yudin,
1983). The complexity of the algorithm is measured in
terms of the number of oracle calls required to optimize
the function to within some prescribed accuracy.

Finite-sum optimization problems are ubiquitous
in machine learning, and are commonly solved
using first-order methods which rely on gradient computations. Recently, there has been
growing interest in second-order methods, which
rely on both gradients and Hessians. In principle, second-order methods can require much
fewer iterations than first-order methods, and
hold the promise for more efficient algorithms.
Although computing and manipulating Hessians
is prohibitive for high-dimensional problems in
general, the Hessians of individual functions in
finite-sum problems can often be efficiently computed, e.g. because they possess a low-rank
structure. Can second-order information indeed
be used to solve such problems more efficiently?
In this paper, we provide evidence that the answer – perhaps surprisingly – is negative, at
least in terms of worst-case guarantees. We also
discuss what additional assumptions and algorithmic approaches might potentially circumvent
this negative result.

Existing lower bounds for finite-sum problems show that
using a first-order oracle, which given a point w and index
i = 1, . . . , n returns fi (w) and ∇fi (w), the number of
oracle queries required to find an -optimal solution is at
least of order
r
 

1
nµ
log
,
Ω n+
λ

either under algorithmic assumptions or assuming the dimension is sufficiently large2 (Agarwal and Bottou, 2014;
Lan, 2015; Woodworth and Srebro, 2016; Arjevani and
Shamir, 2016a). This is matched (up to log factors) by existing approaches, and cannot be improved in general.
An alternative to first-order methods are second-order
methods, which also utilize Hessian information. A prototypical example is the Newton method, which given a
(single) function F , performs iterations of the form

1. Introduction
We consider finite-sum problems of the form
n

min F (w) =

w∈W

1X
fi (w),
n i=1

−1
wt+1 = wt − αt ∇2 F (w)
∇F (w),

(1)

where W is a closed convex subset of some Euclidean or
Hilbert space, each fi is convex and µ-smooth, and F is
λ-strongly convex1 . Such problems are ubiquitous in machine learning, for example in order to perform empirical
risk minimization using convex losses.
1
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Yossi Arjevani <yossi.arjevani@weizmann.ac.il>,
Ohad Shamir <ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
1
For a twice-differentiable function f , it is µ-smooth and λstrongly convex if λI  ∇2 f (w)  µI for all w ∈ W.

(2)

where ∇F (w), ∇2 F (w) are the gradient and the Hessian
of F at w, and αt is a step size parameter. Second-order
methods can have extremely fast convergence, better than
those of first-order methods (i.e. quadratic instead of linear). Moreover, they can be invariant to affine transformations of the objective function, and provably independent of
its strong convexity and smoothness parameters (assuming
e.g. self-concordance) (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004).
A drawback of these methods, however, is that they can
be computationally prohibitive. In the context of machine
2

Depending on how -optimality is defined precisely, and
where the algorithm is assumed to start, these bounds may have
additional factors inside the log. For simplicity, we present the existing bounds assuming  is sufficiently small, so that a log(1/)
term dominates.

