Towards K-means-friendly Spaces: Simultaneous Deep
Learning and Clustering
Bo Yang 1 Xiao Fu 1 Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos 1 Mingyi Hong 2

Abstract
Most learning approaches treat dimensionality
reduction (DR) and clustering separately (i.e., sequentially), but recent research has shown that
optimizing the two tasks jointly can substantially
improve the performance of both. The premise
behind the latter genre is that the data samples are
obtained via linear transformation of latent representations that are easy to cluster; but in practice,
the transformation from the latent space to the
data can be more complicated. In this work, we
assume that this transformation is an unknown
and possibly nonlinear function. To recover the
‘clustering-friendly’ latent representations and to
better cluster the data, we propose a joint DR and
K-means clustering approach in which DR is accomplished via learning a deep neural network
(DNN). The motivation is to keep the advantages
of jointly optimizing the two tasks, while exploiting the deep neural network’s ability to approximate any nonlinear function. This way, the proposed approach can work well for a broad class
of generative models. Towards this end, we carefully design the DNN structure and the associated joint optimization criterion, and propose an
effective and scalable algorithm to handle the formulated optimization problem. Experiments using different real datasets are employed to showcase the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN 55455, USA. 2 Department
of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Iowa
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. Correspondence to:
Bo Yang <yang4173@umn.edu>, Xiao Fu <xfu@umn.edu>,
Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos <nikos@ece.um.edu>, Mingyi Hong
<mingyi@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the most fundamental tasks in data
mining and machine learning, with an endless list of applications. It is also a notoriously hard task, whose outcome
is affected by a number of factors – including data acquisition and representation, use of preprocessing such as dimensionality reduction (DR), the choice of clustering criterion and optimization algorithm, and initialization (Ertoz
et al., 2003; Banerjee et al., 2005). Since its introduction
in 1957 by Lloyd (published much later in 1982 (Lloyd,
1982)), K-means has been extensively used either alone or
together with suitable preprocessing, due to its simplicity
and effectiveness. K-means is suitable for clustering data
samples that are evenly spread around some centroids (cf.
the first subfigure in Fig. 1), but many real-life datasets do
not exhibit this ‘K-means-friendly’ structure. Much effort
has been spent on mapping high-dimensional data to a certain space that is suitable for performing K-means. Various
techniques, including principal component analysis (PCA),
canonical correlation analysis (CCA), nonnegative matrix
factorization (NMF) and sparse coding (dictionary learning), were adopted for this purpose. In addition to these
linear DR operators (e.g., a projection matrix), nonlinear
DR techniques such as those used in spectral clustering (Ng
et al., 2002) and sparse subspace clustering (Elhamifar &
Vidal, 2013; You et al., 2016) have also been considered.
In recent years, motivated by the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in supervised learning, unsupervised
deep learning approaches are now widely used for DR prior
to clustering. For example, the stacked autoencoder (SAE)
(Vincent et al., 2010), deep CCA (DCCA) (Andrew et al.,
2013), and sparse autoencoder (Ng, 2011) take insights
from PCA, CCA, and sparse coding, respectively, and make
use of DNNs to learn nonlinear mappings from the data domain to low-dimensional latent spaces. These approaches
treat their DNNs as a preprocessing stage that is separately
designed from the subsequent clustering stage. The hope is
that the latent representations of the data learned by these
DNNs will be naturally suitable for clustering. However,
since no clustering-promoting objective is explicitly incorporated in the learning process, the learned DNNs do not
necessarily output reduced-dimension data that are suitable

