DeepBach: a Steerable Model for Bach Chorales Generation

Gaëtan Hadjeres 1 2 François Pachet 1 2 Frank Nielsen 3

Abstract
This paper introduces DeepBach, a graphical
model aimed at modeling polyphonic music and
specifically hymn-like pieces. We claim that, after being trained on the chorale harmonizations
by Johann Sebastian Bach, our model is capable
of generating highly convincing chorales in the
style of Bach. DeepBach’s strength comes from
the use of pseudo-Gibbs sampling coupled with
an adapted representation of musical data. This
is in contrast with many automatic music composition approaches which tend to compose music sequentially. Our model is also steerable in
the sense that a user can constrain the generation
by imposing positional constraints such as notes,
rhythms or cadences in the generated score. We
also provide a plugin on top of the MuseScore
music editor making the interaction with DeepBach easy to use.

1. Introduction
The composition of polyphonic chorale music in the style
of J.S. Bach has represented a major challenge in automatic
music composition over the last decades. The corpus of
the chorale harmonizations by Johann Sebastian Bach is
remarkable by its homogeneity and its size (389 chorales
in (Bach, 1985)). All these short pieces (approximately
one minute long) are written for a four-part chorus (soprano, alto, tenor and bass) using similar compositional
principles: the composer takes a well-known (at that time)
melody from a Lutheran hymn and harmonizes it i.e. the
three lower parts (alto, tenor and bass) accompanying the
soprano (the highest part) are composed, see Fig.1 for an
example.
1

LIP6, Université Pierre et Marie Curie 2 Sony
CSL, Paris 3 Sony CSL, Japan.
Correspondence to:
Gaëtan
Hadjeres
<gaetan.hadjeres@etu.upmc.fr>,
François Pachet <pachetcsl@gmail.com>, Frank Nielsen
<Frank.Nielsen@acm.org>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Moreover, since the aim of reharmonizing a melody is to
give more power or new insights to its text, the lyrics have
to be understood clearly. We say that voices are in homophony, i.e. they articulate syllables simultaneously. This
implies characteristic rhythms, variety of harmonic ideas as
well as characteristic melodic movements which make the
style of these chorale compositions easily distinguishable,
even for non experts.
The difficulty, from a compositional point of view comes
from the intricate interplay between harmony (notes sounding at the same time) and voice movements (how a single voice evolves through time). Furthermore, each voice
has its own “style” and its own coherence. Finding a
chorale-like reharmonization which combines Bach-like
harmonic progressions with musically interesting melodic
movements is a problem which often takes years of practice
for musicians.
From the point of view of automatic music generation, the
first solution to this apparently highly combinatorial problem was proposed by (Ebcioglu, 1988) in 1988. This problem is seen as a constraint satisfaction problem, where the
system must fulfill numerous hand-crafted constraints characterizing the style of Bach. It is a rule-based expert system
which contains no less than 300 rules and tries to reharmonize a given melody with a generate-and-test method
and intelligent backtracking. Among the short examples
presented at the end of the paper, some are flawless. The
drawbacks of this method are, as stated by the author, the
considerable effort to generate the rule base and the fact
that the harmonizations produced “do not sound like Bach,
except for occasional Bachian patterns and cadence formulas.” In our opinion, the requirement of an expert knowledge implies a lot of subjective choices.
A neural-network-based solution was later developed by
(Hild et al., 1992). This method relies on several neural
networks, each one trained for solving a specific task: a
harmonic skeleton is first computed then refined and ornamented. A similar approach is adopted in (Allan &
Williams, 2005), but uses Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
instead of neural networks. Chords are represented as
lists of intervals and form the states of the Markov mod2

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
73WF0M99vlg

