World of Bits: An Open-Domain Platform for Web-Based Agents

Tianlin (Tim) Shi 1 2 Andrej Karpathy 2 Linxi (Jim) Fan 1 Jonathan Hernandez 2 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
While simulated game environments have greatly
accelerated research in reinforcement learning,
existing environments lack the open-domain realism of tasks in computer vision or natural language processing, which operate on artifacts created by humans in natural, organic settings. To
foster reinforcement learning research in such
settings, we introduce the World of Bits (WoB),
a platform in which agents complete tasks on
the Internet by performing low-level keyboard
and mouse actions. The two main challenges
are: (i) to curate a diverse set of natural webbased tasks, and (ii) to ensure that these tasks
have a well-defined reward structure and are reproducible despite the transience of the web. To
tackle this, we develop a methodology in which
crowdworkers create tasks defined by natural language questions and provide demonstrations of
how to answer the question on real websites using keyboard and mouse; HTTP traffic is cached
to create a reproducible offline approximation of
the website. Finally, we show that agents trained
via behavioral cloning and reinforcement learning can complete a range of web-based tasks.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, we have witnessed significant
progress in developing agents that can interact with increasingly complex environments (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2016; Levine et al., 2016). Critical to this progress
are not only the core learning algorithms (Sutton et al.,
1999; Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015a) and the
associated techniques for learning at scale (Mnih et al.,
2016), but simulated environments that feature complex
dynamics and help benchmark our progress (e.g., Bellemare et al. (2013); Mikolov et al. (2015); Todorov et al.
Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 OpenAI, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to: Tianlin (Tim) Shi <tianlin@cs.stanford.edu>.

Figure 1. Agents in the World of Bits perceive the screen pixels,
the DOM (with element coordinates grounded in the image), and
a reward, and output keyboard and mouse commands.

(2012); Johansson et al. (2016)). However, simulated environments are intrinsically limited: agents in such environments never experience the sheer breadth of experience of
the real world, and thus they miss out on important semantic knowledge crucial for developing intelligence. For control tasks, it is possible to work with realistic environments
in robotics, but the complexity of physical hardware constraints efficient data gathering and rapid iteration. Even
for narrow domains such as grasping (Levine et al., 2016;
Pinto & Gupta, 2016), the cost and effort of large-scale data
collection is daunting.
To address this, we introduce World of Bits (WoB),1 a learning platform that uses the web as a rich source of opendomain environments. In WoB, an agent receives its observations in the form of the Document Object Model (DOM)
of a webpage and its rendered pixels, and accomplishes
web tasks by sending mouse and keyboard actions. The
use of web as a learning platform offers three benefits:
Open-domain. By allowing agents to interact with the
web, we open up the world’s supply of websites as a rich
source of learning environments and application domains.
Since agents directly work with the UI, we can use existing
web infrastructure without designing specialized APIs.
Open-source. Unlike robotics, WoB is digital, which enables fast iteration and massive scaling. Webpages are
open-source and consist entirely of HTML/CSS/Javascript,
which is easy to inspect and change dynamically.

1

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Easy to collect data. Because agents use same interface
as humans do, it is possible to crowdsource human demonstrations of a web task from anyone with an access to a web
browser, keyboard and mouse at a low cost. This unlocks
1

in contrast to the world of atoms https://goo.gl/JdLQGT

