Learning Discrete Representations via Information Maximizing
Self-Augmented Training
Weihua Hu 1 2 Takeru Miyato 3 4 Seiya Tokui 3 1 Eiichi Matsumoto 3 1 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Learning discrete representations of data is a central machine learning task because of the compactness of the representations and ease of interpretation. The task includes clustering and
hash learning as special cases. Deep neural networks are promising to be used because they can
model the non-linearity of data and scale to large
datasets. However, their model complexity is
huge, and therefore, we need to carefully regularize the networks in order to learn useful representations that exhibit intended invariance for
applications of interest. To this end, we propose a method called Information Maximizing
Self-Augmented Training (IMSAT). In IMSAT,
we use data augmentation to impose the invariance on discrete representations. More specifically, we encourage the predicted representations
of augmented data points to be close to those of
the original data points in an end-to-end fashion.
At the same time, we maximize the informationtheoretic dependency between data and their predicted discrete representations. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that IMSAT
produces state-of-the-art results for both clustering and unsupervised hash learning.

1. Introduction
The task of unsupervised discrete representation learning
is to obtain a function that maps similar (resp. dissimilar)
data into similar (resp. dissimilar) discrete representations,
where the similarity of data is defined according to applications of interest. It is a central machine learning task
because of the compactness of the representations and ease
1
University of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Japan 3 Preferred
Networks, Inc., Japan 4 ATR Cognitive Mechanism Laboratories, Japan. Correspondence to: Weihua Hu <hu@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>, Takeru Miyato <takeru.miyato@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

00
0

11
1

11
1

Discrete representations
Similarization

Information
Maximization

Data augmentation

Figure 1. Basic idea of our proposed method for unsupervised discrete representation learning. We encourage the prediction of
a neural network to remain unchanged under data augmentation
(Red arrows), while maximizing the information-theoretic dependency between data and their representations (Blue arrow).

of interpretation. The task includes two important machine
learning tasks as special cases: clustering and unsupervised
hash learning. Clustering is widely applied to data-driven
application domains (Berkhin, 2006), while hash learning
is popular for an approximate nearest neighbor search for
large scale information retrieval (Wang et al., 2016).
Deep neural networks are promising to be used thanks to
their scalability and flexibility of representing complicated,
non-linear decision boundaries. However, their model
complexity is huge, and therefore, regularization of the networks is crucial to learn meaningful representations of data.
Particularly, in unsupervised representation learning, target representations are not provided and hence, are unconstrained. Therefore, we need to carefully regularize the networks in order to learn useful representations that exhibit
intended invariance for applications of interest (e.g., invariance to small perturbations or affine transformation). Naı̈ve
regularization to use is a weight decay (Erin Liong et al.,
2015). Such regularization, however, encourages global
smoothness of the function prediction; thus, may not necessarily impose the intended invariance on the predicted discrete representations.

