Accelerating Eulerian Fluid Simulation With Convolutional Networks

Jonathan Tompson 1 Kristofer Schlachter 2 Pablo Sprechmann 2 3 Ken Perlin 2

Abstract
Efficient simulation of the Navier-Stokes equations for fluid flow is a long standing problem
in applied mathematics, for which state-of-theart methods require large compute resources. In
this work, we propose a data-driven approach
that leverages the approximation power of deeplearning with the precision of standard solvers
to obtain fast and highly realistic simulations.
Our method solves the incompressible Euler
equations using the standard operator splitting
method, in which a large sparse linear system
with many free parameters must be solved. We
use a Convolutional Network with a highly tailored architecture, trained using a novel unsupervised learning framework to solve the linear
system. We present real-time 2D and 3D simulations that outperform recently proposed datadriven methods; the obtained results are realistic
and show good generalization properties.

1. Introduction
Real-time simulation of fluid flow is a long standing problem in many application domains: from computational
fluid dynamics for industrial applications, to smoke and
fluid effects for computer graphics and animation. High
computational complexity of existing solutions has meant
that real-time simulations have been possible under restricted conditions. In this work we propose a data-driven
solution to the invicid-Euler equations that is faster than
traditional methods, while remaining competitive in longterm simulation stability and accuracy. This work is focused on computer graphics animation as the driving application for our architecture, however the techniques presented here can be extended to more complicated forms of
Navier-Stokes (with appropriate modifications that are outside the scope of this work).
1

Google Brain, Mountain View, USA 2 New York University,
New York, USA 3 Google Deepmind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Jonathan Tompson <tompson@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The dynamics of a large number of physical phenomenon
are governed by the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, which are a set of partial differential equations that
must hold throughout a fluid velocity field for all time steps.
There are two main computational approaches for simulating these equations: the Lagrangian methods, that approximate continuous quantities using discrete moving particles (Gingold & Monaghan, 1977), and the Eulerian, methods that approximate quantities on a fixed grid (Foster &
Metaxas, 1996). We adopt the latter for this work.
Eulerian methods are able to produce accurate results simulating fluids like water with high compute costs. The most
demanding portion of this method is the “pressure projection” step, which satisfies an incompressibility constraint.
It involves solving the discrete Poisson equation and leads
to a well-known sparse, symmetric and positive-definite
linear system. Exact solutions can be found via traditional convex optimization techniques, such as the Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (PCG) algorithm or via stationary iterative methods, like the Jacobi or Gauss-Seidel
methods. PCG exhibits fast asymptotic convergence, however it suffers from high time-constants and is generally
not suited to GPU hardware. The Jacobi method is used for
real-time applications, however it suffers from poor asymptotic convergence. Additionally, the computational complexity of both these algorithms is strongly data-dependent
(i.e. boundary condition dependent) and these iterative
methods are truncated in real-time to fit within a computational budget.
In this paper, we propose a machine learning based approach for accelerating this linear projection that is fast
and whose complexity is data-independent. We leverage
the power of deep-learning techniques to derive an approximate linear projection. We claim that our machine-learning
approach can take advantage of the statistics of fluid data
and the local sparsity structure of the discrete Poisson equation to learn an approximate method that ensures long-term
stability using a fixed computational budget. The main contributions of this work are as follows:
(i) We rephrase the learning task as an unsupervised
learning problem; since ground-truth data is not required we can incorporate loss information from multiple time-steps and perform various forms of non-

