Deep Value Networks Learn to
Evaluate and Iteratively Refine Structured Outputs

Michael Gygli 1 *

Mohammad Norouzi 2

Abstract
We approach structured output prediction by optimizing a deep value network (DVN) to precisely estimate the task loss on different output configurations for a given input. Once the
model is trained, we perform inference by gradient descent on the continuous relaxations of
the output variables to find outputs with promising scores from the value network. When applied to image segmentation, the value network
takes an image and a segmentation mask as inputs and predicts a scalar estimating the intersection over union between the input and ground
truth masks. For multi-label classification, the
DVN’s objective is to correctly predict the F1
score for any potential label configuration. The
DVN framework achieves the state-of-the-art results on multi-label prediction and image segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Structured output prediction is a fundamental problem in
machine learning that entails learning a mapping from input objects to complex multivariate output structures. Because structured outputs live in a high-dimensional combinatorial space, one needs to design factored prediction
models that are not only expressive, but also computationally tractable for both learning and inference. Due to computational considerations, a large body of previous work
(e.g., Lafferty et al. (2001); Tsochantaridis et al. (2004))
has focused on relatively weak graphical models with pairwise or small clique potentials. Such models are not capable of learning complex correlations among the random
variables, making them not suitable for tasks requiring
*
Work done during an internship at Google Brain. 1 ETH Zürich
& gifs.com 2 Google Brain, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Gygli <gygli@vision.ee.ethz.ch>, Mohammad Norouzi <mnorouzi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Anelia Angelova 2

complicated high level reasoning to resolve ambiguity.
An expressive family of energy-based models studied by
LeCun et al. (2006) and Belanger & McCallum (2016) exploits a neural network to score different joint configurations of inputs and outputs. Once the network is trained,
one simply resorts to gradient-based inference as a mechanism to find low energy outputs. Despite recent developments, optimizing parameters of deep energy-based models
remains challenging, limiting their applicability. Moving
beyond large margin training used by previous work (Belanger & McCallum, 2016), this paper presents a simpler
and more effective objective inspired by value based reinforcement learning for training energy-based models.
Our key intuition is that learning to critique different output configurations is easier than learning to directly come
up with optimal predictions. Accordingly, we build a deep
value network (DVN) that takes an input x and a corresponding output structure y, both as inputs, and predicts a
scalar score v(x, y) evaluating the quality of the configuration y and its correspondence with the input x. We exploit
a loss function `(y, y∗ ) that compares an output y against
a ground truth label y∗ to teach a DVN to evaluate different
output configurations. The goal is to distill the knowledge
of the loss function into the weights of a value network so
that during inference, in the absence of the labeled output
y∗ , one can still rely on the value judgments of the neural
net to compare outputs.
To enable effective iterative refinement of structured outputs via gradient ascent on the score of a DVN, similar to
Belanger & McCallum (2016), we relax the discrete output variables to live in a continuous space. Moreover, we
extend the domain of loss functions so the loss applies to
continuous variable outputs. For example, for multi-label
classification, instead of enforcing each output dimension
yi to be binary, we let yi ∈ [0, 1] and we generalize the
notion of F1 score to apply to continuous predictions. For
image segmentation, we use a similar generalization of intersection over union. Then, we train a DVN on many output examples encouraging the network to predict precise
(negative) loss scores for almost any output configuration.
Figure 1 illustrates the gradient based inference process on
a DVN optimized for image segmentation.

