Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks

Mukund Sundararajan * 1 Ankur Taly * 1 Qiqi Yan * 1

Abstract
We study the problem of attributing the prediction of a deep network to its input features,
a problem previously studied by several other
works. We identify two fundamental axioms—
Sensitivity and Implementation Invariance that
attribution methods ought to satisfy. We show
that they are not satisfied by most known attribution methods, which we consider to be a fundamental weakness of those methods. We use
the axioms to guide the design of a new attribution method called Integrated Gradients. Our
method requires no modification to the original
network and is extremely simple to implement;
it just needs a few calls to the standard gradient operator. We apply this method to a couple
of image models, a couple of text models and a
chemistry model, demonstrating its ability to debug networks, to extract rules from a network,
and to enable users to engage with models better.

1. Motivation and Summary of Results
We study the problem of attributing the prediction of a deep
network to its input features.
Definition 1. Formally, suppose we have a function F :
Rn → [0, 1] that represents a deep network, and an input x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rn . An attribution of the prediction at input x relative to a baseline input x0 is a vector
AF (x, x0 ) = (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ Rn where ai is the contribution of xi to the prediction F (x).
For instance, in an object recognition network, an attribution method could tell us which pixels of the image were
responsible for a certain label being picked (see Figure 2).
The attribution problem was previously studied by various papers (Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2013;

Shrikumar et al., 2016; Binder et al., 2016; Springenberg
et al., 2014).
The intention of these works is to understand the inputoutput behavior of the deep network, which gives us the
ability to improve it. Such understandability is critical to
all computer programs, including machine learning models. There are also other applications of attribution. They
could be used within a product driven by machine learning to provide a rationale for the recommendation. For instance, a deep network that predicts a condition based on
imaging could help inform the doctor of the part of the image that resulted in the recommendation. This could help
the doctor understand the strengths and weaknesses of a
model and compensate for it. We give such an example in
Section 6.2. Attributions could also be used by developers
in an exploratory sense. For instance, we could use a deep
network to extract insights that could be then used in a rulebased system. In Section 6.3, we give such an example.
A significant challenge in designing an attribution technique is that they are hard to evaluate empirically. As we
discuss in Section 4, it is hard to tease apart errors that stem
from the misbehavior of the model versus the misbehavior
of the attribution method. To compensate for this shortcoming, we take an axiomatic approach. In Section 2 we
identify two axioms that every attribution method must satisfy. Unfortunately most previous methods do not satisfy
one of these two axioms. In Section 3, we use the axioms
to identify a new method, called integrated gradients.
Unlike previously proposed methods, integrated gradients
do not need any instrumentation of the network, and can
be computed easily using a few calls to the gradient operation, allowing even novice practitioners to easily apply the
technique.

1
Equal contribution
Google Inc., Mountain View,
USA.
Correspondence
to:
Mukund
Sundararajan
<mukunds@google.com>, Ankur Taly <ataly@google.com>.

In Section 6, we demonstrate the ease of applicability over
several deep networks, including two images networks, two
text processing networks, and a chemistry network. These
applications demonstrate the use of our technique in either
improving our understanding of the network, performing
debugging, performing rule extraction, or aiding an end
user in understanding the network’s prediction.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Remark 1. Let us briefly examine the need for the baseline in the definition of the attribution problem. A common
way for humans to perform attribution relies on counter-

*

