On Approximation Guarantees for Greedy Low Rank Optimization
Rajiv Khanna 1 Ethan R. Elenberg 1 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1 Joydeep Ghosh 1 Sahand Negahban 2

Abstract

Unfortunately, the above optimization can be computationally taxing. General purpose solvers for the above optimization problem that rely on semidefinite programming (SDP)
require ⇥(n3 d3 ) computation, which is prohibitive. Gradient descent techniques require ⇥(✏ 1/2 (n3 + d3 )) computational cost for an epsilon accurate solution. This improvement is sizable in comparison to SDP solvers. Unfortunately,
it is still prohibitive for large scale matrix estimation.

We provide new approximation guarantees for
greedy low rank matrix estimation under standard
assumptions of restricted strong convexity and
smoothness. Our novel analysis also uncovers
previously unknown connections between the low
rank estimation and combinatorial optimization,
so much so that our bounds are reminiscent of corresponding approximation bounds in submodular
maximization. Additionally, we also provide statistical recovery guarantees. Finally, we present
empirical comparison of greedy estimation with
established baselines on two important real-world
problems.

An alternate vein of research has focused on directly optimizing the non-convex problem (1). To that end, authors
have seen recent theoretical success in studying the convergence properties of

1. Introduction
Low rank matrix optimization stands as a major tool in
modern dimensionality reduction and unsupervised learning. The singular value decomposition can be used when
the optimization objective is rotationally invariant to the
parameters. However, if we wish to optimize over more
complex, non-convex objectives we must choose to either
rely on convex relaxations (Recht et al., 2010; Negahban
& Wainwright, 2011; Rohde & Tsybakov, 2011) or directly
optimize over the non-convex space (Park et al., 2016; Jain
et al., 2013; Chen & Wainwright, 2015; Lee & Bresler, 2013;
Jain et al., 2014).
More concretely, in the low rank matrix optimization problem, we wish to solve
arg max `(⇥)
⇥

s.t. rank(⇥)  r.

(1)

Rather than perform the computationally intractable optimization above researchers have studied convex relaxations
of the form
arg max `(⇥)
⇥

`(UVT ).

arg max
U2Rn⇥r ,V2Rd⇥r

|||⇥|||nuc .

1
UT Austin 2 Yale University. Correspondence to: Rajiv Khanna
<rajivak@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Solving the problem above automatically forces the solution
to be low rank, and recent results have shown promising
behavior.
Another approach is to optimize (1) incrementally via rank
one updates to the current estimate (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2011; Wang et al., 2015). This approach has also been studied in more general contexts such as boosting (Buhlmann
& Yu, 2009), coordinate descent (Jaggi, 2013; Jaggi &
Sulovský, 2010), and incremental atomic norm optimization (Gribonval & Vandergheynst, 2006; Barron et al., 2008;
Khanna et al., 2016; Rao et al., 2015; Dudik et al., 2012;
Locatello et al., 2017).
1.1. Set Function Optimization and Coordinate
Descent
In this paper, we interpret low rank matrix estimation as
a set optimization problem over an infinite set of atoms.
Specifically, we wish to optimize
!
k
X
arg max `
↵ i Xi ,
{X1 ,...Xk }2A

i=1

where the set of atoms A is the set of all rank one matrices
with unit operator norm. This settings is analogous to that
taken in the results studying atomic norm optimization, coordinate descent via the total variation norm, and Frank-Wolfe
style algorithms for atomic optimization. This formulation
allows us to connect the problem of low rank matrix estimation to that of submodular set function optimization, which

