Parallel Multiscale Autoregressive Density Estimation
Scott Reed 1 Aäron van den Oord 1 Nal Kalchbrenner 1 Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo 1 Ziyu Wang 1
Yutian Chen 1 Dan Belov 1 Nando de Freitas 1

Abstract

“A yellow bird with a black head, orange eyes and an orange bill.”

4

PixelCNN achieves state-of-the-art results in
density estimation for natural images. Although
training is fast, inference is costly, requiring one
network evaluation per pixel; O(N) for N pixels. This can be sped up by caching activations,
but still involves generating each pixel sequentially. In this work, we propose a parallelized
PixelCNN that allows more efficient inference
by modeling certain pixel groups as conditionally independent. Our new PixelCNN model
achieves competitive density estimation and orders of magnitude speedup - O(log N) sampling
instead of O(N) - enabling the practical generation of 512 ⇥ 512 images. We evaluate the model
on class-conditional image generation, text-toimage synthesis, and action-conditional video
generation, showing that our model achieves the
best results among non-pixel-autoregressive density models that allow efficient sampling.

64

64

Many autoregressive image models factorize the joint distribution of images into per-pixel factors:
p(x1:T ) =

t=1

p(xt |x1:t 1 )

(1)

For example PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016b) uses
a deep convolutional network with carefully designed filter masking to preserve causal structure, so that all factors
in equation 1 can be learned in parallel for a given image.
However, a remaining difficulty is that due to the learned
causal structure, inference proceeds sequentially pixel-bypixel in raster order.
1
DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
scot@google.com>.

16

32

256

128

128

256

Figure 1. Samples from our model at resolutions from 4 ⇥ 4 to
256 ⇥ 256, conditioned on text and bird part locations in the CUB
data set. See Fig. 4 and the supplement for more examples.

1. Introduction

T
Y

8

Scott Reed <reed-

Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In the naive case, this requires a full network evaluation
per pixel. Caching hidden unit activations can be used to
reduce the amount of computation per pixel, as in the 1D
case for WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016; Ramachandran et al.,
2017). However, even with this optimization, generation is
still in serial order by pixel.
Ideally we would generate multiple pixels in parallel,
which could greatly accelerate sampling. In the autoregressive framework this only works if the pixels are modeled as independent. Thus we need a way to judiciously
break weak dependencies among pixels; for example immediately neighboring pixels should not be modeled as independent since they tend to be highly correlated.
Multiscale image generation provides one such way to
break weak dependencies. In particular, we can model certain groups of pixels as conditionally independent given a
lower resolution image and various types of context information, such as preceding frames in a video. The basic idea
is obvious, but nontrivial design problems stand between
the idea and a workable implementation.
First, what is the right way to transmit global information
from a low-resolution image to each generated pixel of the
high-resolution image? Second, which pixels can we gen-

