Density Level Set Estimation on Manifolds with DBSCAN

Heinrich Jiang 1

Abstract
We show that DBSCAN can estimate the connected components of the λ-density level set {x :
f (x) ≥ λ} given n i.i.d. samples from an unknown density f . We characterize the regularity of the level set boundaries using parameter
β > 0 and analyze the estimation error under the
Hausdorff metric. When the data lies in RD we
e −1/(2β+D) ), which matches
obtain a rate of O(n
known lower bounds up to logarithmic factors.
When the data lies on an embedded unknown ddimensional manifold in RD , then we obtain a
e −1/(2β+d·max{1,β}) ). Finally, we prorate of O(n
vide adaptive parameter tuning in order to attain
these rates with no a priori knowledge of the intrinsic dimension, density, or β.

1. Introduction
DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996) is one of the most popular clustering algorithms amongst practitioners and has had
profound success in a wide range of data analysis applications. However, despite this, its statistical properties have
not been fully understood. The goal of this work is to give
a theoretical analysis of the procedure and to the best of
our knowledge, provide the first analysis of density levelset estimation on manifolds. We also contribute ideas to
related areas that may be of independent interest.
DBSCAN aims at discovering clusters which turn out to
be the high-density regions of the dataset. It takes in two
hyperparameters: minPts and ε. It defines a point as a
core-point if there are at least minPts sample points in its εradius neighborhood. The points within the ε-radius neighborhood of a core-point are said to be directly reachable
from that core-point. Then, a point q is reachable from a
core-point p if there exists a path from q to p where each
point is directly reachable from the next point. It is now
clear that this definition of reachable gives a partitioning of
1
Google.
Correspondence to:
rich.jiang@gmail.com>.

Heinrich Jiang <hein-

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the dataset (and remaining points not reachable from any
core-point are considered noise). This partitioning is the
clustering that is returned by DBSCAN.
The problem of analyzing DBSCAN has recently been explored in (Sriperumbudur & Steinwart, 2012). Their analysis is for a modified version of DBSCAN and is not focused
on estimating a fixed density level. Their results have many
desirable properties, but are not immediately applicable for
what this paper tries to address. Using recent developments
in topological data analysis along with some tools we develop in this paper, we show that it is now possible to analyze the original procedure.
The clusters DBSCAN aims at discovering can be viewed
as approximations of the connected components of the level
sets {x : f (x) ≥ λ} where f is the density and λ is
some density level. We provide the first comprehensive
analysis in tuning minPts and ε to estimate the density
level set for a particular level. Here, the density level λ
is known to the algorithm while the density remains unknown. Density level set estimation has been studied extensively. e.g., (Carmichael et al., 1968; Hartigan, 1975;
Polonik, 1995; Cuevas & Fraiman, 1997; Walther, 1997;
Tsybakov et al., 1997; Baıllo et al., 2001; Cadre, 2006; Willett & Nowak, 2007; Biau et al., 2008; Rigollet & Vert,
2009; Maier et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2009; Rinaldo &
Wasserman, 2010; Steinwart, 2011; Rinaldo et al., 2012;
Steinwart et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Jiang, 2017).
However approaches that obtain state-of-art consistency results are largely unpractical (i.e. unimplementable). Our
work shows that in actuality, DBSCAN, a procedure known
for decades and has since been used widely, can achieve
the strongest known results. Also, unlike much of the existing work, we show that DBSCAN can also recover the
connected components of the level sets separately and bijectively.
Our work begins with the insight that DBSCAN behaves
like an ε-neighborhood graph, which is different from, but
related to the k-nearest neighbor graph. The latter has
been heavily used for cluster-tree estimation (Chaudhuri &
Dasgupta, 2010; Stuetzle & Nugent, 2010; Kpotufe & von
Luxburg, 2011; Chaudhuri et al., 2014; Jiang & Kpotufe,
2017) and in this paper we adapt some of these ideas for
ε-neighborhood graphs.

