Learning Deep Latent Gaussian Models with Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Matthew D. Hoffman 1

Abstract
Deep latent Gaussian models are powerful
and popular probabilistic models of highdimensional data. These models are almost
always fit using variational expectationmaximization, an approximation to true
maximum-marginal-likelihood estimation. In
this paper, we propose a different approach:
rather than use a variational approximation
(which produces biased gradient signals), we
use Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC, which
allows us to trade bias for computation). We
find that our MCMC-based approach has several
advantages: it yields higher held-out likelihoods, produces sharper images, and does not
suffer from the variational overpruning effect.
MCMC’s additional computational overhead
proves to be significant, but not prohibitive.

1. Introduction
Deep latent Gaussian models (DLGMs; Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) are powerful generative models that can be efficiently fit to very large datasets
of complicated, high-dimensional data. These models assume that the observed data were generated by sampling
some latent variables, feeding them into a deep neural network, and adding some noise to that network’s output.
The central computational challenge in fitting these models
is approximate posterior inference; to make the model better fit an observation x, we need to estimate the posterior
distribution p(z | x) over the latent variables z that generated x. Exact posterior inference is intractable, so these
models are almost always fit with variational inference
(Jordan et al., 1999), which approximates the intractable
posterior with a distribution q from some tractable family.
The choice of family for q matters—more expressive families will better approximate the posterior, leading to better
1

Google, San Francisco, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Matthew D. Hoffman <mhoffman@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

learning signals. There has been a flurry of papers recently
proposing more flexible variational families, all of which
show that the quality of the variational approximation matters (Salimans et al., 2015; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Burda et al., 2016; Tran et al., 2016; Sønderby et al., 2016;
Kingma & Salimans, 2016).
The other workhorse of approximate posterior inference is
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC; Neal, 1993), which
sets up and simulates a random process whose stationary
distribution is the posterior of interest. Compared to variational methods, MCMC methods have a reputation for being slow, but accurate. Perhaps surprisingly, there is little
work exploring the use of MCMC to fit DLGMs (Salimans
et al., 2015; Wolf et al., 2016; Han et al., 2017).
In this paper, we explore the advantages of the MCMC approach, and find that, as promised, it allows us to meaningfully trade off bias and computation. By initializing our
chains with a sample from a variational approximation, we
are able to both speed up convergence and guarantee that
our posterior approximation is strictly better than that of
the underlying variational approximation. Some minor additional refinements dramatically speed up the algorithm.
In section 5, we show that the MCMC approach eliminates overpruning and blurriness (two known issues with
variational autoencoders), and achieves good held-out
log-likelihood on the dynamically binarized permutationinvariant MNIST dataset.

2. Background
2.1. Variational Autoencoders and DLGMs
A deep latent Gaussian model (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014, DLGM; ) assumes the following generative process for each observation x:
1. Sample a vector z ∈ RK variables independently from
the standard normal distribution.
2. Compute a vector-valued nonlinear function gθ (z). g
is typically a deep neural network with some parameters θ.
3. Sample x from some distribution f (g(z)) that takes
the output of g as a parameter.

