Developing Bug-Free Machine Learning Systems With Formal Mathematics

Daniel Selsam 1 Percy Liang 1 David L. Dill 1

Abstract
Noisy data, non-convex objectives, model misspecification, and numerical instability can all
cause undesired behaviors in machine learning
systems. As a result, detecting actual implementation errors can be extremely difficult. We
demonstrate a methodology in which developers
use an interactive proof assistant to both implement their system and to state a formal theorem
defining what it means for their system to be correct. The process of proving this theorem interactively in the proof assistant exposes all implementation errors since any error in the program
would cause the proof to fail. As a case study,
we implement a new system, Certigrad, for optimizing over stochastic computation graphs, and
we generate a formal (i.e. machine-checkable)
proof that the gradients sampled by the system
are unbiased estimates of the true mathematical
gradients. We train a variational autoencoder using Certigrad and find the performance comparable to training the same model in TensorFlow.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are difficult to engineer for many
fundamental reasons. First and foremost, implementation
errors can be extremely difficult to detect—let alone to localize and address—since there are many other potential
causes of undesired behavior in a machine learning system.
For example, an implementation error may lead to incorrect gradients and so cause a learning algorithm to stall, but
such a symptom may also be caused by noise in the training
data, a poor choice of model, an unfavorable optimization
landscape, an inadequate search strategy, or numerical instability. These other issues are so common that it is often
assumed that any undesired behavior is caused by one of
them. As a result, actual implementation errors can persist
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to:
Daniel Selsam <dselsam@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Standard methodology: test it empirically
Debug
Program

Test

Our methodology: verify it mathematically
Debug
Specify

Program

Prove

Figure 1. A high-level comparison of our methodology with the
standard methodology for developing machine learning systems.
Instead of relying on empirical testing to expose implementation
errors, we first formally specify what our system is required to
do in terms of the underlying mathematics, and then try to formally prove that our system satisfies its specification. The process
of proving exposes implementation errors systematically and the
(program → prove → debug) loop eventually terminates with a
bug-free system and a machine-checkable proof of correctness.

indefinitely without detection.1 Errors are even more difficult to detect in stochastic programs, since some errors may
only distort the distributions of random variables and may
require writing custom statistical tests to detect.
Machine learning systems are also difficult to engineer because it can require substantial expertise in mathematics
(e.g. linear algebra, statistics, multivariate analysis, measure theory, differential geometry, topology) to even understand what a machine learning algorithm is supposed to do
and why it is thought to do it correctly. Even simple algorithms such as gradient descent can have intricate justifications, and there can be a large gap between the mechanics of an implementation—especially a highly-optimized
one—and its intended mathematical semantics.
1
Theano (Bergstra et al., 2010) has been under development for almost a decade and yet there is a recent GitHub issue (https://github.com/Theano/Theano/issues/4770) reporting a
model for which the loss continually diverges in the middle of
training. Only after various experiments and comparing the behavior to other systems did the team agree that it is most likely an
implementation error. As of this writing, neither the cause of this
error nor the set of models it affects have been determined.

