Image-to-Markup Generation with Coarse-to-Fine Attention

Yuntian Deng 1 Anssi Kanervisto 2 Jeffrey Ling 1 Alexander M. Rush 1

Abstract
We present a neural encoder-decoder model to
convert images into presentational markup based
on a scalable coarse-to-fine attention mechanism.
Our method is evaluated in the context of imageto-LaTeX generation, and we introduce a new
dataset of real-world rendered mathematical expressions paired with LaTeX markup. We show
that unlike neural OCR techniques using CTCbased models, attention-based approaches can
tackle this non-standard OCR task. Our approach outperforms classical mathematical OCR
systems by a large margin on in-domain rendered data, and, with pretraining, also performs
well on out-of-domain handwritten data. To reduce the inference complexity associated with
the attention-based approaches, we introduce a
new coarse-to-fine attention layer that selects a
support region before applying attention.

1. Introduction
Optical character recognition (OCR) is most commonly
used to recognize natural language from an image; however, as early as the work of Anderson (1967), there has
been research interest in converting images into structured
language or markup that defines both the text itself and
its presentational semantics. The primary target for this
research is OCR for mathematical expressions, and how
to handle presentational aspects such as sub and superscript notation, special symbols, and nested fractions (Belaid & Haton, 1984; Chan & Yeung, 2000). The most effective systems combine specialized character segmentation with grammars of the underlying mathematical layout
language (Miller & Viola, 1998). A prime example of this
approach is the I NFTY system that is used to convert printed
mathematical expressions to LaTeX and other markup formats (Suzuki et al., 2003). Other, mostly proprietary sys1
Harvard University 2 University of Eastern Finland. Correspondence to: Yuntian Deng <dengyuntian@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tems, have competed on this task as part of the CROHME
handwritten mathematics challenge (Mouchere et al., 2013;
2014).
Problems like OCR that require joint processing of image
and text data have recently seen increased research interest due to the refinement of deep neural models in these
two domains. For instance, advances have been made in
the areas of handwriting recognition (Ciresan et al., 2010),
OCR in natural scenes (Jaderberg et al., 2015; 2016; Wang
et al., 2012) and image caption generation (Karpathy & FeiFei, 2015; Vinyals et al., 2015). At a high-level, each of
these systems learn an abstract encoded representation of
the input image which is then decoded to generate a textual
output. In addition to performing quite well on standard
tasks, these models are entirely data driven, which makes
them adaptable to a wide range of datasets without requiring heavy preprocessing or domain specific engineering.
However, we note that tasks such as image captioning differ from the traditional mathematical OCR task in two respects: first, unlike image captioning, the traditional OCR
task assumes a left-to-right ordering, so neural systems addressing this problem have primarily relied on Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) (Graves et al., 2006) or
stroke-based approaches. Second, the image captioning
task theoretically allows for systems to focus their attention anywhere, and thus does not directly test a system’s
ability to maintain consistent tracking with its attention.
In this work, we explore the use of attention-based imageto-text models (Xu et al., 2015) for the problem of generating structured markup. We consider whether a supervised
model can learn to produce correct presentational markup
from an image, without requiring a textual or visual grammar of the underlying markup language. Our model incorporates a multi-layer convolutional network over the image
with an attention-based recurrent neural network decoder.
To adapt this model to the OCR problem and capture the
document’s layout, we also incorporate a new source encoder layer in the form of a multi-row recurrent model as
part of the encoder.
Our modeling contributions are twofold. First, we show
that assumptions like the left-to-right ordering inherent in
CTC-based models are not required for neural OCR, since
general-purpose encoders can provide the necessary track-

