Nonnegative Matrix Factorization for Time Series Recovery
From a Few Temporal Aggregates

Jiali Mei 1 2 Yohann De Castro 1 Yannig Goude 1 2 Georges Hébrail 2

Abstract
Motivated by electricity consumption reconstitution, we propose a new matrix recovery method
using nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF).
The task tackled here is to reconstitute electricity consumption time series at a fine temporal
scale from measures that are temporal aggregates
of individual consumption. Contrary to existing
NMF algorithms, the proposed method uses temporal aggregates as input data, instead of matrix
entries. Furthermore, the proposed method is extended to take into account individual autocorrelation to provide better estimation, using a recent
convex relaxation of quadratically constrained
quadratic programs. Extensive experiments on
synthetic and real-world electricity consumption
datasets illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we propose a new matrix recovery method
using nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF, Lee & Seung
(1999)) where matrix columns represent time series at a
fine temporal scale. Moreover, only temporal aggregates of
these time series are observed.
The method has its motivation in the context of electricity
load balancing, where time series represent electric power
consumption. To avoid failure in the electricity network,
suppliers are typically required by transmission system operators (TSO) to supply as much electricity as their consumers consume at every moment. This mechanism is
called balancing. In the context of an open electricity
market, all market participants, such as suppliers, utility
traders, and large consumers, have a balance responsibility: any imbalance caused within the perimeter of a par1

EDF Lab Paris-Saclay, 91120 Palaiseau, France 2 LMO, Univ.
Paris-Sud, CNRS, Universite Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France.
Correspondence to: Jiali Mei <jiali.mei@u-psud.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ticipant is billed by the TSO. To calculate the imbalance
caused by a market participant, one needs an estimation
of the consumption and production within its perimeter
at a small temporal scale, for example, half-hourly (RTE
(2014), SVK (2016), REE (2016)).
However, for many customers (for instance residential)
within a perimeter, electricity consumption is not recorded
at that scale. Although smart meter readings may be
recorded locally up to every minute, utility companies often
have very limited access to such data, due to data transmission and processing costs and/or privacy issues. Following
a fixed schedule, cumulative consumption of each meter is
recorded by the utility company, for instance every day or
every month. By differentiating consecutive readings, the
utility obtains the consumption of a customer between two
reading dates. Currently, TSOs use proportional rules to
reconstitute consumption from these measurements, based
on national consumption profiles adjusted by temperature.
In this article, we develop an NMF-based matrix recovery
method providing a solution to consumption reconstitution
from such temporal aggregates.
Recent advances in matrix completion have made it clear
that when a large number of individuals and features are
involved, even partial data could be enough to recover
much of lost information, thanks to the low-rank property (Candès & Recht, 2009): although the whole data matrix V∗ ∈ RT ×N is only partially known, if V∗ = WH,
where W ∈ RT ×K , H ∈ RK×N , with K much smaller
than both T and N , one could recover V∗ entirely under
some conditions over the sampling process.
In this article, we adress electricity consumption reconstitution as a matrix recovery problem. Consider the electricity consumption of N consumers during T periods. Since
consumption is always positive, the N time series are organized into a nonnegative matrix V∗ ∈ RT+×N . An entry
∗
of this matrix, vt,n
represents, for example, the electricity
consumption of Consumer n for Period t.
Information about consumption is revealed as meter readings which do not correspond to matrix entries but to cumulative sums of each column of V∗ : at a meter-reading
Pt date
∗
t, we observe that Consumer n has consumed i=1 vi,n

