Data-Efficient Policy Evaluation Through Behavior Policy Search

Josiah P. Hanna 1 Philip S. Thomas 2 3 Peter Stone 1 Scott Niekum 1

Abstract
We consider the task of evaluating a policy for
a Markov decision process (MDP). The standard
unbiased technique for evaluating a policy is to
deploy the policy and observe its performance.
We show that the data collected from deploying
a different policy, commonly called the behavior
policy, can be used to produce unbiased estimates
with lower mean squared error than this standard
technique. We derive an analytic expression for
the optimal behavior policy—the behavior policy that minimizes the mean squared error of the
resulting estimates. Because this expression depends on terms that are unknown in practice, we
propose a novel policy evaluation sub-problem,
behavior policy search: searching for a behavior policy that reduces mean squared error. We
present a behavior policy search algorithm and
empirically demonstrate its effectiveness in lowering the mean squared error of policy performance estimates.

1. Introduction
Many sequential decision problems, including diabetes
treatment (Bastani, 2014), digital marketing (Theocharous
et al., 2015), and robot control (Lillicrap et al., 2015), are
modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs) and solved
using reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. One important problem when applying RL to real problems is policy
evaluation. The goal in policy evaluation is to estimate the
expected return (sum of rewards) produced by a policy. We
refer to this policy as the evaluation policy, πe . The standard policy evaluation approach is to repeatedly deploy πe
and average the resulting returns. While this naı̈ve Monte
Carlo estimator is unbiased, it may have high variance.
1
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA
The University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
Correspondence to: Josiah P. Hanna <jphanna@cs.utexas.edu>.

Methods that evaluate πe while selecting actions according
to πe are termed on-policy. Previous work has addressed
variance reduction for on-policy returns (Zinkevich et al.,
2006; White & Bowling, 2009; Veness et al., 2011). An
alternative approach is to estimate the performance of πe
while following a different, behavior policy, πb . Methods
that evaluate πe with data generated from πb are termed offpolicy. Importance sampling (IS) is one standard approach
for using off-policy data in RL. IS reweights returns observed while executing πb such that they are unbiased estimates of the performance of πe .
Presently, IS is usually used when off-policy data is already
available or when executing πe is impractical. If πb is not
chosen carefully, IS often has high variance (Thomas et al.,
2015). For this reason, an implicit assumption in the RL
community has generally been that on-policy evaluation is
more accurate when it is feasible. However, IS can also be
used for variance reduction when done with an appropriately selected distribution of returns (Hammersley & Handscomb, 1964). While IS-based variance reduction has been
explored in RL, this prior work has required knowledge of
the environment’s transition probabilities and remains onpolicy (Desai & Glynn, 2001; Frank et al., 2008; Ciosek
& Whiteson, 2017). In contrast to this earlier work, we
show how careful selection of the behavior policy can lead
to lower variance policy evaluation than using the evaluation policy and do not require knowledge of the environment’s transition probabilities.
In this paper, we formalize the selection of πb as the behavior policy search problem. We introduce a method for this
problem that adapts the policy parameters of πb with gradient descent on the variance of importance-sampling. Empirically we demonstrate behavior policy search with our
method lowers the mean squared error of estimates compared to on-policy estimates. To the best of our knowledge,
this work is the first to propose adapting the behavior policy to obtain better policy evaluation in RL. Furthermore
we present the first method to address this problem.

2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2. Preliminaries
This section details the policy evaluation problem setting,
the Monte Carlo and Advantage Sum on-policy methods,
and importance-sampling for off-policy evaluation.

