Faster Greedy MAP Inference for Determinantal Point Processes

Insu Han 1 Prabhanjan Kambadur 2 Kyoungsoo Park 1 Jinwoo Shin 1

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are popular probabilistic models that arise in many machine learning tasks, where distributions of diverse sets are characterized by matrix determinants. In this paper, we develop fast algorithms
to find the most likely configuration (MAP) of
large-scale DPPs, which is NP-hard in general.
Due to the submodular nature of the MAP objective, greedy algorithms have been used with
empirical success. Greedy implementations require computation of log-determinants, matrix
inverses or solving linear systems at each iteration. We present faster implementations of the
greedy algorithms by utilizing the complementary benefits of two log-determinant approximation schemes: (a) first-order expansions to the
matrix log-determinant function and (b) highorder expansions to the scalar log function with
stochastic trace estimators. In our experiments,
our algorithms are significantly faster than their
competitors for large-scale instances, while sacrificing marginal accuracy.

1. Introduction
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are elegant probabilistic models, first introduced by (Macchi, 1975), who
called them ‘fermion processes’. Since then, DPPs have
been extensively studied in the fields of quantum physics
and random matrices (Johansson, 2006), giving rise to a
beautiful theory (Daley & Vere-Jones, 2007). The characteristic of DPPs is repulsive behavior, which makes them
useful for modeling diversity.
Recently, they have been applied in many machine learning
tasks such as summarization (Gong et al., 2014), human
1
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. 2 Bloomberg LP, 731 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY,
10069. Correspondence to: Jinwoo Shin <jinsoos@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

pose detection (Kulesza et al., 2012), clustering (Kang,
2013) and tweet time-line generation (Yao et al., 2016).
In particular, their computational advantage compared to
other probabilistic models is that many important inference tasks are computationally tractable. For example,
conditioning, sampling (Kang, 2013) and marginalization
of DPPs admit polynomial-time/efficient algorithms, while
those on popular graphical models (Jordan, 1998) do not,
i.e., they are NP-hard. One exception is the MAP inference (finding the most likely configuration), which is our
main interest; the MAP computation is known to be NPhard even for DPPs (Kulesza et al., 2012).
The distribution of diverse sets under DPPs is characterized
by determinants of submatrices formed by their features,
and the corresponding MAP inference reduces to finding a
submatrix that maximizes its determinant. It is well known
that the matrix log-determinant is a submodular function;
that is, the MAP inference of DPPs is a special instance of
submodular maximization (Kulesza et al., 2012). Greedy
algorithms have been shown to have the best worst-case approximation guarantees for many instances of submodular
maximization; for example, (1 − 1/e)-approximation for
monotone functions. Furthermore, it has been often empirically observed that greedy algorithms provide near optimal
solutions (Krause et al., 2008). Hence, greedy algorithms
have been also applied for the DPP task (Kulesza et al.,
2012; Yao et al., 2016; Zhang & Ou, 2016). Known implementations of greedy selection on DPP require computation of log-determinants, matrix inversions (Kulesza et al.,
2012) or solving linear systems (Li et al., 2016b). Consequently, they run in O(d4 ) time where d is the total number
of items (see Section 2.3). In this paper, we propose faster
greedy implementations that run in O(d3 ) time.
Contribution. Our high-level idea is to amortize greedy
operations by utilizing log-determinant approximation
schemes. A greedy selection requires computation of
marginal gains of log-determinants; we consider their firstorder (linear) approximations. We observe that the computation of multiple marginal gains can be amortized into a
single run of a linear solver, in addition to multiple vector
inner products. We choose the popular conjugate gradient
descent (CG) (Saad, 2003) as a linear solver. In addition,
for improving the quality of first-order approximations, we
partition remaining items into p ≥ 1 sets (via some cluster-

