Averaged-DQN: Variance Reduction and Stabilization for
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Oron Anschel 1 Nir Baram 1 Nahum Shimkin 1

Abstract
Instability and variability of Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) algorithms tend to adversely affect their performance. Averaged-DQN is a simple extension to the DQN algorithm, based on
averaging previously learned Q-values estimates,
which leads to a more stable training procedure
and improved performance by reducing approximation error variance in the target values. To understand the effect of the algorithm, we examine
the source of value function estimation errors and
provide an analytical comparison within a simpliﬁed model. We further present experiments
on the Arcade Learning Environment benchmark
that demonstrate signiﬁcantly improved stability
and performance due to the proposed extension.

1. Introduction
In Reinforcement Learning (RL) an agent seeks an optimal policy for a sequential decision making problem (Sutton & Barto, 1998). It does so by learning which action
is optimal for each environment state. Over the course
of time, many algorithms have been introduced for solving RL problems including Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan,
1992), SARSA (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994; Sutton &
Barto, 1998), and policy gradient methods (Sutton et al.,
1999). These methods are often analyzed in the setup of
linear function approximation, where convergence is guaranteed under mild assumptions (Tsitsiklis, 1994; Jaakkola
et al., 1994; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997; Even-Dar & Mansour, 2003). In practice, real-world problems usually involve high-dimensional inputs forcing linear function approximation methods to rely upon hand engineered features
1

Department
of
Electrical
Engineering,
Haifa
32000, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Oron Anschel
<oronanschel@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Nir
Baram
<nirb@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Nahum
Shimkin
<shimkin@ee.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

for problem-speciﬁc state representation. These problemspeciﬁc features diminish the agent ﬂexibility, and so the
need of an expressive and ﬂexible non-linear function approximation emerges. Except for few successful attempts
(e.g., TD-gammon, Tesauro (1995)), the combination of
non-linear function approximation and RL was considered
unstable and was shown to diverge even in simple domains
(Boyan & Moore, 1995).
The recent Deep Q-Network (DQN) algorithm (Mnih et al.,
2013), was the ﬁrst to successfully combine a powerful non-linear function approximation technique known
as Deep Neural Network (DNN) (LeCun et al., 1998;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012) together with the Q-learning algorithm. DQN presented a remarkably ﬂexible and stable
algorithm, showing success in the majority of games within
the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al.,
2013). DQN increased the training stability by breaking
the RL problem into sequential supervised learning tasks.
To do so, DQN introduces the concept of a target network
and uses an Experience Replay buffer (ER) (Lin, 1993).
Following the DQN work, additional modiﬁcations and extensions to the basic algorithm further increased training
stability. Schaul et al. (2015) suggested sophisticated ER
sampling strategy. Several works extended standard RL
exploration techniques to deal with high-dimensional input
(Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2016; Osband et al.,
2016). Mnih et al. (2016) showed that sampling from ER
could be replaced with asynchronous updates from parallel
environments (which enables the use of on-policy methods). Wang et al. (2015) suggested a network architecture
base on the advantage function decomposition (Baird III,
1993).
In this work we address issues that arise from the combination of Q-learning and function approximation. Thrun &
Schwartz (1993) were ﬁrst to investigate one of these issues
which they have termed as the overestimation phenomena.
The max operator in Q-learning can lead to overestimation
of state-action values in the presence of noise. Van Hasselt
et al. (2015) suggest the Double-DQN that uses the Double
Q-learning estimator (Van Hasselt, 2010) method as a solution to the problem. Additionally, Van Hasselt et al. (2015)
showed that Q-learning overestimation do occur in practice

