The Loss Surface of Deep and Wide Neural Networks

Quynh Nguyen 1 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract
While the optimization problem behind deep
neural networks is highly non-convex, it is frequently observed in practice that training deep
networks seems possible without getting stuck in
suboptimal points. It has been argued that this
is the case as all local minima are close to being globally optimal. We show that this is (almost) true, in fact almost all local minima are
globally optimal, for a fully connected network
with squared loss and analytic activation function given that the number of hidden units of one
layer of the network is larger than the number
of training points and the network structure from
this layer on is pyramidal.

1. Introduction
The application of deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) has
in recent years lead to a dramatic boost in performance in
many areas such as computer vision, speech recognition or
natural language processing. Despite this huge empirical
success, the theoretical understanding of deep learning is
still limited. In this paper we address the non-convex optimization problem of training a feedforward neural network.
This problem turns out to be very difficult as there can
be exponentially many distinct local minima (Auer et al.,
1996; Safran & Shamir, 2016). It has been shown that the
training of a network with a single neuron with a variety of
activation functions turns out to be NP-hard (Sima, 2002).
In practice local search techniques like stochastic gradient
descent or variants are used for training deep neural networks. Surprisingly, it has been observed (Dauphin et al.,
2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015) that in the training of stateof-the-art feedforward neural networks with sparse connectivity like convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al.,
1990; Krizhevsky et al., 2012) or fully connected ones one
1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saarland University, Germany. Correspondence to: Quynh Nguyen
<quynh@cs.uni-saarland.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

does not encounter problems with suboptimal local minima. However, as the authors admit themselves in (Goodfellow et al., 2015), the reason for this might be that there
is a connection between the fact that these networks have
good performance and that they are easy to train.
On the theoretical side there have been several interesting
developments recently, see e.g. (Brutzkus & Globerson,
2017; Lee et al., 2016; Poggio & Liao, 2017; Rister & Rubin, 2017; Soudry & Hoffer, 2017; Zhou & Feng, 2017).
For some class of networks one can show that one can train
them globally optimal efficiently. However, it turns out that
these approaches are either not practical (Janzamin et al.,
2016; Haeffele & Vidal, 2015; Soltanolkotabi, 2017) as
they require e.g. knowledge about the data generating measure, or they modify the neural network structure and objective (Gautier et al., 2016). One class of networks which
are simpler to analyze are deep linear networks for which it
has been shown that every local minimum is a global minimum (Baldi & Hornik, 1988; Kawaguchi, 2016). While
this is a highly non-trivial result as the optimization problem is non-convex, deep linear networks are not interesting
in practice as one efficiently just learns a linear function. In
order to characterize the loss surface for general networks,
an interesting approach has been taken by (Choromanska
et al., 2015a). By randomizing the nonlinear part of a feedforward network with ReLU activation function and making some additional simplifying assumptions, they can relate it to a certain spin glass model which one can analyze.
In this model the objective of local minima is close to the
global optimum and the number of bad local minima decreases quickly with the distance to the global optimum.
This is a very interesting result but is based on a number
of unrealistic assumptions (Choromanska et al., 2015b). It
has recently been shown (Kawaguchi, 2016) that if some of
these assumptions are dropped one basically recovers the
result of the linear case, but the model is still unrealistic.
In this paper we analyze the case of overspecified neural
networks, that is the network is larger than what is required
to achieve minimum training error. Under overspecification (Safran & Shamir, 2016) have recently analyzed under
which conditions it is possible to generate an initialization
so that it is in principle possible to reach the global optimum with descent methods. However, they can only deal
with one hidden layer networks and have to make strong

