Uncovering Causality from Multivariate Hawkes Integrated Cumulants

Massil Achab 1 Emmanuel Bacry 1 Stéphane Gaïffas 1 Iacopo Mastromatteo 2 Jean-François Muzy 1 3

Abstract
We design a new nonparametric method that allows one to estimate the matrix of integrated kernels of a multivariate Hawkes process. This matrix not only encodes the mutual influences of
each node of the process, but also disentangles
the causality relationships between them. Our
approach is the first that leads to an estimation
of this matrix without any parametric modeling
and estimation of the kernels themselves. As a
consequence, it can give an estimation of causality relationships between nodes (or users), based
on their activity timestamps (on a social network
for instance), without knowing or estimating the
shape of the activities lifetime. For that purpose,
we introduce a moment matching method that fits
the second-order and the third-order integrated
cumulants of the process. A theoretical analysis
allows us to prove that this new estimation technique is consistent. Moreover, we show on numerical experiments that our approach is indeed
very robust to the shape of the kernels, and gives
appealing results on the MemeTracker database
and on financial order book data.

1. Introduction
In many applications, one needs to deal with data containing
a very large number of irregular timestamped events that are
recorded in continuous time. These events can reflect, for
instance, the activity of users on a social network (Subrahmanian et al., 2016), high-frequency variations of signals in
finance (Bacry & Muzy, 2014), earthquakes and aftershocks
in geophysics (Ogata, 1998), crime activity (Mohler et al.,
2011) or position of genes in genomics (Reynaud-Bouret
& Schbath, 2010). In this context, multidimensional counting processes based models play a paramount role. Within
this framework, an important task is to recover the mutual
1

Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France 2 Capital Fund Management, Paris, France 3 Université de Corse, Corte, France. Correspondence to: Massil Achab <massil.achab@m4x.org>.

influence of the nodes, by leveraging on their timestamp
patterns (Gomez-Rodriguez et al., 2013; Farajtabar et al.,
2015; Xu et al., 2016).
Consider a set of nodes I = {1, . . . , d}. For each i ∈ I,
we observe a set Z i of events, where any τ ∈ Z i labels
the occurrence time of an event related to the activity of i.
The events of all nodes can be represented as a vector of
counting processes N t = [Nt1 · · · Ntd ]> , where Nti counts
+
the number
P of events of node i until time t ∈ R , namely
i
Nt = τ ∈Z i 1{τ ≤t} . The vector of stochastic intensities
λt = [λ1t · · · λdt ]> associated with the multivariate counting
process N t is defined as
i
P(Nt+dt
− Nti = 1|Ft )
dt→0
dt
for i ∈ I, where the filtration Ft encodes the information
available up to time t. The coordinate λit gives the expected instantaneous rate of event occurrence at time t for
node i. The vector λt characterizes the distribution of N t ,
see (Daley & Vere-Jones, 2003), and patterns in the events
time-series can be captured by structuring these intensities.

λit = lim

1.1. Hawkes processes
The Hawkes process framework (Hawkes, 1971) corresponds to an autoregressive structure of the intensities in order to capture self-excitation and cross-excitation of nodes,
which is a phenomenon typically observed in social networks (Crane & Sornette, 2008). Namely, N t is called a
Hawkes point process if the stochastic intensities can be
written as
d Z t
X
λit = µi +
φij (t − t0 )dNtj0 ,
j=1

0

where µi ∈ R+ is an exogenous intensity and φij are positive, integrable and causal (with support in R+ ) functions
called kernels encoding the impact of an action by node j
on the activity of node i. Note that when all kernels are zero,
the process is a simple homogeneous multivariate Poisson
process.
1.2. Related works

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Most papers use very simple parameterizations of the kernels (Yang & Zha, 2013; Zhou et al., 2013b; Farajtabar

