Gram-CTC: Automatic Unit Selection and Target Decomposition for Sequence
Labelling

Hairong Liu* 1 Zhenyao Zhu* 1 Xiangang Li 1 Sanjeev Satheesh 1

Abstract
Most existing sequence labelling models rely on
a fixed decomposition of a target sequence into
a sequence of basic units. These methods suffer
from two major drawbacks: 1) the set of basic
units is fixed, such as the set of words, characters or phonemes in speech recognition, and 2)
the decomposition of target sequences is fixed.
These drawbacks usually result in sub-optimal
performance of modeling sequences. In this paper, we extend the popular CTC loss criterion
to alleviate these limitations, and propose a new
loss function called Gram-CTC. While preserving the advantages of CTC, Gram-CTC automatically learns the best set of basic units (grams), as
well as the most suitable decomposition of target sequences. Unlike CTC, Gram-CTC allows
the model to output variable number of characters at each time step, which enables the model
to capture longer term dependency and improves
the computational efficiency. We demonstrate
that the proposed Gram-CTC improves CTC in
terms of both performance and efficiency on the
large vocabulary speech recognition task at multiple scales of data, and that with Gram-CTC we
can outperform the state-of-the-art on a standard
speech benchmark.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been an explosion of interest in
sequence labelling tasks. Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss (Graves et al., 2006) and Sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) models (Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever
et al., 2014) present powerful approaches to multiple applications, such as Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
(Chan et al., 2016a; Hannun et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Baidu Silicon Valley AI Lab, 1195
Bordeaux Dr, Sunnyvale, CA 94089, USA. Correspondence to:
Hairong Liu <liuhairong@baidu.com>.

Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2016), machine translation (Sébastien et al., 2015), and
parsing (Vinyals et al., 2015). These methods are based on
1) a fixed and carefully chosen set of basic units, such as
words (Sutskever et al., 2014), phonemes (Chorowski et al.,
2015) or characters (Chan et al., 2016a), and 2) a fixed
and pre-determined decomposition of target sequences into
these basic units. While these two preconditions greatly
simplify the problems, especially the training processes,
they are also strict and unnecessary constraints, which usually lead to suboptimal solutions. CTC models are especially harmed by fixed basic units in target space, because
they build on the independence assumption between successive outputs in that space - an assumption which is often
violated in practice.
The problem with fixed set of basic units is obvious: it is
really hard, if not impossible, to determine the optimal set
of basic units beforehand. For example, in English ASR,
if we use words as basic units, we will need to deal with
the large vocabulary-sized softmax, as well as rare words
and data sparsity problem. On the other hand, if we use
characters as basic units, the model is forced to learn the
complex rules of English spelling and pronunciation. For
example, the "oh" sound can be spelled in any of following ways, depending on the word it occurs in - { o, oa,
oe, ow, ough, eau, oo, ew }. While CTC can easily model
commonly co-occuring grams together, it is impossible to
give roughly equal probability to many possible spellings
when transcribing unseen words. Most speech recognition
systems model phonemes, sub-phoneme units and senones
e.g, (Xiong et al., 2016a) to get around these problems.
Similarly, state-of-the-art neural machine translation systems use pre-segmented word pieces e.g, (Wu et al., 2016a)
aiming to find the best of both worlds.
In reality, groups of characters are typically cohesive units
for many tasks. For the ASR task, words can be decomposed into groups of characters that can be associated with
sound (such as ‘tion’ and ‘eaux’). For the machine translation task, there may be values in decomposing words as
root words and extensions (so that meaning may be shared
explicitly between ‘paternal’ and ‘paternity’). Since this
information is already available in the training data, it is
perhaps, better to let the model figure it out by itself. At
the same time, it raises another import question: how to de-

