Algebraic Variety Models for High-Rank Matrix Completion

Greg Ongie 1 Rebecca Willett 2 Robert D. Nowak 2 Laura Balzano 1

Abstract
We consider a generalization of low-rank matrix
completion to the case where the data belongs to
an algebraic variety, i.e., each data point is a solution to a system of polynomial equations. In this
case the original matrix is possibly high-rank,
but it becomes low-rank after mapping each column to a higher dimensional space of monomial
features. Many well-studied extensions of linear models, including affine subspaces and their
union, can be described by a variety model, as
well as a rich class of nonlinear quadratic and
higher degree curves and surfaces. We study the
sampling requirements for matrix completion under a variety model with a focus on a union of
affine subspaces. We also propose an efficient
matrix completion algorithm that minimizes a
convex or non-convex surrogate of the rank of
the matrix of monomial features, using the wellknown “kernel trick” to avoid working directly
with the high-dimensional monomial matrix. We
show the proposed algorithm is able to recover
synthetically generated data up to the predicted
sampling complexity bounds, and outperforms
standard low rank matrix completion and subspace clustering algorithms in experiments with
real data.

1. Introduction
Work in the last decade on matrix completion has shown
that it is possible to leverage linear structure in order to interpolate missing values in a low-rank matrix (Candes &
Recht, 2012). The high-level idea of this work is that if
the data defining the matrix belongs to a structure having
fewer degrees of freedom than the entire dataset, that structure provides redundancy that can be leveraged to complete
1
Department of EECS, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA 2 Department of ECE, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Greg Ongie
<gongie@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the matrix. The assumption that the matrix is low-rank is
equivalent to assuming the data lies on (or near) a lowdimensional linear subspace.
It is of great interest to generalize matrix completion to
exploit low-complexity nonlinear structures in the data.
Several avenues have been explored in the literature, from
generic manifold learning (Lee et al., 2013), to unions of
subspaces (Eriksson et al., 2012; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013),
to low-rank matrices perturbed by a nonlinear monotonic
function (Ganti et al., 2015; Song et al., 2016). In each
case missing data has been considered, but there lacks a
clear, unifying framework for these ideas.
In this work we study the problem of completing a matrix whose columns belong to an algebraic variety, i.e., the
set of solutions to a system of polynomial equations (Cox
et al., 2015). This is a strict generalization of the linear
(or affine) subspace model, which can be written as the set
of points satisfying a system of linear equations. Unions
of subspaces and unions of affine spaces are also algebraic
varieties. Plus, a much richer class of non-linear curves,
surfaces, and their unions, are captured by a variety model.
The matrix completion problem using
can
 a variety model

be formalized as follows. Let X = x1 , . . . , xs ∈ Rn×s
be a matrix of s data points where each column xi ∈ Rn .
Define φd : Rn → RN as the mapping that sends the
vector x = (x1 , ..., xn ) to the vector of all monomials in
x1 , ..., xn of degree at most d, and let φd (X) denote the
matrix that results after applying φd to each column of X,
which we call the lifted matrix. We will show the lifted matrix is rank deficient if and only if the columns of X belong
to an algebraic variety. This motivates the following matrix
completion approach:
min rank φd (X̂) such that PΩ (X̂) = PΩ (X)

(1)

X̂

where PΩ (·) represents a projection that restricts to some
observation set Ω ⊂ {1, . . . , n} × {1, . . . , s}. The rank of
φd (X̂) depends on the choice of the polynomial degree d
and the underlying “complexity” of the variety, in a sense
we will make precise. Figure 1 shows three examples of
datasets that have low-rank in the lifted space for different
polynomial degrees d.
In this work we investigate the factors that influence the
sampling complexity of varieties as well as algorithms for

