Active Heteroscedastic Regression
Kamalika Chaudhuri 1 Prateek Jain 2 Nagarajan Natarajan 2

Abstract
An active learner is given a model class Θ, a large
sample of unlabeled data drawn from an underlying distribution and access to a labeling oracle
that can provide a label for any of the unlabeled
instances. The goal of the learner is to find a
model θ ∈ Θ that fits the data to a given accuracy
while making as few label queries to the oracle as
possible. In this work, we consider a theoretical
analysis of the label requirement of active learning for regression under a heteroscedastic noise
model, where the noise depends on the instance.
We provide bounds on the convergence rates of
active and passive learning for heteroscedastic
regression. Our results illustrate that just like
in binary classification, some partial knowledge
of the nature of the noise can lead to significant
gains in the label requirement of active learning.

1. Introduction
An active learner is given a model class Θ, a large sample
of unlabeled data drawn from an underlying distribution Px
and access to a labeling oracle O which can provide a label
for any of the unlabeled instances. The goal of the learner is
to find a model θ ∈ Θ that fits the data to a given accuracy
while making as few label queries to the oracle as possible.
There has been a lot of theoretical literature on active learning, most of which has been in the context of binary classification in the PAC model (Balcan et al., 2009; Hanneke, 2007; Dasgupta et al., 2007; Beygelzimer et al., 2009;
Awasthi et al., 2014; Zhang and Chaudhuri, 2014). For
classification, the problem is known to be particularly difficult when there is no perfect classifier in the class that best
fits the labeled data induced by the oracle’s responses. Prior
work in the PAC model has shown that the difficulty of the
problem is alleviated when the “noise” is more benign – for
Authors listed in the alphabetical order 1 University of California, San Diego 2 Microsoft Research, India. Correspondence to:
Nagarajan Natarajan <t-nanata@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

example, when there is a ground truth classifier that induces
a labeling and the oracle’s responses are perturbed versions
of these labels (Hanneke, 2007; Awasthi et al., 2014; Zhang
and Chaudhuri, 2014; Awasthi et al., 2016) corrupted by
certain kinds of noise. In particular, significant improvements in label complexity have been obtained under what
is known as the Tsybakov noise conditions, which model
the realistic case of noise that decreases as we move further from the decision boundary.
The case of active learning under regression however is
significantly less well-understood. In particular, we only
have a theoretical understanding of the two extreme cases
– no noise (as in, no model mismatch) and arbitrary model
mismatch. Chaudhuri et al. (2015) show that allowing the
learner to actively select instances for labeling under regression with no model mismatch can only improve the
convergence rates by a constant factor; moreover, in many
natural cases, such as when the unlabeled data is drawn
from a uniform Gaussian, there is no improvement. Sabato
and Munos (2014) look at the other extreme case – when
arbitrary model mismatch is allowed – and provide an algorithm that attempts to “learn” the locations of the mismatch through increasingly refined partitions of the space,
and then learn a model accordingly. However if the model
mismatch is allowed to be arbitrary, then this algorithm
either requires an extremely refined partition leading to a
very high running time, or a large number of labels. More
recently, Anava and Mannor (2016) study an online learning approach for estimating heteroscedastic variances and
provide general task-dependent regret bounds, but not exact parameter recovery gaurantees.
In this paper we take a step towards closing this gap in understanding by considering active regression under a realistic yet more benign “noise” model – when the variance of
the label noise depends linearly on the example x. Specifically, the oracle’s response on an unlabeled example x
is distributed as N (⟨x, β ∗ ⟩, σx2 ) with σx = ⟨f ∗ , x⟩; here
β ∗ is the unknown vector of regression coefficients and
f ∗ is an unknown parameter vector. In classical statistics,
this framework is called heteroscedastic regression, and is
known to arise in econometric and medical applications.
While the usual least squares estimator for heteroscedastic regression is still statistically consistent, we find that

