OptNet: Differentiable Optimization as a Layer in Neural Networks

Brandon Amos 1 J. Zico Kolter 1

Abstract
This paper presents OptNet, a network architecture that integrates optimization problems (here,
specifically in the form of quadratic programs)
as individual layers in larger end-to-end trainable deep networks. These layers encode constraints and complex dependencies between the
hidden states that traditional convolutional and
fully-connected layers often cannot capture. In
this paper, we explore the foundations for such
an architecture: we show how techniques from
sensitivity analysis, bilevel optimization, and implicit differentiation can be used to exactly differentiate through these layers and with respect to
layer parameters; we develop a highly efficient
solver for these layers that exploits fast GPUbased batch solves within a primal-dual interior
point method, and which provides backpropagation gradients with virtually no additional cost on
top of the solve; and we highlight the application of these approaches in several problems. In
one notable example, we show that the method
is capable of learning to play mini-Sudoku (4x4)
given just input and output games, with no a priori information about the rules of the game; this
highlights the ability of our architecture to learn
hard constraints better than other neural architectures.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider how to treat exact, constrained
optimization as an individual layer within a deep learning architecture. Unlike traditional feedforward networks,
where the output of each layer is a relatively simple (though
non-linear) function of the previous layer, our optimization
framework allows for individual layers to capture much
richer behavior, expressing complex operations that in to1
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Brandon Amos
<bamos@cs.cmu.edu>, J. Zico Kolter <zkolter@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tal can reduce the overall depth of the network while preserving richness of representation. Specifically, we build a
framework where the output of the i + 1th layer in a network is the solution to a constrained optimization problem
based upon previous layers. This framework naturally encompasses a wide variety of inference problems expressed
within a neural network, allowing for the potential of much
richer end-to-end training for complex tasks that require
such inference procedures.
Concretely, in this paper we specifically consider the task
of solving small quadratic programs as individual layers.
These optimization problems are well-suited to capturing interesting behavior and can be efficiently solved with
GPUs. Specifically, we consider layers of the form
1 T
z Q(zi )z + q(zi )T z
2
z
subject to A(zi )z = b(zi )
G(zi )z ≤ h(zi )

zi+1 = argmin

(1)

where z is the optimization variable, Q(zi ), q(zi ), A(zi ),
b(zi ), G(zi ), and h(zi ) are parameters of the optimization
problem. As the notation suggests, these parameters can
depend in any differentiable way on the previous layer zi ,
and which can eventually be optimized just like any other
weights in a neural network. These layers can be learned
by taking the gradients of some loss function with respect
to the parameters. In this paper, we derive the gradients of
(1) by taking matrix differentials of the KKT conditions of
the optimization problem at its solution.
In order to the make the approach practical for larger networks, we develop a custom solver which can simultaneously solve multiple small QPs in batch form. We do so
by developing a custom primal-dual interior point method
tailored specifically to dense batch operations on a GPU.
In total, the solver can solve batches of quadratic programs
over 100 times faster than existing highly tuned quadratic
programming solvers such as Gurobi and CPLEX. One crucial algorithmic insight in the solver is that by using a
specific factorization of the primal-dual interior point update, we can obtain a backward pass over the optimization layer virtually “for free” (i.e., requiring no additional
factorization once the optimization problem itself has been
solved). Together, these innovations enable parameterized
optimization problems to be inserted within the architec-

