Learning to Align the Source Code to the Compiled Object Code

Dor Levy 1 Lior Wolf 1 2

Abstract
We propose a new neural network architecture
and use it for the task of statement-by-statement
alignment of source code and its compiled object code. Our architecture learns the alignment
between the two sequences – one being the translation of the other – by mapping each statement
to a context-dependent representation vector and
aligning such vectors using a grid of the two sequence domains. Our experiments include short
C functions, both artificial and human-written,
and show that our neural network architecture
is able to predict the alignment with high accuracy, outperforming known baselines. We also
demonstrate that our model is general and can
learn to solve graph problems such as the Traveling Salesman Problem.

1. Introduction
The problem of aligning sequences is well studied in
the literature across many domains, e.g., machine translation (Brown et al., 1993; Dyer et al., 2013; Bahdanau
et al., 2014), speech recognition (Graves et al., 2006;
2013), handwriting recognition (Graves et al., 2009; Graves
& Schmidhuber, 2009), alignment of books with movies
made based on them (Zhu et al., 2015) and more. The
alignment is often done sequentially, one step at a time. We
propose a neural network architecture, capable of aligning
two input sequences globally and at once.
We focus on the alignment of source code and its translation to the compiled object code. During compilation,
source code typically written in a human-readable high
level programming language, such as C, C++ and Java, is
transformed by the compiler to object code. Every object
code statement stems from a specific location in the source
code, and, therefore, there is a statement-level alignment
1

The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Dor Levy
<dor.levy@cs.tau.ac.il>, Lior Wolf <wolf@cs.tau.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

between source code and object code.
As far as we know, statement-by-statement alignment of
source- and object-code is not treated in the literature. It is
challenging, since the per-statement outcome of the compilation process also depends on other statements of the
source code. In addition, this outcome is produced in increasing levels of sophistication that are determined by the
compiler’s optimization flags.
Our compound deep neural network combines one embedding and one RNN per input sequence, a CNN applied to
a grid of sequence representation pairs and multiple softmax layers. Training is performed using both real-world
and synthetic data that we created for this purpose. The
real-world data consists of 53,000 short functions from 90
open-source projects of the GNU project. Three levels of
compiler optimization are used and the ground truth alignment labels are extracted from the compiler’s output.
Our experiments1 show that the neural network presented is
able to predict the alignment considerably more accurately
than the literature baselines. Moreover, our method is general and transcends the problem of aligning sequences. We
demonstrate it by using exactly the same architecture for
learning the Traveling Salesman Problem.
1.1. Our Contributions
We propose a novel network architecture and challenge it
with a difficult alignment problem, which has unique characteristics: the input sequences’ representations are not per
token, but per statement (a subsequence of tokens). The
alignment is predicted by our architecture not sequentially
(e.g., by employing attention), but by considering the entire grid of potential alignments at once. This is done using an architecture that combines a top-level CNN with
LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).
While neural networks have been shown to be capable of
aligning sequences in the domain of NLP, where a sentence in one natural (human) language is aligned with its
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), the current domain has
additional challenges. First, each source or object-code
statement contains both an operation (a reserved C key1

Our code and data are publicly available at: https://
github.com/DorLevyML/learn-align

