Fairness in Reinforcement Learning ⇤
Shahin Jabbari Matthew Joseph Michael Kearns Jamie Morgenstern Aaron Roth 1

Abstract
We initiate the study of fairness in reinforcement
learning, where the actions of a learning algorithm may affect its environment and future rewards. Our fairness constraint requires that an
algorithm never prefers one action over another
if the long-term (discounted) reward of choosing
the latter action is higher. Our first result is negative: despite the fact that fairness is consistent
with the optimal policy, any learning algorithm
satisfying fairness must take time exponential in
the number of states to achieve non-trivial approximation to the optimal policy. We then provide a provably fair polynomial time algorithm
under an approximate notion of fairness, thus establishing an exponential gap between exact and
approximate fairness.

1. Introduction
The growing use of machine learning for automated
decision-making has raised concerns about the potential for
unfairness in learning algorithms and models. In settings
as diverse as policing [22], hiring [19], lending [4], and
criminal sentencing [2], mounting empirical evidence suggests these concerns are not merely hypothetical [1; 25].
We initiate the study of fairness in reinforcement learning,
where an algorithm’s choices may influence the state of the
world and future rewards. In contrast, previous work on fair
machine learning has focused on myopic settings where
such influence is absent, e.g. in i.i.d. or no-regret models [5; 6; 9; 10]. The resulting fairness definitions therefore
do not generalize well to a reinforcement learning setting,
as they do not reason about the effects of short-term actions on long-term rewards. This is relevant for the set1
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns,
Jamie Morgenstern, Aaron Roth <jabbari, majos, mkearns,
jamiemor, aaroth@cis.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
⇤
The full technical version of this paper is available at
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1611.03071.pdf.

tings where historical context can have a distinct influence
on the future. For concreteness, we consider the specific
example of hiring (though other settings such as college
admission or lending decisions can be embedded into this
framework). Consider a firm aiming to hire employees for
a number of positions. The firm might consider a variety
of hiring practices, ranging from targeting and hiring applicants from well-understood parts of the applicant pool
(which might be a reasonable policy for short-term productivity of its workforce), to exploring a broader class of applicants whose backgrounds might differ from the current
set of employees at the company (which might incur shortterm productivity and learning costs but eventually lead to
a richer and stronger overall applicant pool).
We focus on the standard model of reinforcement learning,
in which an algorithm seeks to maximize its discounted
sum of rewards in a Markovian decision process (MDP).
Throughout, the reader should interpret the actions available to a learning algorithm as corresponding to choices or
policies affecting individuals (e.g. which applicants to target and hire). The reward for each action should be viewed
as the short-term payoff of making the corresponding decision (e.g. the short-term influence on the firm’s productivity after hiring any particular candidate). The actions taken
by the algorithm affect the underlying state of the system
(e.g. the company’s demographics as well as the available
applicant pool) and therefore in turn will affect the actions
and rewards available to the algorithm in the future.
Informally, our definition of fairness requires that (with
high probability) in state s, an algorithm never chooses an
available action a with probability higher than another action a0 unless Q⇤ (s, a) > Q⇤ (s, a0 ), i.e. the long-term reward of a is greater than that of a0 . This definition, adapted
from Joseph et al. (2016), is weakly meritocratic: facing
some set of actions, an algorithm must pick a distribution
over actions with (weakly) heavier weight on the better actions (in terms of their discounted long-term reward). Correspondingly, a hiring process satisfying our fairness definition cannot probabilistically target one population over
another if hiring from either population will have similar
long-term benefit to the firm’s productivity.
Unfortunately, our first result shows an exponential separation in expected performance between the best unfair algo-

