Spherical Structured Feature Maps for Kernel Approximation

Yueming Lyu 1

Abstract
We propose Spherical Structured Feature (SSF)
maps to approximate shift and rotation invariant kernels as well as bth -order arc-cosine kernels (Cho & Saul, 2009). We construct SSF
maps based on the point set on d − 1 dimensional sphere Sd−1 . We prove that the inner
product of SSF maps are unbiased estimates for
above kernels if asymptotically uniformly distributed point set on Sd−1 is given. According
to (Brauchart & Grabner, 2015), optimizing the
discrete Riesz s-energy can generate asymptotically uniformly distributed point set on Sd−1 .
Thus, we propose an efficient coordinate decent
method to find a local optimum of the discrete
Riesz s-energy for SSF maps construction. Theoretically, SSF maps construction achieves linear
space complexity and loglinear time complexity.
Empirically, SSF maps achieve superior performance compared with other methods.

1. Introduction
Kernel methods such as Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen, 2006; Srinivas et al., 2009; Snoek et al., 2012)
and support vector machines (SVMs) (Chang & Lin, 2011;
Fan et al., 2008) have been successfully used in many statistical modeling and machine learning tasks. Despite of
strong expressive power, kernel methods usually cannot
scale up to the large scale datasets with L samples due to
the need of manipulating L×L Gram matrix. Recently, random feature maps (Rahimi et al., 2007; Rahimi & Recht,
2009; Sutherland & Schneider, 2015) have demonstrated
their effectiveness on kernel approximation to scale up kernel methods. Roughly speaking, a shift invariant kernel
K(x, z) = K(x − z) : Rd → C can be approximated
by K(x, z) ≈ Ψ(x)T Ψ(z), where Ψ is the√
explicit mapped
feature constructed as Ψ(x) = f (WT x)/ N , where f (·)
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Hong Kong . Correspondence to: Yueming Lyu <LV Yueming@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

denotes the nonlinear function, W ∈ Rd×N is constructed
by N i.i.d samples drawn from a distribution defined by
K. Therefore, the training and inference of kernel methods
can be greatly accelerated by working directly on the primal space of Ψ(·). For example, Gaussian Processes (GPs)
have O(L3 ) computation and O(L2 ) storage complexity.
By using feature maps, it reduces to O(N 2 L + N 3 ) computation and O(N L + N 2 ) storage complexity. All these
elegant properties make random feature maps promising
for large scale kernel methods. Thus, many kernel methods (Le & Wilson, 2015; Cutajar et al., 2016; Oliva et al.,
2016) have been proposed to deal with large scale statistical
learning by directly working on feature maps.
Generally, two aspects of random feature maps are mostly
concerned by literature for scaling up kernel methods. One
is the approximation accuracy of feature maps while the
other is the computational cost of feature maps construction. To achieve better approximation accuracy, (Yang,
2014; Avron et al., 2016) employ QMC (Dick et al., 2013)
sampling instead of standard Monte Carlo sampling to construct feature maps. By mapping QMC points on [0, 1]d
through the inverse cumulative distribution function, they
construct more effective feature maps. To reduce time
complexity, (Le et al., 2013) propose Fastfood to construct
feature maps. Benefiting from the special structured matrix multiplication, it reduces time complexity of feature
maps construction from O(N d) to O(N log d). However,
it achieves computational efficiency at the expense of increasing the variance of approximation. Recently, (Feng
et al., 2015) employ the property of circulant matrix to accelerate feature maps construction of Gaussian kernel without increasing the variance. (Choromanski & Sindhwani,
2016) generalize the Fastfood and circulant feature maps
to P model and particularly discuss the structured matrix
with low-displacement rank. Despite of the success of P
model, it still cannot achieve better approximation accuracy
compared with feature maps obtained with fully Gaussian
matrix.
To achieve better approximation accuracy and loglinear
time complexity, we propose Spherical Structured Feature
(SSF) maps to approximate shift and rotation invariant kernels as well as bth -order arc-cosine kernels (Cho & Saul,
2009). Specifically, We construct SSF maps based on the
point set on d − 1 dimensional sphere Sd−1 , where the

