Adaptive Feature Selection: Computationally Efficient Online Sparse Linear
Regression under RIP

Satyen Kale 1 Zohar Karnin 2 Tengyuan Liang 3 Dávid Pál 4

Abstract
Online sparse linear regression is an online problem where an algorithm repeatedly chooses a
subset of coordinates to observe in an adversarially chosen feature vector, makes a real-valued
prediction, receives the true label, and incurs the
squared loss. The goal is to design an online
learning algorithm with sublinear regret to the
best sparse linear predictor in hindsight. Without any assumptions, this problem is known to
be computationally intractable. In this paper, we
make the assumption that data matrix satisfies restricted isometry property, and show that this assumption leads to computationally efficient algorithms with sublinear regret for two variants of
the problem. In the first variant, the true label is
generated according to a sparse linear model with
additive Gaussian noise. In the second, the true
label is chosen adversarially.

1. Introduction
In modern real-world sequential prediction problems, samples are typically high dimensional, and construction of
the features may itself be a computationally intensive task.
Therefore in sequential prediction, due to the computation
and resource constraints, it is preferable to design algorithms that compute only a limited number of features for
each new data example. One example of this situation,
from (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2011), is medical diagnosis of a
disease, in which each feature is the result of a medical test
on the patient. Since it is undesirable to subject a patient to
1
2
Google Research, New York.
Amazon, New York.
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago.
4
Yahoo Research, New York.
Work done while the authors were at Yahoo Research, New York.
Correspondence to: Satyen Kale <satyenkale@google.com>, Zohar Karnin <zkarnin@gmail.com>,
Tengyuan Liang
<Tengyuan.Liang@chicagobooth.edu>,
Dávid
Pál
<dpal@yahoo-inc.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a battery of medical tests, we would like to adaptively design diagnostic procedures that rely on only a few, highly
informative tests.
Online sparse linear regression (OSLR) is a sequential prediction problem in which an algorithm is allowed to see
only a small subset of coordinates of each feature vector.
The problem is parameterized by 3 positive integers: d,
the dimension of the feature vectors, k, the sparsity of the
linear regressors we compare the algorithm’s performance
to, and k0 , a budget on the number of features that can be
queried in each round by the algorithm. Generally we have
k  d and k0 ≥ k but not significantly larger (our algorithms need1 k0 = Õ(k)).
In the OSLR problem, the algorithm makes predictions
over a sequence of T rounds. In each round t, nature
chooses a feature vector xt ∈ Rd , the algorithm chooses
a subset of {1, 2, . . . , d} of size at most k 0 and observes
the corresponding coordinates of the feature vector. It then
makes a prediction ybt ∈ R based on the observed features,
observes the true label yt , and suffers loss (yt − ybt )2 . The
goal of the learner is to make the cumulative loss comparable to that of the best k-sparse linear predictor w in hindsight. The performance of the online learner is measured
by the regret, which is defined as the difference between
the two losses:
RegretT =

T
X
t=1

2

(yt − ybt ) −

min

w: kwk0 ≤k

T
X

2

(yt − hxt , wi) .

t=1

The goal is to construct algorithms that enjoy regret that is
sub-linear in T , the total number of rounds. A sub-linear
regret implies that in the asymptotic sense, the average perround loss of the algorithm approaches the average perround loss of the best k-sparse linear predictor.
Sparse regression is in general a computationally hard
problem. In particular, given k, x1 , x2 , . . . , xT and
y1 , y2 , . . . , yT as inputs, the offline P
problem of finding a
T
k-sparse w that minimizes the error t=1 (yt − hxt , wi)2
does not admit a polynomial time algorithm under standard
complexity assumptions (Foster et al., 2015). This hard1
In this paper, we use the Õ(·) notation to suppress factors that
are polylogarithmic in the natural parameters of the problem.

