Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

Charlotte Laclau 1 Ievgen Redko 2 Basarab Matei 1 Younès Bennani 1 Vincent Brault 3

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel method for
co-clustering, an unsupervised learning approach
that aims at discovering homogeneous groups of
data instances and features by grouping them simultaneously. The proposed method uses the entropy regularized optimal transport between empirical measures defined on data instances and
features in order to obtain an estimated joint
probability density function represented by the
optimal coupling matrix. This matrix is further factorized to obtain the induced row and
columns partitions using multiscale representations approach. To justify our method theoretically, we show how the solution of the regularized optimal transport can be seen from the variational inference perspective thus motivating its
use for co-clustering. The algorithm derived for
the proposed method and its kernelized version
based on the notion of Gromov-Wasserstein distance are fast, accurate and can determine automatically the number of both row and column
clusters. These features are vividly demonstrated
through extensive experimental evaluations.

1. Introduction
Cluster analysis aims to gather data instances into groups,
called clusters, where instances within one group are similar among themselves while instances in different groups
are as dissimilar as possible. Clustering methods have become more and more popular recently due to their ability
to provide new insights into unlabeled data that may be
difficult or even impossible to capture for a human being.
1

CNRS, LIPN, Université Paris 13 - Sorbonne Paris Cité,
France 2 CNRS UMR 5220 - INSERM U1206, Univ. Lyon 1,
INSA Lyon, F-69621 Villeurbanne, France 3 CNRS, LJK, Univ.
Grenoble-Alpes, France. Correspondence to: Charlotte Laclau
<charlotte.laclauc@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
0
The first author of this paper is now a post-doc in CNRS,
LIG, Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, France

Clustering methods, however, do not take into account the
possible existing relationships between the features that describe the data instances. For example, one may consider
a data matrix extracted from text corpus where each document is described by the terms appearing in it. In this
case, clustering documents may benefit from the knowledge about the correlation that exists between different
terms revealing their probability of appearing in the same
documents. This idea is the cornerstone of co-clustering
(Hartigan, 1972; Mirkin, 1996) where the goal is to perform clustering of both data points and features simultaneously. The obtained latent structure of data is composed of blocks usually called co-clusters. Applications of
co-clustering include but are not limited to recommendation systems (George & Merugu, 2005; Deodhar & Ghosh,
2010; Xu et al., 2012), gene expression analysis (Cheng
et al., 2008; Hanisch et al., 2002) and text mining (Dhillon
et al., 2003a; Wang et al., 2009). As a result, these methods
are of an increasing interest to the data mining community.
Co-clustering methods are often distinguished into probabilistic methods (e.g., (Dhillon et al., 2003b; Banerjee
et al., 2007; Nadif & Govaert, 2008; Wang et al., 2009;
Shan & Banerjee, 2010)) and metric based (e.g., (Rocci
& Vichi, 2008; Ding et al., 2006)) methods. Probabilistic
methods usually make an assumption that data was generated as a mixture of probability density functions where
each one of them corresponds to one co-cluster. The goal
then is to estimate the parameters of the underlying distributions and the posterior probabilities of each co-cluster
given the data. Metric based approaches proceed in a different way and rely on introducing and optimizing a criterion commonly taking into account intra- and inter-block
variances. This criterion, in its turn, is defined using some
proper metric function that describes the geometry of data
in the most precise way possible. Both metric and probabilistic approaches are known to have their own advantages
and limitations: despite being quite efficient in modeling
the data distribution, probabilistic methods are computationally demanding and hardly scalable; metric methods
are less computationally demanding but present the need to
choose the “right” distance that uncovers the underlying latent co-clusters’ structure based on available data. Furthermore, the vast majority of co-clustering methods require
the number of co-clusters to be set in advance. This is usu-

