Failures of Gradient-Based Deep Learning
Shai Shalev-Shwartz 1 Ohad Shamir 2 Shaked Shammah 1

Abstract
In recent years, Deep Learning has become the
go-to solution for a broad range of applications,
often outperforming state-of-the-art. However,
it is important, for both theoreticians and practitioners, to gain a deeper understanding of the difficulties and limitations associated with common
approaches and algorithms. We describe four
types of simple problems, for which the gradientbased algorithms commonly used in deep learning either fail or suffer from significant difficulties. We illustrate the failures through practical experiments, and provide theoretical insights
explaining their source, and how they might be
remedied.

1. Introduction
The success stories of deep learning form an ever lengthening list of practical breakthroughs and state-of-theart performances, ranging the fields of computer vision
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Schroff et al.,
2015; Taigman et al., 2014), audio and natural language
processing and generation (Collobert & Weston, 2008;
Hinton et al., 2012; Graves et al., 2013; van den Oord et al.,
2016), as well as robotics (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2015), to name just a few. The list of success stories
can be matched and surpassed by a list of practical “tips
and tricks”, from different optimization algorithms, parameter tuning methods (Sutskever et al., 2013; Kingma & Ba,
2014), initialization schemes (Glorot & Bengio, 2010), architecture designs (Szegedy et al., 2016), loss functions,
data augmentation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and so on.
The current theoretical understanding of deep learning is
far from being sufficient for a rigorous analysis of the difficulties faced by practitioners. Progress must be made from
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University 2 Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence to: Shai Shalev-Shwartz <shais@cs.huji.ac.il>, Ohad
Shamir <ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il>, Shaked Shammah
<shaked.shammah@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

both parties: from a practitioner’s perspective, emphasizing
the difficulties provides practical insights to the theoretician, which in turn, supplies theoretical insights and guarantees, further strengthening and sharpening practical intuitions and wisdom. In particular, understanding failures of
existing algorithms is as important as understanding where
they succeed.
Our goal in this paper is to present and discuss families
of simple problems for which commonly used methods do
not show as exceptional a performance as one might expect. We use empirical results and insights as a ground
on which to build a theoretical analysis, characterising the
sources of failure. Those understandings are aligned, and
sometimes lead to, different approaches, either for an architecture, loss function, or an optimization scheme, and
explain their superiority when applied to members of those
families. Interestingly, the sources for failure in our experiment do not seem to relate to stationary point issues such
as spurious local minima or a plethora of saddle points, a
topic of much recent interest (e.g. (Dauphin et al., 2014;
Choromanska et al., 2015)), but rather to more subtle issues, having to do with informativeness of the gradients,
signal-to-noise ratios, conditioning etc. The code for running all our experiments is available online1 . In this version, due to the lack of space, we focus on two families of
failures, and briefly describe two others in Section 4. We
refer the reader to (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017) for an extended version of this paper.
We start off in Section 2 by discussing a class of simple
learning problems for which the gradient information, central to deep learning algorithms, provably carries negligible information on the target function which we attempt to
learn. This result is a property of the learning problems
themselves, and holds for any specific network architecture one may choose for tackling the learning problem, implying that no gradient-based method is likely to succeed.
Our analysis relies on tools and insights from the Statistical Queries literature, and underscores one of the main
deficiencies of Deep Learning: its reliance on local properties of the loss function, with the objective being of a global
nature.
1

https://github.com/shakedshammah/
failures_of_DL. See command lines in Appendix D.

