Bottleneck Conditional Density Estimation
Rui Shu 1 Hung H. Bui 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3

Abstract
We introduce a new framework for training deep
generative models for high-dimensional conditional density estimation. The Bottleneck Conditional Density Estimator (BCDE) is a variant of the conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) that employs layer(s) of stochastic variables as the bottleneck between the input x
and target y, where both are high-dimensional.
Crucially, we propose a new hybrid training
method that blends the conditional generative
model with a joint generative model. Hybrid
blending is the key to effective training of the
BCDE, which avoids overfitting and provides a
novel mechanism for leveraging unlabeled data.
We show that our hybrid training procedure enables models to achieve competitive results in
the MNIST quadrant prediction task in the fullysupervised setting, and sets new benchmarks in
the semi-supervised regime for MNIST, SVHN,
and CelebA.

1. Introduction
Conditional density estimation (CDE) refers to the problem of estimating a conditional density p(y|x) for the input
x and target y. In contrast to classification where the target y is simply a discrete class label, y is typically continuous or high-dimensional in CDE. Furthermore, we want
to estimate the full conditional density (as opposed to its
conditional mean in regression), an important task the conditional distribution has multiple modes. CDE problems
in which both x and y are high-dimensional have a wide
range of important applications, including video prediction,
cross-modality prediction (e.g. image-to-caption), model
estimation in model-based reinforcement learning, and so
on.
1

Stanford University 2 Adobe Research 3 DeepMind (The work
was done when all the authors were with Adobe Research). Correspondence to: Rui Shu <ruishu@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Classical non-parametric conditional density estimators
typically rely on local Euclidean distance in the original input and target spaces (Holmes et al., 2012). This approach
quickly becomes ineffective in high-dimensions from both
computational and statistical points of view. Recent advances in deep generative models have led to new parametric models for high-dimensional CDE tasks, namely the
conditional variational autoencoders (CVAE) (Sohn et al.,
2015). CVAEs have been applied to a variety of problems,
such as MNIST quadrant prediction, segmentation (Sohn
et al., 2015), attribute-based image generation (Yan et al.,
2015), and machine translation (Zhang et al., 2016).
But CVAEs suffer from two statistical deficiencies. First,
they do not learn the distribution of the input x. We argue that in the case of high-dimensional input x where
there might exist a low-dimensional representation (such
as a low-dimensional manifold) of the data, recovering this
structure is important, even if the task at hand is to learn the
conditional density p(y|x). Otherwise, the model is susceptible to overfitting. Second, for many CDE tasks, the acquisition of labeled points is costly, motivating the need for
semi-supervised CDE. A purely conditional model would
not be able to utilize any available unlabeled data.1 We
note that while variational methods (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014) have been applied to semisupervised classification (where y is a class label) (Kingma
et al., 2014; Maaløe et al., 2016), semi-supervised CDE
(where y is high-dimensional) remains an open problem.
We focus on a set of deep conditional generative models, which we call bottleneck conditional density estimators (BCDEs). In BCDEs, the input x influences the target
y via layers of bottleneck stochastic variables z = {zi } in
the generative path. The BCDE naturally has a joint generative sibling model which we denote the bottleneck joint
density estimator (BJDE), where the bottleneck z generates x and y independently. Motivated by Lasserre et al.
(2006), we propose a hybrid training framework that regularizes the conditionally-trained BCDE parameters toward
the jointly-trained BJDE parameters. This is the key feature that enables semi-supervised learning for conditional
density estimation in the BCDEs.
1

We define a “labeled point” to be a paired (x, y) sample, and
an “unlabeled point” to be unpaired x or y.

