Leveraging Union of Subspace Structure to Improve Constrained Clustering

John Lipor 1 Laura Balzano 1

Abstract
Many clustering problems in computer vision and
other contexts are also classification problems,
where each cluster shares a meaningful label. Subspace clustering algorithms in particular are often
applied to problems that fit this description, for
example with face images or handwritten digits.
While it is straightforward to request human input on these datasets, our goal is to reduce this
input as much as possible. We present a pairwiseconstrained clustering algorithm that actively selects queries based on the union-of-subspaces
model. The central step of the algorithm is in
querying points of minimum margin between estimated subspaces; analogous to classifier margin,
these lie near the decision boundary. We prove
that points lying near the intersection of subspaces
are points with low margin. Our procedure can be
used after any subspace clustering algorithm that
outputs an affinity matrix. We demonstrate on several datasets that our algorithm drives the clustering error down considerably faster than the stateof-the-art active query algorithms on datasets with
subspace structure and is competitive on other
datasets.

1. Introduction
The union of subspaces (UoS) model, in which data vectors
lie near one of several subspaces, has been used actively in
the computer vision community on datasets ranging from
images of objects under various lighting conditions (Basri
& Jacobs, 2003) to visual surveillance tasks (Oliver et al.,
2000). The recent textbook (Vidal et al., 2016) includes a
number of useful applications for this model, including lossy
image compression, clustering of face images under different lighting conditions, and video segmentation. Subspace
clustering algorithms utilize the UoS model to cluster data
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Correspondence to: John
Lipor <lipor@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

vectors and estimate the underlying subspaces, achieving excellent performance on a variety of real datasets. However,
as we will show in Section 4, even oracle UoS classifiers
do not achieve perfect clustering on these datasets. While
current algorithms for subspace clustering are unsupervised,
in many cases a human could provide relevant information
in the form of pairwise constraints between points, e.g., answering whether two images are of the same person or
whether two objects are the same.
The incorporation of pairwise constraints into clustering algorithms is known as pairwise-constrained clustering (PCC).
PCC algorithms use supervision in the form of must-link
and cannot-link constraints by ensuring that points with
must-link constraints are clustered together and points with
cannot-link constraints are clustered apart. In (Davidson
et al., 2006), the authors investigate the phenomenon that
incorporating poorly-chosen constraints can lead to an increase in clustering error, rather than a decrease as one
would expect from additional label information. This is
because points constrained to be in the same cluster that
are otherwise dissimilar can confound the constrained clustering algorithm. For this reason, researchers have turned
to active query selection methods, in which constraints are
intelligently selected based on a number of heuristics. These
algorithms perform well across a number of datasets but do
not take advantage of any known structure in the data. In the
case where data lie on a union of subspaces, one would hope
that knowledge of the underlying geometry could give hints
as to which points are likely to be clustered incorrectly.

N
Let X = xi ∈ RD i=1 be a set of data points lying near
a union of K linear subspaces of the ambient space. We
K
denote the subspaces by {Sk }k=1 , each having dimension
dk . An example union of subspaces is shown in Fig. 1,
where d1 = 2, d2 = d3 = 1. The goal of subspace clustering algorithms has traditionally been to cluster the points
in X according to their nearest subspace without any supervised input. We turn this around and ask whether this
model is useful for active clustering, where we request a
very small number of intelligently selected labels. A key observation when considering data well-modeled by a union of
subspaces is that uncertain points will be ones lying equally
distant to multiple subspaces. Using a novel definition of
margin tailored for the union of subspaces model, we incorporate this observation into an active subspace clustering

