Neural Audio Synthesis of Musical Notes
with WaveNet Autoencoders
Jesse Engel * 1 Cinjon Resnick * 1 Adam Roberts 1 Sander Dieleman 2 Mohammad Norouzi 1 Douglas Eck 1
Karen Simonyan 2

Abstract
Generative models in vision have seen rapid
progress due to algorithmic improvements and
the availability of high-quality image datasets. In
this paper, we offer contributions in both these areas to enable similar progress in audio modeling.
First, we detail a powerful new WaveNet-style
autoencoder model that conditions an autoregressive decoder on temporal codes learned from
the raw audio waveform. Second, we introduce
NSynth, a large-scale and high-quality dataset of
musical notes that is an order of magnitude larger
than comparable public datasets. Using NSynth,
we demonstrate improved qualitative and quantitative performance of the WaveNet autoencoder
over a well-tuned spectral autoencoder baseline.
Finally, we show that the model learns a manifold of embeddings that allows for morphing between instruments, meaningfully interpolating in
timbre to create new types of sounds that are realistic and expressive.

1. Introduction
Audio synthesis is important for a large range of applications including text-to-speech (TTS) systems and music generation. Audio generation algorithms, know as
vocoders in TTS and synthesizers in music, respond to
higher-level control signals to create fine-grained audio
waveforms. Synthesizers have a long history of being
hand-designed instruments, accepting control signals such
as ‘pitch’, ‘velocity’, and filter parameters to shape the
tone, timbre, and dynamics of a sound (Pinch et al., 2009).
In spite of their limitations, or perhaps because of them,
synthesizers have had a profound effect on the course of
music and culture in the past half century (Punk, 2014).
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Jesse Engel <jesseengel@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In this paper, we outline a data-driven approach to audio
synthesis. Rather than specifying a specific arrangement
of oscillators or an algorithm for sample playback, such as
in FM Synthesis or Granular Synthesis (Chowning, 1973;
Xenakis, 1971), we show that it is possible to generate new
types of expressive and realistic instrument sounds with a
neural network model. Further, we show that this model
can learn a semantically meaningful hidden representation
that can be used as a high-level control signal for manipulating tone, timbre, and dynamics during playback.
Explicitly, our two contributions to advance the state of
generative audio modeling are:
• A WaveNet-style autoencoder that learns temporal
hidden codes to effectively capture longer term structure without external conditioning.
• NSynth: a large-scale dataset for exploring neural audio synthesis of musical notes.
The primary motivation for our novel autoencoder structure
follows from the recent advances in autoregressive models
like WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016a) and SampleRNN
(Mehri et al., 2016). They have proven to be effective at
modeling short and medium scale (∼500ms) signals, but
rely on external conditioning for longer-term dependencies.
Our autoencoder removes the need for that external conditioning. It consists of a WaveNet-like encoder that infers
hidden embeddings distributed in time and a WaveNet decoder that uses those embeddings to effectively reconstruct
the original audio. This structure allows the size of an embedding to scale with the size of the input and encode over
much longer time scales.
Recent breakthroughs in generative modeling of images
(Kingma & Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014;
van den Oord et al., 2016b) have been predicated on the
availability of high-quality and large-scale datasets such as
MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011),
CIFAR (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009). While generative models are notoriously hard
to evaluate (Theis et al., 2015), these datasets provide a
common test bed for consistent qualitative and quantitative

