A Birth-Death Process for Feature Allocation
Konstantina Palla 1 David Knowles 2 Zoubin Ghahramani 3 4

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian nonparametric prior over
feature allocations for sequential data, the birthdeath feature allocation process (BDFP). The
BDFP models the evolution of the feature allocation of a set of N objects across a covariate (e.g. time) by creating and deleting features.
A BDFP is exchangeable, projective, stationary
and reversible, and its equilibrium distribution
is given by the Indian buffet process (IBP). We
show that the Beta process on an extended space
is the de Finetti mixing distribution underlying
the BDFP. Finally, we present the finite approximation of the BDFP, the Beta Event Process
(BEP), that permits simplified inference. The
utility of the BDFP as a prior is demonstrated on
real world dynamic genomics and social network
data.

1. Introduction - Problem Statement
We are interested in time series settings where we observe
data {Yt ∈ Y : t = 1, . . . , L}. We consider problems
where the observations are explained by a latent structure
which assigns objects to features and this feature allocation changes over time. For instance, consider the topics covered by a number of newspapers over time; some
topics “die” while new ones are “born”. The topic coverage of each paper is its latent feature allocation which
could be modelled with an Indian buffet process (Griffiths
& Ghahramani, 2011, IBP). While static feature allocation
models are well studied, these are not able to handle the
time series nature of many datasets. We propose a process
that extends the IBP by allowing the feature allocation to
evolve over the covariate as a result of “birth” and “death”
of features.
1
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Stanford University, California, USA 3 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 4 Uber AI
Labs, SF, California, USA. Correspondence to: Konstantina Palla
<konstantina.palla@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2. Related Work
We target problems where the data depends on a covariate,
such as time or space, and is explained by a latent structure, in particular a (multi-membership) clustering of the
data points. The observations are result of the underlying
partitioning and its evolution over the covariate. Typical
models fall in two main categories: clustering and feature
allocation. The former allow each data point to belong to
one and only one class (cluster), while the latter let each
data point belong to multiple groups (features). Bayesian
nonparametric approaches are primarily based on the Chinese restaurant process (CRP, Aldous, 1983) or the Indian
buffet process (IBP, Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2005) corresponding to the two categories. In particular, a sample from a CRP is an assignment of data points to disjoint classes (a clustering), while a sample from an IBP is
an allocation of the data points to (possibly) overlapping
classes (a feature allocation). Dependent nonparametric
processes extend distributions over partitions to distributions over collections of partitions indexed by locations in
some covariate space, such as R+ (e.g. continuous time),
Z (e.g. discrete time), or Rd (e.g. geographical location).
Teh et al. (2013) define such a process based on the duality between Kingman’s coalescent (Kingman, 1982) and
the Dirichlet diffusion tree (Neal, 2003). In the resulting
“Fragmentation-Coagulation” process (FCP) a partitioning
of the data points evolves over the covariate undergoing
fragmentation and coagulation events while maintaining
CRP marginals. More recently, Palla et al. (2013) derived
a dependent partition-valued process (DPVP) on an arbitrary covariate space which, like the FCP, is exchangeable
and has CRP distributed marginals. In the setting of feature allocations, Williamson et al. (2010) propose a nonparametric process, the dependent IBP (dIBP), with IBP
distributed marginals and in which the feature allocations
are coupled over the covariate space using a Gaussian process (GP, Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). In a similar vein,
Van Gael et al. (iFHMM, 2009) define the Markov Indian
Buffet process (mIBP), a probability distribution over a potentially infinite number of binary Markov chains evolving
in discrete time. They use the mIBP to extend the factorial hidden Markov model (FHMM, Ghahramani & Jordan,
1997) to the infinite FHMM (iFHMM).
In this paper, we address the problem of dependence for

