A Divergence Bound for Hybrids of MCMC and Variational Inference and an
Application to Langevin Dynamics and SGVI
Justin Domke 1

Abstract
Two popular classes of methods for approximate inference are Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) and variational inference. MCMC
tends to be accurate if run for a long enough time,
while variational inference tends to give better
approximations at shorter time horizons. However, the amount of time needed for MCMC to
exceed the performance of variational methods
can be quite high, motivating more fine-grained
tradeoffs. This paper derives a distribution over
variational parameters, designed to minimize a
bound on the divergence between the resulting
marginal distribution and the target, and gives an
example of how to sample from this distribution
in a way that interpolates between the behavior
of existing methods based on Langevin dynamics and stochastic gradient variational inference
(SGVI).

1. Introduction
One of the simplest Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods is Langevin dynamics (Grenander & Miller, 1994;
Robert & Casella, 2004, Sec. 7.8.5) where one repeats gradient steps with injected Gaussian noise. Namely, one iterates
p
✏
z
z + rz log p(z) + ✏⌘,
(1)
2
where ⌘ is sampled from a standard Gaussian distribution
and ✏ is a step-size that may decay over time. To get exact samples, a Metropolis-Hastings rejection step should
be used. However, as the step-size ✏ becomes smaller,
the acceptance probability goes to one, and so this can be
disregarded. In the Bayesian inference setting, z denotes
unknown parameters and p(z) represents a posterior over
1

College of Computing and Information Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA. Correspondence to: Justin
Domke <domke@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

them. Computing p(z) thus requires a full pass over the
dataset. The idea of Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011) is to get an unbiased estimate
of the gradient of log p(z) by approximating the posterior
using a minibatch. Since the gradient term is multiplied by
2
✏, the
p variance of its error has order ✏ , while the variance
of ✏⌘ has order ✏. Thus, with a small step ✏, the injected
noise dominates, meaning one can might expect these to
have a stationary distribution close to the target p(z).
The idea of variational inference is to posit a simple family of distributions qw (z) and then optimize w to minimize
the KL-divergence from qw (z) to the target p(z). (In a
Bayesian setting, this is equivalent to maximizing the evidence lower bound.) If one were to use plain gradient ascent to perform this optimization, this leads to the iterate
of
w

✏
w + rw Eqw (Z) [log p(Z)
2

log qw (Z)],

(2)

where the gradient step ✏ is divided by two for convenience,
and may again decay over time. In practice, doing gradient
ascent like this has two difficulties. First, in the Bayesian
inference setting, computing log p(z) requires a full pass
over the data. This can be approximated without bias using
a minibatch. The second difficulty stems from the expectation of log p(z) with respect to qw (z) in Eq. 2. The gradient
of this expectation can be approximated in different ways
using samples from qw (Z) (Section 3.2). Since this gives
unbiased estimates of the gradient, stochastic optimization
methods, such as stochastic gradient descent, will converge
to a local optima when the step-size becomes small.
Intuitively, both MCMC and variational methods can be
thought of as trying to find a high-probability region of
log p(z), with different strategies to encourage entropy to
get coverage of the distribution. In MCMC, entropy is created by randomness in the Markov chain, while in variational methods the KL-divergence directly measures the
entropy of the variational distribution. It is natural to think
that hybrid methods might employ fractions of these two
strategies. This paper does so by defining a distribution
over the parameters w of the approximating family q(z|w).
This distribution q(w) is designed to minimize a bound on
the KL-divergence of the resulting marginal distribution

