“Convex Until Proven Guilty”: Dimension-Free Acceleration
of Gradient Descent on Non-Convex Functions
Yair Carmon John C. Duchi Oliver Hinder Aaron Sidford 1

Abstract
We develop and analyze a variant of Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient descent (AGD) for minimization of smooth non-convex functions. We
prove that one of two cases occurs: either
our AGD variant converges quickly, as if the
function was convex, or we produce a certificate that the function is “guilty” of being
non-convex. This non-convexity certificate allows us to exploit negative curvature and obtain deterministic, dimension-free acceleration
of convergence for non-convex functions. For
a function f with Lipschitz continuous gradient and Hessian, we compute a point x with
krf (x)k  ✏ in O(✏ 7/4 log(1/✏)) gradient and
function evaluations. Assuming additionally that
the third derivative is Lipschitz, we require only
O(✏ 5/3 log(1/✏)) evaluations.

1. Introduction
Nesterov’s seminal 1983 accelerated gradient method has
inspired substantial development of first-order methods
for large-scale convex optimization. In recent years, machine learning and statistics have seen a shift toward large
scale non-convex problems, including methods for matrix
completion (Koren et al., 2009), phase retrieval (Candès
et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016), dictionary learning (Mairal
et al., 2008), and neural network training (LeCun et al.,
2015). In practice, techniques from accelerated gradient
methods—namely, momentum—can have substantial benefits for stochastic gradient methods, for example, in training neural networks (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Kingma and
Ba, 2015). Yet little of the rich theory of acceleration for
convex optimization is known to transfer into non-convex
optimization.
1

Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. Correspondence to: Yair Carmon <yairc@stanford.edu>, Oliver Hinder
<ohinder@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Optimization becomes more difficult without convexity, as
gradients no longer provide global information about the
function. Even determining if a stationary point is a local minimum is (generally) NP-hard (Murty and Kabadi,
1987; Nesterov, 2000). It is, however, possible to leverage non-convexity to improve objectives in smooth optimization: moving in directions of negative curvature can
guarantee function value reduction. We explore the interplay between negative curvature, smoothness, and acceleration techniques, showing how an understanding of the
three simultaneously yields a method that provably accelerates convergence of gradient descent for a broad class of
non-convex functions.
1.1. Problem setting
We consider the unconstrained minimization problem
minimize f (x),
x

(1)

where f : Rd ! R is smooth but potentially non-convex.
We assume throughout the paper that f is bounded from
below, two-times differentiable, and has Lipschitz continuous gradient and Hessian. In Section 4 we strengthen our
results under the additional assumption that f has Lipschitz continuous third derivatives. Following the standard
first-order oracle model (Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983), we
consider optimization methods that access only values and
gradients of f (and not higher order derivatives), and we
measure their complexity by the total number of gradient
and function evaluations.
Approximating the global minimum of f to ✏-accuracy is
generally intractable, requiring time exponential in d log 1✏
(Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983, §1.6). Instead, we seek a
point x that is ✏-approximately stationary, that is,
krf (x)k  ✏.

(2)

Finding stationary points is a canonical problem in nonlinear optimization (Nocedal and Wright, 2006), and while
saddle points and local maxima are stationary, excepting
pathological cases, descent methods that converge to a stationary point converge to a local minimum (Lee et al.,
2016; Nemirovski, 1999, §3.2.2).

