Improved Variational Autoencoders for Text Modeling using Dilated
Convolutions
Zichao Yang 1 Zhiting Hu 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick 1

Abstract

of this class: the variational autoencoder1 (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013).

Recent work on generative text modeling has
found that variational autoencoders (VAE) with
LSTM decoders perform worse than simpler
LSTM language models (Bowman et al., 2015).
This negative result is so far poorly understood,
but has been attributed to the propensity of
LSTM decoders to ignore conditioning information from the encoder. In this paper, we experiment with a new type of decoder for VAE:
a dilated CNN. By changing the decoder’s dilation architecture, we control the size of context from previously generated words. In experiments, we find that there is a trade-off between contextual capacity of the decoder and effective use of encoding information. We show
that when carefully managed, VAEs can outperform LSTM language models. We demonstrate
perplexity gains on two datasets, representing the
first positive language modeling result with VAE.
Further, we conduct an in-depth investigation of
the use of VAE (with our new decoding architecture) for semi-supervised and unsupervised labeling tasks, demonstrating gains over several
strong baselines.

The generative story behind the VAE (to be described in
detail in the next section) is simple: First, a continuous latent representation is sampled from a multivariate Gaussian. Then, an output is sampled from a distribution parameterized by a neural decoder, conditioned on the latent
representation. The latent representation (treated as a latent
variable during training) is intended to give the model more
expressive capacity when compared with simpler neural
generative models–for example, conditional language models. The choice of decoding architecture and final output
distribution, which connect the latent representation to output, depends on the kind of data being modeled. The VAE
owes its name to an accompanying variational technique
(Kingma & Welling, 2013) that has been successfully used
to train such models on image data (Gregor et al., 2015;
Salimans et al., 2015; Yan et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Generative models play an important role in NLP, both in
their use as language models and because of their ability
to effectively learn from unlabeled data. By parameterzing generative models using neural nets, recent work has
proposed model classes that are particularly expressive and
can pontentially model a wide range of phenomena in language and other modalities. We focus on a specific instance
1
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Zichao
Yang <zichaoy@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The application of VAEs to text data has been far less successful (Bowman et al., 2015; Miao et al., 2016). The obvious choice for decoding architecture for a textual VAE
is an LSTM, a typical workhorse in NLP. However, Bowman et al. (2015) found that using an LSTM-VAE for text
modeling yields higher perplexity on held-out data than using an LSTM language model. In particular, they observe
that the LSTM decoder in VAE does not make effective
use of the latent representation during training and, as a result, VAE collapses into a simple language model. Related
work (Miao et al., 2016; Larochelle & Lauly, 2012; Mnih
& Gregor, 2014) has used simpler decoders that model text
as a bag of words. Their results indicate better use of latent representations, but their decoders cannot effectively
model longer-range dependencies in text and thus underperform in terms of final perplexity.
Motivated by these observations, we hypothesize that the
contextual capacity of the decoder plays an important role
in whether VAEs effectively condition on the latent representation when trained on text data. We propose the use
of a dilated CNN as a decoder in VAE, inspired by the recent success of using CNNs for audio, image and language
1

The name VAE is often used to refer to both a model class
and an associated inference procedure.

