Robust Structured Estimation with Single-Index Models

Sheng Chen 1 Arindam Banerjee 1

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate general single-index
models (SIMs) in high dimensions. Based on
U -statistics, we propose two types of robust estimators for the recovery of model parameters,
which can be viewed as generalizations of several existing algorithms for one-bit compressed
sensing (1-bit CS). With minimal assumption on
noise, the statistical guarantees are established
for the generalized estimators under suitable conditions, which allow general structures of underlying parameter. Moreover, the proposed estimator is novelly instantiated for SIMs with monotone transfer function, and the obtained estimator can better leverage the monotonicity. Experimental results are provided to support our theoretical analyses.

1. Introduction
In machine learning and statistics, a linear model of the form y = ⟨θ ∗ , x⟩+ϵ is widely used to find the relationship between feature and response, which has gained overwhelming popularity for a very long time. Here y ∈ R and x ∈ Rp
is the pair of observed response and feature/measurement
vector, ϵ is a zero-mean noise, and θ ∗ ∈ Rp is the unknown parameter to be estimated. The simplicity of linear
model leads to its great interpretability and computational
efficiency, which are often favored in practical applications. On theoretical side, even in high-dimensional regime
where sample size is smaller than the problem dimension
p, strong statistical guarantees have been established under mild assumptions for various estimators, such as Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) and Dantzig selector (Candes & Tao,
2007). Despite its attractive merits, one main drawback
of linear models is the stringent assumption of linear relationship between x and y, which may fail to hold in com1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Minnesota, USA. Correspondence to: Sheng Chen <shengc@cs.umn.edu>, Arindam Banerjee <banerjee@cs.umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

plicated scenarios. To introduce more flexibility, one option is to consider the general single-index models (SIMs)
(Ichimura, 1993; Horowitz & Hardle, 1996),
E[y|x] = f ∗ (⟨θ ∗ , x⟩) ,

(1)

where f ∗ : R 7→ R is an unknown univariate transfer function (a.k.a. link function). This class of models enjoys rich
modeling power in the sense that it encompasses several
useful models as special cases, which are briefly described
below:
• One-bit Compressed Sensing: In one-bit compressed sensing (1-bit CS) (Boufounos & Baraniuk,
2008; Plan & Vershynin, 2013), the response y is restricted to be binary, i.e., y ∈ {+1, −1}, and the range
of transfer function f ∗ is [−1, 1]. Given the measurement vector x, one can generate y from the Bernoulli
model,
( ∗ ∗
)
f (⟨θ , x⟩) + 1
y+1
∼ Ber
.
(2)
2
2
In the noiseless case, f ∗ (z) = sign(z) and y always
reflects the true sign of ⟨θ ∗ , x⟩, while y can be incorrect for other f ∗ whose shape determines the noise
level in some way.
• Generalized Linear Models: In generalized linear
models (GLMs) (McCullagh, 1984), the transfer function is assumed to be monotonically increasing and
conditional distribution of y|x belongs to exponential family. Different choices of f ∗ give rise to different members in GLMs. If f ∗ is identity function
f ∗ (z) = z, one has the simple linear models, while
the sigmoid function f ∗ (z) = 1+e1−z results in the logistic model for binary classification. In this work,
however, we have no access to exact f ∗ other than
knowing it is monotonic.
• Noise in Monotone Transfer: Instead of having the
general expectation form of y as GLMs, one could directly introduce the noise inside monotone transfer f˜
to model the randomness of y (Plan et al., 2016),
y = f˜ (⟨θ ∗ , x⟩ + ϵ) .

(3)

In this setting, the transfer function f˜ is slightly different from the f ∗ in (1), which are related by f ∗ (z) =
Eϵ [f˜(z + ϵ)|z].

