Warped Convolutions: Efficient Invariance to Spatial Transformations

João F. Henriques 1 Andrea Vedaldi 1

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are extremely efficient, since they exploit the inherent
translation-invariance of natural images. However, translation is just one of a myriad of useful spatial transformations. Can the same efficiency be attained when considering other spatial invariances? Such generalized convolutions
have been considered in the past, but at a high
computational cost. We present a construction
that is simple and exact, yet has the same computational complexity that standard convolutions
enjoy. It consists of a constant image warp followed by a simple convolution, which are standard blocks in deep learning toolboxes. With
a carefully crafted warp, the resulting architecture can be made equivariant to a wide range of
two-parameter spatial transformations. We show
encouraging results in realistic scenarios, including the estimation of vehicle poses in the Google
Earth dataset (rotation and scale), and face poses
in Annotated Facial Landmarks in the Wild (3D
rotations under perspective).

1. Introduction
A crucial aspect of current deep learning architectures is the
encoding of invariances. This fact is epitomized in the success of convolutional neural networks (CNN), where equivariance to image translation is key: translating the input
results in a translated output. When invariances are present
in the data, encoding them explicitly in an architecture provides an important source of regularization, which reduces
the amount of training data required for learning.
Invariances may also be used to improve the efficiency of
implementations. For instance, a convolutional layer requires orders of magnitude less memory (by reusing filters
1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: João F. Henriques
<joao@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

across space) and less computation (due to their limited
support) compared to a fully-connected layer. Its local and
predictable memory access pattern also makes better use of
modern hardware’s caching mechanisms.
The success of CNNs indicates that translation invariance
is an important property of images. However, this does
not explain why translation equivariant operators work well
for image understanding. The common interpretation is
that such operators are matched to the statistics of natural images, which are well known to be translation invariant (Hyvärinen et al., 2009). However, natural image
statistics are also (largely) invariant to other transformations such as isotropic scaling and rotation, which suggests
that alternative neural network designs may also work well
with images. Furthermore, in specific applications, invariances other than translation may be more appropriate.
Therefore, it is natural to consider generalizing convolutional architectures to other image transformations, and this
has been the subject of extensive study (Kanazawa et al.,
2014; Bruna et al., 2013; Cohen & Welling, 2016). Unfortunately these approaches do not possess the same memory
and speed benefits that CNNs enjoy. The reason is that, ultimately, they have to transform (warp) an image or filter
several times (Kanazawa et al., 2014; Marcos et al., 2016;
Dieleman et al., 2015), incurring a high computational burden. Another approach is to consider a basis of filters
(analogous to eigen-images) encoding the desired invariance (Cohen & Welling, 2014; Bruna et al., 2013; Cohen
& Welling, 2016). Although they are able to handle transformations with many pose parameters, in practice most
recent proposals are limited to very coarsely discretized
transformations, such as horizontal/vertical flips and 90◦
rotations (Dieleman et al., 2015; Cohen & Welling, 2014).
In this work we consider generalizations of CNNs that
overcome these disadvantages. Well known constructions
in group theory enable the extension of convolution to general transformation groups (Folland, 1995). However, this
generality usually comes at an increased computational
cost or complexity. Here we show that, by making appropriate assumptions, we can design convolution operators that are equivariant to a large class of two-parameter
transformations while reducing to a standard convolution
in a warped image space. The fixed image warp can be

