Learning Hawkes Processes from Short Doubly-Censored Event Sequences

Hongteng Xu 1 Dixin Luo 2 Hongyuan Zha 1

Abstract
Many real-world applications require robust algorithms to learn point processes based on a type
of incomplete data — the so-called short doublycensored (SDC) event sequences. We study this
critical problem of quantitative asynchronous
event sequence analysis under the framework
of Hawkes processes by leveraging the idea of
data synthesis. Given SDC event sequences observed in a variety of time intervals, we propose a sampling-stitching data synthesis method,
sampling predecessors and successors for each
SDC event sequence from potential candidates
and stitching them together to synthesize long
training sequences. The rationality and the feasibility of our method are discussed in terms
of arguments based on likelihood. Experiments
on both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate that the proposed data synthesis method
improves learning results indeed for both timeinvariant and time-varying Hawkes processes.

1. Introduction
Real-world interactions among multiple entities are often
recorded as asynchronous event sequences, such as user behaviors in social networks, job hunting and hopping among
companies, and diseases and their complications. The entities or event types in the sequences often exhibit selftriggering and mutually-triggering patterns. For example,
a tweet of a twitter user may trigger further responses from
her friends (Zhao et al., 2015). A disease of a patient may
trigger other complications (Choi et al., 2015). Hawkes
processes, an important kind of temporal point process
model (Hawkes & Oakes, 1974), have capability to describe the triggering patterns quantitatively and capture the
infectivity network of the entities.
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to: Hongteng Xu <hxu42@gatech.edu>, Dixin Luo
<dixin.luo@utoronto.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. For each SDC sequence, i.e., incomplete disease history
of a person in his lifetime, we design a mechanism to select other
SDC sequences as predecessors/successors and synthesize a long
sequence. Then, we can estimate the unobserved triggering patterns among diseases, i.e., the red dashed arrows, and construct a
disease network.

Despite the usefulness of Hawkes processes, robust learning of Hawkes processes often needs many event sequences
with events occurring over a long observation window. Unfortunately, the observation window is likely to be very
short and sequence-specific in many important practical applications, i.e., within an imagined universal window, each
sequence is only observed with a corresponding short subinterval of it, and the events outside this sub-interval are
not observed — we call them short doubly-censored (SDC)
event sequences. Existing learning algorithms of Hawkes
processes directly applied to SDCs may suffer from overfitting, and what is worse, the triggering patterns between
historical events and current ones are lost, so that the triggering patterns learned from SDC event sequences are often unreliable. This problem is a thorny issue in several practical applications, especially in those having timevarying triggering patterns. For example, the disease networks of patients should evolve with the increase of age.
However, it is very hard to track and record people’s diseases on a life-time scale. Instead, we can only obtain their
several admissions (even only one admission) in a hospital during one or two years, which are just SDC event
sequences. Therefore, it is highly desirable to propose a
method to learn Hawkes processes having a longtime support from a collection of SDC event sequences
In this paper, we propose a novel and simple data synthesis
method to enhance the robustness of learning algorithms
for Hawkes processes. Fig. 1 illustrates the principle of our
method. Given a set of SDC event sequences, we sample
predecessor for each event sequence from potential candidates and stitch them together as new training data. In
the sampling step, the distribution of predecessor (and successor) is estimated according to the similarities between

