Leveraging Node Attributes for Incomplete Relational Data

He Zhao 1 Lan Du 1 Wray Buntine 1

Abstract
Relational data are usually highly incomplete in
practice, which inspires us to leverage side information to improve the performance of community detection and link prediction. This paper
presents a Bayesian probabilistic approach that
incorporates various kinds of node attributes encoded in binary form in relational models with
Poisson likelihood. Our method works flexibly
with both directed and undirected relational networks. The inference can be done by efficient
Gibbs sampling which leverages sparsity of both
networks and node attributes. Extensive experiments show that our models achieve the stateof-the-art link prediction results, especially with
highly incomplete relational data.

1. Introduction
Relational learning from network data, particularly with
probabilistic methods, has gained a wide range of applications such as social network analysis (Xiang et al., 2010),
recommender systems (Gopalan et al., 2014b), knowledge
graph completion (Hu et al., 2016b), and bioinformatics (Huopaniemi et al., 2010). Generally speaking, the
goal of relational learning is to discover and analyse latent
clusters of entities (i.e., community detection), and predict
missing links (i.e., link prediction).
The standard approach for modelling relational data is latent factor analysis via matrix factorisation and its variations. Among the existing approaches, Non-negative Matrix Factorisation (NMF) and the Stochastic Block Model
(SBM) are prominent foundational methods. NMF is usually used to model relationships between two sets of entities
such as users and movies in collaborative filtering (Mnih
& Salakhutdinov, 2008). While developed independently,
SBM (Wang & Wong, 1987; Nowicki & Snijders, 2001)
can be viewed as an extension of NMF that introduces
1
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia. Correspondence to: He Zhao <he.zhao@monash.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a block matrix to capture the interactions between latent
factors. There have been many Bayesian extensions of
these two methods, relaxing the assumptions and/or introducing extra components, such as the Infinite Relational
Model (IRM) (Kemp et al., 2006), the mixture membership
stochastic block model (MMSB) (Airoldi et al., 2008), and
the non-parametric latent feature models (NLFM) (Miller
et al., 2009). Poisson Factorisation (PF) (Dunson & Herring, 2005; Zhou et al., 2012), is a popular version of
NMF which models count data with convenient statistical
properties (Gopalan et al., 2014b; 2015). Combining the
ideas of PF and SBM, the infinite Edge Partition Model
(EPM) (Zhou, 2015) and its extensions (Hu et al., 2016b)
have proven successful for relational networks.
When a network has less data, relational learning becomes
more difficult. One extreme case is the cold-start problem (Lin et al., 2013; Sedhain et al., 2014; Zhang & Wang,
2015), where a node has no observed links, making suggestion of links for that node even more challenging. In such
cases, it is natural to appeal to side information such as
node attributes or features. For instance, papers in citation
networks are often associated with categories and authors,
and users in Facebook or Twitter are often asked to provide
information such as age, gender and interests. It is reasonable to assume that nodes having similar attributes are more
likely to relate to each other (i.e., homophily, Nickel et al.,
2016). Thus, node attributes serve as important complementary information to relational data.
There are few Bayesian probabilistic relational models that
are able to leverage side information. For example, NLFM
uses a linear regression model to transform the features of
each node into a single number, which contributes to link
probabilities. However, side information in NLFM cannot directly influence the latent factors, which gives little support for community detection. As an extension of
MMSB, the Non-parametric Meta-data Dependent Relational (NMDR) model (Kim et al., 2012) incorporates attributes into the mixed-membership distribution of each
node with the logistic-normal transform, which results in
non-conjugacy for inference. Fan et al. (2016) further developed this idea in the Node information Involved Mixture Membership model (niMM), where side information
is integrated in a conjugate way. Although these models demonstrate improvement using side information, they

