Deep Transfer Learning with Joint Adaptation Networks

Mingsheng Long 1 Han Zhu 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Michael I. Jordan 2

Abstract
Deep networks have been successfully applied to
learn transferable features for adapting models
from a source domain to a different target domain.
In this paper, we present joint adaptation networks
(JAN), which learn a transfer network by aligning
the joint distributions of multiple domain-specific
layers across domains based on a joint maximum
mean discrepancy (JMMD) criterion. Adversarial
training strategy is adopted to maximize JMMD
such that the distributions of the source and target
domains are made more distinguishable. Learning
can be performed by stochastic gradient descent
with the gradients computed by back-propagation
in linear-time. Experiments testify that our model
yields state of the art results on standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep networks have significantly improved the state of the
arts for diverse machine learning problems and applications.
Unfortunately, the impressive performance gains come only
when massive amounts of labeled data are available for
supervised learning. Since manual labeling of sufficient
training data for diverse application domains on-the-fly is
often prohibitive, for a target task short of labeled data,
there is strong motivation to build effective learners that can
leverage rich labeled data from a different source domain.
However, this learning paradigm suffers from the shift in
data distributions across different domains, which poses a
major obstacle in adapting predictive models for the target
task (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Pan & Yang, 2010).
Learning a discriminative model in the presence of the shift
between training and test distributions is known as transfer
learning or domain adaptation (Pan & Yang, 2010). Previous
1

Key Lab for Information System Security, MOE; Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Technology (TNList); NELBDS; School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China 2 University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley 94720. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

shallow transfer learning methods bridge the source and target domains by learning invariant feature representations or
estimating instance importance without using target labels
(Huang et al., 2006; Pan et al., 2011; Gong et al., 2013). Recent deep transfer learning methods leverage deep networks
to learn more transferable representations by embedding
domain adaptation in the pipeline of deep learning, which
can simultaneously disentangle the explanatory factors of
variations behind data and match the marginal distributions
across domains (Tzeng et al., 2014; 2015; Long et al., 2015;
2016; Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Bousmalis et al., 2016).
Transfer learning becomes more challenging when domains
may change by the joint distributions of input features and
output labels, which is a common scenario in practical applications. First, deep networks generally learn the complex
function from input features to output labels via multilayer
feature transformation and abstraction. Second, deep features in standard CNNs eventually transition from general to
specific along the network, and the transferability of features
and classifiers decreases when the cross-domain discrepancy
increases (Yosinski et al., 2014). Consequently, after feedforwarding the source and target domain data through deep
networks for multilayer feature abstraction, the shifts in the
joint distributions of input features and output labels still
linger in the network activations of multiple domain-specific
higher layers. Thus we can use the joint distributions of the
activations in these domain-specific layers to approximately
reason about the original joint distributions, which should
be matched across domains to enable domain adaptation. To
date, this problem has not been addressed in deep networks.
In this paper, we present Joint Adaptation Networks (JAN)
to align the joint distributions of multiple domain-specific
layers across domains for unsupervised domain adaptation.
JAN largely extends the ability of deep adaptation networks
(Long et al., 2015) to reason about the joint distributions
as mentioned above, while keeping the training procedure
even simpler. Specifically, JAN admits a simple transfer
pipeline, which processes the source and target domain data
by convolutional neural networks (CNN) and then aligns
the joint distributions of activations in multiple task-specific
layers. To learn parameters and enable alignment, we derive
joint maximum mean discrepancy (JMMD), which measures
the Hilbert-Schmidt norm between kernel mean embedding
of empirical joint distributions of source and target data.

