Safety-Aware Algorithms for Adversarial Contextual Bandit
Wen Sun 1 Debadeepta Dey 2 Ashish Kapoor 2

Abstract
In this work we study the safe sequential decision
making problem under the setting of adversarial contextual bandits with sequential risk constraints. At each round, nature prepares a context,
a cost for each arm, and additionally a risk for
each arm. The learner leverages the context to
pull an arm and receives the corresponding cost
and risk associated with the pulled arm. In addition to minimizing the cumulative cost, for safety
purposes, the learner needs to make safe decisions such that the average of the cumulative risk
from all pulled arms should not be larger than a
pre-defined threshold. To address this problem,
we first study online convex programming in the
full information setting where in each round the
learner receives an adversarial convex loss and a
convex constraint. We develop a meta algorithm
leveraging online mirror descent for the full information setting and then extend it to contextual
bandit with sequential risk constraints setting using expert advice. Our algorithms can achieve
near-optimal regret in terms of minimizing the
total cost, while successfully maintaining a sublinear growth of accumulative risk constraint violation. We support our theoretical results by
demonstrating our algorithm on a simple simulated robotics reactive control task.

1. Introduction
The topic of Safe Sequential Decision Making recently has
received a lot of attention (Amodei et al., 2016) and finds its
importance in different applications ranging from robotics,
artificial intelligence and clinical trials. Designing reactive
controls for mobile robots requires reasoning and making
safe decisions so that robots can minimize the risk of dangerous obstacle collision. In clinical trials the risk of the
1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA. Correspondence to: Wen
Sun <wensun@cs.cmu.edu>.

side-effect of a new treatment must be taken into consideration for patients’ safety. In general these applications will
require the risk (probability of collision, level of side-effect)
to be less than some safe-threshold. In this work we study
safe sequential decision making under the setting of adversarial contextual bandits with sequential risk constraints.
The Contextual Bandits problem (Langford & Zhang, 2008)
is a classic framework for studying sequential decision making with rich contextual information. In each round, given
the contextual information, the learner chooses an arm (i.e.,
a decision) to pull based on the history of the interaction
with the environment, and then receives the reward associated with the pulled arm. For the special case where
contexts and rewards are i.i.d sampled from fixed unknown
distributions, there exists an oracle-based computationally
efficient algorithm (Agarwal et al., 2014) that achieves nearoptimal regret rate. For adversarial contexts and rewards,
EXP4 (Auer et al., 2002) and EXP4.P (Beygelzimer et al.,
2011) are state-of-the-art algorithms, which achieve nearoptimal regret rate, but are not computationally efficient
in general. Recently, a few authors have started to incorporate global constraints into multi-armed bandit and contextual bandits problem where the goal of the learner is to
maximize the reward while satisfying a global constraint
to some degree. Previous work considered special cases
such as single resource budget constraint (Ding et al., 2013;
Madani et al., 2004) and multiple resources budget constraints (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013). Resourceful Contextual
Bandits (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014) first introduced resource
budget constraint to contextual bandits. Later on, the authors in (Agrawal et al., 2015) generalize the setting to a
setting with a global convex constraint and a concave objective. Recently (Agrawal & Devanur, 2015) introduce a
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) style algorithm for linear
contextual bandits with knapsack constraints. The settings
considered in these previous work mainly focused on the
stochastic case where contexts and rewards are i.i.d, and
the single constraint is pre-fixed (i.e., time-independent,
non-adversarial).

2

We introduce sequential risk constraints in contextual bandits: in each round, the environment prepares a context, a

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

They can be very computationally efficient for special cases
of expert class (Beygelzimer et al., 2011)

