The Price of Differential Privacy for Online Learning
Naman Agarwal 1 Karan Singh 1

Abstract
We design differentially private algorithms for
the problem of online linear optimization in the
fullpinformation and bandit settings with optimal
Õ( T )1 regret bounds. In the full-information
setting, our results demonstrate that "-differential
privacy may be ensured for free
p – in particular,
the regret bounds scale as O( T ) + Õ 1" . For
bandit linear optimization, and as a special case,
for non-stochastic multi-armed bandits,⇣the prop ⌘
posed algorithm achieves a regret of Õ 1" T ,
while the
known best regret bound
⇣ previously
⌘
1 23
was Õ " T .

1. Introduction
In the paradigm of online learning, a learning algorithm
makes a sequence of predictions given the (possibly incomplete) knowledge of the correct answers for the past
queries. In contrast to statistical learning, online learning algorithms typically offer distribution-free guarantees.
Consequently, online learning algorithms are well suited
to dynamic and adversarial environments, where real-time
learning from changing data is essential making them ubiquitous in practical applications such as servicing search advertisements. In these settings often these algorithms interact with sensitive user data, making privacy a natural concern for these algorithms. A natural notion of privacy in
such settings is differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006)
which ensures that the outputs of an algorithm are indistinguishable in the case when a user’s data is present as
opposed to when it is absent in a dataset.
In this paper, we design differentially private algorithms for
online linear optimization with near-optimal regret, both in
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Naman Agarwal <namana@cs.princeton.edu>, Karan Singh
<karans@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
1
Here the Õ(·) notation hides polylog(T ) factors.

the full information and partial information (bandit) settings. This result improves the known best regret bounds
for a number of important online learning problems – including prediction from expert advice and non-stochastic
multi-armed bandits.
1.1. Full-Information Setting: Privacy for Free
For the full-information setting where the algorithm gets
to see the complete loss vector every round, we design
"-differentially
algorithms with regret bounds that
⇣p private
⌘
scale as O
T + Õ 1" (Theorem 3.1), partially resolving an open question
⇣ p ⌘ to improve the previously best known
bound of O 1" T posed in (Smith & Thakurta, 2013).
A decomposition of the bound on the regret bound of this
p1 , the regret incurred by
form implies that when "
T
the differentially private algorithm matches the optimal regret in the non-private setting, i.e. differential privacy is
free. Moreover even when "  p1T , our results guarantee
a sub-constant regret per round in contrast to the vacuous
constant regret per round guaranteed by existing results.
Concretely, consider the case of online linear optimization
over the cube, with unit l1 -norm-bounded loss vectors. In
this setting, (Smith
& Thakurta, 2013) achieves a regret
p
N
bound of O( 1" N T ), which is meaningful only if T
"2 .
p
Our theorems imply a regret bound of Õ( N T + N" ). This
is an improvement on the previous bound regardless of the
value of ". Furthermore, when T is between N" and "N2 , the
previous bounds are vacuous whereas our results are still
meaningful. Note that the above arguments show an improvement over existing results even for moderate value of
". Indeed, when " is very small, the magnitude of improvements are more pronounced.
Beyond the separation between T and ", the key point of
our analysis is that we obtain bounds for general regularization based algorithms which adapt to the geometry of
the underlying problem optimally, unlike the previous algorithms (Smith & Thakurta, 2013) which utilizes euclidean
regularization. This allows our results
p to get rid of a polynomial dependence on N (in the T term) in some cases.
Online linear optimization over the sphere and prediction
with expert advice are notable examples.

