Learning in POMDPs with Monte Carlo Tree Search

Sammie Katt 1 Frans A. Oliehoek 2 Christopher Amato 1

Abstract
The POMDP is a powerful framework for reasoning under outcome and information uncertainty,
but constructing an accurate POMDP model is
difficult. Bayes-Adaptive Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes (BA-POMDPs) extend POMDPs to allow the model to be learned
during execution. BA-POMDPs are a Bayesian
RL approach that, in principle, allows for an
optimal trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Unfortunately, BA-POMDPs are currently impractical to solve for any non-trivial domain. In this paper, we extend the Monte-Carlo
Tree Search method POMCP to BA-POMDPs
and show that the resulting method, which we
call BA-POMCP, is able to tackle problems that
previous solution methods have been unable to
solve. Additionally, we introduce several techniques that exploit the BA-POMDP structure to
improve the efficiency of BA-POMCP along with
proof of their convergence.

1. Introduction
The Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998) is a general model for
sequential decision making in stochastic and partially observable environments, which are ubiquitous in real-world
problems. A key shortcoming of POMDP methods is
the assumption that the dynamics of the environment are
known a priori. In real-world applications, however, it may
be impossible to obtain a complete and accurate description of the system. Instead, we may have uncertain prior
knowledge about the model. When lacking a model, a prior
can be incorporated into the POMDP problem in a principled way, as demonstrated by the Bayes-Adaptive POMDP
framework (Ross et al., 2011).

to decision making by maintaining a probability distribution over possible models as the agent acts in an online reinforcement learning setting (Duff, 2002; Wyatt, 2001). This
method casts the Bayesian reinforcement learning problem into a POMDP planning problem where the hidden
model of the environment is part of the state space. Unfortunately, this planning problem becomes very large, with
a continuous state space over all possible models, and as
such, current solution methods are not scalable or perform
poorly (Ross et al., 2011).
Online and sample-based planning has shown promising
performance on non-trivial POMDP problems (Ross et al.,
2008). Online methods reduce the complexity by considering the relevant (i.e., reachable) states only, and samplebased approaches tackle the complexity issues through approximations in the form of simulated interactions with the
environment. Here we modify one of those methods, Partial Observable Monte-Carlo Planning (POMCP) (Silver
& Veness, 2010) and extend it to the Bayes-Adaptive case,
leading to a novel approach: BA-POMCP.
In particular, we improve the sampling approach by exploiting the structure of the BA-POMDP resulting in root
sampling and expected models methods. We also present
an approach for more efficient state representation, which
we call linking states. Lastly, we prove the correctness
of our improvements, showing that they converge to the
true BA-POMDP solution. As a result, we present methods that significantly improve the scalability of learning in
BA-POMDPs, making them practical for larger problems.

2. Background
First, we discuss POMDPs and BA-POMDPs in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
2.1. POMDPs

Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts,USA
University of Liverpool, UK. Correspondence to: Sammie Katt
<katt.s@husky.neu.edu>.

Formally, a POMDP is described by a tuple (S, A, Z, D,
R, γ, h), where S is the set of states of the environment;
A is the set of actions; Z is the set of observations; D is
the ‘dynamics function’ that describes the dynamics of the
system in the form of transition probabilities D(s0 ,z|s,a);1

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

1
This formulation generalizes the typical formulation with
separate transition T and observation functions O: D = hT, Oi.
In our experiments, we do employ this typical factorization.

The BA-POMDP framework provides a Bayesian approach
1

2

