Learning Infinite Layer Networks Without the Kernel Trick

Roi Livni 1 Daniel Carmon 2 Amir Globerson 2

Abstract
Infinite Layer Networks (ILN) have been proposed as an architecture that mimics neural networks while enjoying some of the advantages
of kernel methods. ILN are networks that integrate over infinitely many nodes within a single hidden layer. It has been demonstrated by
several authors that the problem of learning ILN
can be reduced to the kernel trick, implying that
whenever a certain integral can be computed analytically they are efficiently learnable. In this
work we give an online algorithm for ILN, which
avoids the kernel trick assumption. More generally and of independent interest, we show that
kernel methods in general can be exploited even
when the kernel cannot be efficiently computed
but can only be estimated via sampling. We provide a regret analysis for our algorithm, showing
that it matches the sample complexity of methods
which have access to kernel values. Thus, our
method is the first to demonstrate that the kernel
trick is not necessary, as such, and random features suffice to obtain comparable performance.

1. Introduction
With the increasing success of highly non-convex and complex learning architectures such as neural networks, there
is an increasing effort to further understand and explain the
limits of training such hierarchical structures.
Recently there have been attempts to draw mathematical
insight from kernel methods in order to better understand
deep learning, as well as come up with new computationally learnable architectures. One such line of work consists
of learning classifiers that are linear functions of a very
large or infinite collection of non-linear functions (Bach,
1

University of Princeton, Princeton, New Jersey,
USA 2 Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Correspondence to: Roi Livni <rlivni@cs.princeton.edu>, Daniel
Carmon <carmonda@mail.tau.ac.il>,
Amir Globerson
<gamir@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2014; Daniely et al., 2016; Cho & Saul, 2009; Heinemann
et al., 2016; Williams, 1997). Such models can be interpreted as a neural network with infinitely many nodes in a
hidden layer, and we thus refer to them as “Infinite Layer
Networks” (ILN). They are of course also related to kernel
based classifiers, as will be discussed later.
A target function in an ILN class will be of the form:
Z
x → ψ(x; w)f (w)dµ(w),

(1)

Here ψ is some function of the input x and parameters w,
and dµ(w) is a prior over the parameter space. For example, ψ(x; w) can be a single sigmoidal neuron or a complete convolutional network. The integral can be thought
of as an infinite sum over all such possible networks, and
f (w) can be thought of as an infinite output weight vector
to be trained.
A Standard 1–hidden layer network with a finite set of units
can be obtained from the above formalism as follows. First,
choose ψ(x; w) = σ(x · w) where σ is an activation function (e.g., sigmoid or relu). Next, set dµ(w) to be a discrete
measure over a finite set w1 , . . . , wd .1 In this case, the integral results in a network with d hidden units, and the function f is the linear weights of the output layer. Namely:
d

x→

1X
f (wi ) · σ(x · wi ).
d i=1

The main challenge when training 1–hidden layer networks
is of course to find the w1 , . . . , wd on which we wish to
support our distribution. It is known (Livni et al., 2014),
that due to hardness of learning intersection of halfspaces
(Klivans & Sherstov, 2006; Daniely et al., 2014), 1–hidden
layer neural networks are computationally hard for a wide
class of activation functions. Therefore, as the last example illustrates, the choice of µ is indeed crucial for performance.
For a fixed prior µ, the class of ILN functions is highly
expressive, since f can be chosen to approximate any 1hidden layer architecture to arbitrary precision (by setting
f to delta functions around the weights of the network, as
1

In δ function notation dµ(w) = d1

Pd

i=1 δ(w − wi )dw

