Distributed and Provably Good Seedings for k-Means in Constant Rounds

Olivier Bachem 1 Mario Lucic 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
The k-means++ algorithm is the state of the art
algorithm to solve k-Means clustering problems
as the computed clusterings are O(log k) competitive in expectation. However, its seeding step
requires k inherently sequential passes through
the full data set making it hard to scale to massive data sets. The standard remedy is to use the
k-meansk algorithm which reduces the number
of sequential rounds and is thus suitable for a distributed setting. In this paper, we provide a novel
analysis of the k-meansk algorithm that bounds
the expected solution quality for any number of
rounds and oversampling factors greater than k,
the two parameters one needs to choose in practice. In particular, we show that k-meansk provides provably good clusterings even for a small,
constant number of iterations. This theoretical
finding explains the common observation that
k-meansk performs extremely well in practice
even if the number of rounds is low. We further
provide a hard instance that shows that an additive error term as encountered in our analysis is
inevitable if less than k − 1 rounds are employed.

1. Introduction
Over the last several years, the world has witnessed the
emergence of data sets of an unprecedented scale across
different scientific disciplines. This development has created a need for scalable, distributed machine learning algorithms to deal with the increasing amount of data. In this
paper, we consider large-scale clustering or, more specifically, the task of finding provably good seedings for kMeans in a massive data setting.
Seeding — the task of finding initial cluster centers —
is critical to finding good clusterings for k-Means. In
fact, the seeding step of the state of the art algorithm
k-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007) provides the
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Olivier Bachem <olivier.bachem@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

theoretical guarantee on the solution quality while the subsequent refinement using Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982)
only guarantees that the quality does not deteriorate. While
the k-means++ seeding step guarantees a solution that is
O(log k) competitive with the optimal solution in expectation, it also requires k inherently sequential passes through
the data set. This makes it unsuitable for the massive data
setting where the data set is distributed across machines and
computation has to occur in parallel.
As a remedy, Bahmani et al. (2012) propose the
k-meansk algorithm which produces seedings for kMeans with a reduced number of sequential iterations.
Whereas k-means++ only samples a single cluster center in each of k rounds, k-meansk samples in expectation
` points in each of t iterations. Provided t is small enough,
this makes k-meansk suitable for a distributed setting as
the number of synchronizations is reduced.
Our contributions. We provide a novel analysis of
k-meansk that bounds the expected solution quality for
any number of rounds t and any oversampling factor ` ≥ k,
the two parameters that need to be chosen in practice. Our
bound on the expected quantization error includes both a
“traditional” multiplicative error term based on the optimal solution as well as a scale-invariant additive error term
based on the variance of the data. The key insight is that

k t
if t or ` is
this additive error term vanishes at a rate of e`
increased. This shows that k-meansk provides provably
good clusterings even for a small, constant number of iterations and explains the commonly observed phenomenon
that k-meansk works very well even for small t.
We further provide a hard instance on which k-meansk
provably incurs an additive error based on the variance of
the data and for which an exclusively multiplicative error
guarantee cannot be achieved. This implies that an additive
error term such as the one in our analysis is in fact necessary if less than k − 1 rounds are employed.

2. Background & related work
k-Means clustering. Let X denote a set of points in Rd .
The k-Means clustering problem is to find a set C of k
cluster centers in Rd that minimizes the quantization error
X
X
φX (C) =
d(x, C)2 =
minkx − qk22 .
x∈X

x∈X

q∈C

