Zero-Shot Task Generalization with Multi-Task Deep Reinforcement Learning

Junhyuk Oh 1 Satinder Singh 1 Honglak Lee 1 2 Pushmeet Kohli 3

Abstract
As a step towards developing zero-shot task generalization capabilities in reinforcement learning
(RL), we introduce a new RL problem where the
agent should learn to execute sequences of instructions after learning useful skills that solve
subtasks. In this problem, we consider two types
of generalizations: to previously unseen instructions and to longer sequences of instructions. For
generalization over unseen instructions, we propose a new objective which encourages learning correspondences between similar subtasks by
making analogies. For generalization over sequential instructions, we present a hierarchical
architecture where a meta controller learns to use
the acquired skills for executing the instructions.
To deal with delayed reward, we propose a new
neural architecture in the meta controller that
learns when to update the subtask, which makes
learning more efficient. Experimental results on
a stochastic 3D domain show that the proposed
ideas are crucial for generalization to longer instructions as well as unseen instructions.

1. Introduction
The ability to understand and follow instructions allows
us to perform a large number of new complex sequential tasks even without additional learning. For example,
we can make a new dish following a recipe, and explore
a new city following a guidebook. Developing the ability to execute instructions can potentially allow reinforcement learning (RL) agents to generalize quickly over tasks
for which such instructions are available. For example,
factory-trained household robots could execute novel tasks
in a new house following a human user’s instructions (e.g.,
tasks involving household chores, going to a new place,
picking up/manipulating new objects, etc.). In addition to
generalization over instructions, an intelligent agent should
also be able to handle unexpected events (e.g., low bat1
University of Michigan 2 Google Brain 3 Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to: Junhyuk Oh <junhyuk@umich.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1: Example of 3D world and instructions. The agent is
tasked to execute longer sequences of instructions in the correct
order after training on short sequences of instructions; in addition, previously unseen instructions can be given during evaluation (blue text). Additional reward is available from randomly
appearing boxes regardless of instructions (green circle).

tery, arrivals of reward sources) while executing instructions. Thus, the agent should not blindly execute instructions sequentially but sometimes deviate from instructions
depending on circumstances, which requires balancing between two different objectives.
Problem. To develop such capabilities, this paper introduces the instruction execution problem where the agent’s
overall task is to execute a given list of instructions described by a simple form of natural language while dealing
with unexpected events, as illustrated in Figure 1. More
specifically, we assume that each instruction can be executed by performing one or more high-level subtasks in sequence. Even though the agent can pre-learn skills to perform such subtasks (e.g., [Pick up, Pig] in Figure 1), and the
instructions can be easily translated to subtasks, our problem is difficult due to the following challenges.
• Generalization: Pre-training of skills can only be done
on a subset of subtasks, but the agent is required to perform previously unseen subtasks (e.g., going to a new
place) in order to execute unseen instructions during testing. Thus, the agent should learn to generalize to new
subtasks in the skill learning stage. Furthermore, the
agent is required to execute previously unseen and longer
sequences of instructions during evaluation.
• Delayed reward: The agent is not told which instruction
to execute at any point of time from the environment but
just given the full list of instructions as input. In addition,
the agent does not receive any signal on completing in-

