AdaNet: Adaptive Structural Learning of Artificial Neural Networks

Corinna Cortes 1 Xavier Gonzalvo 1 Vitaly Kuznetsov 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Scott Yang 2

Abstract
We present new algorithms for adaptively learning artificial neural networks. Our algorithms
(A DA N ET) adaptively learn both the structure
of the network and its weights. They are
based on a solid theoretical analysis, including
data-dependent generalization guarantees that we
prove and discuss in detail. We report the results of large-scale experiments with one of our
algorithms on several binary classification tasks
extracted from the CIFAR-10 dataset and on the
Criteo dataset. The results demonstrate that our
algorithm can automatically learn network structures with very competitive performance accuracies when compared with those achieved by neural networks found by standard approaches.

1. Introduction
Multi-layer artificial neural networks form a powerful
learning model which has helped achieve a remarkable performance in several applications in recent years. Representing the input through increasingly more abstract layers of feature representation has shown to be very effective in natural language processing, image captioning,
speech recognition and several other areas (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Sutskever et al., 2014). However, despite the
compelling arguments for adopting multi-layer neural networks as a general template for tackling learning problems,
training these models and designing the right network for a
given task has raised several theoretical questions and faced
numerous practical challenges.
A critical step in learning a large multi-layer neural network for a specific task is the choice of its architecture,
which includes the number of layers and the number of
units within each layer. Standard training methods for neural networks return a model admitting precisely the number
1

Google Research, New York, NY, USA; 2 Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Vitaly Kuznetsov <vitalyk@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

of layers and units specified since there needs to be at least
one path through the network for the hypothesis to be nontrivial. Single weights can be pruned (Han et al., 2015)
via a technique originally termed Optimal Brain Damage
(LeCun et al., 1990), but the global architecture remains
unchanged. Thus, this imposes a stringent lower bound on
the complexity of the model, which may not match that
of the learning task considered: complex networks trained
with insufficient data may be prone to overfitting and, in
reverse, simpler architectures may not suffice to achieve an
adequate performance.
This places a considerable burden on the user who is left
with the requirement to specify an architecture with the
right complexity, which is often a difficult task even with a
significant level of experience and domain knowledge. As a
result, the choice of the network is typically left to a hyperparameter search using a validation set. This search space
can quickly become exorbitantly large (Szegedy et al.,
2015; He et al., 2015) and large-scale hyperparameter tuning to find an effective network architecture often wasteful of data, time, and resources (e.g. grid search, random
search (Bergstra et al., 2011)).
This paper seeks precisely to address some of these issues.
We present a theoretical analysis of the problem of learning simultaneously both the network architecture and its
parameters. To the best of our knowledge, our results are
the first generalization bounds for the problem of structural
learning of neural networks. These general guarantees can
guide the design of a variety of different algorithms for
learning in this setting. We describe in detail two such algorithms (A DA N ET algorithms) that directly benefit from
our theory.
Rather than enforcing a pre-specified architecture and
thus a fixed network complexity, our A DA N ET algorithms
adaptively learn the appropriate network architecture for
a learning task. Starting from a simple linear model, our
algorithms incrementally augment the network with more
units and additional layers, as needed. The choice of the
additional subnetworks depends on their complexity and is
directly guided by our learning guarantees. Remarkably,
the optimization problems for both of our algorithms turn
out to be strongly convex and thus guaranteed to admit a
unique global solution.

