Learned Optimizers that Scale and Generalize
Olga Wichrowska 1 Niru Maheswaranathan 2 3 Matthew W. Hoffman 4 Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo 4
Misha Denil 4 Nando de Freitas 4 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1

Abstract
Learning to learn has emerged as an important direction for achieving artificial intelligence. Two
of the primary barriers to its adoption are an inability to scale to larger problems and a limited
ability to generalize to new tasks. We introduce a learned gradient descent optimizer that
generalizes well to new tasks, and which has
significantly reduced memory and computation
overhead. We achieve this by introducing a
novel hierarchical RNN architecture, with minimal per-parameter overhead, augmented with
additional architectural features that mirror the
known structure of optimization tasks. We
also develop a meta-training ensemble of small,
diverse, optimization tasks capturing common
properties of loss landscapes. The optimizer
learns to outperform RMSProp/ADAM on problems in this corpus. More importantly, it performs comparably or better when applied to
small convolutional neural networks, despite seeing no neural networks in its meta-training set.
Finally, it generalizes to train Inception V3 and
ResNet V2 architectures on the ImageNet dataset
for thousands of steps, optimization problems
that are of a vastly different scale than those it
was trained on.

1. Introduction
Optimization is a bottleneck for almost all tasks in machine learning, as well as in many other fields, including engineering, design, operations research, and statistics. Advances in optimization therefore have broad impact. Historically, optimization has been performed using hand-designed algorithms. Recent results in machine
1

Google Brain 2 Work done during an internship at Google
Brain. 3 Stanford University 4 Deepmind. Correspondence to:
Olga Wichrowska <olganw@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

learning show that, given sufficient data, well-trained neural networks often outperform hand-tuned approaches on
supervised tasks. This raises the tantalizing possibility that
neural networks may be able to outperform hand-designed
optimizers.
Despite the promise in this approach, previous work on
learned RNN optimizers for gradient descent has failed to
produce neural network optimizers that generalize to new
problems, or that continue to make progress on the problems for which they were meta-trained when run for large
numbers of steps (see Figure 2). Current neural network
optimizers are additionally too costly in both memory and
computation to scale to larger problems.
We address both of these issues. Specifically, we improve
upon existing learned optimizers by:
1. Developing a meta-training set that consists of an ensemble of small tasks with diverse loss landscapes
2. Introducing a hierarchical RNN architecture with
lower memory and compute overhead, and which is
capable of capturing inter-parameter dependencies.
3. Incorporating features motivated by successful handdesigned optimizers into the RNN, so that it can build
on existing techniques. These include dynamically
adapted input and output scaling, momentum at multiple time scales, and a cross between Nesterov momentum and RNN attention mechanisms.
4. Improving the meta-optimization pipeline, for instance by introducing a meta-objective that better
encourages exact convergence of the optimizer, and
by drawing the number of optimization steps during
training from a heavy tailed distribution.

2. Related work
Learning to learn has a long history in psychology (Ward,
1937; Harlow, 1949; Kehoe, 1988; Lake et al., 2016). Inspired by it, machine learning researchers have proposed
meta-learning techniques for optimizing the process of
learning itself. Schmidhuber (1987), for example, considers networks that are able to modify their own weights.

