Modular Multitask Reinforcement Learning with Policy Sketches
Jacob Andreas 1 Dan Klein 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
We describe a framework for multitask deep reinforcement learning guided by policy sketches.
Sketches annotate tasks with sequences of named
subtasks, providing information about high-level
structural relationships among tasks but not how
to implement them—specifically not providing
the detailed guidance used by much previous
work on learning policy abstractions for RL (e.g.
intermediate rewards, subtask completion signals, or intrinsic motivations). To learn from
sketches, we present a model that associates every subtask with a modular subpolicy, and jointly
maximizes reward over full task-specific policies by tying parameters across shared subpolicies. Optimization is accomplished via a decoupled actor–critic training objective that facilitates
learning common behaviors from multiple dissimilar reward functions. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in three environments
featuring both discrete and continuous control,
and with sparse rewards that can be obtained only
after completing a number of high-level subgoals. Experiments show that using our approach
to learn policies guided by sketches gives better
performance than existing techniques for learning task-specific or shared policies, while naturally inducing a library of interpretable primitive behaviors that can be recombined to rapidly
adapt to new tasks.

1. Introduction
This paper describes a framework for learning composable deep subpolicies in a multitask setting, guided only
by abstract sketches of high-level behavior. General reinforcement learning algorithms allow agents to solve tasks
in complex environments. But tasks featuring extremely
1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Jacob
Andreas <jda@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

τ1: make planks
b1: get wood

K1

b2: use workbench

Π1
π1
π2

τ2: make sticks
b1: get wood
b3: use toolshed

K2

Π2
π1
π3

π3
π2
π1

π1

Figure 1: Learning from policy sketches. The figure shows simplified versions of two tasks (make planks and make sticks, each
associated with its own policy (⇧1 and ⇧2 respectively). These
policies share an initial high-level action b1 : both require the
agent to get wood before taking it to an appropriate crafting station. Even without prior information about how the associated behavior ⇡1 should be implemented, knowing that the agent should
initially follow the same subpolicy in both tasks is enough to learn
a reusable representation of their shared structure.

delayed rewards or other long-term structure are often difficult to solve with flat, monolithic policies, and a long
line of prior work has studied methods for learning hierarchical policy representations (Sutton et al., 1999; Dietterich, 2000; Konidaris & Barto, 2007; Hauser et al., 2008).
While unsupervised discovery of these hierarchies is possible (Daniel et al., 2012; Bacon & Precup, 2015), practical
approaches often require detailed supervision in the form
of explicitly specified high-level actions, subgoals, or behavioral primitives (Precup, 2000). These depend on state
representations simple or structured enough that suitable
reward signals can be effectively engineered by hand.
But is such fine-grained supervision actually necessary to
achieve the full benefits of hierarchy? Specifically, is it
necessary to explicitly ground high-level actions into the
representation of the environment? Or is it sufficient to
simply inform the learner about the abstract structure of
policies, without ever specifying how high-level behaviors
should make use of primitive percepts or actions?
To answer these questions, we explore a multitask reinforcement learning setting where the learner is pre-

