Attentive Recurrent Comparators

Pranav Shyam 1 2 Shubham Gupta 2 Ambedkar Dukkipati 2

Abstract
Rapid learning requires flexible representations
to quickly adopt to new evidence. We develop a
novel class of models called Attentive Recurrent
Comparators (ARCs) that form representations
of objects by cycling through them and making
observations. Using the representations extracted
by ARCs, we develop a way of approximating a
dynamic representation space and use it for oneshot learning. In the task of one-shot classification on the Omniglot dataset, we achieve the
state of the art performance with an error rate of
1.5%. This represents the first super-human result achieved for this task with a generic model
that uses only pixel information.

1. Introduction
Utilizing the success and the potential of Deep Neural Networks to solve hard Artificial Intelligence tasks requires
neural models that are capable of performing rapid learning
(Lake et al., 2016). For models to embody such rich learning capabilities, we believe that a crucial characteristic will
be the employment of dynamic representations – representations that are formed by observing a growing and continually evolving set of features. We call the space that is
formed by such evolving representations the dynamic representation space.
In this paper, we present a novel model for one-shot learning that utilizes a crude approximation of such a dynamic
representation space. This is done by constructing the representation space lazily and relative to a particular (test)
sample every time. For the purpose of producing such relative representations, we develop a novel class of models
called Attentive Recurrent Comparators (ARCs).
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Rashtreeya Vidyalaya College of Engineering, Bengaluru, India
2
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India. Correspondence to: Pranav
Shyam <pranavshyam13@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

We first test ARCs across many tasks that require assessment of visual similarity. We find that ARCs that do not use
any convolutions show comparable performance to Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks on challenging datasets
like CASIA WebFace and Omniglot. Though dense ARCs
are as capable as ConvNets, a combination of both ARCs
and convolutions (ConvARCs) produces much more superior models. In the task of estimating the similarity of
two characters from the Omniglot dataset, ARCs and Deep
ConvNets both achieve about 93.4% accuracy, whereas
ConvARCs achieve 96.10% accuracy. In the task of face
verification on the CASIA Webface dataset, ConvARCs
achieved 81.73% accuracy surpassing the 79.48% accuracy
achieved by a CNN baseline considered.
We then use ARCs as a means for developing a lazy, relative representation space and use it for one-shot learning.
On the challenging Omniglot one-shot classification task,
our model achieved an accuracy of 98.5%, significantly
surpassing the current state-of-the-art set by all other methods. This is also the first super-human result achieved for
this task with a generic model that uses only pixel information.
1.1. Comparing Objects
ARCs are inspired by our interpretation of how humans
generally compare a set of objects. When a person is asked
to compare two objects and estimate their similarity, the
person does so by repeatedly looking back and forth between the two objects. With each glimpse of the object, a
specific observation is made. These observations which are
made in both objects are then cumulatively used to come to
a conclusion about their similarity. A crucial characteristic
of this process is that new observations are made conditioned on the previous context that has been investigated
so far by the observer. The observation and it’s contextual
location are all based on intermediate deductions – deductions that are themselves based on the observations made
so far in the two objects. A series of such guided observations and their entailing inferences are accumulated to form
a final the judgement on their similarity. We will refer to
how humans compare objects as the human way.
In stark contrast to this, current similarity estimating systems in Deep Learning are analogues of the Siamese sim-

