Schema Networks: Zero-shot Transfer with a Generative Causal Model of
Intuitive Physics

Ken Kansky Tom Silver David A. Mély Mohamed Eldawy Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla Xinghua Lou
Nimrod Dorfman Szymon Sidor Scott Phoenix Dileep George

Abstract
The recent adaptation of deep neural networkbased methods to reinforcement learning and
planning domains has yielded remarkable
progress on individual tasks.
Nonetheless,
progress on task-to-task transfer remains limited.
In pursuit of efficient and robust generalization,
we introduce the Schema Network, an objectoriented generative physics simulator capable
of disentangling multiple causes of events and
reasoning backward through causes to achieve
goals. The richly structured architecture of the
Schema Network can learn the dynamics of an
environment directly from data. We compare
Schema Networks with Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic and Progressive Networks on a
suite of Breakout variations, reporting results on
training efficiency and zero-shot generalization,
consistently demonstrating faster, more robust
learning and better transfer. We argue that
generalizing from limited data and learning
causal relationships are essential abilities on the
path toward generally intelligent systems.

Figure 1. Variations of Breakout. From top left: standard version,
middle wall, half negative bricks, offset paddle, random target,
and juggling. After training on the standard version, Schema Networks are able to generalize to the other variations without any
additional training.

1. Introduction
A longstanding ambition of research in artificial intelligence is to efficiently generalize experience in one scenario
to other similar scenarios. Such generalization is essential
for an embodied agent working to accomplish a variety of
goals in a changing world. Despite remarkable progress on
individual tasks like Atari 2600 games (Mnih et al., 2015;
Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2016) and Go (Silver
et al., 2016a), the ability of state-of-the-art models to transfer learning from one environment to the next remains limAll authors affiliated with Vicarious AI, California, USA. Correspondence to: Ken Kansky <ken@vicarious.com>, Tom Silver
<tom@vicarious.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ited. For instance, consider the variations of Breakout illustrated in Fig. 1. In these environments the positions of objects are perturbed, but the object movements and sources
of reward remain the same. While humans have no trouble
generalizing experience from the basic Breakout to its variations, deep neural network-based models are easily fooled
(Taylor & Stone, 2009; Rusu et al., 2016).
The model-free approach of deep reinforcement learning
(Deep RL) such as the Deep-Q Network and its descendants is inherently hindered by the same feature that makes
it desirable for single-scenario tasks: it makes no assumptions about the structure of the domain. Recent work has
suggested how to overcome this deficiency by utilizing
object-based representations (Diuk et al., 2008; Usunier
et al., 2016). Such a representation is motivated by the

