High-dimensional Non-Gaussian Single Index Models via Thresholded Score
Function Estimation
Zhuoran Yang 1 Krishnakumar Balasubramanian 1 Han Liu 1

Abstract
We consider estimating the parametric component of single index models in high dimensions.
Compared with existing work, we do not require
the covariate to be normally distributed. Utilizing
Stein’s Lemma, we propose estimators based on
the score function of the covariate. Moreover, to
handle score function and response variables that
are heavy-tailed, our estimators are constructed
via carefully thresholding their empirical counterparts. Under a bounded fourth moment condition, we establish optimal statistical rates of convergence for the proposed estimators. Extensive
numerical experiments are provided to back up
our theory.

1. Introduction
Estimators for high-dimensional parametric (linear) models have been developed and analyzed extensively in
the last two decades (see for example (Bühlmann &
van de Geer, 2011; Vershynin, 2015) for comprehensive
overviews). While being a useful testbed for illustrating
conceptual phenomenon, they often suffer from a lack of
flexibility in modeling real-world situations. On the other
hand, completely nonparametric models, although flexible, suffer from the curse of dimensionality unless restrictive additive sparsity or smoothness assumptions are imposed (Ravikumar et al., 2009; Yuan et al., 2016). An interesting compromise between the parametric and nonparametric models is provided by the so-called semiparametric
index models (Horowitz, 2009). Here, the response and the
covariate are linked through a low-dimensional nonparametric function that takes in as input a linear transformation of the covariate. The nonparametric component is also
called as the link function and the linear components are
1

Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. Correspondence to: Han Liu <hanliu@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

called as the indices.
In this work, we focus on the simplest family of such models, the single index models (SIMs), which assume that the
response Y and the covariate X satisfy Y = f (hX, β ∗ i) +
, where β ∗ is the true signal,  is the mean-zero random
noise, and f is a univariate link function. (see §2 for the
precise definition). They form the basis of more complicated models such as Multiple Index Models (MIMs) (Diaconis & Shahshahani, 1984) and Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) (LeCun et al., 2015), which are cascades of MIMs.
Moreover, we focus on the task of estimating the parametric (linear) component β ∗ without the knowledge of
the nonparametric part f in the high-dimensional setting,
where the number of samples is much smaller than the dimensionality of β ∗ .
Estimating the parametric component without depending
on the specific form of the nonparametric part appears naturally in several situations. For example, in one-bit compressed sensing (Boufounos & Baraniuk, 2008) and sparse
generalized linear models (Loh & Wainwright, 2015), we
are interested in recovering the true signal vector based on
nonlinear measurements. Furthermore, in a DNN, the activation function is pre-specified and the task is to estimate
the linear components, which are used for prediction in the
test stage. Performing nonlinear least-squares in this setting, leads to nonconvex optimization problems that are invariably sub-optimal without further assumptions. Hence,
developing estimators for the linear component that are
both statistically accurate and computationally efficient for
a class of activation functions provide a compelling alternative. Understanding such estimators for SIMs is hence
crucial for understanding the more complicated DNNs.
Although SIMs appear to be a simple extension of the
standard linear models, most existing work in the highdimensional setting assume X follows a Gaussian distribution for estimating β ∗ without the knowledge of the nonparametric part. It is not clear whether those estimation
methods are still valid and optimal when X is drawn from
a more general class of distributions. To relax the Gaussian
assumption, we study the setting where the distribution of
X is non-Gaussian but known a priori.

