Globally Optimal Gradient Descent for a ConvNet with Gaussian Inputs

Alon Brutzkus 1 Amir Globerson 1

Abstract
Deep learning models are often successfully
trained using gradient descent, despite the worst
case hardness of the underlying non-convex optimization problem. The key question is then under what conditions can one prove that optimization will succeed. Here we provide a strong result of this kind. We consider a neural net with
one hidden layer and a convolutional structure
with no overlap, and a ReLU activation function. For this architecture we show that learning is NP-complete in the general case, but that
when the input distribution is Gaussian, gradient
descent converges to the global optimum in polynomial time. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first global optimality guarantee of gradient
descent on a convolutional neural network with
ReLU activations.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance on many machine learning tasks in areas such as natural language processing (Wu et al., 2016), computer vision
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and speech recognition (Hinton
et al., 2012). Training of such networks is often successfully performed by minimizing a high-dimensional nonconvex objective function, using simple first-order methods
such as stochastic gradient descent.
Nonetheless, the success of deep learning from an optimization perspective is poorly understood theoretically.
Current results are mostly pessimistic, suggesting that even
training a 3-node neural network is NP-hard (Blum &
Rivest, 1993), and that the objective function of a single
neuron can admit exponentially many local minima (Auer
et al., 1996; Safran & Shamir, 2016). There have been re1
Tel Aviv University, Blavatnik School of Computer Science.
Correspondence to:
Alon Brutzkus
<alonbrutzkus@mail.tau.ac.il>,
Amir
Globerson
<gamir@cs.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

cent attempts to bridge this gap between theory and practice. Several works focus on the geometric properties of
loss functions that neural networks attempt to minimize.
For some simplified architectures, such as linear activations, it can be shown that there are no bad local minima
(Kawaguchi, 2016). Extension of these results to the nonlinear case currently requires very strong independence assumptions between the activations of the neurons and the
inputs (Kawaguchi, 2016).
Since gradient descent is the main “work-horse” of deep
learning it is of key interest to understand its convergence
properties. However, there are no results showing that
gradient descent is globally optimal for non-linear models, except for the case of many hidden neurons (Andoni
et al., 2014) and non-linear activation functions that are not
widely used in practice (Zhang et al., 2017).1 Here we provide the first such result for a neural architecture that has
two very common components: namely a ReLU activation
function and a convolution layer.
The architecture considered in the current paper is shown in
Figure 1. We refer to these models as no-overlap networks.
A no-overlap network can be viewed as a simple convolution layer with non overlapping filters, followed by a ReLU
activation function, and then average pooling. Formally, let
w ∈ Rm denote the filter coefficients, and assume the input
x is in Rd . Define k = d/m and assume that k is integral.
Partition x into k non-overlapping parts and denote x[i] the
ith part. Finally, define σ to be the ReLU activation function, namely σ (z) = max{0, z}. Then the output of the
network in Figure 1 is given by:
1X
f (x; w) =
σ (w · x[i])
(1)
k i
We note that such architectures have been used in several
works (Lin et al., 2013; Milletari et al., 2016), but we view
them as important firstly because they capture key properties of general convolutional networks.
We address the realizable case, where training data is generated from a function as in Eq. 1 with weight vector
w∗ . Training data is then generated by sampling n training points x1 , . . . , xn from a distribution D, and assigning
them labels using y = f (x; w∗ ). The learning problem is
1

See more related work in Section 2.

