Deep Tensor Convolution on Multicores

David Budden 1 Alexander Matveev 1 Shibani Santurkar 1 Shraman Ray Chaudhuri 1 Nir Shavit 1

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNets)
of 3-dimensional kernels allow joint modeling of
spatiotemporal features. These networks have
improved performance of video and volumetric
image analysis, but have been limited in size due
to the low memory ceiling of GPU hardware. Existing CPU implementations overcome this constraint but are impractically slow. Here we extend and optimize the faster Winograd-class of
convolutional algorithms to the N -dimensional
case and specifically for CPU hardware. First,
we remove the need to manually hand-craft algorithms by exploiting the relaxed constraints
and cheap sparse access of CPU memory. Second, we maximize CPU utilization and multicore scalability by transforming data matrices to
be cache-aware, integer multiples of AVX vector
widths. Treating 2D ConvNets as a special case,
we demonstrate a 5 to 25-fold improvement in
throughput compared to previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Although convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) have
been successfully applied to solve non-trivial image processing problems since the 1990s (LeCun et al., 1989;
2012), their adoption as a de facto standard for image classification (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and segmentation (Long et al., 2015) is due largely to recent
breakthroughs in network architecture. Beginning with
AlexNet in 2012 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the annual ImageNet classification challenge (ILSVRC) has been dominated by progressively deeper networks with smaller kernels (Szegedy et al., 2015; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014b).
Recent solutions to the issues of vanishing and exploding
gradients (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) have allowed these networks to extend even deeper, with the ILSVRC15 winner
(ResNet (He et al., 2016)) being 8-fold deeper than VGG.
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
David Budden <budden@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

It is easy to see why the “deeper is better” trend has led to
better performing ConvNets. Constructing even a modest
7 x 7 receptive field with stacked k = 3 kernels requires
45% fewer parameters than a single kernel of size k = 7.
Intuitively it also captures a richer set of features due to additional non-linearity. Recent studies have begun to formalize the expressive power of deep versus shallow networks,
finding that classification boundaries acquire local curvature and expressivity as an exponential function of network
depth but not breadth (Poole et al., 2016). The only obvious
trade-off to this performance is the extra memory necessary
to store the intermediate activations in deeper networks.
Motivated by the success of these models in image processing tasks, researchers have begun to investigate ConvNet applications in the video processing domain. Example applications include video classification (Karpathy
et al., 2014), segmentation (Couprie et al., 2013) and denoising (Shi et al., 2016b). An important observation
that has emerged from these studies is the importance of
3D convolutional primitives for modelling joint spatiotemporal features; the naı̈ve application of traditional 2D
ConvNets frame-by-frame does not capture motion continuity or other rich temporal correlations (Ledig et al.,
2016; Tran et al., 2015). It is thus unsurprising that simple
3D ConvNets have yielded state-of-the-art performance on
video classification benchmarks (Tran et al., 2015) and volumetric image segmentation, e.g. tracing neurons between
electron microscopy samples (Lee et al., 2015).
Given the early success and conceptual simplicity of 3D
ConvNets, it is interesting to note that many popular deep
learning libraries (e.g. Caffe (Jia et al., 2014)) do not provide native support. One simple explanation is that these
libraries are optimized for execution on GPUs, and higherorder convolutions require prohibitively large volumes of
data with respect to the 16 GB ceiling of today’s most advanced GPU hardware. These limitations are clear in previous studies, which either (a) limit the network size (Tran
et al., 2015), (b) down-sample images to lower resolution (Ji et al., 2013), or (c) include 3D primitives for only a
subset of network layers (Lee et al., 2015).
There are many potential options for circumventing the issue of ConvNet memory usage. The first is to split the
network across multiple GPUs, which requires the careful

