Partitioned Tensor Factorizations for Learning Mixed Membership Models

Zilong Tan 1 Sayan Mukherjee 1

Abstract
We present an efficient algorithm for learning
mixed membership models when the number of
variables p is much larger than the number of
hidden components k. This algorithm reduces
the computational complexity of state-of-the-art
tensormethods, which require decomposing an
O p3 tensor, to factorizing
O (p/k) sub-tensors

each of size O k 3 . In addition, we address the
issue of negative entries in the empirical method
of moments based estimators. We provide sufficient conditions under which our approach has
provable guarantees. Our approach obtains competitive empirical results on both simulated and
real data.

1. Introduction
Mixed membership models (Woodbury et al., 1978;
Pritchard et al., 2000a;b; Blei et al., 2003; Erosheva, 2005)
have been used extensively across applications ranging
from modeling population structure in genetics (Pritchard
et al., 2000a;b) to topic modeling of documents (Woodbury et al., 1978; Blei et al., 2003; Erosheva, 2005). Mixed
membership models use Dirichlet latent variables to define
cluster membership where samples can partially belong to
each of k latent components. Parameter estimation for such
latent variables models (LVMs) using maximum likelihood
methods such as expectation maximization is computationally intensive for large data, for example, if number of samples n is large.
Parameter estimation using the method of moments for
LVMs is an attractive scalable alternative that has been
shown to have certain theoretical and computational advantages over maximum likelihood methods in the setting when n is large. For LVMs, method of moments approaches reduce to tensor methods—the moments of the
model parameters are expressed as a function of statistics
1
Duke University, Durham, NC. Correspondence to: Sayan
Mukherjee <sayan@stat.duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

of the observations in a tensor form. Inference in this setting becomes a problem of tensor factorization. Computational advantages of using tensor methods have been observed for many popular models, including latent Dirichlet
allocation (Anandkumar et al., 2012), spherical Gaussian
mixture models (Hsu & Kakade, 2013), hidden Markov
models (Anandkumar et al., 2012), independent component
analysis (Comon & Jutten, 2010), and multi-view models
(Anandkumar et al., 2014). An appealing property of tensor
methods is the guarantee of a unique decomposition under
mild conditions (cf. Kruskal, 1977; Leurgans et al., 1993).
There are two complications to using standard tensor decomposition methods (Anandkumar et al., 2016; 2014; Gu
et al., 2014; Kuleshov et al., 2015; Nicolò Colombo and
Nikos Vlassis; Kim et al., 2014; Chi & Kolda, 2012) for
LVMs. The first problem is computation and space complexity. Given p variables in the LVM, parameter inference
requires factorizing typically a non-orthogonal estimator
tensor of size O p3 (Anandkumar et al., 2014; Kuleshov
et al., 2015; Nicolò Colombo and Nikos Vlassis), which
is prohibitive for large p. When the estimator is orthogo
nal and symmetric, this can be done in O p2 log p (Wang
et al., 2015). Online tensor decomposition (Huang et al.,
2013) uses dimension reduction to instead factorize a reduced k-by-k-by-k tensor. However, the dimension reduction can be slower than decomposing the estimator directly
for large sample sizes, as well as suffer from high variance
(Wang et al., 2015). We introduce a simple factorization
with improved complexity for the general case where the
parameters are not required to be orthogonal.
The second problem arises from negative entries in the
empirical moments tensor. LVMs for count data are constrained to have nonnegative parameters. However, the empirical moments tensor computed from the data may contain negative elements due to sampling variation and noise.
Indeed, for small sample sizes or data with many small
or zero counts, there will be many negative entries in the
empirical moments tensor. General tensor decomposition
algorithms (Kuleshov et al., 2015; Nicolò Colombo and
Nikos Vlassis), including the tensor power method (TPM)
(Anandkumar et al., 2014), do not guarantee the nonnegativity of model parameters. Approaches such as positive/nonnegative tensor factorization (Chi & Kolda, 2012;
Shashua & Hazan, 2005; Welling & Weber, 2001) also do

