On Mixed Memberships and Symmetric Nonnegative Matrix Factorizations

Xueyu Mao 1 Purnamrita Sarkar 2 Deepayan Chakrabarti 3

Abstract
The problem of finding overlapping communities in networks has gained much attention recently. Optimization-based approaches use nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) or variants,
but the global optimum cannot be provably attained in general. Model-based approaches,
such as the popular mixed membership stochastic
blockmodel or MMSB (Airoldi et al., 2008), use
parameters for each node to specify the overlapping communities, but standard inference techniques cannot guarantee consistency. We link
the two approaches, by (a) establishing sufficient
conditions for the symmetric NMF optimization
to have a unique solution under MMSB, and (b)
proposing a computationally efficient algorithm
called GeoNMF that is provably optimal and
hence consistent for a broad parameter regime.
We demonstrate its accuracy on both simulated
and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Community detection is a fundamental problem in network analysis. It has been widely used in a diverse
set of applications ranging from link prediction in social networks (Soundarajan & Hopcroft, 2012), predicting
protein-protein or protein-DNA interactions in biological
networks (Chen & Yuan, 2006), to network protocol design such as data forwarding in delay tolerant networks (Lu
et al., 2015).
Traditional community detection assumes that every node
in the network belongs to exactly one community, but
many practical settings call for greater flexibility. For

instance, individuals in a social network may have multiple interests, and hence are best described as members of multiple interest-based communities. We focus
on the popular mixed membership stochastic blockmodel
(MMSB) (Airoldi et al., 2008) where each node i, i ∈ [n]
has a discrete probability distribution θi = (θi1 , . . . , θiK )
over K communities. The probability of linkage between
nodes i and j depends on the degree of overlap between
their communities:
θi ∼ Dirichlet(α)
P = ρΘBΘ

T

Aij = Aji = Bernoulli(Pij )

i ∈ [n]
i, j ∈ [n]

where θi is the i-th row of Θ, A represents the adjacency matrix of the generated graph, and B ∈ RK×K
is the community-community interaction matrix. The parameter ρ controls the sparsity of the graph, so WLOG,
the largest
P entry of B can be set to 1. The parameter
α0 = i αi controls the amount of overlap. In particular,
when α0 → 0, MMSB reduces to the well known stochastic blockmodel, where every node belongs to exactly one
community. Larger α0 leads to more overlap. Since we
only observe A, a natural question is: how can {θi } and B
be recovered from A in a way that is provably consistent?
1.1. Prior work
We categorize existing approaches broadly into three
groups: model-based parameter inference methods, specialized algorithms that offer provable guarantees, and
optimization-based methods using non-negative matrix
factorization.

1
Department of Computer Science. 2 Department of Statistics
and Data Sciences. 3 Department of Information, Risk, and Operations Management. The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA.
Correspondence to: Xueyu Mao <xmao@cs.utexas.edu>, Purnamrita Sarkar <purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu>, Deepayan
Chakrabarti <deepay@utexas.edu>.

Model-based methods: These apply standard techniques
for inference of hidden variables to the MMSB model. Examples include MCMC techniques (Chang, 2012) and variational methods (Gopalan & Blei, 2013). While these often
work well in practice, there are no proofs of consistency for
these methods. The MCMC methods are difficult to scale
to large graphs, so we compare against the faster variational
inference methods in our experiments.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Algorithms with provable guarantees: There has been
work on provably consistent estimation on models similar
to MMSB. Zhang et al. (2014) propose a spectral method

