Adaptive Multiple-Arm Identification

Jiecao Chen * 1 Xi Chen * 2 Qin Zhang * 1 Yuan Zhou * 1

Abstract
We study the problem of selecting K arms with
the highest expected rewards in a stochastic narmed bandit game. This problem has a wide
range of applications, e.g., A/B testing, crowdsourcing, simulation optimization. Our goal is
to develop a PAC algorithm, which, with probability at least 1 − δ, identifies a set of K arms
with the aggregate regret at most . The notion of
aggregate regret for multiple-arm identification
was first introduced in Zhou et al. (2014) , which
is defined as the difference of the averaged expected rewards between the selected set of arms
and the best K arms. In contrast to Zhou et al.
(2014) that only provides instance-independent
sample complexity, we introduce a new hardness
parameter for characterizing the difficulty of any
given instance. We further develop two algorithms and establish the corresponding sample
complexity in terms of this hardness parameter.
The derived sample complexity can be significantly smaller than state-of-the-art results for a
large class of instances and matches the instanceindependent lower bound upto a log(−1 ) factor
in the worst case. We also prove a lower bound
result showing that the extra log(−1 ) is necessary for instance-dependent algorithms using the
introduced hardness parameter.

1. Introduction
Given a set of alternatives with different quality, identifying high quality alternatives via a sequential experiment is
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA 2 Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Jiecao Chen <jiecchen@umail.iu.edu; supported
in part by NSF CCF-1525024 and IIS-1633215>, Xi Chen
<xchen3@stern.nyu.edu; supported by Google Faculty Research
Fellowship>, Qin Zhang <qzhangcs@indiana.edu; supported
in part by NSF CCF-1525024 and IIS-1633215>, Yuan Zhou
<yzhoucs@indiana.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

an important problem in multi-armed bandit (MAB) literature, which is also known as the “pure-exploration” problem. This problem has a wide range of applications. For
example, consider the A/B/C testing problem with multiple
website designs, where each candidate design corresponds
to an alternative. In order to select high-quality designs,
an agent could display different designs to website visitors
and measure the attractiveness of an design. The question
is: how should the agent adaptively select which design to
be displayed next so that the high-quality designs can be
quickly and accurately identified? For another example, in
crowdsourcing, it is critical to identify high-quality workers from a pool of a large number of noisy workers. An
effective strategy is testing workers by gold questions, i.e.,
questions with the known answers provided by domain experts. Since the agent has to pay a fixed monetary reward
for each answer from a worker, it is important to implement
a cost-effective strategy for to select the top workers with
the minimum number of tests. Other applications include
simulation optimization, clinical trials, etc.
More formally, we assume that there are n alternative arms,
where the i-th arm is associated with an unknown reward
distribution Di with mean θi . For the ease of illustration,
we assume each Di is supported on [0, 1]. In practice, it
is easy to satisfy this assumption by a proper scaling. For
example, the traffic of a website or the correctness of an
answer for a crowd worker (which simply takes the value
either 0 or 1), can be scaled to [0, 1]. The mean reward θi
characterizes the quality of the i-th alternative. The agent
sequentially pulls an arm, and upon each pulling of the ith arm, the i.i.d. reward from Di is observed. The goal
of “top-K arm identification” is to design an adaptive arm
pulling strategy so that the top K arms with the largest
mean rewards can be identified with the minimum number of trials. In practice, identifying the exact top-K arms
usually requires a large number of arm pulls, which could
be wasteful. In many applications (e.g., crowdsourcing), it
is sufficient to find an “approximate set” of top-K arms.
To measure the quality of the selected arms, we adopt the
notion of aggregate regret (or regret for short) from Zhou
et al. (2014). In particular, we assume that arms are ordered
by their mean θ1 ≥ θ2 ≥ · · · ≥ θn so that the set of the
best K arms is {1, . . . , K}. For the selected arm set T with

