Dance Dance Convolution
Chris Donahue 1 Zachary C. Lipton 2 Julian McAuley 2

Abstract
Dance Dance Revolution (DDR) is a popular
rhythm-based video game. Players perform steps
on a dance platform in synchronization with music as directed by on-screen step charts. While
many step charts are available in standardized
packs, players may grow tired of existing charts,
or wish to dance to a song for which no chart exists. We introduce the task of learning to choreograph. Given a raw audio track, the goal is to
produce a new step chart. This task decomposes
naturally into two subtasks: deciding when to
place steps and deciding which steps to select.
For the step placement task, we combine recurrent and convolutional neural networks to ingest
spectrograms of low-level audio features to predict steps, conditioned on chart difficulty. For
step selection, we present a conditional LSTM
generative model that substantially outperforms
n-gram and fixed-window approaches.

1. Introduction
Dance Dance Revolution (DDR) is a rhythm-based video
game with millions of players worldwide (Hoysniemi,
2006). Players perform steps atop a dance platform, following prompts from an on-screen step chart to step on the
platform’s buttons at specific, musically salient points in
time. A player’s score depends upon both hitting the correct buttons and hitting them at the correct time. Step charts
vary in difficulty with harder charts containing more steps
and more complex sequences. The dance pad contains up,
down, left, and right arrows, each of which can be in one
of four states: on, off, hold, or release. Because the four arrows can be activated or released independently, there are
256 possible step combinations at any instant.
1

UCSD Department of Music, San Diego, CA 2 UCSD Department of Computer Science, San Diego, CA. Correspondence
to: Chris Donahue <cdonahue@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Proposed learning to choreograph pipeline for four seconds of the song Knife Party feat. Mistajam - Sleaze. The pipeline
ingests audio features (Bottom) and produces a playable DDR
choreography (Top) corresponding to the audio.

Step charts exhibit rich structure and complex semantics to
ensure that step sequences are both challenging and enjoyable. Charts tend to mirror musical structure: particular sequences of steps correspond to different motifs (Figure 2),
and entire passages may reappear as sections of the song
are repeated. Moreover, chart authors strive to avoid patterns that would compel a player to face away from the
screen.
The DDR community uses simulators, such as the opensource StepMania, that allow fans to create and play their
own charts. A number of prolific authors produce and disseminate packs of charts, bundling metadata with relevant
recordings. Typically, for each song, packs contain one
chart for each of five difficulty levels.
Despite the game’s popularity, players have some reasonable complaints: For one, packs are limited to songs with
favorable licenses, meaning players may be unable to dance
to their favorite songs. Even when charts are available,
players may tire of repeatedly performing the same charts.
Although players can produce their own charts, the process
is painstaking and requires significant expertise.

