Input Switched Affine Networks: An RNN Architecture Designed for
Interpretability

Jakob N. Foerster * 1 Justin Gilmer * 2 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 3 Jan Chorowski 4 David Sussillo 3

Abstract
There exist many problem domains where the
interpretability of neural network models is essential for deployment. Here we introduce a recurrent architecture composed of input-switched
affine transformations – in other words an RNN
without any explicit nonlinearities, but with inputdependent recurrent weights. This simple form
allows the RNN to be analyzed via straightforward linear methods: we can exactly characterize
the linear contribution of each input to the model
predictions; we can use a change-of-basis to disentangle input, output, and computational hidden unit subspaces; we can fully reverse-engineer
the architecture’s solution to a simple task. Despite this ease of interpretation, the input switched
affine network achieves reasonable performance
on a text modeling tasks, and allows greater computational efficiency than networks with standard
nonlinearities.

1. Introduction
1.1. The importance of interpretable machine learning
As neural networks move into applications where the outcomes of human lives depend on their decisions, it is increasingly crucial that we are able to interpret the decisions
they make. Indeed, the European Union is considering legislation with a clause that asserts that individuals have ’rights
to explanation’, i.e. individuals should be able to understand how algorithms make decisions about them (Council
of European Union, 2016). Example problem domains re*

Equal contribution 1 This work was performed as an intern
at Google Brain 2 Work done as a member of the Google Brain
Residency program (g.co/brainresidency) 3 Google Brain,
Mountain View, CA, USA 4 Work performed when author was
a visiting faculty at Google Brain. Correspondence to: Jakob
N. Foerster <jakob.foerster@cs.ox.ac.uk>, David Sussillo <sussillo@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

quiring interpretable ML include self-driving cars (Bojarski
et al., 2016), air traffic control (Katz et al., 2017), power
grid control (Siano et al., 2012), hiring and promotion decisions while preventing bias (Scarborough & Somers, 2006),
automated sentencing decisions in US courts (Tashea, 2017;
Berk et al., 2017), and medical diagnosis (Gulshan et al.,
2016). For many of these applications, practitioners will not
adopt ML models without fully understanding what drives
their predictions, including understanding when and how
these models fail (Ching et al., 2017; Deo, 2015).
1.2. Post hoc analysis
One approach to interpreting neural networks is to train
the network as normal, and then apply analysis techniques
after training. Often this approach yields systems that perform extremely well, but where interpretability is challenging. For example, Sussillo & Barak (2013) used linearization and nonlinear dynamical systems theory to understand
RNNs solving a set of simple but varied tasks. Karpathy
et al. (2015) analyzed an LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) trained on a character-based language modeling
task. They were able to break down LSTM language model
errors into classes, such as e.g., “rare word” errors. Concurrently with our submission, Murdoch & Szlam (2017)
decomposed LSTM outputs using telescoping sums of statistics computed from memory cells at different RNN steps.
The decomposition is exact, but not unique and the authors
justify it by demonstrating good performance of decision
rules formed using the computed cell statistics.
The community is also interested in post hoc interpretation
of feed-forward networks. Examples include the use of
linear probes in Alain & Bengio (2016), and a variety of
techniques (most driven by back-propagation) to assign
credit for activations to specific inputs or input patterns in
feed-forward networks (Zeiler et al., 2010; Le et al., 2012;
Mordvintsev et al., 2015).
1.3. Building interpretability into the architecture
A second approach is to build a neural network where interpretability is an explicit design constraint. In this approach,
a typical outcome is a system that can be better understood,
but at the cost of reduced performance. Model classes whose

