Frame-based Data Factorizations
Sebastian Mair 1 Ahcène Boubekki 1 2 Ulf Brefeld 1

Abstract
Archetypal Analysis is the method of choice
to compute interpretable matrix factorizations.
Every data point is represented as a convex
combination of factors, i.e., points on the
boundary of the convex hull of the data. This
renders computation inefficient. In this paper, we
show that the set of vertices of a convex hull, the
so-called frame, can be efficiently computed by
a quadratic program. We provide theoretical and
empirical results for our proposed approach and
make use of the frame to accelerate Archetypal
Analysis. The novel method yields similar
reconstruction errors as baseline competitors but
is much faster to compute.

1. Introduction
Matrix factorizations are used in many different learning
tasks, including clustering, classification, recommendation,
text and social network analysis, image denoising and
hyperspectral imaging; consequently, a great deal of
approaches to factor a matrix into two or more matrices
have been proposed.
A common limitation of matrix factorization techniques,
however, is a lack of interpretability of the resulting
factors. This observation also holds for non-negative
matrix factorization (Paatero & Tapper, 1994; Lee &
Seung, 1999) (NMF). Although NMF constrains data,
matrices, and factors to be non-negative, the remaining
factors may lie far from other data points and do not
necessarily contribute to interpretability. Recently, the
focus on interpretable factors led to stochastic NMFs
for clusterings (Arora et al., 2011; 2013) and convex
constraints (Ding et al., 2010).
However, computing interpretable factors is actually an
“old” problem that has been introduced by Cutler and
1

Leuphana University, Lüneburg, Germany 2 German Institute
for Educational Research, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Correspondence to: Sebastian Mair <mair@leuphana.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Breiman (1994). Their idea is to represent every data
point as a convex combination of factors, the so-called
archetypes. Since the archetypes are themselves restricted
to be convex combinations of data points, they need to lie
on the boundary of the convex hull of the data; hence, they
are either close to actual data points or mixtures thereof,
see Figure 1. An archetype-based factorization yields two
stochastic matrices and naturally interpretable factors for
arbitrary data matrices. Variants of Archtypal Analysis
(AA) are for instance introduced in Mørup and Hansen
(2010), Chen et al. (2014) and Bauckhage et al. (2015).
The computation of convex hulls is generally demanding.
For AA, a straight forward idea is to make use of (e.g.,
precomputed) vertices of the convex hull of the data. We
will refer to the set of vertices as the frame. Given
the frame, computing the archetypes reduces to a search
within the frame. We propose to go one step further and
approximate AA by restricting the whole optimization to
the frame: firstly, we compute the frame and secondly,
we compute the archetypes on the frame (and just on the
frame). Naturally, the result is a factorization of the frame
itself. The factorization can then be extended to the all
data points by recomputing the weights in hindsight. The
idea is similar to Thurau et al. (2011) who propose to
approximate the frame using two-dimensional projections;
unfortunately, their approach adds an unnecessary layer
of approximation to the problem: Ideally, given an
appropriate approximation of the frame, the bulk of
the remaining data points should be reconstructed either
lossless or at only a small cost.
Standard approaches to compute the convex hull like
Quickhull (Barber et al., 1996) become infeasible for
dimensionalities larger than three because of dispensable
triangulations. Discarding the triangulations leads to linear
programming (LP)-based solutions (Dulá & Helgason,
1996; Ottmann et al., 2001; Dulá & López, 2012) which
test whether a point at-hand is part of the frame. These
approaches require adequate preprocessing as duplicates
may cause false negatives.
In this paper, we (i) show that the exact frame can be
computed by a quadratic program (QP), (ii) reduce the
optimization to an existing algorithm and (iii) provide
theoretical and empirical justifications for the developed
method.

