Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

Riad Akrour 1 Dmitry Sorokin 1 Jan Peters 1 2 Gerhard Neumann 1 3

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is renowned for its sample efficiency but its application to higher dimensional tasks is impeded by its focus on global
optimization. To scale to higher dimensional
problems, we leverage the sample efficiency of
Bayesian optimization in a local context. The
optimization of the acquisition function is restricted to the vicinity of a Gaussian search distribution which is moved towards high value areas of the objective. The proposed informationtheoretic update of the search distribution results
in a Bayesian interpretation of local stochastic search: the search distribution encodes prior
knowledge on the optimum’s location and is
weighted at each iteration by the likelihood of
this location’s optimality. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithm on several benchmark objective functions as well as a continuous
robotic task in which an informative prior is obtained by imitation learning.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning, supported
by the ability of generating and processing large amounts
of data, allowed impressive achievements such as playing
Atari at human level (Mnih et al., 2015) or mastering the
game of Go (Silver et al., 2016). In robotics however, sample complexity is paramount as sample generation on physical systems cannot be sped up and can cause wear and
damage to the robot when excessive (Kober et al., 2013).
Relying on a simulator to carry the learning will inevitably
result in a reality gap, since mechanical forces such as
stiction are hard to accurately model. However, a policy
learned in a simulated environment can still be valuable
provided the availability of a sample efficient algorithm to
1
CLAS/IAS, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 2 Max
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 LCAS, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Riad Akrour <riad@robot-learning.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

carry an additional optimization phase on the physical system.
Bayesian optimization is best known as a black-box global
optimizer (Brochu et al., 2010; Shahriari et al., 2016). It
was shown to be efficient for several function landscapes
(Jones, 2001), real world scenarios such as the automatic
tuning of machine learning algorithms (Bergstra et al.,
2011; Snoek et al., 2012; Feurer et al., 2015) or robotics and
control (Lizotte et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2014; Calandra
et al., 2016) and several of its variants have convergence
guaranties to a global optimum (Vazquez & Bect, 2010;
Bull, 2011). Its efficiency stems from two key principles: a
probabilistic modeling of the objective function and a sampling procedure that fully exploits this model. However,
as the dimensionality of the task increases, non-stationarity
effects of the objective or the noise function (see Shahriari et al. (2016), Sec. V.D. for a discussion of these effects) are exacerbated, rendering the modeling of the objective function challenging. An additional difficulty stemming from the increase in dimensionality is the tendency
of Bayesian optimization to over-explore, which was experimentally observed in e.g. Brochu et al. (2007). Several
recent approaches trying to scale Bayesian optimization to
higher dimensions assume additional structure of the objective function. In Snoek et al. (2014), it is assumed that stationarity of the objective function can be recovered through
the use of a parametric family of mappings. While it is assumed that the objective function has a lower intrinsic dimension in Djolonga et al. (2013); Wang et al. (2016), can
be decomposable into a sum of lower dimensional functions in Kandasamy et al. (2015) or a combination of both
hypothesis in Li et al. (2016).
In this paper, we assume prior knowledge on the location
of the optimum—given by an initial solution and a confidence on the optimality thereof—and leverage Bayesian
optimization in a local manner to improve over this solution. We are especially interested in the application of our
algorithm to the optimization of motor skills since i) evaluating the policy return is expensive on physical systems and
will likely dominate the computational budget of the optimization process; as such, sample efficient algorithms such
as Bayesian optimization are desirable ii) robotics applications are typically high dimensional and global optimization might be prohibitively expensive iii) an initial solution

