Preferential Bayesian Optimization

Javier González 1 Zhenwen Dai 1 Andreas Damianou 1 Neil D. Lawrence 1 2

Abstract

X × X from which we obtain binary feedback {0, 1} that
represents whether or not x is preferred over x0 (has lower
value)1 . We will consider that x is the winner of the duel if
the output is {1} and that x0 wins the duel if the output is
{0}. The goal here is to find xmin by reducing as much as
possible the number of queried duels.

Bayesian optimization (BO) has emerged during
the last few years as an effective approach to optimizing black-box functions where direct queries
of the objective are expensive. In this paper we
consider the case where direct access to the function is not possible, but information about user
preferences is. Such scenarios arise in problems
where human preferences are modeled, such as
A/B tests or recommender systems. We present
a new framework for this scenario that we call
Preferential Bayesian Optimization (PBO) which
allows us to find the optimum of a latent function that can only be queried through pairwise
comparisons, the so-called duels. PBO extends
the applicability of standard BO ideas and generalizes previous discrete dueling approaches by
modeling the probability of the winner of each
duel by means of a Gaussian process model with
a Bernoulli likelihood. The latent preference function is used to define a family of acquisition functions that extend usual policies used in BO. We
illustrate the benefits of PBO in a variety of experiments, showing that PBO needs drastically fewer
comparisons for finding the optimum. According
to our experiments, the way of modeling correlations in PBO is key in obtaining this advantage.

Our setup is different to the one typically used in BO where
direct feedback from g in the domain is available (Jones,
2001; Snoek et al., 2012). In our context, the objective
is a latent object that is only accessible via indirect observations. However, although the scenario described in this
work has not received a wider attention, there exist a variety of real wold scenarios in which the objective function
needs to be optimized via preferential returns. Most cases
involve modeling latent human preferences, such as web
design via A/B testing, the use of recommender systems
(Brusilovsky et al., 2007) or the ranking of game players
skills (Herbrich et al., 2007). In prospect theory, the models
used are based on comparisons with some reference point,
as it has been demonstrated that humans are better at evaluating differences rather than absolute magnitudes (Kahneman
and Tversky, 1979).

1. Introduction
Let g : X → < be a well-behaved black-box function
defined on a bounded subset X ⊆ <q . We are interested in
solving the global optimization problem of finding
xmin = arg min g(x).
x∈X

(1)

We assume that g is not directly accessible and that queries
to g can only be done in pairs of points or duels [x, x0 ] ∈
1

Optimization methods for pairwise preferences have been
studied in the armed-bandits context (Yuea et al., 2012).
Zoghi et al. (2014) propose a new method for the K-armed
duelling bandit problem based on the Upper Confidence
Bound algorithm. Jamieson et al. (2015) study the problem
by allowing noise comparisons between the duels. Zoghi
et al. (2015b) choose actions using contextual information.
Dudı́k et al. (2015) study the Copeland’s dueling bandits,
a case in which a Condorcet winner, or an arm that uniformly wins the duels with all the other arms may not exist. Szörényi et al. (2015) study Online Rank Elicitation
problem in the duelling bandits setting. An analysis on
Thompson sampling in duelling bandits is done by Wu et al.
(2016). Yue and Joachims (2011) proposes a method that
does not need transitivity and comparison outcomes to have
independent and time-stationary distributions.

Amazon Research Cambridge, UK 2 University of
Sheffield, UK. Correspondence to: Javier González <gojav@amazon.com>.

Preference learning has also been studied (Chu and Ghahramani, 2005) in the context of Gaussian process (GP) models
by using a likelihood able to model preferential returns. Sim-

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

In this work we use [x, x0 ] to represent the vector resulting
from concatenating both elements involved in the duel.
1

