Dropout Inference in Bayesian Neural Networks with Alpha-divergences

Yingzhen Li 1 Yarin Gal 1 2

Abstract
To obtain uncertainty estimates with real-world
Bayesian deep learning models, practical inference approximations are needed. Dropout variational inference (VI) for example has been used
for machine vision and medical applications,
but VI can severely underestimates model uncertainty. Alpha-divergences are alternative divergences to VI’s KL objective, which are able
to avoid VI’s uncertainty underestimation. But
these are hard to use in practice: existing techniques can only use Gaussian approximating distributions, and require existing models to be
changed radically, thus are of limited use for
practitioners. We propose a re-parametrisation
of the alpha-divergence objectives, deriving a
simple inference technique which, together with
dropout, can be easily implemented with existing models by simply changing the loss of the
model. We demonstrate improved uncertainty estimates and accuracy compared to VI in dropout
networks. We study our model’s epistemic uncertainty far away from the data using adversarial
images, showing that these can be distinguished
from non-adversarial images by examining our
model’s uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have been used to obtain state-ofthe-art results on many tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Szegedy et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014; Sundermeyer
et al., 2012; Mikolov et al., 2010; Kalchbrenner & Blunsom, 2013), and in many pipelines these models have replaced the more traditional Bayesian probabilistic models
(Sennrich et al., 2016). But unlike deep learning models,
Bayesian probabilistic models can capture parameter uncertainty and its induced effects over predictions, capturing
the models’ ignorance about the world, and able to convey
their increased uncertainty on out-of-data examples. This
1
University of Cambridge, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute,
UK. Correspondence to: Yingzhen Li <yl494@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

information can be used, for example, to identify when a vision model is given an adversarial image (studied below),
or to tackle many problems in AI safety (Amodei et al.,
2016). With model uncertainty at hand, applications as farreaching as safety in self-driving cars can be explored, using models which can propagate their uncertainty up the
decision making pipeline (Gal, 2016). With deterministic
deep learning models this invaluable uncertainty information is often lost.
Bayesian deep learning – an approach to combining
Bayesian probability theory together with deep learning –
allows us to use state-of-the-art models and at the same
time obtain model uncertainty (Gal, 2016; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016a). Originating in the 90s (Neal, 1995; MacKay,
1992; Denker & LeCun, 1991), Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs) in particular have started gaining in popularity
again (Graves, 2011; Blundell et al., 2015; HernandezLobato & Adams, 2015). BNNs are standard neural networks (NNs) with prior probability distributions placed
over their weights. Given observed data, inference is
then performed to find what are the more likely and less
likely weights to explain the data. But as easy it is to
formulate BNNs, is as difficult to perform inference in
them. Many approximations have been proposed over the
years (Denker & LeCun, 1991; Neal, 1995; Graves, 2011;
Blundell et al., 2015; Hernandez-Lobato & Adams, 2015;
Hernández-Lobato et al., 2016), some more practical and
some less practical. A practical approximation for inference in Bayesian neural networks should be able to scale
well to large data and complex models (such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Rumelhart et al., 1985;
LeCun et al., 1989)). Much more importantly perhaps, it
would be impractical to change existing model architectures that have been well studied, and it is often impractical
to work with complex and cumbersome techniques which
are difficult to explain to non-experts. Many existing approaches to obtain model confidence often do not scale to
complex models or large amounts of data, and require us to
develop new models for existing tasks for which we already
have well performing tools (Gal, 2016).
One possible solution for practical inference in BNNs is
variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al., 1999), a ubiquitous
technique for approximate inference. Dropout variational
distributions in particular (a mixture of two Gaussians with

