The Sample Complexity of Online One-Class Collaborative Filtering

Reinhard Heckel 1 Kannan Ramchandran 1

Abstract
We consider the online one-class collaborative
filtering (CF) problem that consists of recommending items to users over time in an online
fashion based on positive ratings only. This problem arises when users respond only occasionally
to a recommendation with a positive rating, and
never with a negative one. We study the impact of the probability of a user responding to
a recommendation, pf , on the sample complexity, i.e., the number of ratings required to make
‘good’ recommendations, and ask whether receiving positive and negative ratings, instead of
positive ratings only, improves the sample complexity. Both questions arise in the design of
recommender systems. We introduce a simple
probabilistic user model, and analyze the performance of an online user-based CF algorithm. We
prove that after an initial cold start phase, where
recommendations are invested in exploring the
user’s preferences, this algorithm makes—up to
a fraction of the recommendations required for
updating the user’s preferences—perfect recommendations. The number of ratings required for
the cold start phase is nearly proportional to 1/pf ,
and that for updating the user’s preferences is essentially independent of pf . As a consequence
we find that, receiving positive and negative ratings instead of only positive ones improves the
number of ratings required for initial exploration
by a factor of 1/pf , which can be significant.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems seek to identify the subset of a large
collection of items that a user likes (Aggarwal, 2016). In
practice, recommender systems often use collaborative filtering (CF) (Ekstrand et al., 2011) to identify items a given
1

University of California, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Reinhard Heckel <heckel@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

user likes, based on ratings that this user and a large number of other users have provided in the past. To this end,
a user-based CF algorithm first identifies similar users, and
then predicts the ratings of a given user from the ratings
provided by similar users. In practice, recommender systems typically operate in an online fashion, i.e., items are
recommended to users over time, and the ratings obtained
in response to recommendations are used to improve future
recommendations.
However, in many application areas of recommender systems, users only occasionally rate what they ‘like’, and
never what they ‘dislike’. E.g., in e-commerce, such as
Amazon’s recommender system, an item (or a set of items)
is recommended to a user, and the user either purchases
the item, which indicates a ‘like’, or the user does not purchase the item. Not purchasing the item, however, does
not necessarily indicate a ‘dislike’, since the user might not
even have considered the recommendation. Other examples of such feedback include implicit ratings such as viewing a webpage and listening to a song (Hu et al., 2008), and
business-to-business recommender systems (Heckel et al.,
2017). The problem of generating recommendations based
on positive ratings only is known as one-class CF (Pan
et al., 2008). The lack of negative ratings is often considered to make this problem challenging (Pan et al., 2008).
However, it is unclear whether it is fundamentally more
difficult in the absence of negative ratings to identify the
user’s preferences, in the sense that the sample complexity
(i.e., the number of ratings required to make good recommendations) is fundamentally larger. Additionally, there is
little theoretical understanding on how the probability of a
user responding to a recommendation, pf , affects the sample complexity of a one-class CF algorithm and in particular its cold start time, i.e., the number of recommendations
the algorithm needs to invest in learning the user’s preferences before being able to make good recommendations.
In this paper, we address those two questions, that turn out
to be closely related.
To this end, we introduce a probabilistic model for a oneclass online recommender system and a corresponding online user-based CF algorithm, termed User-CF, and analyze its performance. Our model, and elements of our
algorithm, are inspired by a related model and algorithm
by Bresler et al. (2014) for the two-class CF problem, i.e.,

