No Spurious Local Minima in Nonconvex Low Rank Problems:
A Unified Geometric Analysis

Rong Ge 1 Chi Jin 2 Yi Zheng 1

Abstract
In this paper we develop a new framework that
captures the common landscape underlying the
common non-convex low-rank matrix problems
including matrix sensing, matrix completion and
robust PCA. In particular, we show for all above
problems (including asymmetric cases): 1) all local minima are also globally optimal; 2) no highorder saddle points exists. These results explain
why simple algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent have global converge, and efficiently
optimize these non-convex objective functions in
practice. Our framework connects and simplifies
the existing analyses on optimization landscapes
for matrix sensing and symmetric matrix completion. The framework naturally leads to new
results for asymmetric matrix completion and robust PCA.

2016; Park et al., 2016) and matrix completion (Ge et al.,
2016) have well-behaved optimization landscape: all local
optima are also globally optimal. Combined with recent
results (e.g. Ge et al. (2015); Carmon et al. (2016); Agarwal et al. (2016); Jin et al. (2017)) that are guaranteed to
find a local minimum for many non-convex functions, such
problems can be efficiently solved by basic optimization
algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent.
In this paper we focus on optimization problems that look
for low rank matrices using partial or corrupted observations. Such problems are studied extensively (Fazel,
2002; Rennie & Srebro, 2005; Candès & Recht, 2009) and
has many applications in recommendation systems (Koren,
2009), see survey by Davenport & Romberg (2016). These
optimization problems can be formalized as follows:
min

M∈Rd1 ×d2

f (M),

(1)

s.t. rank(M) = r.

1. Introduction
Non-convex optimization is one of the most powerful tools
in machine learning. Many popular approaches, from traditional ones such as matrix factorization (Hotelling, 1933)
to modern deep learning (Bengio, 2009) rely on optimizing non-convex functions. In practice, these functions are
optimized using simple algorithms such as alternating minimization or gradient descent. Why such simple algorithms
work is still a mystery for many important problems.
One way to understand the success of non-convex optimization is to study the optimization landscape: for the objective function, where are the possible locations of global
optima, local optima and saddle points. Recently, a line
of works showed that several natural problems including
tensor decomposition (Ge et al., 2015), dictionary learning (Sun et al., 2015a), matrix sensing (Bhojanapalli et al.,
Authors listed alphabetically. 1 Duke University, Durham NC
UC Berkeley, Berkeley CA. Correspondence to: Rong Ge
<rongge@cs.duke.edu>, Chi Jin <chijin@cs.berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Here M is an d1 × d2 matrix and f is a convex function
of M. The non-convexity of this problem stems from the
low rank constraint. Several interesting problems, such
as matrix sensing (Recht et al., 2010), matrix completion
(Candès & Recht, 2009) and robust PCA (Candès et al.,
2011) can all be framed as optimization problems of this
form(see Section 3).
In practice, Burer & Monteiro (2003) heuristic is often
used – replace M with an explicit low rank representation
M = UV> , where U ∈ Rd1 ×r and V ∈ Rd2 ×r . The new
optimization problem becomes
min

U∈Rd1 ×r ,V∈Rd2 ×r

f (UV> ) + Q(U, V).

(2)

Here Q(U, V) is a (optional) regularizer. Despite the objective being non-convex, for all the problems mentioned
above, simple iterative updates from random or even arbitrary initial point find the optimal solution in practice. It is
then natural to ask: Can we characterize the similarities
between the optimization landscape of these problems?
We show this is indeed possible:
Theorem 1 (informal). The objective function of matrix
sensing, matrix completion and robust PCA have similar

