A Simulated Annealing Based Inexact Oracle
for Wasserstein Loss Minimization
Jianbo Ye 1 James Z. Wang 1 Jia Li 2

Abstract
Learning under a Wasserstein loss, a.k.a. Wasserstein loss minimization (WLM), is an emerging
research topic for gaining insights from a large
set of structured objects. Despite being conceptually simple, WLM problems are computationally challenging because they involve minimizing over functions of quantities (i.e. Wasserstein
distances) that themselves require numerical algorithms to compute. In this paper, we introduce a stochastic approach based on simulated
annealing for solving WLMs. Particularly, we
have developed a Gibbs sampler to approximate
effectively and efficiently the partial gradients of
a sequence of Wasserstein losses. Our new approach has the advantages of numerical stability
and readiness for warm starts. These characteristics are valuable for WLM problems that often require multiple levels of iterations in which
the oracle for computing the value and gradient
of a loss function is embedded. We applied the
method to optimal transport with Coulomb cost
and the Wasserstein non-negative matrix factorization problem, and made comparisons with the
existing method of entropy regularization.

1. Introduction
An oracle is a computational module in an optimization
procedure that is applied iteratively to obtain certain characteristics of the function being optimized. Typically, it
calculates the value and gradient of loss function l(x, y). In
the vast majority of machine learning models, where those
loss functions are decomposable along each dimension
(e.g., Lp norm, KL divergence, or hinge loss), rx l(·, y) or
1
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA. 2 Department of
Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA.. Correspondence to: Jianbo Ye <jxy198@ist.psu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ry l(x, ·) is computed in O(m) time, m being the complexity of outcome variables x or y. This part of calculation is
often negligible compared with the calculation of full gradient with respect to the model parameters. But this is no
longer the case in learning problems based on Wasserstein
distance due to the intrinsic complexity of the distance.
We will call such problems Wasserstein loss minimization
(WLM). Examples of WLMs include Wasserstein barycenters (Li & Wang, 2008; Agueh & Carlier, 2011; Cuturi &
Doucet, 2014; Benamou et al., 2015; Ye & Li, 2014; Ye
et al., 2017b), principal geodesics (Seguy & Cuturi, 2015),
nonnegative matrix factorization (Rolet et al., 2016; Sandler & Lindenbaum, 2009), barycentric coordinate (Bonneel et al., 2016), and multi-label classification (Frogner
et al., 2015).
Wasserstein distance is defined as the cost of matching two
probability measures, originated from the literature of optimal transport (OT) (Monge, 1781). It takes into account
the cross-term similarity between different support points
of the distributions, a level of complexity beyond the usual
vector data treatment, i.e., to convert the distribution into a
vector of frequencies. It has been promoted for comparing
sets of vectors (e.g. bag-of-words models) by researchers
in computer vision, multimedia and more recently natural
language processing (Kusner et al., 2015; Ye et al., 2017a).
However, its potential as a powerful loss function for machine learning has been underexplored. The major obstacle
is a lack of standardized and robust numerical methods to
solve WLMs. Even to empirically better understand the
advantages of the distance is of interest.
As a long-standing consensus, solving WLMs is challenging (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014). Unlike the usual optimization in machine learning where the loss and the (partial)
gradient can be calculated in linear time, these quantities
are non-smooth and hard to obtain in WLMs, requiring solution of a costly network transportation problem (a.k.a.
OT). The time complexity, O(m3 log m), is prohibitively
high (Orlin, 1993). In contrast to the Lp or KL counterparts, this step of calculation elevates from a negligible
fraction of the overall learning problem to a dominant portion, preventing the scaling of WLMs to large data. Recently, iterative approximation techniques have been developed to compute the loss and the (partial) gradient at com-

