Sparse + Group-Sparse Dirty Models: Statistical Guarantees without
Unreasonable Conditions and a Case for Non-Convexity

Eunho Yang 1 2 Aurélie C. Lozano 3

Abstract
Imposing sparse + group-sparse superposition
structures in high-dimensional parameter estimation is known to provide flexible regularization
that is more realistic for many real-world problems. For example, such a superposition enables partially-shared support sets in multi-task
learning, thereby striking the right balance between parameter overlap across tasks and task
specificity. Existing theoretical results on estimation consistency, however, are problematic as
they require too stringent an assumption: the incoherence between sparse and group-sparse superposed components. In this paper, we fill the
gap between the practical success and suboptimal analysis of sparse + group-sparse models,
by providing the first consistency results that do
not require unrealistic assumptions. We also
study non-convex counterparts of sparse + groupsparse models. Interestingly, we show that these
are guaranteed to recover the true support set
under much milder conditions and with smaller
sample size than convex models, which might be
critical in practical applications as illustrated by
our experiments.

1. Introduction
We consider high-dimensional statistical models where the
ambient dimension p is much larger than the number of
observations n. Under such high-dimensional scaling, it
is still possible to obtain consistent estimators by imposing low-dimensional structural constraints upon the statistical models, such as sparsity (e.g. in compressed sens1

School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea 2 AItrics, Seoul, South Korea 3 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Eunho Yang <eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr>, Aurelie C. Lozano
<aclozano@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ing (Baraniuk, 2007) and Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996)), lowrank structure (Recht et al., 2007; Negahban & Wainwright,
2010), sparse graphical model structure (Friedman et al.,
2007; Ravikumar et al., 2008), and sparse additive structure for non-parametric models (Ravikumar et al., 2009). A
widely used approach to structured learning is via specific
regularization functions. For instance, `1 -regularization
is employed for sparse models (Tibshirani, 1996), `1 /`q
norms for group sparsity (Yuan & Lin, 2006), and nuclear
norm for low-rank matrix-structured models (Candès &
Tao, 2010). Much attention has been devoted to the study
of these structured norms and their theoretical properties.
Such a “clean” regularization approach, however, might be
too stringent in practice. For instance in linear regression,
a blend of element-wise sparsity and group-sparsity might
be more appropriate than a purely sparse or purely groupsparse solution. In multitask learning, while some parameters might be shared across tasks, others might only be relevant to a subset of tasks or a single task. To overcome
this limitation, a line of work on so-called dirty models
has emerged, which addresses this caveat by “mixing and
matching” different structures. One basic approach consists in decomposing the model parameters as a sum of
two components, each penalized separately: one component captures the common structure across tasks and the
other task-specific characteristics (Jalali et al., 2010; Gong
et al., 2012). For instance the dirty model in Jalali et al.
(2010) employs `1,1 and `1,∞ regularizers to the two components. Chandrasekaran et al. (2011) consider the problem of recovering unknown low-rank and sparse matrices,
given the sum of their sum, with application such as optical imaging systems. Robust principal component analysis
and related extensions (Candès et al., 2011; Agarwal et al.,
2012; Hsu et al., 2011) estimate a covariance matrix that is
the sum of a low-rank matrix and a structured (e.g. sparse,
column sparse) matrix.
A general framework for studying dirty models was recently proposed in Yang & Ravikumar (2013), which
bridges and extends several analyses for specific pairs
of superposition structures and specific statistical models (e.g., Jalali et al. (2010); Chandrasekaran et al. (2011);
Candès et al. (2011); Agarwal et al. (2012); Hsu et al.

