Regret Minimization in Behaviorally-Constrained Zero-Sum Games

Gabriele Farina 1 Christian Kroer 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1

Abstract
No-regret learning has emerged as a powerful
tool for solving extensive-form games. This was
facilitated by the counterfactual-regret minimization (CFR) framework, which relies on the instantiation of regret minimizers for simplexes at
each information set of the game. We use an
instantiation of the CFR framework to develop
algorithms for solving behaviorally-constrained
(and, as a special case, perturbed in the Selten
sense) extensive-form games, which allows us to
compute approximate Nash equilibrium refinements. Nash equilibrium refinements are motivated by a major deficiency in Nash equilibrium: it provides virtually no guarantees on how
it will play in parts of the game tree that are
reached with zero probability. Refinements can
mend this issue, but have not been adopted in
practice, mostly due to a lack of scalable algorithms. We show that, compared to standard algorithms, our method finds solutions that have
substantially better refinement properties, while
enjoying a convergence rate that is comparable to
that of state-of-the-art algorithms for Nash equilibrium computation both in theory and practice.

1. Introduction
No-regret learning algorithms have become a powerful
tool for solving large-scale zero-sum extensive-form games
(EFGs) (Bowling et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2015). This has
largely been facilitated by the counterfactual-regret minimization (CFR) algorithm (Zinkevich et al., 2007) and
its newer variants (Lanctot et al., 2009; Sandholm, 2010;
Bowling et al., 2015; Brown and Sandholm, 2015; Brown
et al., 2017; Brown and Sandholm, 2017). This framework
works by defining a notion of regret local to an information
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA. Correspondence to: Gabriele Farina <gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>, Christian Kroer <ckroer@cs.cmu.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

set, and instantiating a standard regret minimizer at each
information set in order to minimize local regret. Zinkevich et al. (2007) prove that this scheme of local regret
minimization leads to a Nash equilibrium in two-player
zero-sum extensive-form games of perfect recall. The
framework works with any regret-minimizing algorithm,
but in practice variants of the regret matching algorithm
have been dominant (Hart and Mas-Colell, 2000; Bowling et al., 2015; Brown and Sandholm, 2015; Brown et al.,
2015). We investigate the extension of regret-matching+
(RM+ ) (Tammelin et al., 2015), an even faster regretmatching algorithm, to more general regret-minimization
problems over (finitely-generated) convex polytopes. We
use these results to instantiate RM+ for linearly constrained
simplexes, which in turn allows us to model and solve
behaviorally-constrained EFGs (which are EFGs with additional linear constraints on the simplexes at each information set). An important special case of this framework is
behaviorally-perturbed EFGs, which can be used to compute Nash equilibrium refinements.1
Nash equilibrium refinements are motivated by major deficiencies in the Nash equilibrium solution concept: Nash
equilibria provide no guarantees on performance in information sets that are reached with probability zero in
equilibrium, beyond not giving up more utility than the
value of the game. Thus, if an opponent makes a mistake,
Nash equilibrium is not guaranteed to capitalize on it, but
may instead give back up to all of that utility (Miltersen
and Sørensen, 2010). This is especially relevant when
Nash equilibria are used as a solution concept for playing against imperfect opponents. Equilibrium refinements
ameliorate this issue by introducing further constraints on
behavior in information sets that are reached with probability zero. We will be interested in equilibrium concepts
1

The idea of certain kinds of behavioral perturbations to CFR
has been suggested by Neller and Lanctot (2013). They suggest
that at every information set, with small probability , a player
will make a random move. However, they provide no results of
what the refinement consequences are (i.e., what kind of refinement this would lead to), and it is unclear whether the proposed
method actually leads to refinements. In contrast, we establish a
connection to (approximate) EFPEs in this paper. Furthermore,
Neller and Lanctot cite Miltersen and Sørensen (2010) which is
about quasi-perfect equilibrium (where a player assumes she will
not make errors in the future), while the  modeling of Neller and
Lanctot makes  errors at future information sets as well.

