Deeply AggreVaTeD:
Differentiable Imitation Learning for Sequential Prediction
Wen Sun 1 Arun Venkatraman 1 Geoffrey J. Gordon 2 Byron Boots 3 J. Andrew Bagnell 1

Abstract

optimize for a loss acquired only after many predictions.

Recently, researchers have demonstrated stateof-the-art performance on sequential prediction
problems using deep neural networks and Reinforcement Learning (RL). For some of these
problems, oracles that can demonstrate good performance may be available during training, but
are not used by plain RL methods. To take advantage of this extra information, we propose AggreVaTeD, an extension of the Imitation Learning (IL) approach of Ross & Bagnell (2014).
AggreVaTeD allows us to use expressive differentiable policy representations such as deep
networks, while leveraging training-time oracles to achieve faster and more accurate solutions with less training data. Specifically, we
present two gradient procedures that can learn
neural network policies for several problems, including a sequential prediction task and several
high-dimensional robotics control problems. We
also provide a comprehensive theoretical study
of IL that demonstrates that we can expect up
to exponentially-lower sample complexity for
learning with AggreVaTeD than with plain RL
algorithms. Our results and theory indicate that
IL (and AggreVaTeD in particular) can be a more
effective strategy for sequential prediction than
plain RL.

Although conventional supervised learning of deep models has been pivotal in advancing performance in sequential prediction problems, researchers are beginning to utilize Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods to achieve even
higher performance (Ranzato et al., 2015; Bahdanau et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2016). In sequential prediction tasks, future predictions often depend on the history of previous
predictions; thus, a poor prediction early in the sequence
can lead to high loss (cost) for future predictions. Viewing
the predictor as a policy ⇡, deep RL algorithms are able to
reason about the future accumulated cost in sequential prediction problems. These approaches have dramatically advanced the state-of-the-art on a number of problems including high-dimensional robotics control tasks and video and
board games (Schulman et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
A fundamental challenge in artificial intelligence, robotics,
and language processing is sequential prediction: to reason,
plan, and make a sequence of predictions or decisions to
minimize accumulated cost, achieve a long-term goal, or
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
USA 3 College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,
USA. Correspondence to: Wen Sun <wensun@cs.cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In contrast with general reinforcement learning methods,
imitation learning and related sequential prediction algorithms such as SEARN (Daumé III et al., 2009), DaD
(Venkatraman et al., 2015), AggreVaTe (Ross & Bagnell,
2014), and LOLS (Chang et al., 2015b) reduce the sequential prediction problems to supervised learning by leveraging a (near) optimal cost-to-go oracle that can be queried
for the next (near)-best prediction at any point during training. Specifically, these methods assume access to an oracle that provides an optimal or near-optimal action and the
future accumulated loss Q⇤ , the so-called cost-to-go. For
robotics control problems, this oracle may be a human expert guiding the robot during the training phase (Abbeel &
Ng, 2004) or the policy from an optimal MDP solver (Ross
et al., 2011; Kahn et al., 2016; Choudhury et al., 2017)
that is either too slow to use at test time or leverages information unavailable at test time. For sequential prediction problems, an oracle can be constructed by optimization (e.g., beam search) or by a clairvoyant greedy algorithm (Daumé III et al., 2009; Ross et al., 2013; Rhinehart
et al., 2015; Chang et al., 2015a) that, given the training
data’s ground truth, is near-optimal on the task-specific performance metric (e.g., cumulative reward, IoU, Unlabeled
Attachment Score, BLEU).
Expert, demonstrator, and oracle are used interchangeably.

