Stochastic Variance Reduction Methods for Policy Evaluation
Simon S. Du 1 Jianshu Chen 2 Lihong Li 2 Lin Xiao 2 Dengyong Zhou 2

Abstract
Policy evaluation is concerned with estimating
the value function that predicts long-term values of states under a given policy. It is a crucial step in many reinforcement-learning algorithms. In this paper, we focus on policy evaluation with linear function approximation over
a fixed dataset. We first transform the empirical policy evaluation problem into a (quadratic)
convex-concave saddle-point problem, and then
present a primal-dual batch gradient method, as
well as two stochastic variance reduction methods for solving the problem. These algorithms
scale linearly in both sample size and feature dimension. Moreover, they achieve linear convergence even when the saddle-point problem has
only strong concavity in the dual variables but no
strong convexity in the primal variables. Numerical experiments on benchmark problems demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods.

1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful learning
paradigm for sequential decision making (see, e.g., Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1995; Sutton & Barto, 1998). An RL
agent interacts with the environment by repeatedly observing the current state, taking an action according to a certain
policy, receiving a reward signal and transitioning to a next
state. A policy specifies which action to take given the current state. Policy evaluation estimates a value function that
predicts expected cumulative reward the agent would receive by following a fixed policy starting at a certain state.
In addition to quantifying long-term values of states, which
can be of interest on its own, value functions also provide
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington 98052, USA.. Correspondence
to: Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.cmu.edu>, Jianshu Chen <jianshuc@microsoft.com>, Lihong Li <lihongli@microsoft.com>,
Lin Xiao <lin.xiao@microsoft.com>, Dengyong Zhou <denzho@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

important information for the agent to optimize its policy.
For example, policy-iteration algorithms iterate between
policy-evaluation steps and policy-improvement steps, until a (near-)optimal policy is found (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis,
1995; Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003). Therefore, estimating the
value function efficiently and accurately is essential in RL.
There has been substantial work on policy evaluation, with
temporal-difference (TD) methods being perhaps the most
popular. These methods use the Bellman equation to bootstrap the estimation process. Different cost functions are
formulated to exploit this idea, leading to different policy
evaluation algorithms; see Dann et al. (2014) for a comprehensive survey. In this paper, we study policy evaluation
by minimizing the mean squared projected Bellman error
(MSPBE) with linear approximation of the value function.
We focus on the batch setting where a fixed, finite dataset
is given. This fixed-data setting is not only important in itself (Lange et al., 2011), but also an important component
in other RL methods such as experience replay (Lin, 1992).
The finite-data regime makes it possible to solve policy
evaluation more efficiently with recently developed fast optimization methods based on stochastic variance reduction,
such as SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014). For minimizing strongly convex functions with a finite-sum structure, such methods enjoy the
same low computational cost per iteration as the classical stochastic gradient method, but also achieve fast, linear
convergence rates (i.e., exponential decay of the optimality
gap in the objective). However, they cannot be applied directly to minimize the MSPBE, whose objective does not
have the finite-sum structure. In this paper, we overcome
this obstacle by transforming the empirical MSPBE problem to an equivalent convex-concave saddle-point problem
that possesses the desired finite-sum structure.
In the saddle-point problem, we consider the model parameters as the primal variables, which are coupled with the
dual variables through a bilinear term. Moreover, without
an `2 -regularization on the model parameters, the objective
is only strongly concave in the dual variables, but not in the
primal variables. We propose a primal-dual batch gradient
method, as well as two stochastic variance-reduction methods based on SVRG and SAGA, respectively. Surprisingly,
we show that when the coupling matrix is full rank, these
algorithms achieve linear convergence in both the primal

