From Patches to Images: A Nonparametric Generative Model

Geng Ji 1 Michael C. Hughes 2 Erik B. Sudderth 1 3

Abstract
We propose a hierarchical generative model that
captures the self-similar structure of image regions as well as how this structure is shared
across image collections. Our model is based on
a novel, variational interpretation of the popular
expected patch log-likelihood (EPLL) method as
a model for randomly positioned grids of image
patches. While previous EPLL methods modeled
image patches with finite Gaussian mixtures, we
use nonparametric Dirichlet process (DP) mixtures to create models whose complexity grows
as additional images are observed. An extension based on the hierarchical DP then captures
repetitive and self-similar structure via imagespecific variations in cluster frequencies. We derive a structured variational inference algorithm
that adaptively creates new patch clusters to more
accurately model novel image textures. Our denoising performance on standard benchmarks is
superior to EPLL and comparable to the state-ofthe-art, and we provide novel statistical justifications for common image processing heuristics.
We also show accurate image inpainting results.

1. Introduction
Models of the statistical structure of natural images play a
key role in computer vision and image processing (Srivastava et al., 2003). Due to the high dimensionality of the images captured by modern cameras, a rich research literature
instead models the statistics of small image patches. For
example, the K-SVD method (Elad & Aharon, 2006) generalizes K-means clustering to learn a dictionary for sparse
coding of image patches. The state-of-the-art learned simultaneous sparse coding (LSSC, Mairal et al. (2009))
and block matching and 3D filtering (BM3D, Dabov et al.
(2008)) methods integrate clustering, dictionary learning,
1

2

Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 3 University of California, Irvine, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Geng Ji <gji@cs.brown.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

and denoising to extract information directly from a single
corrupted image. Alternatively, the accurate expected patch
log-likelihood (EPLL, Zoran & Weiss (2011)) method
maximizes the log-likelihood of overlapping image patches
under a finite Gaussian mixture model learned from uncorrupted natural images.
We show that with minor modifications, the objective function underlying EPLL is equivalent to a variational loglikelihood bound for a novel generative model of whole
images. Our model coherently captures overlapping image
patches via a randomly positioned spatial grid. By deriving a rigorous variational bound, we then develop improved
nonparametric models of natural image statistics using the
hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP, Teh et al. (2006)). In
particular, DP mixtures allow an appropriate model complexity to be inferred from data, while the hierarchical DP
captures the patch self-similarities and repetitions that are
ubiquitous in natural images (Jégou et al., 2009). Unlike
previous whole-image generative models such as fields of
experts (FoE, Roth & Black (2005)), which uses a single
set of Markov random field parameters to model all images,
our HDP model learns image-specific clusters to accurately
model distinctive textures. Coupled with a scalable structured variational inference algorithm, we improve on the
excellent denoising accuracy of the LSSC and BM3D algorithms, while providing a Bayesian nonparametric model
with a broader range of potential applications.

2. Expected Patch Log-likelihood
Our approach is derived from models of small (8 × 8 pixel)
patches of a large natural image x. Let Pi be a binary indicator matrix that extracts the G = 82 pixels Pi x ∈ RG in
patch i. To reduce sensitivity to lighting variations, a contrast normalizing transform is applied to remove the mean
(or “DC component”) of the pixel intensities in each patch:
1 T
1 Pi x = BPi x,
vi = P i x − G

(1)

for a “zero-centering” matrix B. Zoran & Weiss (2012)
show that a finite mixture of K zero-mean Gaussians,
PK
p(vi ) = k=1 πk Norm(vi | 0, Λ−1
(2)
k ),
is superior to many classic image models in terms of predictive likelihood and patch denoising performance.

