Prediction and Control with Temporal Segment Models

Nikhil Mishra 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 2 Igor Mordatch 2

Abstract
We introduce a method for learning the dynamics
of complex nonlinear systems based on deep generative models over temporal segments of states
and actions. Unlike dynamics models that operate over individual discrete timesteps, we learn
the distribution over future state trajectories conditioned on past state, past action, and planned
future action trajectories, as well as a latent prior
over action trajectories. Our approach is based
on convolutional autoregressive models and variational autoencoders. It makes stable and accurate predictions over long horizons for complex,
stochastic systems, effectively expressing uncertainty and modeling the effects of collisions, sensory noise, and action delays. The learned dynamics model and action prior can be used for
end-to-end, fully differentiable trajectory optimization and model-based policy optimization,
which we use to evaluate the performance and
sample-efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
The problem of learning dynamics – where an agent learns
a model of how its actions will affect its state and that of
its environment – is a key open problem in robotics and
reinforcement learning. An agent equipped with a dynamics model can leverage model-predictive control or modelbased reinforcement learning (RL) to perform a wide variety of tasks, whose exact nature need not be known in
advance, and without additional access to the environment.
In contrast with model-free RL, which seeks to directly
learn a policy (mapping from states to actions) in order to
accomplish a specific task, learning dynamics has the advantage that dynamics models can be learned without taskspecific supervision. Since dynamics models are decoupled
from any particular task, they can be reused across different
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 OpenAI. Correspondence
to: Nikhil Mishra <nmishra@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tasks in the same environment. Additionally, learning differentiable dynamics models (such as those based on neural
networks) enables the use of end-to-end backpropagationbased methods for policy and trajectory optimization that
are much more efficient than model-free methods.
Typical approaches to dynamics learning build a one-step
model of the dynamics, predicting the next state as a function of the current state and the current action. However,
when chained successively for many timesteps into the future, the predictions from a one-step model tend to diverge
from the true dynamics, either due to the accumulation of
small errors or deviation from the regime represented by
the data the model was trained on. Any learned dynamics
model is only valid under the distribution of states and actions represented by its training data, and one-step models
make no attempt to deal with the fact that they cannot make
accurate predictions far outside this distribution.
When the true dynamics are stochastic, or the sensory measurements noisy or unreliable, these problems are only exacerbated. Moreover, the dynamics may be inherently difficult to learn: bifurcations such as collisions induce sharp
changes in state that are hard to model with certainty when
looking at a single timestep. There may also be hysteresis effects such as gear backlash in robots, or high-order
dynamics in hydraulic robot actuators and human muscles
that require looking at a history of past states.
We present a novel approach to learning dynamics based on
a deep generative model over temporal segments: we wish
to model the distribution over possible future state trajectories conditioned on planned future actions and a history
of past states and actions. By considering an entire segment of future states, our approach can model both uncertainty and complex interactions (like collisions) holistically
over a segment, even if it makes small errors at individual
timesteps. We also model a prior over action segments using a similar generative model, which can be used to ensure
that the action distribution explored during planning is the
same as the one the model was trained on. We show that
that our method makes better predictions over long horizons than one-step models, is robust to stochastic dynamics and measurements, and can be used in a variety of control settings while only considering actions from the regime
where the model is valid.

