Robust Budget Allocation via Continuous Submodular Functions
Matthew Staib 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1

Abstract
The optimal allocation of resources for maximizing influence, spread of information or coverage,
has gained attention in the past years, in particular in machine learning and data mining. But in
applications, the parameters of the problem are
rarely known exactly, and using wrong parameters can lead to undesirable outcomes. We hence
revisit a continuous version of the Budget Allocation or Bipartite Influence Maximization problem introduced by Alon et al. (2012) from a robust optimization perspective, where an adversary may choose the least favorable parameters
within a confidence set. The resulting problem
is a nonconvex-concave saddle point problem
(or game). We show that this nonconvex problem can be solved exactly by leveraging connections to continuous submodular functions, and by
solving a constrained submodular minimization
problem. Although constrained submodular minimization is hard in general, here, we establish
conditions under which such a problem can be
solved to arbitrary precision ✏.

1. Introduction
The optimal allocation of resources for maximizing influence, spread of information or coverage, has gained attention in the past few years, in particular in machine
learning and data mining (Domingos & Richardson, 2001;
Kempe et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2009; Gomez Rodriguez &
Schölkopf, 2012; Borgs et al., 2014).
In the Budget Allocation Problem, one is given a bipartite
influence graph between channels S and people T , and the
task is to assign a budget y(s) to each channel s in S with
the goal of maximizing the expected number of influenced
people I(y). Each edge (s, t) 2 E between channel s and
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence
to: Matthew Staib <mstaib@mit.edu>, Stefanie Jegelka <stefje@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

person t is weighted with a probability pst that, e.g., an
advertisement on radio station s will influence person t to
buy some product. The budget y(s) controls how many independent attempts are made via the channel s to influence
the people in T . The probability that a customer t is influenced when the advertising budget is y is
It (y) = 1

Y

(s,t)2E

[1

pst ]y(s) ,

(1)

and hence
P the expected number of influenced people is
I(y) = t2T It (y). We write I(y; p) = I(y) to make the
dependence on the probabilities pst explicit. The total budget y must remain within someP
feasible set Y which may
encode e.g. a total budget limit s2S y(s)  C. We allow
the budgets y to be continuous, as in (Bian et al., 2017).
Since its introduction by Alon et al. (2012), several works
have extended the formulation of Budget Allocation and
provided algorithms (Bian et al., 2017; Hatano et al., 2015;
Maehara et al., 2015; Soma et al., 2014; Soma & Yoshida,
2015). Budget Allocation may also be viewed as influence maximization on a bipartite graph, where information
spreads as in the Independent Cascade model. For integer
y, Budget Allocation and Influence Maximization are NPhard. Yet, constant-factor approximations are possible, and
build on the fact that the influence function is submodular
in the binary case, and DR-submodular in the integer case
(Soma et al., 2014; Hatano et al., 2015). If y is continuous,
the problem is a concave maximization problem.

The formulation of Budget Allocation assumes that the
transmission probabilities are known exactly. But this is
rarely true in practice. Typically, the probabilities pst ,
and possibly the graph itself, must be inferred from observations (Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2010; Du et al., 2013;
Narasimhan et al., 2015; Du et al., 2014; Netrapalli &
Sanghavi, 2012). In Section 4 we will see that a misspecification or point estimate of parameters pst can lead to much
reduced outcomes. A more realistic assumption is to know
confidence intervals for the pst . Realizing this severe deficiency, recent work studied robust versions of Influence
Maximization, where a budget y must be chosen that maximizes the worst-case approximation ratio over a set of possible influence functions (He & Kempe, 2016; Chen et al.,
2016; Lowalekar et al., 2016). The resulting optimization
problem is hard but admits bicriteria approximations.

