Grammar Variational Autoencoder
Matt J. Kusner * 1 2 Brooks Paige * 1 3 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 3

Abstract
Deep generative models have been wildly successful at learning coherent latent representations
for continuous data such as natural images, artwork, and audio. However, generative modeling of discrete data such as arithmetic expressions and molecular structures still poses significant challenges. Crucially, state-of-the-art methods often produce outputs that are not valid. We
make the key observation that frequently, discrete data can be represented as a parse tree from
a context-free grammar. We propose a variational autoencoder which directly encodes from
and decodes to these parse trees, ensuring the
generated outputs are always syntactically valid.
Surprisingly, we show that not only does our
model more often generate valid outputs, it also
learns a more coherent latent space in which
nearby points decode to similar discrete outputs.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our learned
models by showing their improved performance
in Bayesian optimization for symbolic regression
and molecule generation.

1. Introduction
Generative machine learning models have been used recently to produce extraordinary results, from realistic musical improvisation (Jaques et al., 2016), to changing facial expressions in images (Radford et al., 2015; Upchurch
et al., 2016), to creating realistic looking artwork (Gatys
et al., 2015). In large part, these generative models have
been successful at representing data in continuous domains.
Recently there is increased interest in training generative
models to construct more complex, discrete data types such
as arithmetic expressions (Kusner & Hernández-Lobato,
2016), source code (Gaunt et al., 2016; Riedel et al., 2016)
*

1
Equal contribution
Alan Turing Institute 2 University
of Warwick 3 University of Cambridge.
Correspondence
to:
<mkusner@turing.ac.uk>,
<bpaige@turing.ac.uk>,
<jmh233@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

and molecules (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2016b).
To train generative models for these tasks, these objects
are often first represented as strings. This is in large part
due to the fact that there exist powerful models for text sequence modeling such as Long Short Term Memory networks (LSTMs) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), Gated
Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho et al., 2014), and Dynamic
Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) (Kalchbrenner
et al., 2014). For instance, molecules can be represented by
so-called SMILES strings (Weininger, 1988) and GómezBombarelli et al. (2016b) has recently developed a generative model for molecules based on SMILES strings that
uses GRUs and DCNNs. This model is able to encode and
decode molecules to and from a continuous latent space,
allowing one to search this space for new molecules with
desirable properties (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2016b).
However, one immediate difficulty in using strings to represent discrete objects is that the representation is very brittle: small changes in the string can lead to completely different objects, or often do not correspond to valid objects
at all. Specifically, Gómez-Bombarelli et al. (2016b) described that while searching for new molecules, the probabilistic decoder — the distribution which maps from the
continuous latent space into the space of molecular structures — would sometimes accidentally put high probability
on strings which are not valid SMILES strings or do not encode plausible molecules.
To address this issue, we propose to directly incorporate knowledge about the structure of discrete data using
a grammar. Grammars exist for a wide variety of discrete domains such as symbolic expressions (Allamanis
et al., 2016), standard programming languages such as C
(Kernighan et al., 1988), and chemical structures (James
et al., 2015). For instance the set of syntactically valid
SMILES strings is described using a context free grammar,
which can be used for parsing and validation1 .
Given a grammar, every valid discrete object can be described as a parse tree from the grammar. Thus, we propose the grammar variational autoencoder (GVAE) which
encodes and decodes directly from and to these parse trees.
Generating parse trees as opposed to strings ensures that
1

http://opensmiles.org/spec/open-smiles-2-grammar.html

