Conditional Image Synthesis with Auxiliary Classifier GANs

Augustus Odena 1 Christopher Olah 1 Jonathon Shlens 1

Abstract
In this paper we introduce new methods for the
improved training of generative adversarial networks (GANs) for image synthesis. We construct a variant of GANs employing label conditioning that results in 128 × 128 resolution image samples exhibiting global coherence. We
expand on previous work for image quality assessment to provide two new analyses for assessing the discriminability and diversity of samples
from class-conditional image synthesis models.
These analyses demonstrate that high resolution
samples provide class information not present in
low resolution samples. Across 1000 ImageNet
classes, 128 × 128 samples are more than twice
as discriminable as artificially resized 32 × 32
samples. In addition, 84.7% of the classes have
samples exhibiting diversity comparable to real
ImageNet data.

1. Introduction
Characterizing the structure of natural images has been a
rich research endeavor. Natural images obey intrinsic invariances and exhibit multi-scale statistical structures that
have historically been difficult to quantify (Simoncelli &
Olshausen, 2001). Recent advances in machine learning
offer an opportunity to substantially improve the quality of
image models. Improved image models advance the stateof-the-art in image denoising (Ballé et al., 2015), compression (Toderici et al., 2016), in-painting (van den Oord et al.,
2016a), and super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2016). Better models of natural images also improve performance in
semi-supervised learning tasks (Kingma et al., 2014; Springenberg, 2015; Odena, 2016; Salimans et al., 2016) and reinforcement learning problems (Blundell et al., 2016).
One method for understanding natural image statistics is to
build a system that synthesizes images de novo. There are
1
Google Brain. Correspondence to: Augustus Odena <augustusodena@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

several promising approaches for building image synthesis models. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) maximize a
variational lower bound on the log-likelihood of the training data (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014).
VAEs are straightforward to train but introduce potentially
restrictive assumptions about the approximate posterior
distribution (but see (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma
et al., 2016)). Autoregressive models dispense with latent
variables and directly model the conditional distribution
over pixels (van den Oord et al., 2016a;b). These models
produce convincing samples but are costly to sample from
and do not provide a latent representation. Invertible density estimators transform latent variables directly using a
series of parameterized functions constrained to be invertible (Dinh et al., 2016). This technique allows for exact
log-likelihood computation and exact inference, but the invertibility constraint is restrictive.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) offer a distinct
and promising approach that focuses on a game-theoretic
formulation for training an image synthesis model (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Recent work has shown that GANs can
produce convincing image samples on datasets with low
variability and low resolution (Denton et al., 2015; Radford
et al., 2015). However, GANs struggle to generate globally coherent, high resolution samples - particularly from
datasets with high variability. Moreover, a theoretical understanding of GANs is an on-going research topic (Uehara
et al., 2016; Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2016).
In this work we demonstrate that that adding more structure
to the GAN latent space along with a specialized cost function results in higher quality samples. We exhibit 128×128
pixel samples from all classes of the ImageNet dataset
(Russakovsky et al., 2015) with increased global coherence
(Figure 1). Importantly, we demonstrate quantitatively that
our high resolution samples are not just naive resizings of
low resolution samples. In particular, downsampling our
128 × 128 samples to 32 × 32 leads to a 50% decrease in
visual discriminability. We also introduce a new metric for
assessing the variability across image samples and employ
this metric to demonstrate that our synthesized images exhibit diversity comparable to training data for a large fraction (84.7%) of ImageNet classes. In more detail, this work
is the first to:

