Constrained Policy Optimization
Joshua Achiam 1 David Held 1 Aviv Tamar 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 2

Abstract
For many applications of reinforcement learning it can be more convenient to specify both
a reward function and constraints, rather than
trying to design behavior through the reward
function. For example, systems that physically
interact with or around humans should satisfy
safety constraints. Recent advances in policy
search algorithms (Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Levine
et al., 2016) have enabled new capabilities in
high-dimensional control, but do not consider
the constrained setting. We propose Constrained
Policy Optimization (CPO), the ﬁrst generalpurpose policy search algorithm for constrained
reinforcement learning with guarantees for nearconstraint satisfaction at each iteration. Our
method allows us to train neural network policies for high-dimensional control while making
guarantees about policy behavior all throughout
training. Our guarantees are based on a new theoretical result, which is of independent interest:
we prove a bound relating the expected returns
of two policies to an average divergence between
them. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach on simulated robot locomotion tasks
where the agent must satisfy constraints motivated by safety.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep reinforcement learning has enabled neural
network policies to achieve state-of-the-art performance
on many high-dimensional control tasks, including Atari
games (using pixels as inputs) (Mnih et al., 2015; 2016),
robot locomotion and manipulation (Schulman et al., 2015;
Levine et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016), and even Go at
the human grandmaster level (Silver et al., 2016).
1
UC Berkeley 2 OpenAI. Correspondence to: Joshua Achiam
<jachiam@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In reinforcement learning (RL), agents learn to act by trial
and error, gradually improving their performance at the
task as learning progresses. Recent work in deep RL assumes that agents are free to explore any behavior during
learning, so long as it leads to performance improvement.
In many realistic domains, however, it may be unacceptable
to give an agent complete freedom. Consider, for example,
an industrial robot arm learning to assemble a new product
in a factory. Some behaviors could cause it to damage itself or the plant around it—or worse, take actions that are
harmful to people working nearby. In domains like this,
safe exploration for RL agents is important (Moldovan &
Abbeel, 2012; Amodei et al., 2016). A natural way to incorporate safety is via constraints.
A standard and well-studied formulation for reinforcement
learning with constraints is the constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) framework (Altman, 1999), where
agents must satisfy constraints on expectations of auxilliary costs. Although optimal policies for ﬁnite CMDPs
with known models can be obtained by linear programming, methods for high-dimensional control are lacking.
Currently, policy search algorithms enjoy state-of-theart performance on high-dimensional control tasks (Mnih
et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016). Heuristic algorithms for
policy search in CMDPs have been proposed (Uchibe &
Doya, 2007), and approaches based on primal-dual methods can be shown to converge to constraint-satisfying policies (Chow et al., 2015), but there is currently no approach
for policy search in continuous CMDPs that guarantees every policy during learning will satisfy constraints. In this
work, we propose the ﬁrst such algorithm, allowing applications to constrained deep RL.
Driving our approach is a new theoretical result that bounds
the difference between the rewards or costs of two different policies. This result, which is of independent interest,
tightens known bounds for policy search using trust regions
(Kakade & Langford, 2002; Pirotta et al., 2013; Schulman
et al., 2015), and provides a tighter connection between the
theory and practice of policy search for deep RL. Here,
we use this result to derive a policy improvement step that
guarantees both an increase in reward and satisfaction of
constraints on other costs. This step forms the basis for our
algorithm, Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO), which

