Emulating the Expert: Inverse Optimization through Online Learning
Andreas Bärmann * 1 Sebastian Pokutta * 2 Oskar Schneider * 1

Abstract
In this paper, we demonstrate how to learn the
objective function of a decision maker while only
observing the problem input data and the decision maker’s corresponding decisions over multiple rounds. Our approach is based on online
learning techniques and works for linear objectives over arbitrary sets for which we have a linear optimization oracle and as such generalizes
previous work based on KKT-system decomposition and dualization approaches. The applicability of our framework for learning linear constraints is also discussed briefly. Our algorithm
converges at a rate of O( p1T ), and we demonstrate its effectiveness and applications in preliminary computational results.

1. Introduction
Human decision makers are very good at making decisions
under rather imprecise specification of the decision-making
problem both in terms of constraints as well as objective.
One might argue that the human decision maker can pretty
reliably learn from observed previous decisions – a traditional learning-by-example setup. At the same time, when
we try to turn these decision-making problems into actual
optimization problems, we often run into all types of issues
in terms of specifying the model. In an optimal world, we
would be able to infer or learn the optimization problem
from previously observed decisions taken by an expert.
This problem naturally occurs in many settings where we
do not have direct access to the decision maker’s preference
or objective function but we can observe her behaviour and
the learner as well as the decision maker have access to
the same information. Natural examples are as diverse as
*

1
Equal contribution
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany 2 Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Andreas Bärmann <Andreas.Baermann@math.uni-erlangen.de>, Sebastian
Pokutta <Sebastian.Pokutta@isye.gatech.edu>, Oskar Schneider
<Oskar.Schneider@fau.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

making recommendations based on user history and strategic planning problems, where the agent’s preferences are
unknown but the system is observable. Other examples
include knowledge transfer from a human planner into a
decision-support system: often human operators have arrived at finely-tuned ‘objective functions’ through many
years of experience, and in many cases it is desirable to
replicate the decision-making process both for scaling up
and also for potentially including it in large-scale scenario
analysis and simulation to explore responses under varying
conditions.
Here we consider the learning of preferences or objectives
from an expert by means of observing her actions. More
precisely, we observe a set of input parameters and corresponding decisions of the form {(p1 , x1 ), . . . , (pT , xT )}.
They are such that pt 2 P with t = 1, . . . , T is a certain
realization of problem parameters from a given set P ✓ k
and xt is an optimal solution to the optimization problem
max cTtrue x
s.t. x 2 X(pt ),
where ctrue 2 n is the expert’s true but unknown objective
and X(pt ) ✓ n for some (fixed) n. We assume that we
have full information on the feasible set X(pt ) and that we
can compute argmax {cT x | x 2 X(pt )} for any candidate
objective c 2 n and t = 1, . . . , T . We present an online
learning algorithm based on the multiplicative weights update method that allows us to learn a strategy (c1 , . . . , cT )
of subsequent objective function choices with the following guarantee: if we optimize according to the surrogate
objective function ct instead of the actual unknown objective function ctrue in response to parameter realization pt ,
we obtain a sequence of optimal decisions (w.r.t. to each ct )
given by
x̄t = argmax {cTt x | x 2 X(pt )},
that are essentially as good as the decisions xt taken by the
expert on average. To this end, we interpret the observations of parameters and expert solutions as revealed over
multiple rounds such that in each round t we are shown the
parameters pt first, then take our optimal decision x̄t according to our objective function ct , then we are shown the
solution xt chosen by the expert and finally we are allowed

