Deriving Neural Architectures from Sequence and Graph Kernels
Tao Lei* 1 Wengong Jin* 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
The design of neural architectures for structured
objects is typically guided by experimental insights rather than a formal process. In this work,
we appeal to kernels over combinatorial structures, such as sequences and graphs, to derive
appropriate neural operations. We introduce a
class of deep recurrent neural operations and formally characterize their associated kernel spaces.
Our recurrent modules compare the input to virtual reference objects (cf. filters in CNN) via the
kernels. Similar to traditional neural operations,
these reference objects are parameterized and directly optimized in end-to-end training. We empirically evaluate the proposed class of neural architectures on standard applications such as language modeling and molecular graph regression,
achieving state-of-the-art results across these applications.

1. Introduction
Many recent studies focus on designing novel neural architectures for structured data such as sequences or annotated graphs. For instance, LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), GRU (Chung et al., 2014) and other complex
recurrent units (Zoph & Le, 2016) can be easily adapted
to embed structured objects such as sentences (Tai et al.,
2015) or molecules (Li et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2016) into
vector spaces suitable for later processing by standard predictive methods. The embedding algorithms are typically
integrated into an end-to-end trainable architecture so as to
tailor the learnable embeddings directly to the task at hand.
The embedding process itself is characterized by a sequence operations summarized in a structure known as
the computational graph. Each node in the computational
*
1
Equal contribution
MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Correspondence to:
Tao Lei <taolei@csail.mit.edu>, Wengong Jin <wengong@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

graph identifies the unit/mapping applied while the arcs
specify the relative arrangement/order of operations. The
process of designing such computational graphs or associated operations for classes of objects is often guided by
insights and expertise rather than a formal process.
Recent work has substantially narrowed the gap between
desirable computational operations associated with objects
and how their representations are acquired. For example,
value iteration calculations can be folded into convolutional
architectures so as to optimize the representations to facilitate planning (Tamar et al., 2016). Similarly, inference
calculations in graphical models about latent states of variables such as atom characteristics can be directly associated
with embedding operations (Dai et al., 2016).
We appeal to kernels over combinatorial structures to define the appropriate computational operations. Kernels give
rise to well-defined function spaces and possess rules of
composition that guide how they can be built from simpler
ones. The comparison of objects inherent in kernels is often broken down to elementary relations such as counting
of common sub-structures as in
X
K( , 0 ) =
1[s 2 ]1[s 2 0 ]
(1)
s2S

where S is the set of possible substructures. For example, in a string kernel (Lodhi et al., 2002), S may refer
to all possible subsequences while a graph kernel (Vishwanathan et al., 2010) would deal with possible paths
in the graph. Several studies have highlighted the relation between feed-forward neural architectures and kernels (Hazan & Jaakkola, 2015; Zhang et al., 2016) but we
are unaware of any prior work pertaining to kernels associated with neural architectures for structured objects.
In this paper, we introduce a class of deep recurrent neural
embedding operations and formally characterize their associated kernel spaces. The resulting kernels are parameterized in the sense that the neural operations relate objects of
interest to virtual reference objects through kernels. These
reference objects are parameterized and readily optimized
for end-to-end performance.
To summarize, the proposed neural architectures, or Kernel
Neural Networks 1 , enjoy the following advantages:
1

Code available at https://github.com/taolei87/icml17 knn

