Generalization and Equilibrium in Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs)
Sanjeev Arora 1 Rong Ge 2 Yingyu Liang 1 Tengyu Ma 1 Yi Zhang 1

Abstract
It is shown that training of generative adversarial network (GAN) may not have good generalization properties; e.g., training may appear
successful but the trained distribution may be
far from target distribution in standard metrics.
However, generalization does occur for a weaker
metric called neural net distance. It is also shown
that an approximate pure equilibrium exists in the
discriminator/generator game for a natural training objective (Wasserstein) when generator capacity and training set sizes are moderate. This
existence of equilibrium inspires MIX + GAN protocol, which can be combined with any existing
GAN training, and empirically shown to improve
some of them.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) have become one of the dominant methods for
fitting generative models to complicated real-life data, and
even found unusual uses such as designing good cryptographic primitives (Abadi & Andersen, 2016). See a survey
by (Goodfellow, 2016). Various novel architectures and
training objectives were introduced to address perceived
shortcomings of the original idea, leading to more stable
training and more realistic generative models in practice
(see (Odena et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017; Radford
et al., 2016; Tolstikhin et al., 2017; Salimans et al., 2016;
Jiwoong Im et al., 2016; Durugkar et al., 2016) and the reference therein).
The goal is to train a generator deep net whose input is
a standard Gaussian, and whose output is a sample from
some distribution D on Rd , which has to be close to some
target distribution Dreal (which could be, say, real-life imAuthors listed in alphabetical order. 1 Princeton University, Princeton NJ 2 Duke University, Durham NC. Correspondence to: Rong Ge <rongge@cs.duke.edu>, Yi Zhang
<y.zhang@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Probability density Dreal with many peaks and valleys

ages represented using raw pixels). The training uses samples from Dreal and together with the generator net also
trains a discriminator deep net trying to maximise its ability
to distinguish between samples from Dreal and D. So long
as the discriminator is successful at this task with nonzero
probability, its success can be used to generate a feedback
(using backpropagation) to the generator, thus improving
its distribution D. Training is continued until the generator
wins, meaning that the discriminator can do no better than
random guessing when deciding whether or not a particular
sample came from D or Dreal . This basic iterative framework has been tried with many training objectives; see Section 2. But it has been unclear what to conclude when the
generator wins this game: is D close to Dreal in some metric? One seems to need some extension of generalization
theory that would imply such a conclusion. The hurdle is
that distribution Dreal could be complicated and may have
many peaks and valleys; see Figure 1. The number of peaks
(modes) may even be exponential in d. (Recall the curse of
dimensionality: in d dimensions there are exp(d) directions
whose pairwise angle exceeds say ⇡/3, and each could be
the site of a peak.) Whereas the number of samples from
Dreal (and from D for that matter) used in the training is
a lot fewer, and thus may not reflect most of the peaks and
valleys of Dreal .
A standard analysis due to (Goodfellow et al., 2014) shows
that when the discriminator capacity (= number of parameters) and number of samples is “large enough”, then a win
by the generator implies that D is very close to Dreal (see
Section 2). But the discussion in the previous paragraph
raises the possibility that “sufficiently large” in this analysis may need to be exp(d).
Another open theoretical issue is whether an equilibrium
always exists in this game between generator and discrim-

