Adaptive Neural Networks for Efficient Inference

Tolga Bolukbasi 1 Joseph Wang 2 Ofer Dekel 3 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
We present an approach to adaptively utilize deep
neural networks in order to reduce the evaluation
time on new examples without loss of accuracy.
Rather than attempting to redesign or approximate existing networks, we propose two schemes
that adaptively utilize networks. We first pose an
adaptive network evaluation scheme, where we
learn a system to adaptively choose the components of a deep network to be evaluated for each
example. By allowing examples correctly classified using early layers of the system to exit,
we avoid the computational time associated with
full evaluation of the network. We extend this to
learn a network selection system that adaptively
selects the network to be evaluated for each example. We show that computational time can be
dramatically reduced by exploiting the fact that
many examples can be correctly classified using
relatively efficient networks and that complex,
computationally costly networks are only necessary for a small fraction of examples. We pose
a global objective for learning an adaptive early
exit or network selection policy and solve it by
reducing the policy learning problem to a layerby-layer weighted binary classification problem.
Empirically, these approaches yield dramatic reductions in computational cost, with up to a 2.8x
speedup on state-of-the-art networks from the
ImageNet image recognition challenge with minimal (< 1%) loss of top5 accuracy.

speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), and machine
translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). However, the power
of DNNs comes at a considerable cost, namely, the computational cost of applying them to new examples. This
cost, often called the test-time cost, has increased rapidly
for many tasks (see Fig. 1) with ever-growing demands
for improved performance in state-of-the-art systems. As
a point of fact, the Resnet152 (He et al., 2016) architecture with 152 layers, realizes a substantial 4.4% accuracy
gain in top-5 performance over GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al.,
2015) on the large-scale ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky
et al., 2015) but is about 14X slower at test-time. The high
test-time cost of state-of-the-art DNNs means that they can
only be deployed on powerful computers, equipped with
massive GPU accelerators. As a result, technology companies spend billions of dollars a year on expensive and
power-hungry computer hardware. Moreover, high testtime cost prevents DNNs from being deployed on resource
constrained platforms, such as those found in Internet of
Things (IoT) devices, smart phones, and wearables. This
problem has given rise to a concentrated research effort to
reduce the test-time cost of DNNs. Most of the work on this
topic focuses on designing more efficient network topologies and on compressing pre-trained models using various
techniques (see related work below). We propose a different approach, which leaves the original DNN intact and instead changes the way in which we apply the DNN to new

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are among the most powerful and versatile machine learning techniques, achieving
state-of-the-art accuracy in a variety of important applications, such as visual object recognition (He et al., 2016),
1

Boston University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Amazon, Cambridge,
MA, USA 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Tolga Bolukbasi <tolgab@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Performance versus evaluation complexity of the DNN
architectures that won the ImageNet challenge over past several
years. The model evaluation times increase exponentially with
respect to the increase in accuracy.

