Confident Multiple Choice Learning

Kimin Lee 1 Changho Hwang 1 KyoungSoo Park 1 Jinwoo Shin 1

Abstract
Ensemble methods are arguably the most trustworthy techniques for boosting the performance
of machine learning models. Popular independent ensembles (IE) relying on naı̈ve averaging/voting scheme have been of typical choice
for most applications involving deep neural networks, but they do not consider advanced collaboration among ensemble models. In this paper,
we propose new ensemble methods specialized
for deep neural networks, called confident multiple choice learning (CMCL): it is a variant of
multiple choice learning (MCL) via addressing
its overconfidence issue. In particular, the proposed major components of CMCL beyond the
original MCL scheme are (i) new loss, i.e., confident oracle loss, (ii) new architecture, i.e., feature sharing and (iii) new training method, i.e.,
stochastic labeling. We demonstrate the effect of
CMCL via experiments on the image classification on CIFAR and SVHN, and the foregroundbackground segmentation on the iCoseg. In particular, CMCL using 5 residual networks provides 14.05% and 6.60% relative reductions in
the top-1 error rates from the corresponding IE
scheme for the classification task on CIFAR and
SVHN, respectively.

1. Introduction
Ensemble methods have played a critical role in the
machine learning community to obtain better predictive
performance than what could be obtained from any of
the constituent learning models alone, e.g., Bayesian
model/parameter averaging (Domingos, 2000), boosting
(Freund et al., 1999) and bagging (Breiman, 1996). Recently, they have been successfully applied to enhancing
the power of many deep neural networks, e.g., 80% of
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Repulic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Jinwoo Shin <jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

top-5 best-performing teams on ILSVRC challenge 2016
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) employ ensemble methods. They
are easy and trustworthy to apply for most scenarios.
While there exists a long history on ensemble methods,
the progress on developing more advanced ensembles specialized for deep neural networks has been slow. Despite continued efforts that apply various ensemble methods such as bagging and boosting to deep models, it has
been observed that traditional independent ensembles (IE)
which train models independently with random initialization achieve the best performance (Ciregan et al., 2012; Lee
et al., 2015). In this paper, we focus on developing more
advanced ensembles for deep models utilizing the concept
of multiple choice learning (MCL).
The MCL concept was originally proposed in (GuzmanRivera et al., 2012) under the scenario when inference procedures are cascaded:
(a) First, generate a set of plausible outputs.
(b) Then, pick the correct solution form the set.
For example, (Park & Ramanan, 2011; Batra et al., 2012)
proposed human-pose estimation methods which produce
multiple predictions and then refine them by employing a
temporal model, and (Collins & Koo, 2005) proposed a
sentence parsing method which re-ranks the output of an
initial system which produces a set of plausible outputs
(Huang & Chiang, 2005). In such scenarios, the goal of
the first stage (a) is generating a set of plausible outputs
such that at least one of them is correct for the second stage
(b), e.g., human operators. Under this motivation, MCL has
been studied (Guzman-Rivera et al., 2014; 2012; Lee et al.,
2016), where various applications have been demonstrated,
e.g., image classification (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), semantic segmentation (Everingham et al., 2010) and image
captioning (Lin et al., 2014b). It trains an ensemble of
multiple models by minimizing the so-called oracle loss,
only focusing on the most accurate prediction produced by
them. Consequently, it makes each model specialized for
a certain subset of data, not for the entire one similarly as
mixture-of-expert schemes (Jacobs et al., 1991).
Although MCL focuses on the first stage (a) in cascaded
scenarios and thus can produce diverse/plausible outputs, it
might be not useful if one does not have a good scheme for

