Language Modeling with Gated Convolutional Networks

Yann N. Dauphin 1 Angela Fan 1 Michael Auli 1 David Grangier 1

Abstract
The pre-dominant approach to language modeling to date is based on recurrent neural networks. Their success on this task is often linked
to their ability to capture unbounded context.
In this paper we develop a finite context approach through stacked convolutions, which can
be more efficient since they allow parallelization over sequential tokens. We propose a novel
simplified gating mechanism that outperforms
Oord et al. (2016b) and investigate the impact
of key architectural decisions. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art on the WikiText103 benchmark, even though it features longterm dependencies, as well as competitive results on the Google Billion Words benchmark.
Our model reduces the latency to score a sentence by an order of magnitude compared to a
recurrent baseline. To our knowledge, this is the
first time a non-recurrent approach is competitive
with strong recurrent models on these large scale
language tasks.

1. Introduction
Statistical language models estimate the probability distribution of a sequence of words by modeling the probability
of the next word given preceding words, i.e.
P (w0 , . . . , wN ) = P (w0 )

N
Y

P (wi |w0 , . . . , wi−1 ),

i=1

where wi are discrete word indices in a vocabulary. Language models are a critical part of systems for speech
recognition (Yu & Deng, 2014) and machine translation
(Koehn, 2010).
Recently, neural networks (Bengio et al., 2003; Mikolov
et al., 2010; Jozefowicz et al., 2016) have been shown to
1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Yann N. Dauphin
<ynd@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

outperform classical n-gram language models (Kneser &
Ney, 1995; Chen & Goodman, 1996). These classical models suffer from data sparsity, which makes it difficult to represent large contexts and thus, long-range dependencies.
Neural language models tackle this issue by embedding
words in continuous space over which a neural network is
applied. The current state of the art for language modeling is based on long short term memory networks (LSTM;
Hochreiter et al., 1997) which can theoretically model arbitrarily long dependencies.
In this paper, we introduce new gated convolutional networks and apply them to language modeling. Convolutional networks can be stacked to represent large context
sizes and extract hierarchical features over larger and larger
contexts with more abstractive features (LeCun & Bengio,
1995). This allows them to model long-term dependencies by applying O( N
k ) operations over a context of size N
and kernel width k. In contrast, recurrent networks view
the input as a chain structure and therefore require a linear
number O(N ) of operations.
Analyzing the input hierarchically bears resemblance to
classical grammar formalisms which build syntactic tree
structures of increasing granuality, e.g., sentences consist
of noun phrases and verb phrases each comprising further
internal structure (Manning & Schütze, 1999; Steedman,
2002). Hierarchical structure also eases learning since the
number of non-linearities for a given context size is reduced
compared to a chain structure, thereby mitigating the vanishing gradient problem (Glorot & Bengio, 2010).
Modern hardware is well suited to models that are highly
parallelizable. In recurrent networks, the next output depends on the previous hidden state which does not enable
parallelization over the elements of a sequence. Convolutional networks, however, are very amenable to this computing paradigm since the computation of all input words
can be performed simultaneously (§2).
Gating has been shown to be essential for recurrent neural
networks to reach state-of-the-art performance (Jozefowicz et al., 2016). Our gated linear units reduce the vanishing gradient problem for deep architectures by providing a
linear path for the gradients while retaining non-linear capabilities (§5.2).

