Composing Tree Graphical Models with Persistent Homology Features
for Clustering Mixed-Type Data

Xiuyan Ni 1 Novi Quadrianto 2 3 Yusu Wang 4 Chao Chen 1

Abstract
Clustering data with both continuous and discrete attributes is a challenging task. Existing
methods often lack a principled probabilistic formulation. In this paper, we propose a clustering method based on a tree-structured graphical model to describe the generation process of
mixed-type data. Our tree-structured model factorizes into a product of pairwise interactions,
and thus localizes the interaction between feature
variables of different types. To provide a robust
clustering method based on the tree-model, we
adopt a topographical view and compute peaks of
the density function and their attractive basins for
clustering. Furthermore, we leverage the theory
from topology data analysis to adaptively merge
trivial peaks into large ones in order to achieve
meaningful clusterings. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on mixed-type data.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the most widely used techniques
in data analysis (Xu & Wunsch, 2005; Jain, 2010). Despite a rich literature on pure continuous data or pure categorical data, the clustering problem remains challenging
for mixed-type data, i.e., data with both types of attributes
(Everitt et al., 2001). Mixed-type data are ubiquitous in
real world domains, e.g., social science, biomedicine and
finance, where categorical attributes often describe demographic information or questionnaire responses, and continuous attributes often correspond to quantitative measurements. However, only a very limited number of clustering
methods have been proposed for such data (Everitt et al.,
2001; Huang, 1998). The major challenge is the lack of a
good geometric intuition of data on the mixed-type domain;
1

City University of New York (CUNY), New York, USA
University of Sussex, Falmer, United Kingdom 3 National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia 4 Ohio State University, Columbus, USA. Correspondence to:
Chao Chen <chao.chen.cchen@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

such intuition is the important basis of many successful
geometric clustering methods, e.g., k-means (MacQueen
et al., 1967), Ward’s method (Ward Jr, 1963), DBSCAN
(Ester et al., 1996), to name a few. In practice, what usually being done is to convert mixed-type data to either pure
continuous or pure categorical domain, and subsequently
use existing geometric clustering methods. A metric for directly dealing with mixed-type data is also available, based
on Gower’s coefficient (1971). The uptake of geometric
clustering methods is mostly driven by their lightweight
computational requirements. However, these methods lack
a well justified underlying probabilistic model, are sensitive to the choice of underlying metric, and do not give a
principled answer to the fundamental question of required
number of clusters for the data at hand.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic clustering
method for mixed-type data, which admits at least four
attractive properties. First, our probabilistic method goes
beyond the widely-adopted class conditional independence
assumption of feature variables, e.g., as in the latent class
model (McCutcheon, 1987). Second, our method is based
on the global topographical features, i.e., peaks and mountains, of the density function, rather than the distances between data points. The argument for topographical features
is to sidestep a premature specification of the metric space
in which our mixed-type data will achieve the best grouping. Third, our method is able to utilize a persistent homology theory to automatically determine the number of clusters in the data. Fourth, the proposed method can be easily
parallelized to achieve a competitive running time with respect to many lightweight geometric clustering methods.
From the modeling perspective, we compose tree
graphical models with topographical features to achieve a
probabilistic mixed-type clustering model. Graphical models provide a way of factorizing a joint probability distribution into a product of local interactions. These local
interactions capture dependency among feature variables.
While a Bayesian network or a Markov random field can
be built with a set of nodes representing each feature variable. The graph structure and parameter estimation can be
computationally expensive. By constraining the graph to
be a tree, the structure and parameter can be learned efficiently. Other than computational benefits, tree-structured

