Bi-objective Trade-off with Dynamic Barrier
Gradient Descent
Chengyue Gong
Xingchao Liu
Qiang Liu
Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
{cygong17,xcliu,lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks have to make a trade-off between two loss functions,
typically the main data-fitness loss and an auxiliary loss. The most widely used
approach is to optimize the linear combination of the objectives, which, however,
requires manual tuning of the combination coefficient and is theoretically unsuitable for non-convex functions. In this work, we consider constrained optimization
as a more principled approach for trading off two losses, with a special emphasis
on lexicographic (lexico) optimization, a degenerated limit of constrained optimization which optimizes a secondary loss inside the optimal set of the main loss.
We propose a dynamic barrier gradient descent algorithm which provides a unified solution of both constrained and lexicographic optimization. We establish the
convergence of the method for general non-convex functions. Through a number
of experiments on real-world deep learning tasks, we show that 1) lexico optimization provides a tuning-free approach to incorporating side loss functions without
hurting the main objective, and 2) constrained and lexico optimization combined
provide an automatic approach to profiling Pareto sets, especially in non-convex
problems on which linear combination methods fail.

1

Introduction

Although machine learning (ML) has been typically conceptualized as optimizing a single objective
function, most practical ML tasks actually involve trading off two or more objective functions, such
as the data fitness function vs. a regularization or auxiliary loss. Let f and g be two objectives functions of interest on Rd . A principled way to trade-off f and g is through constrained optimization:
min f (✓)

✓2Rd

s.t.

g(✓)  c,

(1)

where c is a threshold. When varying c, solutions of (1) cover the Pareto points of (f, g), providing
different trade-offs on f, g. Moreover, (1) naturally arises when g is an important constraint that
should be controlled explicitly, e.g., in terms of safety, fairness, and other trustworthy measures.
However, compared to unconstrained optimization, constrained optimization (1) has been much less
widely used in practical machine learning. In fact, perhaps the most common approach to handling
(1) is to transform it into the unconstrained optimization of the linear combination of f and g,
min f (✓) + g(✓),

✓2Rd

(2)

where the trade-off between f and g is controlled by a weight coefficient , instead of the threshold
parameter c. A folklore argument is that can be viewed as the Lagrange multiplier of (1), and
hence (1) can be mapped into (2) with properly selected .
Unfortunately, despite being broadly used, (2) is insufficient to fully replace (1) and suffers from a
number of disadvantages in both theory and practice:
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

