From global to local MDI variable importances for
random forests and when they are Shapley values

Antonio Sutera∗, Gilles Louppe, Van Anh Huynh-Thu, Louis Wehenkel, Pierre Geurts
Dept. of EE & CS, University of Liège, Belgium
{a.sutera,g.louppe,vahuynh,l.wehenkel,p.geurts}@uliege.be

Abstract
Random forests have been widely used for their ability to provide so-called importance measures, which give insight at a global (per dataset) level on the relevance
of input variables to predict a certain output. On the other hand, methods based
on Shapley values have been introduced to refine the analysis of feature relevance
in tree-based models to a local (per instance) level. In this context, we first show
that the global Mean Decrease of Impurity (MDI) variable importance scores correspond to Shapley values under some conditions. Then, we derive a local MDI
importance measure of variable relevance, which has a very natural connection
with the global MDI measure and can be related to a new notion of local feature
relevance. We further link local MDI importances with Shapley values and discuss them in the light of related measures from the literature. The measures are
illustrated through experiments on several classification problems.

1

Motivation

While research in machine learning (ML) often focuses on predictive accuracy, another important
topic concerns the interpretation of ML models and their predictions. Interpreting a model helps to
uncover the mechanisms it captures (e.g., biomarkers useful to diagnose a disease), and to explain its
predictions (e.g., why a particular patient is diagnosed healthy or sick). The latter becomes essential
when a ML prediction may impact one’s life, and as a way of checking the trustworthiness of a ML
model (e.g., to identify unwanted biases). Common interpretation tools include variable importance
measures that assess which, and to which extent, variables are important for a model. They help to
understand how the model works, and to gain insight on the underlying modelled mechanism.
In tree-based methods, such as Random forests [Breiman, 2001], feature importance scores can be
derived as a low-cost by-product of the learning step. Given their extensive use in applied research,
tree-based importance measures have been studied both empirically (see, e.g., Strobl et al. [2007],
Archer and Kimes [2008], Genuer et al. [2010], Auret and Aldrich [2011]) and theoretically (see, e.g.,
Ishwaran et al. [2007], Louppe et al. [2013], Louppe [2014], Sutera et al. [2018], Li et al. [2019],
Sutera [2019], Scornet [2020]). Assuming a sufficiently large learning set and number of trees,
these works showed that importance measures have desirable properties, such as consistency with
respect to the notion of feature relevance. They also analyzed the impact of learning meta-parameters
(e.g., randomization level, tree depth, ensemble size) on such properties. While standard importance
measures evaluate the global importance of a feature at the level of a dataset, several works proposed
new approaches based on Shapley values to derive local scores reflecting the importance of a feature
for a given prediction (e.g., Neto and Paulovich [2020], Lundberg et al. [2020], Izza et al. [2020]).
The contribution of the present work in this context is two-fold. First, we show that the standard mean
decrease of impurity (MDI) measure when derived from totally randomized trees and in asymptotic
∗

Corresponding author. Email address: sutera.antonio@gmail.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

