Strategic Behavior is Bliss: Iterative Voting Improves
Social Welfare
Joshua Kavner
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
kavnej@rpi.edu

Lirong Xia
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
xialirong@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent work in iterative voting has defined the additive dynamic price of anarchy
(ADPoA) as the difference in social welfare between the truthful and worst-case
equilibrium profiles resulting from repeated strategic manipulations. While iterative plurality has been shown to only return alternatives with at most one less
initial votes than the truthful winner, it is less understood how agents’ welfare
changes in equilibrium. To this end, we differentiate agents’ utility from their manipulation mechanism and determine iterative plurality’s ADPoA in the worst- and
average-cases. We first prove that the worst-case ADPoA is linear in the number
of agents. To overcome this negative result, we study the average-case ADPoA
and prove that equilibrium winners have a constant order welfare advantage over
the truthful winner in expectation. Our positive results illustrate the prospect for
social welfare to increase due to strategic manipulation.

1

Introduction

Voting is one of the most popular methods for a group of agents to make a collective decision
based on their preferences. Whether a decision is for a high-stakes presidential election or a routine
luncheon, agents submit their preferences and a voting rule is applied to select a winning alternative.
One critical flaw of voting is its susceptibility to strategic manipulations. That is, agents may have
an incentive to misreport their preferences (i.e. votes) to obtain a more favorable outcome. Unfortunately, manipulation is inevitable under any non-dictatorial single-round voting systems when
there are three or more alternatives, as recognized by the celebrated Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem [Gibbard, 1973, Satterthwaite, 1975]. Consequently, decades of research sought to deter manipulation, especially by high computational barriers [Bartholdi et al., 1989, Faliszewski et al., 2010,
Faliszewski and Procaccia, 2010]; see [Conitzer and Walsh, 2016] for a recent survey of the field.
While there is a large body of literature on manipulation of single-round voting systems, sequential
and iterative voting procedures are less understood. Indeed, these procedures occur in a variety of
applications, such as Doodle or presidential election polls, where people finalize their votes after
previewing others’ responses [Meir et al., 2010, Desmedt and Elkind, 2010, Xia and Conitzer, 2010,
Reijngoud and Endriss, 2012, Zou et al., 2015]. Our key question is:
What is the effect of strategic behavior in sequential and iterative voting?
A series of work initiated by Meir et al. [2010] characterizes the dynamics and equilibria of iterative
voting, where agents sequentially and myopically improve their reported preferences based on other
agents’ reports [Reyhani and Wilson, 2012, Lev and Rosenschein, 2012, Brânzei et al., 2013, Grandi
et al., 2013, Obraztsova et al., 2013, Meir et al., 2014, Rabinovich et al., 2015, Obraztsova et al.,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

