Leveraging Recursive Gumbel-Max Trick for
Approximate Inference in Combinatorial Spaces
Kirill Struminsky⇤
HSE University
Moscow, Russia
k.struminsky@gmail.com

Artyom Gadetsky⇤ †
HSE University
Moscow, Russia
artygadetsky@yandex.ru

Danil Karpushkin
AIRI,§ Sber AI Lab, MIPT¶
Moscow, Russia
kardanil@mail.ru

Denis Rakitin⇤
HSE University, Skoltech‡
Moscow, Russia
rakitindenis32@gmail.com

Dmitry Vetrov
HSE University, AIRI§
Moscow, Russia
vetrovd@yandex.ru

Abstract
Structured latent variables allow incorporating meaningful prior knowledge into
deep learning models. However, learning with such variables remains challenging
because of their discrete nature. Nowadays, the standard learning approach is to
define a latent variable as a perturbed algorithm output and to use a differentiable
surrogate for training. In general, the surrogate puts additional constraints on the
model and inevitably leads to biased gradients. To alleviate these shortcomings,
we extend the Gumbel-Max trick to define distributions over structured domains.
We avoid the differentiable surrogates by leveraging the score function estimators
for optimization. In particular, we highlight a family of recursive algorithms with
a common feature we call stochastic invariant. The feature allows us to construct
reliable gradient estimates and control variates without additional constraints on the
model. In our experiments, we consider various structured latent variable models
and achieve results competitive with relaxation-based counterparts.

1

Introduction

To this day, the majority of deep learning architectures consists of differentiable computation blocks
and relies on gradient estimates for learning. At the same time, architectures with discrete intermediate
components are a good fit for incorporating inductive biases [3, 48] or dynamic control flow [26, 12].
One of the approaches to train such architectures is to replace the discrete component with a stochastic
latent variable and optimize the expected objective.
In practice, the expectation has high computational cost, thus one typically resorts to stochastic
estimates for the expectation and its gradient. Particularly, the two prevalent approaches to estimate
the gradient of the objective are the score function estimator [45] and the reparameterization trick
[16, 40] for relaxed discrete variables [29, 15]. The former puts mild assumptions on the distribution
and the objective, requiring the gradient of log-probability with respect to the distribution parameters
to be differentiable, and provides unbiased estimates for the objective gradient. However, the naive
⇤

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
‡
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
§
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
¶
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

