Robust Learning of Optimal Auctions

Wenshuo Guo
University of California, Berkeley
wguo@cs.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Manolis Zampetakis
University of California, Berkeley
mzampet@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning revenue-optimal multi-bidder auctions from
samples when the samples of bidders’ valuations can be adversarially corrupted
or drawn from distributions that are adversarially perturbed. First, we prove tight
upper bounds on the revenue we can obtain with a corrupted distribution under a
population model, for both regular valuation distributions and distributions with
monotone hazard rate (MHR). We then propose new algorithms that, given only
an “approximate distribution” for the bidder’s valuation, can learn a mechanism
whose revenue is nearly optimal simultaneously for all “true distributions” that
are α-close to the original distribution in Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance. The
proposed algorithms operate beyond the setting of bounded distributions that have
been studied in prior works, and are guaranteed to obtain a fraction 1 − O(α) of
the optimal revenue under the true distribution when the distributions
are MHR.
√
Moreover, they are guaranteed to yield at least a fraction 1 − O( α) of the optimal
revenue when the distributions are regular. We prove that these upper bounds
cannot be further improved, by providing matching lower bounds. Lastly, we
derive sample complexity upper bounds for learning a near-optimal auction for
both MHR and regular distributions.

1

Introduction

Optimal auctions play a crucial role in economic theory, with a wide range of applications across
various industries, public sectors, and online platforms [Myerson, 1981, Bykowsky et al., 2000, Roth
and Ockenfels, 2002, Klemperer, 2002, Milgrom and Milgrom, 2004, Lahaie et al., 2007]. In such
auctions, pricing mechanisms need to be determined by the auction designer so as to satisfy various
desired goals, such as revenue maximization and incentive compatibility. Often this determination is
made based on information about the buyers that is assumed to be available a priori. For example, in
a standard valuation model, each bidder has a valuation over the available items, and if the sellers
knows the distribution of these valuations, they could design an optimal auction which maximizes the
revenue.
Arguably the fundamental difficulty in the design of optimal auctions is that real valuations are
private and unknown to the auction designer. Consider specifically the problem of selling one item to
multiple buyers. Suppose that we model the buyers’ valuations as arising as independent draws from
buyer-specific prior distributions. In this scenario, what is the optimal mechanism in terms of the
expected revenue? This problem was solved by Myerson [1981] through a characterization of virtual
value functions. In particular, we can define a virtual value function of each buyer based on their
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

