Hit and Lead Discovery with Explorative RL and
Fragment-based Molecule Generation

Soojung Yang ∗
AITRICS
soojungy@mit.edu
Seul Lee
KAIST
ellenlee7890@gmail.com

Doyeong Hwang †
AITRICS
desertbeagle11@gmail.com

Seongok Ryu ‡
AITRICS
seongokryu@galux.co.kr

Sung Ju Hwang
AITRICS, KAIST
sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, utilizing reinforcement learning (RL) to generate molecules with desired properties has been highlighted as a promising strategy for drug design. A
molecular docking program – a physical simulation that estimates protein-small
molecule binding affinity – can be an ideal reward scoring function for RL, as it is
a straightforward proxy of the therapeutic potential. Still, two imminent challenges
exist for this task. First, the models often fail to generate chemically realistic and
pharmacochemically acceptable molecules. Second, the docking score optimization
is a difficult exploration problem that involves many local optima and less smooth
surfaces with respect to molecular structure. To tackle these challenges, we propose
a novel RL framework that generates pharmacochemically acceptable molecules
with large docking scores. Our method – Fragment-based generative RL with Explorative Experience replay for Drug design (FREED) – constrains the generated
molecules to a realistic and qualified chemical space and effectively explores the
space to find drugs by coupling our fragment-based generation method and a novel
error-prioritized experience replay (PER). We also show that our model performs
well on both de novo and scaffold-based schemes. Our model produces molecules
of higher quality compared to existing methods while achieving state-of-the-art
performance on two of three targets in terms of the docking scores of the generated molecules. We further show with ablation studies that our method, predictive
error-PER (FREED(PE)), significantly improves the model performance.

1

Introduction

Searching for “hits", the molecules with desired therapeutic potentials, is a critical task in drug
discovery. Instead of screening a library of countless potential candidates in a brute-force manner,
designing drugs with sample-efficient generative models has been highlighted as a promising strategy.
While many generative models for drug design are trained on the distribution of known active
compounds [1–3], such models tend to produce molecules that are similar to that of the training
dataset [4], which discourages finding novel molecules.
In this light, reinforcement learning (RL) has been increasingly used for goal-directed molecular
design, thanks to its exploration ability. Previous models have been assessed with relatively simple
∗

Currently at MIT.
Currently at LG AI Research.
‡
Currently at Galux inc.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

