Averaging on the Bures-Wasserstein manifold:
dimension-free convergence of gradient descent

Jason M. Altschuler
MIT
jasonalt@mit.edu

Sinho Chewi
MIT
schewi@mit.edu

Patrik Gerber
MIT
prgerber@mit.edu

Austin J. Stromme
MIT
astromme@mit.edu

Abstract
We study first-order optimization algorithms for computing the barycenter of
Gaussian distributions with respect to the optimal transport metric. Although
the objective is geodesically non-convex, Riemannian GD empirically converges
rapidly, in fact faster than off-the-shelf methods such as Euclidean GD and SDP
solvers. This stands in stark contrast to the best-known theoretical results for
Riemannian GD, which depend exponentially on the dimension. In this work,
we prove new geodesic convexity results on auxiliary functionals; this provides
strong control of the Riemannian GD iterates, ultimately yielding a dimension-free
convergence rate. Our techniques also enable the analysis of two related notions
of averaging, the entropically-regularized barycenter and the geometric median,
providing the first convergence guarantees for Riemannian GD for these problems.

1

Introduction

Averaging multiple data sources is among the most classical and fundamental subroutines in data
science. However, a modern challenge is that data is often more complicated than points in Rd . In
this paper, we study the task of averaging probability distributions on Rd , a setting that commonly
arises in machine learning and statistics [CD14; Ho+17; SLD18; Dog+19], computer vision and
graphics [Rab+11; Sol+15], probability theory [KS94; RU02], and signal processing [Elv+20]; see
also the surveys [PC+19; PZ19] and the references within.
The Wasserstein barycenter [AC11; Rab+11] has emerged as a particularly canonical notion of
average. Formally, let P2 (Rd ) denote the space of probability measures on Rd with finite second
moment, let P be a probability measure over P2 (Rd ), and let W2 denote the 2-Wasserstein distance
(i.e. the standard optimal transport distance). Then, the Wasserstein barycenter of P is a solution of
Z
minimize
W22 (b, ·) dP .
(1)
b∈P2 (Rd )

A related notion of average is the entropically-regularized Wasserstein barycenter of P , which is
defined to be a solution of
Z
minimize
W22 (b, ·) dP + ent(b) ,
(2)
b∈P2 (Rd )

where ent is an entropic penalty which allows for incorporating prior knowledge into the average.
Lastly, a third related notion of average with better robustness properties (e.g., with a breakdown
point of 50% [FVJ09]) is the Wasserstein geometric median of P , which is defined to be a solution of
Z
minimize
W2 (b, ·) dP .
(3)
b∈P2 (Rd )

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

