Reinforced Few-Shot Acquisition Function Learning
for Bayesian Optimization

1

Bing-Jing Hsieh1 , Ping-Chun Hsieh1 , Xi Liu2
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
2
Applied Machine Learning, Facebook AI, Menlo Park, CA, USA
{bingjing2000.cs08g, pinghsieh}@nctu.edu.tw, xliu1@fb.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) conventionally relies on handcrafted acquisition functions (AFs) to sequentially determine the sample points. However, it has been
widely observed in practice that the best-performing AF in terms of regret can
vary significantly under different types of black-box functions. It has remained
a challenge to design one AF that can attain the best performance over a wide
variety of black-box functions. This paper aims to attack this challenge through
the perspective of reinforced few-shot AF learning (FSAF). Specifically, we first
connect the notion of AFs with Q-functions and view a deep Q-network (DQN) as
a surrogate differentiable AF. While it serves as a natural idea to combine DQN and
an existing few-shot learning method, we identify that such a direct combination
does not perform well due to severe overfitting, which is particularly critical in
BO due to the need of a versatile sampling policy. To address this, we present a
Bayesian variant of DQN with the following three features: (i) It learns a distribution of Q-networks as AFs based on the Kullback-Leibler regularization framework.
This inherently provides the uncertainty required in sampling for BO and mitigates
overfitting. (ii) For the prior of the Bayesian DQN, we propose to use a demo policy
induced by an off-the-shelf AF for better training stability. (iii) On the meta-level,
we leverage the meta-loss of Bayesian model-agnostic meta-learning, which serves
as a natural companion to the proposed FSAF. Moreover, with the proper design of
the Q-networks, FSAF is general-purpose in that it is agnostic to the dimension and
the cardinality of the input domain. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the FSAF achieves comparable or better regrets than the state-of-the-art
benchmarks on a wide variety of synthetic and real-world test functions.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has served as a powerful and popular framework for global optimization
in many real-world tasks, such as hyperparameter tuning [1–4], robot control [5], automatic material
design [6–8], etc. To search for global optima under a small sampling budget and potentially noisy
observations, BO imposes a Gaussian process (GP) prior on the unknown black-box function and
continually updates the posterior as more samples are collected. BO relies on acquisition functions
(AFs) to determine the sample location, i.e., those with larger AF values are prioritized than those with
smaller ones. AFs are often designed to capture the trade-off between exploration and exploitation
of the global optima. The design of AFs has been extensively studied from various perspectives,
such as optimism in the face of uncertainty (e.g., GP-UCB [9]), optimizing information-theoretic
metrics (e.g., entropy search methods [10–12]), and maximizing one-step improvement (e.g., expected
improvement or EI [13, 14]). As a result, AFs are often handcrafted according to different perspectives
of the trade-off, and the best-performing AFs can vary significantly under different types of black-box
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

