Leveraging SE(3) Equivariance for Self-Supervised
Category-Level Object Pose Estimation

Xiaolong Li
Virginia Tech
lxiaol9@vt.edu

Yijia Weng
Peking University
halfsummer11@gmail.com

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University
guibas@cs.stanford.edu
Shuran Song
Columbia University
shurans@cs.columbia.edu

Li Yi
Tsinghua University
ericyi0124@gmail.com
A. Lynn Abbott
Virginia Tech
abbott@vt.edu

He Wang†
Peking University
hewang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Category-level object pose estimation aims to find 6D object poses of previously
unseen object instances from known categories without access to object CAD
models. To reduce the huge amount of pose annotations needed for categorylevel learning, we propose for the first time a self-supervised learning framework
to estimate category-level 6D object pose from single 3D point clouds. During
training, our method assumes no ground-truth pose annotations, no CAD models,
and no multi-view supervision. The key to our method is to disentangle shape
and pose through an invariant shape reconstruction module and an equivariant
pose estimation module, empowered by SE(3) equivariant point cloud networks.
The invariant shape reconstruction module learns to perform aligned reconstructions, yielding a category-level reference frame without using any annotations.
In addition, the equivariant pose estimation module achieves category-level pose
estimation accuracy that is comparable to some fully supervised methods. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on both complete and
partial depth point clouds from the ModelNet40 benchmark, and on real depth
point clouds from the NOCS-REAL 275 dataset. The project page with code and
visualizations can be found at: dragonlong.github.io/equi-pose.

1

Introduction

Object pose estimation is a crucial computer vision task that is widely employed in robotics, humanobject interaction, and augmented-reality applications. Previous work can be categorized broadly into
two genres: classic instance-level 6D object pose estimation (e.g., PoseCNN [25]), which assumes
the availability of exact CAD models for all object instances; and category-level 6D object pose
estimation (e.g., NOCS [23]), which defines a category-level reference frame and is able to generalize
to a category of object instances. The motivation underlying the category-level approach is to develop
systems that can accommodate novel object instances that were unseen during training. This approach
is therefore more applicable for general robotic vision systems (e.g., of a home robot) that must face
complex environments, such as those encountered in everyday situations.
†

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

