Fairness in Ranking under Uncertainty

Ashudeep Singh
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ashudeep@cs.cornell.edu

David Kempe
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
david.m.kempe@gmail.com

Thorsten Joachims
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
tj@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Fairness has emerged as an important consideration in algorithmic decision making.
Unfairness occurs when an agent with higher merit obtains a worse outcome than
an agent with lower merit. Our central point is that a primary cause of unfairness
is uncertainty. A principal or algorithm making decisions never has access to the
agents’ true merit, and instead uses proxy features that only imperfectly predict
merit (e.g., GPA, star ratings, recommendation letters). None of these ever fully
capture an agent’s merit; yet existing approaches have mostly been defining fairness
notions directly based on observed features and outcomes.
Our primary point is that it is more principled to acknowledge and model the
uncertainty explicitly. The role of observed features is to give rise to a posterior
distribution of the agents’ merits. We use this viewpoint to define a notion of
approximate fairness in ranking. We call an algorithm φ-fair (for φ ∈ [0, 1]) if it
has the following property for all agents x and all k: if agent x is among the top k
agents with respect to merit with probability at least ρ (according to the posterior
merit distribution), then the algorithm places the agent among the top k agents in
its ranking with probability at least φρ.
We show how to compute rankings that optimally trade off approximate fairness
against utility to the principal. In addition to the theoretical characterization, we
present an empirical analysis of the potential impact of the approach in simulation
studies. For real-world validation, we applied the approach in the context of a paper
recommendation system that we built and fielded at the KDD 2020 conference.

1

Introduction

Fairness is an important consideration in decision-making, in particular when a limited resource must
be allocated among multiple agents by a principal (or decision maker). A widely accepted tenet of
fairness is that if an agent B does not have stronger merits for the resource than A, then B should not
get more of the resource than A. Depending on the context, merit could be a qualification (e.g., job
performance), a need (e.g., disaster relief), or some other measure of eligibility.
The motivation for our work is that uncertainty about merits is a primary reason that a principal’s
allocations can violate this tenet and thereby lead to unfair outcomes. Were agents’ merits fully
observable, it would be both fair and in the principal’s best interest to rank agents by their merit.
However, actual merits are practically always unobservable. Consider the following standard algorithmic decision making environments: (1) An e-commerce or recommender platform (the principal)
displays items (the agents) in response to a user query. An item’s merit is the utility the user would
derive from it, whereas the platform can only observe numerical ratings, text reviews, the user’s
past history, and similar features. (2) A job recommendation site or employer (the principal) wants
to recommend/hire one or more applicants (the agents). The merit of an applicant is her (future)
performance on the job over a period of time, whereas the site or employer can only observe (past)
grades, test scores, recommendation letters, performance in interviews, and similar assessments.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

