Learning a Single Neuron with Bias
Using Gradient Descent

Gal Vardi∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
gal.vardi@weizmann.ac.il

Gilad Yehudai∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
gilad.yehudai@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We theoretically study the fundamental problem of learning a single neuron with a
bias term (x 7→ σ(hw, xi + b)) in the realizable setting with the ReLU activation,
using gradient descent. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that this is a significantly
different and more challenging problem than the bias-less case (which was the
focus of previous works on single neurons), both in terms of the optimization
geometry as well as the ability of gradient methods to succeed in some scenarios.
We provide a detailed study of this problem, characterizing the critical points of
the objective, demonstrating failure cases, and providing positive convergence
guarantees under different sets of assumptions. To prove our results, we develop
some tools which may be of independent interest, and improve previous results on
learning single neurons.

1

Introduction

Learning a single ReLU neuron with gradient descent is a fundamental primitive in the theory of
deep learning, and has been extensively studied in recent years. Indeed, in order to understand the
success of gradient descent on complicated neural networks, it seems reasonable to expect a satisfying
analysis of convergence on a single neuron. Although many previous works studied the problem of
learning a single neuron with gradient descent, none of them considered this problem with an explicit
bias term.
In this work, we study the common setting of learning a single neuron with respect to the squared
loss, using gradient descent. We focus on the realizable setting, where the inputs are drawn from
a distribution D on Rd+1 , and are labeled by a single target neuron of the form x 7→ σ(hv, xi),
where σ : R → R is some non-linear activation function. To capture the bias term, we assume
that the distribution D is such that its first d components are drawn from some distribution D̃ on
Rd , and the last component is a constant 1. Thus, the input x can be decomposed as (x̃, 1) with
x̃ ∼ D̃, the vector v can be decomposed as (ṽ, bv ), where ṽ ∈ Rd and bv ∈ R, and the target neuron
computes a function of the form x 7→ σ(hṽ, x̃i + bv ). Similarly, we can define the learned neuron as
x 7→ σ(hw̃, x̃i + bw ), where w = (w̃, bw ). Overall, we can write the objective function we wish to
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

