Detecting Individual Decision-Making Style:
Exploring Behavioral Stylometry in Chess
Reid McIlroy-Young
University of Toronto
reidmcy@cs.toronto.edu

Russell Wang
University of Toronto
russell@cs.toronto.edu

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University
kleinberg@cornell.edu

Siddhartha Sen
Microsoft Research
sidsen@microsoft.com

Ashton Anderson
University of Toronto
ashton@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The advent of machine learning models that surpass human decision-making ability
in complex domains has initiated a movement towards building AI systems that
interact with humans. Many building blocks are essential for this activity, with a
central one being the algorithmic characterization of human behavior. While much
of the existing work focuses on aggregate human behavior, an important long-range
goal is to develop behavioral models that specialize to individual people and can
differentiate among them.
To formalize this process, we study the problem of behavioral stylometry, in which
the task is to identify a decision-maker from their decisions alone. We present
a transformer-based approach to behavioral stylometry in the context of chess,
where one attempts to identify the player who played a set of games. Our method
operates in a few-shot classification framework, and can correctly identify a player
from among thousands of candidate players with 98% accuracy given only 100
labeled games. Even when trained on amateur play, our method generalises to outof-distribution samples of Grandmaster players, despite the dramatic differences
between amateur and world-class players. Finally, we consider more broadly
what our resulting embeddings reveal about human style in chess, as well as the
potential ethical implications of powerful methods for identifying individuals from
behavioral data.

1

Introduction

The advent of machine learning models that surpass human decision-making ability in complex
domains raises the prospect of building AI systems that can collaborate and interact productively
with humans. While many advances will be essential in order to achieve this far-reaching goal,
algorithmically characterizing aspects of human behavior will be a significant step. Whereas existing
work focuses on characterizing human behavior in an aggregate or generic sense, genuine human-AI
interaction will require specializing these characterizations to individual people.
Developing algorithms that can detect signatures of individual decision-making style would constitute
an important advance for many reasons. First, being able to recognize an individual from their
behavioural characteristics would greatly benefit an AI system’s ability to coordinate with that
individual. In general, decision-making styles can range from complementary to clashing, and a
predictive characterization of an individual’s decisions would be useful for an AI system trying to
adapt to their style. Second, such fine-grained, individual-level characterizations would help isolate
the distinguishing features of individual styles. In a domain where ML systems are able to match
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

