Differentiable Equilibrium Computation with
Decision Diagrams for Stackelberg Models of
Combinatorial Congestion Games

Shinsaku Sakaue
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Kengo Nakamura
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
kengo.nakamura.dx@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
We address Stackelberg models of combinatorial congestion games (CCGs); we
aim to optimize the parameters of CCGs so that the selfish behavior of non-atomic
players attains desirable equilibria. This model is essential for designing such social
infrastructures as traffic and communication networks. Nevertheless, computational
approaches to the model have not been thoroughly studied due to two difficulties:
(I) bilevel-programming structures and (II) the combinatorial nature of CCGs.
We tackle them by carefully combining (I) the idea of differentiable optimization
and (II) data structures called zero-suppressed binary decision diagrams (ZDDs),
which can compactly represent sets of combinatorial strategies. Our algorithm
numerically approximates the equilibria of CCGs, which we can differentiate with
respect to parameters of CCGs by automatic differentiation. With the resulting
derivatives, we can apply gradient-based methods to Stackelberg models of CCGs.
Our method is tailored to induce Nesterov’s acceleration and can fully utilize the
empirical compactness of ZDDs. These technical advantages enable us to deal with
CCGs with a vast number of combinatorial strategies. Experiments on real-world
network design instances demonstrate the practicality of our method.

1

Introduction

Congestion games (CGs) [49] form an important class of non-cooperative games and appear in various
resource allocation scenarios. Combinatorial CGs (CCGs) can model more complex situations where
each strategy is a combination of resources. A well-known example of a CCG is selfish routing [50],
where each player on a traffic network chooses an origin-destination path, which is a strategy given
by a combination of some roads with limited width (resources). Computing the outcomes of players’
selfish behaviors (or equilibria) is essential when designing social infrastructures such as traffic
networks. Therefore, how to compute equilibria of CCGs has been widely studied [5, 12, 57, 42].
In this paper, we are interested in the perspective of the leader who designs non-atomic CCGs. For
example, the leader aims to optimize some traffic-network parameters (e.g., road width values) so
that players can spend less traveling time at equilibrium. An equilibrium of non-atomic CCGs is
characterized by an optimum of potential function minimization [41, 53]. Thus, designing CCGs can
be seen as a Stackelberg game; the leader optimizes the parameters of CCGs to minimize an objective
function (typically, the social-cost function) while the follower, who represents the population of
selfish non-atomic players, minimizes the potential function. This mathematical formulation is called
the Stackelberg model in the context of traffic management [46]. Therefore, we call our model with
general combinatorial strategies a Stackelberg model of CCGs.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

