Differentially Private n-gram Extraction∗

Kunho Kim
Microsoft
kuki@microsoft.com

Sivakanth Gopi
Microsoft Research
sigopi@microsoft.com

Janardhan Kulkarni
Microsoft Research
jakul@microsoft.com

Sergey Yekhanin
Microsoft Research
yekhanin@microsoft.com

Abstract
We revisit the problem of n-gram extraction in the differential privacy setting. In
this problem, given a corpus of private text data, the goal is to release as many
n-grams as possible while preserving user level privacy. Extracting n-grams is a
fundamental subroutine in many NLP applications such as sentence completion,
response generation for emails etc. The problem also arises in other applications
such as sequence mining, and is a generalization of recently studied differentially
private set union (DPSU). In this paper, we develop a new differentially private
algorithm for this problem which, in our experiments, significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art. Our improvements stem from combining recent advances in DPSU,
privacy accounting, and new heuristics for pruning in the tree-based approach
initiated by Chen et al. (2012) [CAC12].

1

Introduction

We revisit the problem of n-gram extraction in the differential privacy setting. In this problem, we
are given a set of N users, and each user has some text data, which can be a collection of emails,
documents, or conversation history. An n-gram is any sequence of n consecutive words that appears
in the text associated with some user. For example, suppose there are two users u1 and u2 , and they
have texts “Serena Williams is a great tennis player” and “Erwin Schrodinger wrote a book called
What is Life”. Then, ‘great tennis player’ is a 3-gram as it appears in the text of u1 , ‘book called
What is Life’ is a valid 5-gram as it appears in the text of the u2 . On the other hand, ‘tennis player
Serena’ is not a 3-gram as that sequence does not appear in the text of either of the users. Similarly
‘wrote called What’ is not a 3-gram as it does not appear as a contiguous subsequence of either text.
Our goal is to extract as many n-grams2 as possible, of all different lengths up to some maximum
length T , while guaranteeing differential privacy.
Our motivation to study this question comes from its applications to Natural Language Processing
(NLP) problems. The applications such as suggested replies for e-mails and dialog systems rely on the
discovery of n-grams, and then training a DNN model to rank them [HLLC14, KKR+ 16, CLB+ 19,
DBS19]. However, n-grams used for training come from individuals, and may contain sensitive
information such as social security numbers, medical history, etc. Users may be left vulnerable if
personal information is revealed (inadvertently) by an NLP model. For example, a model could
complete a sentence or predict the next word that can potentially reveal personal information of the
Code available at https://github.com/microsoft/differentially-private-ngram-extraction
In some papers, an n-gram model specifically refers to a probabilistic prediction model based on Markov
chains. We do not make any probabilistic assumptions on how user data is generated.
∗

2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

