Online Market Equilibrium with Application to Fair
Division
Yuan Gao
Columbia University
gao.yuan@columbia.edu

Alex Peysakhovich
Facebook AI Research
alex.peys@gmail.com

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract
Computing market equilibria is a problem of both theoretical and applied interest.
Much research to date focuses on the case of static Fisher markets with full information on buyers’ utility functions and item supplies. Motivated by real-world
markets, we consider an online setting: individuals have linear, additive utility
functions; items arrive sequentially and must be allocated and priced irrevocably. We define the notion of an online market equilibrium in such a market as
time-indexed allocations and prices which guarantee buyer optimality and market
clearance in hindsight. We propose a simple, scalable and interpretable allocation
and pricing dynamics termed as PACE. When items are drawn i.i.d. from an unknown distribution (with a possibly continuous support), we show that PACE leads
to an online market equilibrium asymptotically. In particular, PACE ensures that
buyers’ time-averaged utilities converge to the equilibrium utilities w.r.t. a static
market with item supplies being the unknown distribution and that buyers’ timeaveraged expenditures converge to their per-period budget. Hence, many desirable
properties of market equilibrium-based fair division such as envy-freeness, Pareto
optimality, and the proportional-share guarantee are also attained asymptotically
in the online setting. Next, we extend the dynamics to handle quasilinear buyer
utilities, which gives the first online algorithm for computing first-price pacing
equilibria. Finally, numerical experiments on real and synthetic datasets show that
the dynamics converges quickly under various metrics.

1

Introduction

A market is said to be in equilibrium when supply is equal to demand. Computing prices and
allocations which constitute a market equilibrium (ME) has long been a topic of interest [17, 20,
28, 31, 38, 43]. Most existing work focuses on the case of static markets. However, in this paper
we consider the case of online markets where items arrive sequentially. We consider the extension
of market equilibrium to this setting and provide market dynamics which quickly converge to an
equilibrium in the case of online Fisher markets.
In static Fisher markets there is a fixed supply of each item, individual preferences are linear, additive,
and items are divisible (or equivalently, randomization is allowed so individuals can purchase not just
items but lotteries over items). In general, finding market equilibria is a hard problem [14, 39, 47].
However, in static linear Fisher markets, equilibrium prices and allocations can be computed via
solving the Eisenberg-Gale (EG) convex program [22, 37].
We consider an online extension of Fisher markets where buyers are constantly present but items
arrive one-at-a-time. Buyers’ budgets are per-period and represent their respective ‘bidding powers’
instead of being binding constraints. We extend the definition of market equilibrium to the online
setting: online equilibrium allocations and prices are time-indexed and, when averaged across time,
form an equilibrium in a corresponding static Fisher market where item supplies are proportional
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

