Learning rule influences recurrent network
representations but not attractor structure in
decision-making tasks

Brandon McMahan Michael Kleinman Jonathan C. Kao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
{bmcmahan2025, michael.kleinman}@ucla.edu
kao@seas.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are popular tools for studying computational
dynamics in neurobiological circuits. However, due to the dizzying array of design
choices, it is unclear if computational dynamics unearthed from RNNs provide
reliable neurobiological inferences. Understanding the effects of design choices on
RNN computation is valuable in two ways. First, invariant properties that persist
in RNNs across a wide range of design choices are more likely to be candidate
neurobiological mechanisms. Second, understanding what design choices lead to
similar dynamical solutions reduces the burden of imposing that all design choices
be totally faithful replications of biology. We focus our investigation on how RNN
learning rule and task design affect RNN computation. We trained large populations
of RNNs with different, but commonly used, learning rules on decision-making
tasks inspired by neuroscience literature. For relatively complex tasks, we find that
attractor topology is invariant to the choice of learning rule, but representational
geometry is not. For simple tasks, we find that attractor topology depends on task
input noise. However, when a task becomes increasingly complex, RNN attractor
topology becomes invariant to input noise. Together, our results suggest that RNN
dynamics are robust across learning rules but can be sensitive to the training task
design, especially for simpler tasks.

1

Introduction

Computational neuroscientists have increasingly used recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to model
cortical computation and gain insight into how the brain performs cognitive and motor tasks. Typically,
neuroscientists design RNNs to model a particular brain region during a behavioral task by generating
an artificial dataset that abstracts the task. RNNs are trained to perform this task and often exhibit
similar representations and low-dimensional dynamics to neural population recordings. This similarity
is used to argue that the RNN is a good model of the brain circuit’s computations and neural dynamics.
In this way, RNNs have been successfully used to study cognitive tasks, including decision-making
and working memory [1–7], as well as motor tasks [8–12]. Because RNN parameters are fully
observed, trained RNNs can be analyzed to propose new hypotheses for how these computations are
carried out in the brain [13].
One potential concern of this approach is that there are significant differences between RNNs and
biological circuits. Further, RNNs may exhibit different representations and dynamics as a result
of design choices, such as hyperparameters and architectures. Maheswaranathan, Williams, et al.
[14] investigated whether there were any universal properties across recurrent architectures and
activation functions. They found through a numerical study that RNNs tend to exhibit different
representations across architectures (RNN, GRU, LSTM, UGRNN) and activation function (relu, tanh)
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

