Towards understanding retrosynthesis by
energy-based models
Ruoxi Sun1 , Hanjun Dai2 , Li Li3 , Steven Kearnes3 , and Bo Dai2
1

Google Cloud AI 2 Google Brain 3 Google Research
{ruoxis, hadai, leeley, kearnes, bodai}@google.com

Abstract
Retrosynthesis is the process of identifying a set of reactants to synthesize a target
molecule. It is critical to material design and drug discovery. Existing machine
learning approaches based on language models and graph neural networks have
achieved encouraging results. However, the inner connections of these models are
rarely discussed, and rigorous evaluations of these models are largely in need. In
this paper, we propose a framework that unifies sequence- and graph-based methods
as energy-based models (EBMs) with different energy functions. This unified
view establishes connections and reveals the differences between models, thereby
enhances our understanding of model design. We also provide a comprehensive
assessment of performance to the community. Additionally, we present a novel
dual variant within the framework that performs consistent training to induce the
agreement between forward- and backward-prediction. This model improves the
state-of-the-art of template-free methods with or without reaction types.
Retrosynthesis is a critical problem in organic chemistry and drug discovery [1–5]. As the reverse
process of chemical synthesis [6, 7], retrosynthesis aims to find the set of reactants that can synthesize
the provided target via chemical reactions (Fig 1). Since the search space of theoretically feasible
reactant candidates is enormous, models should be designed carefully to have the expression power
to learn complex chemical rules and maintain computational efficiency.
Recent machine learning applications on retrosynthesis, including sequence- and graph-based models, have Input: Product
Output: Reactants
made significant progress [3, 8, 9]. Sequence-based
models treat molecules as one-dimensional token sequences (SMILES [10], bottom of Fig 1) and formulate retrosynthesis as a sequence-to-sequence problem,
ClCc1ccncc1
Cc1ccc(-n2c(S)nc3c
where recent advances in neural machine translation Cc1ccc(-n2c(SCc3ccnc
c3)nc3ccccc3c2=O)cc1
cccc3c2=O)cc1
[11, 12] can be applied. In this principle, the LSTMbased encoder-decoder frameworks and, more recently, Figure 1: Retrosynthesis and SMILES.
transformer-based approaches have achieved promising
results [13, 12, 14]. On the other hand, graph-based models have a natural representation of humaninterpretable molecular graphs, where chemical rules are easily applied. Graph-based approaches
that perform graph matching with templates (e.g. chemical rules) or reaction centers have reached
encouraging results. Among those, G2Gs [15], RetroXpert [16] and GraphRETRO [17] outperform
template-based methods by inferring reaction centers in a supervised way. In this paper, we focus on
one-step retrosynthesis, which is also the foundation of multi-step retrosynthesis [3].
O

O

N

S

N

Cl

N

N

N

N

HS

Our goal here is to provide a unified view of both sequence- and graph-based retrosynthesis models
using an energy-based model (EBM) framework. It is beneficial because: First, the model design with
EBM is very flexible. Within this framework, both types of models can be formulated as different
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

