Gradient-based Hyperparameter Optimization
Over Long Horizons

Paul Micaelli
University of Edinburgh
{paul.micaelli}@ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
University of Edinburgh
{a.storkey}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Gradient-based hyperparameter optimization has earned a widespread popularity
in the context of few-shot meta-learning, but remains broadly impractical for tasks
with long horizons (many gradient steps), due to memory scaling and gradient
degradation issues. A common workaround is to learn hyperparameters online, but
this introduces greediness which comes with a significant performance drop. We
propose forward-mode differentiation with sharing (FDS), a simple and efficient
algorithm which tackles memory scaling issues with forward-mode differentiation,
and gradient degradation issues by sharing hyperparameters that are contiguous in
time. We provide theoretical guarantees about the noise reduction properties of our
algorithm, and demonstrate its efficiency empirically by differentiating through
∼ 104 gradient steps of unrolled optimization. We consider large hyperparameter
search ranges on CIFAR-10 where we significantly outperform greedy gradientbased alternatives, while achieving ×20 speedups compared to the state-of-the-art
black-box methods. Code is available at: https://github.com/polo5/FDS

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown tremendous success on a wide range of applications, including
classification [1], generative models [2], natural language processing [3] and speech recognition [4].
This success is in part due to effective optimizers such as SGD with momentum or Adam [5],
which require carefully tuned hyperparameters for each application. In recent years, a long list
of heuristics to tune such hyperparameters has been compiled by the deep learning community,
including things like: how to best decay the learning rate [6], how to scale hyperparameters with
the budget available [7], and how to scale learning rate with batch size [8]. Unfortunately these
heuristics are often dataset specific and architecture dependent [9]. They also don’t apply well to new
optimizers [10], or new tools, like batch normalization which allows for larger learning rates [11].
With so many ways to choose hyperparameters, the deep learning community is at risk of adopting
models based on how much effort went into tuning them, rather than their methodological insight.
The field of hyperparameter optimization (HPO) aims to find hyperparameters that provide a good
generalization performance automatically. Unfortunately, existing tools are rather unpopular for
deep learning, largely owing to their computational cost. The method developed here is a gradientbased HPO approach; that is, it calculates hypergradients, i.e. the gradient of some validation loss
with respect to each hyperparameter. Gradient-based HPO should be more efficient than black-box
methods as the dimensionality of the hyperparameter space increases, since it is able to utilize gradient
information rather than rely on trial and error. In practice however, learning hyperparameters with
gradients has only been popular in few-shot learning tasks where the horizon is short, i.e. where the
underlying task is solved with a few gradient steps. This is because long horizons cause hypergradient
degradation, and incur a memory cost that makes reverse-mode differentiation prohibitive.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

