QuPeD: Quantized Personalization via Distillation
with Applications to Federated Learning

Kaan Ozkara
University of California, Los Angeles
kaan@ucla.edu

Navjot Singh
University of California, Los Angeles
navjotsingh@ucla.edu

Deepesh Data
University of California, Los Angeles
deepesh.data@gmail.com

Suhas Diggavi
University of California, Los Angeles
suhas@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Traditionally, federated learning (FL) aims to train a single global model while
collaboratively using multiple clients and a server. Two natural challenges that
FL algorithms face are heterogeneity in data across clients and collaboration
of clients with diverse resources. In this work, we introduce a quantized and
personalized FL algorithm QuPeD that facilitates collective (personalized model
compression) training via knowledge distillation (KD) among clients who have
access to heterogeneous data and resources. For personalization, we allow clients
to learn compressed personalized models with different quantization parameters
and model dimensions/structures. Towards this, first we propose an algorithm
for learning quantized models through a relaxed optimization problem, where
quantization values are also optimized over. When each client participating in
the (federated) learning process has different requirements for the compressed
model (both in model dimension and precision), we formulate a compressed
personalization framework by introducing knowledge distillation loss for local
client objectives collaborating through a global model. We develop an alternating
proximal gradient update for solving this compressed personalization problem,
and analyze its convergence properties. Numerically, we validate that QuPeD
outperforms competing personalized FL methods, FedAvg, and local training of
clients in various heterogeneous settings.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a learning procedure where the aim is to utilize vast amount of data
residing in numerous (in millions) edge devices (clients) to train machine learning models without
collecting clients’ data [26]. Formally, if there are n clients and fi denotes the local loss function at
client i, then traditional FL learns a single global model by minimizing
n


1X
arg min f (w) :=
fi (w) .
n i=1
w∈Rd

(1)

It has been realized lately that a single model may not provide good performance to all the clients in
settings where data is distributed heterogeneously. This leads to the need for personalized learning,
where each client wants to learn its own model [7, 8]. Since a locally learned client model may not
generalize well due to insufficient data, in personalized FL process, clients maintain personalized
models locally and utilize other clients’ data via a global model. Resource diversity among clients,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

