Efficient Combination of Rematerialization and
Offloading for Training DNNs

Olivier Beaumont

Lionel Eyraud-Dubois

Alena Shilova

Inria Bordeaux
{olivier.beaumont, lionel.eyraud-dubois, alena.shilova}@inria.fr

Abstract
Rematerialization and offloading are two well known strategies to save memory
during the training phase of deep neural networks, allowing data scientists to
consider larger models, batch sizes or higher resolution data. Rematerialization
trades memory for computation time, whereas Offloading trades memory for data
movements. As these two resources are independent, it is appealing to consider
the simultaneous combination of both strategies to save even more memory. We
precisely model the costs and constraints corresponding to Deep Learning frameworks such as PyTorch or Tensorflow, we propose optimal algorithms to find a
valid sequence of memory-constrained operations and finally, we evaluate the performance of proposed algorithms on realistic networks and computation platforms.
Our experiments show that the possibility to offload can remove one third of the
overhead of rematerialization, and that together they can reduce the memory used
for activations by a factor 4 to 6, with an overhead below 20%.

1

Introduction

A general trend in machine learning, especially in NLP today, is to increase the size of models to
improve accuracy. For example, NLP models like BERT [7] or GPT-3 [30] have billions of parameters
and vision networks like EfficientNet [35], AmoebaNet [34] or SENET [15] routinely have a hundred
million parameters, which raises difficult memory issues on architectures like GPUs. Moreover, it
was observed [29] that a sufficiently large batch-size is required to obtain good and fast convergence.
In this paper we focus on the strategies for reducing the memory usage of activations that can be
implemented when considering a single computation node, typically a single GPU. These techniques
can of course be combined with the different possible parallelizations of the training phase, like data
parallelism [39, 27, 11], model parallelism [25, 37, 26], filter or kernel [9] or image parallelisms [8].
The combination with parallel strategies is however out of the scope of the present paper and our
goal here is to model, analyze the complexity and understand how to benefit simultaneously from
rematerialization and offloading.
Rematerialization [14, 5, 20, 3] is a technique that consists in deleting from memory some of the
activations computed during the forward phase as soon as they are no longer needed for the forward
phase. As these activations are required again during the backward phase, they are then recomputed
from other activations kept in memory. The idea is therefore to trade additional computations for
lower memory requirements. The objective, in the context of rematerialization, is to compute a
sequence of valid operations (i.e. such that the inputs of any operation are actually in memory at
the time of the operation) consisting of elementary forward, backward and delete operations, and
which has a minimum execution time among all sequences that satisfy a given memory constraint.
Offloading [32, 2, 23, 4] is a technique that has the same objective, i.e. to produce a sequence of
operations satisfying a given memory constraint. However, in the case of offloading, each computation
operation is executed exactly once.The idea here is therefore to trade transfers on the PCI bus between
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

