Variational Automatic Curriculum Learning for
Sparse-Reward Cooperative Multi-Agent Problems

Jiayu Chen 1] , Yuanxin Zhang1 , Yuanfan Xu1 , Huimin Ma3 ,
Huazhong Yang1 , Jiaming Song4 , Yu Wang1 , Yi Wu12\
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute,
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing, 4 Stanford University,
]
jia768167535@gmail.com, \ jxwuyi@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a curriculum learning algorithm, Variational Automatic Curriculum
Learning (VACL), for solving challenging goal-conditioned cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning problems. We motivate our paradigm through a
variational perspective, where the learning objective can be decomposed into two
terms: task learning on the current task distribution, and curriculum update to a
new task distribution. Local optimization over the second term suggests that the
curriculum should gradually expand the training tasks from easy to hard. Our VACL
algorithm implements this variational paradigm with two practical components, task
expansion and entity progression, which produces training curricula over both the
task configurations as well as the number of entities in the task. Experiment results
show that VACL solves a collection of sparse-reward problems with a large number
of agents. Particularly, using a single desktop machine, VACL achieves 98%
coverage rate with 100 agents in the simple-spread benchmark and reproduces the
ramp-use behavior originally shown in OpenAI’s hide-and-seek project. Our project
website is at https://sites.google.com/view/vacl-neurips-2021.

1

Introduction

Building intelligent agents in complex multi-agent games remains a long-standing challenge in
artificial intelligence [23]. Recently, it has been a trend to apply multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) to extremely challenging multi-agent games, such as Dota II [5], StarCraft II [29] and
Hanabi [3]. Despite these successes, learning intelligent multi-agent policies in general still remains
a great RL challenge. Multi-agent games allow sophisticated interactions between agents and
environment. Feasible solutions may require non-trivial intra-agent coordination, which leads to
substantially more complex strategies than the single-agent setting. Moreover, as the number of
agents increases, the joint action space grows at an exponential rate, which results in an exponentially
large policy search space. Thus, most existing MARL applications typically require shaped rewards,
or assume simplified environment dynamics, or only handle a limit number of agents.
We tackle goal-conditioned cooperative MARL problems with sparse rewards through a novel variational inference perspective. Assuming each task can be parameterized by a continuous representation,
we introduce a variational proposal distribution over the task space and then decomposing the overall
training objective into two separate terms, i.e., a policy improvement term and a task proposal update
term. By treating the proposal distribution updates as the training curriculum, such a variational
objective naturally suggests a curriculum learning framework by alternating between curriculum
update and MARL training. In addition, we propose a continuous relaxation technique for discrete
variables so that the variational curricula can be also applied over the number of agents and objects in
the task, which leads to a generic and unified training paradigm for the cooperative MARL setting.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

