Exploring the Limits of Out-of-Distribution Detection
Stanislav Fort⇤
Stanford University
sfort1@stanford.edu

Jie Ren⇤
Google Research, Brain Team
jjren@google.com

Balaji Lakshminarayanan
Google Research, Brain Team
balajiln@google.com

Abstract
Near out-of-distribution detection (OOD) is a major challenge for deep neural
networks. We demonstrate that large-scale pre-trained transformers can significantly improve the state-of-the-art (SOTA) on a range of near OOD tasks across
different data modalities. For instance, on CIFAR-100 vs CIFAR-10 OOD detection, we improve the AUROC from 85% (current SOTA) to 96% using Vision
Transformers pre-trained on ImageNet-21k. On a challenging genomics OOD detection benchmark, we improve the AUROC from 66% to 77% using transformers
and unsupervised pre-training. To further improve performance, we explore the
few-shot outlier exposure setting where a few examples from outlier classes may
be available; we show that pre-trained transformers are particularly well-suited for
outlier exposure, and that the AUROC of OOD detection on CIFAR-100 vs CIFAR10 can be improved to 98.7% with just 1 image per OOD class, and 99.46% with
10 images per OOD class. For multi-modal image-text pre-trained transformers
such as CLIP, we explore a new way of using just the names of outlier classes as a
sole source of information without any accompanying images, and show that this
outperforms previous SOTA on standard vision OOD benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are increasingly used in high-stakes applications such as healthcare [Roy et al.,
2021, Ren et al., 2019]. Safe deployment of models requires that models not only be accurate but
also be robust to distribution shift [Amodei et al., 2016]. Neural networks can assign high-confidence
predictions to mis-classified inputs [Guo et al., 2017, Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017] as well as test
inputs that do not belong to one of the training classes [Nguyen et al., 2015]. This motivates the
need for methods that can reliably detect out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs. There has been a lot of
progress in detecting OOD inputs including methods based on discriminative models [Hendrycks and
Gimpel, 2016, Lee et al., 2018, Liang et al., 2017, Liu et al., 2020] as well as methods based on deep
generative models [Nalisnick et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2020].
The difficulty of the OOD detection task depends on how semantically close the outliers are to the
inlier classes. Winkens et al. [2020] distinguish between near-OOD tasks which are harder and
far-OOD tasks which are easier, as evidenced by the difference in state-of-the-art (SOTA) for area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). For instance, for a model trained on
CIFAR-100 (which consists of classes such as mammals, fish, flowers, fruits, household devices,
trees, vehicles, insects, etc), a far-OOD task would be detecting digits from the street-view house
numbers (SVHN) dataset as outliers. For the same model, detecting images from the CIFAR-10
dataset (which consists of the following 10 classes: airplane, automobile, bird, cat, deer, dog, frog,
horse, ship, truck) would be considered a near-OOD task, which is more difficult as the classes are
semantically similar. There has been impressive progress on far-OOD detection, for instance there
are several approaches which can achieve AUROC close to 99% on CIFAR-100 (in) vs SVHN (out)
task, cf. [Sastry and Oore, 2020]. However, the state-of-the-art for near-OOD detection is much
lower, for instance the SOTA AUROC for CIFAR-100 (in) vs CIFAR-10 (out) task is around 85%
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

