Robust Visual Reasoning via Language Guided
Neural Module Networks
Arjun R. Akula1 , Varun Jampani2 , Soravit Changpinyo2 , Song-Chun Zhu3,4,5
UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy, 2 Google Research
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI),
4
Tsinghua University, 5 Peking University
aakula@ucla.edu, {varunjampani,schangpi}@google.com
s.c.zhu@pku.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Neural module networks (NMN) are a popular approach for solving multi-modal
tasks such as visual question answering (VQA) and visual referring expression
recognition (REF). A key limitation in prior implementations of NMN is that
the neural modules do not effectively capture the association between the visual
input and the relevant neighbourhood context of the textual input. This limits
their generalizability. For instance, NMN fail to understand new concepts such
as “yellow sphere to the left" even when it is a combination of known concepts
from train data: “blue sphere", “yellow cube", and “metallic cube to the left". In
this paper, we address this limitation by introducing a language-guided adaptive
convolution layer (LG-Conv) into NMN, in which the filter weights of convolutions
are explicitly multiplied with a spatially varying language-guided kernel. Our
model allows the neural module to adaptively co-attend over potential objects of
interest from the visual and textual inputs. Extensive experiments on VQA and
REF tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Additionally, we propose
a new challenging out-of-distribution test split for REF task, which we call C3Ref+, for explicitly evaluating the NMN’s ability to generalize well to adversarial
perturbations and unseen combinations of known concepts. Experiments on C3Ref+ further demonstrate the generalization capabilities of our approach.

1

Introduction

Visual question answering (VQA) [11, 8, 7] and visual referring expression recognition (REF) [37, 27]
are fundamental language-to-vision matching tasks that have several downstream applications such
as robot navigation, image retrieval, and natural language interfaces [42, 50, 4, 3, 39]. The highlevel goal of these tasks is to perform joint reasoning over visual and textual queries. In the
recent years, neural module networks (NMN) [10, 20, 33] attracted increasing attention due to their
superior performance on these tasks [33, 26]. Briefly, NMN models learn to parse textual queries
as executable programs composed of learnable neural modules. Each of these modules implements
a single step of reasoning (e.g. count, filter, compare) and are dynamically assembled to
perform multi-step reasoning over text. In addition to the good performance, NMN also provide
high model interpretability thanks to their transparent, hierarchical and semantically motivated
architecture [45, 5, 6, 32].
Despite great success, the current NMN implementations require a large amount of training data and
are less effective in generalizing to unseen but known language constructs [29, 13, 51]. For example,
NMN fail to understand new concepts such as “yellow sphere to the left" that are constructed using a
combinations of known concepts from train data such as “blue sphere", “yellow cube", and “metallic
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

