Argmax Flows and Multinomial Diffusion:
Learning Categorical Distributions
Emiel Hoogeboom1⇤ , Didrik Nielsen2⇤ , Priyank Jaini1 , Patrick Forré3 , Max Welling1
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam1 ,
Technical University of Denmark2 , University of Amsterdam3
didni@dtu.dk, e.hoogeboom@uva.nl, p.jaini@uva.nl,
p.d.forre@uva.nl, m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
Generative flows and diffusion models have been predominantly trained on ordinal
data, for example natural images. This paper introduces two extensions of flows
and diffusion for categorical data such as language or image segmentation: Argmax
Flows and Multinomial Diffusion. Argmax Flows are defined by a composition of
a continuous distribution (such as a normalizing flow), and an argmax function.
To optimize this model, we learn a probabilistic inverse for the argmax that lifts
the categorical data to a continuous space. Multinomial Diffusion gradually adds
categorical noise in a diffusion process, for which the generative denoising process
is learned. We demonstrate that our method outperforms existing dequantization
approaches on text modelling and modelling on image segmentation maps in
log-likelihood.

1

Introduction

Many sources of high-dimensional data are categorical, for example language and image segmentation. Although natural images have been
studied to a large extent with generative flows
and diffusion models, categorical data has not
had the same extensive treatment. Currently
they are primarily modelled by autoregressive
models, which are expensive to sample from
(Cooijmans et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019).

(a) Argmax Flow: Composition of a flow p(v) and
argmax transformation which gives the model P (x).
The flow maps from a base distribution p(z) using a
bijection g.

Normalizing flows are attractive because they
can be designed to be fast both in the evaluation
and sampling direction. Typically, normalizing
flows model continuous distributions. As a re- (b) Multinomial Diffusion: Each step p(xt 1 |xt ) desult, directly optimizing a flow on discrete data noises the signal starting from a uniform categorical
may lead to arbitrarily high likelihoods. In lit- base distribution which gives the model p(x0 ).
erature this problem is resolved for ordinal data
Figure 1: Overview of generative models.
by adding noise in a unit interval around the discrete value (Uria et al., 2013; Theis et al., 2016; Ho et al., 2019). However, because these methods
have been designed for ordinal data, they do not work well on categorical data.
Other attractive generative models are diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), which are fast
to train due to an objective that decomposes over time steps (Ho et al., 2020). Diffusion models
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

