An Online Method for A Class of Distributionally
Robust Optimization with Non-Convex Objectives

Qi Qi†∗, Zhishuai Guo†∗, Yi Xu‡ , Rong Jin‡ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242
‡
Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group
{qi-qi, zhishuai-guo, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu,{yixu, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com
†

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a practical online method for solving a class of distributionally robust optimization (DRO) with non-convex objectives, which has
important applications in machine learning for improving the robustness of neural
networks. In the literature, most methods for solving DRO are based on stochastic
primal-dual methods. However, primal-dual methods for DRO suffer from several
drawbacks: (1) manipulating a high-dimensional dual variable corresponding to
the size of data is time expensive; (2) they are not friendly to online learning where
data is coming sequentially. To address these issues, we consider a class of DRO
with an KL divergence regularization on the dual variables, transform the minmax problem into a compositional minimization problem, and propose practical
duality-free online stochastic methods without requiring a large mini-batch size.
We establish the state-of-the-art complexities of the proposed methods with and
without a Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) condition of the objective. Empirical studies
on large-scale deep learning tasks (i) demonstrate that our method can speed up
the training by more than 2 times than baseline methods and save days of training
time on a large-scale dataset with ∼ 265K images, and (ii) verify the supreme
performance of DRO over Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) on imbalanced
datasets. Of independent interest, the proposed method can be also used for solving
a family of stochastic compositional problems with state-of-the-art complexities.

1

Introduction

Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has received tremendous attention in machine learning due
to its capability to handle noisy data, adversarial data and imbalanced classification data [42, 33, 4].
Given a set of observed data {z1 , . . . , zn }, where zi = (xi , yi ), a DRO formulation can be written
as:
min max Fp (w) =

w∈Rd p∈∆n

n
X

pi `(w; zi ) − h(p, 1/n) + r(w),

(1)

i=1

P
where w denotes the model parameter, ∆n = {p ∈ Rn :
i pi = 1, pi ≥ 0} denotes a ndimensional simplex, `(w; z) denotes a loss function on data z, h(p, 1/n) is a divergence measure
between p and uniform probabilities 1/n, and r(w) is convex regularizer of w. When `(w; z) is
a convex function (e.g., for learning a linear model), many stochastic primal-dual methods can be
employed for solving the above min-max problem [35, 20, 49, 48, 32]. When `(w; z) is a non-convex
function (e.g., for learning a deep neural network), some recent studies also proposed stochastic
primal-dual methods [41, 48].
∗

The first two authors make equal contributions. Correspondence to tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

