Learning Frequency Domain Approximation for
Binary Neural Networks

Yixing Xu1 , Kai Han1 , Chang Xu2 , Yehui Tang1,3 , Chunjing Xu1 , Yunhe Wang∗1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2
The University of Sydney 3 Peking University
{yixing.xu, kai.han, tangyehui, xuchunjing, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com
c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Binary neural networks (BNNs) represent original full-precision weights and activations into 1-bit with sign function. Since the gradient of the conventional sign
function is almost zero everywhere which cannot be used for back-propagation,
several attempts have been proposed to alleviate the optimization difficulty by
using approximate gradient. However, those approximations corrupt the main
direction of factual gradient. To this end, we propose to estimate the gradient of sign function in the Fourier frequency domain using the combination
of sine functions for training BNNs, namely frequency domain approximation
(FDA). The proposed approach does not affect the low-frequency information
of the original sign function which occupies most of the overall energy, and
high-frequency coefficients will be ignored to avoid the huge computational overhead. In addition, we embed a noise adaptation module into the training phase
to compensate the approximation error. The experiments on several benchmark
datasets and neural architectures illustrate that the binary network learned using our method achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy. Code will be available at
https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/FDA-BNN.

1

Introduction

The success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has been well demonstrated in several
real-world applications, e.g., image classification [24, 35, 59, 16], object detection [42], semantic
segmentation [34], and low-level computer vision [46]. Massive parameters and huge computational complexity are usually required for achieving the desired high performance, which limits the
application of these models to portable devices such as mobile phones and smart cameras.
In order to reduce the computational costs of deep neural networks, a number of works have
been proposed to compress and accelerate the original cumbersome model into a portable one.
For example, filter pruning methods [33, 60, 8, 58, 47, 48] aim to sort the filters based on their
importance scores in which unimportant filters will be treated as redundancy and removed to derive
lightweight architectures. Knowledge distillation methods [19, 36, 5, 52, 51] are explored to transfer
the knowledge inside a teacher model to a student model. Tensor decomposition method [40]
decomposes the original large weight tensor into several small ones to simplify the overall inference
process. Model quantization methods [13, 22, 54, 32, 31] quantize the widely used 32-bit floating
point weights and activations into low-bit ones to save the memory consumption and computational
cost.
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

