Selective Sampling for Online Best-arm Identification
Romain Camilleri∗, Zhihan Xiong∗, Maryam Fazel, Lalit Jain, Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
{camilr,zhihanx,mfazel,lalitj,jamieson}@uw.edu

Abstract
This work considers the problem of selective-sampling for best-arm identification.
Given a set of potential options Z ⊂ Rd , a learner aims to compute with probability
greater than 1 − δ, arg maxz∈Z z > θ∗ where θ∗ is unknown. At each time step,
a potential measurement xt ∈ X ⊂ Rd is drawn IID and the learner can either
choose to take the measurement, in which case they observe a noisy measurement
of x> θ∗ , or to abstain from taking the measurement and wait for a potentially more
informative point to arrive in the stream. Hence the learner faces a fundamental
trade-off between the number of labeled samples they take and when they have
collected enough evidence to declare the best arm and stop sampling. The main
results of this work precisely characterize this trade-off between labeled samples
and stopping time and provide an algorithm that nearly-optimally achieves the
minimal label complexity given a desired stopping time. In addition, we show that
the optimal decision rule has a simple geometric form based on deciding whether a
point is in an ellipse or not. Finally, our framework is general enough to capture
binary classification improving upon previous works.

1

Introduction

In this work we consider selective sampling for online best-arm identification. In this setting, at every
time step t = 1, 2, . . . , Nature reveals a potential measurement xt ∈ X ⊂ Rd to the learner. The
learner can choose to either query xt (ξt = 1) or abstain (ξt = 0) and immediately move on to the next
time. If the learner chooses to take a query (ξt = 1), then Nature reveals a noisy linear measurement
of an unknown θ∗ ∈ Rd , i.e. yt = hxt , θ∗ i + t where t is mean zero sub-Gaussian noise. Before
the start of the game, the learner has knowledge of a set Z ⊂ Rd . The objective of the learner is to
identify z∗ := arg maxz∈Z hz, θ∗ i with probability at least 1 − δ at a learner specified stopping time
U. It is desirable to minimize both the stopping time U which counts the total number of unlabeled or
PU
labeled queries and the number of labeled queries requested L := t=1 1{ξt = 1}. In this setting, at
each time t the learner must make the decision of whether to accept the available measurement xt , or
abstain and wait for an even more informative measurement. While abstention may result in a smaller
total labeled sample complexity L, the stopping time U may be very large. This paper characterizes
the set of feasible pairs (U, L) that are necessary and sufficient to identify z∗ with probability at
least 1 − δ when xt are drawn IID at each time t from a distribution ν. Moreover, we propose an
algorithm that nearly obtains the minimal information theoretic label sample complexity L for any
desired unlabeled sample complexity U.

While characterizing the sample complexity of selective sampling for online best arm identification is
the primary theoretical goal of this work, the study was initially motivated by fundamental questions
about how to optimally trade-off the value of information versus time. Even for this idealized linear
setting, it is far from obvious a priori what an optimal decision rule ξt looks like and if it can even be
succinctly described, or if it is simply the solution to an opaque optimization problem. Remarkably,
∗

Equal contribution. Alphabetical order.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

