Stability & Generalisation of Gradient Descent for
Shallow Neural Networks without the Neural Tangent
Kernel
Dominic Richards
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
24-29 St Giles’, Oxford, OX1 3LB
Dominic.Richards94@gmail.com

Ilja Kuzborskij
DeepMind
London
iljak@deepmind.com

Abstract
We revisit on-average algorithmic stability of Gradient Descent (GD) for training overparameterised shallow neural networks and prove new generalisation
and excess risk bounds without the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) or PolyakŁojasiewicz (PL) assumptions. In particular, we show oracle type bounds which
reveal that the generalisation and excess risk of GD is controlled by an interpolating
network with the shortest GD path from initialisation (in a sense, an interpolating
network with the smallest relative norm). While this was known for kernelised
interpolants, our proof applies directly to networks trained by GD without intermediate kernelisation. At the same time, by relaxing oracle inequalities developed
here we recover existing NTK-based risk bounds in a straightforward way, which
demonstrates that our analysis is tighter. Finally, unlike most of the NTK-based
analyses we focus on regression with label noise and show that GD with early
stopping is consistent.

1

Introduction

In a canonical statistical learning problem the learner is given a tuple of independently sampled
training examples S = (z1 , . . . , zn ), where each example zi = (xi , yi ) consists of an input xi and
label yi jointly distributed according to some unknown probability measure P . In the following we
assume that inputs belong to an Euclidean ball B2d (Cx ) of radius Cx and labels belong to [−Cy , Cy ].
Based on training examples the goal of the learner is to select parameters W from some parameter
space W in order to minimise the statistical risk
Z
def 1
2
L(W) =
(fW (x) − y) dP
2
where fW is a predictor parameterised by W. The
R best possible predictor in this setting is the
regression function f ? , which is defined as f ? (x) = y dPY |X=xR, while the minimum possible risk
is equal to the noise-rate of the problem, which is given by σ 2 = Z (f ? (x) − y)2 dP .
In this paper we will focus on a shallow neural network predictor that takes the form
def

fW (x) =

m
X

uk φ (hWk , xi)

x ∈ Rd , W ∈ Rd×m



k=1
√

m

defined with respect to some activation function φ : R → R, fixed output layer u ∈ {±1/ m} ,
and a tunable (possibly randomised) hidden layer W. In particular, we will consider fWT , where the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

