Gradient-Driven Rewards to Guarantee Fairness in
Collaborative Machine Learning

Xinyi Xu1,5∗, Lingjuan Lyu2∗, Xingjun Ma3 , Chenglin Miao4 ,
Chuan Sheng Foo5 , and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore1
Sony AI2 , School of Computer Science, Fudan University, People’s Republic of China3
Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia, USA4
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Republic of Singapore5
{xuxinyi,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg1 , lingjuan.lv@sony.com2
danxjma@gmail.com3 , cmiao@uga.edu4 , foo_chuan_sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg5

Abstract
In collaborative machine learning (CML), multiple agents pool their resources
(e.g., data) together for a common learning task. In realistic CML settings where
the agents are self-interested and not altruistic, they may be unwilling to share data
or model information without adequate rewards. Furthermore, as the data/model
information shared by the agents may differ in quality, designing rewards which are
fair to them is important so that they would not feel exploited nor discouraged from
sharing. In this paper, we adopt federated learning as the CML paradigm, propose
a novel cosine gradient Shapley value (CGSV) to fairly evaluate the expected
marginal contribution of each agent’s uploaded model parameter update/gradient
without needing an auxiliary validation dataset, and based on the CGSV, design
a novel training-time gradient reward mechanism with a fairness guarantee by
sparsifying the aggregated parameter update/gradient downloaded from the server
as reward to each agent such that its resulting quality is commensurate to that
of the agent’s uploaded parameter update/gradient. We empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness of our fair gradient reward mechanism on multiple benchmark
datasets in terms of fairness, predictive performance, and time overhead.

1

Introduction

In collaborative machine learning (CML), multiple agents (e.g., researchers, organizations, companies) pool their resources (e.g., data) together for a common learning task. It spans a wide variety
of real-world applications such as digital healthcare [49], clinical trial research [13, 23], wake word
detection for smart voice assistants [27], and next word prediction on mobile devices [15].
Federated learning (FL) provides a natural paradigm of CML [18, 29, 41, 43, 57, 62]. In FL, the
agents perform local model training (e.g., using stochastic gradient descent) and share their resulting
model parameter updates/gradients via a trusted server [40, 56, 59]. An important distinction of
our work here from the standard FL literature is that the agents are self-interested and hence not
necessarily cooperative like the worker nodes in distributed learning. The implication is that to
achieve competitive predictive performance for the learning task, it is imperative to incentivize/reward
the agents for contributing/sharing high-quality information in the form of model parameter updates/gradients [47, 48, 52].
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

