Sub-Linear Memory: How to Make Performers SLiM

Valerii Likhosherstov
University of Cambridge
vl304@cam.ac.uk

Krzysztof Choromanski
Google Brain & Columbia University

Jared Davis
DeepMind & Stanford University

Xingyou Song
Google Brain

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge & Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Transformer architectures have become very popular yet the original implementation requires O(L2 ) in serial time and memory as functions of input length L.
Recent works proposed various linear self-attention mechanisms, scaling only
as O(L) for serial computation. We conduct a thorough complexity analysis of
Performers, a class which includes most recent linear Transformer mechanisms.
We note a remarkable computational flexibility: the gradient computation can be
performed with no approximations using sublinear memory as a function of L
(in addition to negligible storage for the input sequence), at a cost of greater time
complexity in the parallel setting. In the extreme case, a Performer consumes
only O(1) memory, and still requires O(L) time. Due to complete backwardcompatibility, this discovered time-memory tradeoff can be used for fine-tuning on
low-memory devices in a decentralized fashion without any server computations.

1

Introduction

The Transformer architecture [38] has changed the landscape of deep learning for sequential data.
A computational advantage of Transformers over conventional methods such as recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) [17, 9] is parallelization over the sequence dimension, meaning that the training
speed can be increased by simply using more compute resources. However, this parallel-friendly
structure of self-attention comes at a cost of quadratic Θ(L2 ) time and memory complexity, where L
is the length of the Transformer’s input sequence.
A recent line of work aimed to address this restriction, using either structured sparsity [8], truncated
back-propagation [12], clustering [20, 31] or linear attention methods [18, 10, 11, 33, 23]. For a
detailed overview of efficient Transformers, see [37]. We refer to the family of linear attention
architectures as Performers (also known as Linear Transformers), following [11], since their generic
kernel formulation covers all the aforementioned linear attention methods. Performers reduce time
and memory complexity to linear O(L) and can provably approximate conventional quadratic Transformers [11], demonstrating strong performance in a systematic comparison of efficient Transformers
[36].
This recent trend of feeding longer sequences into Transformers, coupled with the use of deeper models, introduces new challenges for researchers and practitioners. Whereas conventional Transformer
setups benefit from large-batch optimization [42], long sequence modelling necessitates smaller batch
sizes in order to fit the model into memory. For example, recently proposed efficient Transformers
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

