Direct Multi-view Multi-person 3D Pose Estimation

Tao Wang1,2∗, Jianfeng Zhang2∗ , Yujun Cai1 , Shuicheng Yan1 , Jiashi Feng1 ,
1
Sea AI Lab 2 National University of Singapore,
twangnh@gmail.com,
zhangjianfeng@u.nus.edu,
{caiyj,yansc,fengjs}@sea.com

Abstract
We present Multi-view Pose transformer (MvP) for estimating multi-person 3D
poses from multi-view images. Instead of estimating 3D joint locations from costly
volumetric representation or reconstructing the per-person 3D pose from multiple
detected 2D poses as in previous methods, MvP directly regresses the multi-person
3D poses in a clean and efficient way, without relying on intermediate tasks.
Specifically, MvP represents skeleton joints as learnable query embeddings and
let them progressively attend to and reason over the multi-view information from
the input images to directly regress the actual 3D joint locations. To improve the
accuracy of such a simple pipeline, MvP presents a hierarchical scheme to concisely
represent query embeddings of multi-person skeleton joints and introduces an inputdependent query adaptation approach. Further, MvP designs a novel geometrically
guided attention mechanism, called projective attention, to more precisely fuse the
cross-view information for each joint. MvP also introduces a RayConv operation
to integrate the view-dependent camera geometry into the feature representations
for augmenting the projective attention. We show experimentally that our MvP
model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on several benchmarks while being
much more efficient. Notably, it achieves 92.3% AP25 on the challenging Panoptic
dataset, improving upon the previous best approach [40] by 9.8%. MvP is general
and also extendable to recovering human mesh represented by the SMPL model,
thus useful for modeling multi-person body shapes. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/sail-sg/mvp.

1

Introduction

Multi-view multi-person 3D pose estimation aims to localize 3D skeleton joints for each person
instance in a scene from multi-view camera inputs. It is a fundamental task that benefits many
real-world applications (such as surveillance, sportscast, gaming and mixed reality) and is mainly
tackled by reconstruction-based [6, 14, 4] and volumetric [40] approaches in previous literature, as
shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b). The former first estimates 2D poses in each view independently and then
aggregates them and reconstructs their 3D counterparts via triangulation or a 3D pictorial structure
model. The volumetric approach [40] builds a 3D feature volume through heatmap estimation and
2D-to-3D un-projection at first, based on which instance localization and 3D pose estimation are
performed for each person instance individually. Though with notable accuracy, the above paradigms
are inefficient due to highly relying on those intermediate tasks. Moreover, they estimate 3D pose for
each person separately, making the computation cost grow linearly with the number of persons.
Targeted at a more simplified and efficient pipeline, we were wondering if it is possible to directly
regress 3D poses from multi-view images without relying on any intermediate task? Though conceptually attractive, adopting such a direct mapping paradigm is highly non-trivial as it remains
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

