Shaping embodied agent behavior with
activity-context priors from egocentric video

Tushar Nagarajan
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research
tushar.nagarajan@utexas.edu

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research
grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Complex physical tasks entail a sequence of object interactions, each with its
own preconditions—which can be difficult for robotic agents to learn efficiently
solely through their own experience. We introduce an approach to discover activitycontext priors from in-the-wild egocentric video captured with human worn cameras. For a given object, an activity-context prior represents the set of other
compatible objects that are required for activities to succeed (e.g., a knife and
cutting board brought together with a tomato are conducive to cutting). We encode
our video-based prior as an auxiliary reward function that encourages an agent to
bring compatible objects together before attempting an interaction. In this way,
our model translates everyday human experience into embodied agent skills. We
demonstrate our idea using egocentric EPIC-Kitchens video of people performing
unscripted kitchen activities to benefit virtual household robotic agents performing
various complex tasks in AI2-iTHOR, significantly accelerating agent learning.
Project page: http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/ego-rewards/

1

Introduction

Embodied AI agents that are capable of moving around and interacting with objects in human spaces
promise important practical applications for home service robots, ranging from agents that can
search for misplaced items, to agents that can cook entire meals. The pursuit of such agents has
driven exciting new research in visual semantic planning [69], instruction following [59], and object
rearrangement [3, 30], typically supported by advanced simulators [46, 33, 58, 22] where policies
may be learned quickly and safely before potentially transferring to real robots. In such tasks, an
agent aims to perform a sequence of actions that will transform the visual environment from an initial
state to a goal state. This in turn requires jointly learning behaviors for both navigation, to move from
one place to another, and object interaction, to manipulate objects and modify the environment (e.g.,
pick-up objects, use tools and objects together, turn-on lights).
A key challenge is that changing the state of the environment involves context-sensitive actions that
depend on both the agent and environment’s current state—what the agent is holding, what other
objects are present nearby, and what their properties are. For example, to wash a plate, a plate must
be in the sink before the agent toggles-on the faucet; to slice an apple the agent must first be holding a
knife, and the apple must not already be sliced. Understanding these conditions is critical for efficient
learning and planning: the agent must first bring the environment into the proper precondition state
before attempting to perform a given activity with objects. We refer to these states as activity-contexts.
Despite its importance, current approaches do not explicitly model the activity-context. Pure reinforcement learning (RL) approaches directly search for goal states without considering preconditions.
This requires a large number of trials for the agent to chance upon suitable configurations, and
leads to poor sample efficiency or learning failures [69, 59]. Instead, most methods resort to collecting expert demonstrations to train imitation learning (IL) agents and optionally finetune with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

