Disentangling Identifiable Features from Noisy Data
with Structured Nonlinear ICA
Hermanni Hälvä1 ∗
Jonathan So4
2

Sylvain Le Corff2

Yongjie Zhu1

Luc Lehéricy3

Elisabeth Gassiat5 †

Aapo Hyvärinen1 †

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
Samovar, Télécom SudParis, département CITI, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
3
Laboratoire J. A. Dieudonné, Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, 06100, Nice, France
4
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
5
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France

Abstract
We introduce a new general identifiable framework for principled disentanglement
referred to as Structured Nonlinear Independent Component Analysis (SNICA).
Our contribution is to extend the identifiability theory of deep generative models
for a very broad class of structured models. While previous works have shown
identifiability for specific classes of time-series models, our theorems extend this to
more general temporal structures as well as to models with more complex structures
such as spatial dependencies. In particular, we establish the major result that
identifiability for this framework holds even in the presence of noise of unknown
distribution. Finally, as an example of our framework’s flexibility, we introduce
the first nonlinear ICA model for time-series that combines the following very
useful properties: it accounts for both nonstationarity and autocorrelation in a fully
unsupervised setting; performs dimensionality reduction; models hidden states; and
enables principled estimation and inference by variational maximum-likelihood.

1

Introduction

A central tenet of unsupervised deep learning is that noisy and high dimensional real world data is
generated by a nonlinear transformation of lower dimensional latent factors. Learning such lower
dimensional features is valuable as they may allow us to understand complex scientific observations
in terms of much simpler, semantically meaningful, representations (Morioka et al., 2020; Zhou and
Wei, 2020). Access to a ground truth generative model and its latent features would also greatly
enhance several other downstream tasks such as classification (Klindt et al., 2021; Banville et al.,
2021), transfer learning (Khemakhem et al., 2020b), as well as causal inference (Monti et al., 2019;
Wu and Fukumizu, 2020).
A recently popular approach to deep representation learning has been to learn disentangled features.
Whilst not rigorously defined, the general methodology has been to use deep generative models such
as VAEs (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Higgins et al., 2017) to estimate semantically distinct factors
of variation that generate and encode the data. A substantial problem with the vast majority of work
on disentanglement learning is that the models used are not identifiable – that is, they do not learn
the true generative features, even in the limit of infinite data – in fact, this task has been proven
∗
†

hermanni.halva@helsinki.fi
Equal senior authorship

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

