Multi-Facet Clustering Variational Autoencoders

Fabian Falck ∗ ,1,5 Haoting Zhang ∗,2,5 Matthew Willetts 3,6
George Nicholson 1 Christopher Yau 4,5,6 Chris Holmes 1,5,6
1
University of Oxford 2 University of Cambridge 3 University College London
4
University of Manchester 5 Health Data Research UK 6 The Alan Turing Institute
fabian.falck@stats.ox.ac.uk, hz381@cl.cam.ac.uk, mwilletts@turing.ac.uk,
george.nicholson@stats.ox.ac.uk, cyau@turing.ac.uk, cholmes@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Work in deep clustering focuses on finding a single partition of data. However,
high-dimensional data, such as images, typically feature multiple interesting characteristics one could cluster over. For example, images of objects against a background could be clustered over the shape of the object and separately by the colour
of the background. In this paper, we introduce Multi-Facet Clustering Variational
Autoencoders (MFCVAE), a novel class of variational autoencoders with a hierarchy
of latent variables, each with a Mixture-of-Gaussians prior, that learns multiple
clusterings simultaneously, and is trained fully unsupervised and end-to-end. MFCVAE uses a progressively-trained ladder architecture which leads to highly stable
performance. We provide novel theoretical results for optimising the ELBO analytically with respect to the categorical variational posterior distribution, correcting
earlier influential theoretical work. On image benchmarks, we demonstrate that our
approach separates out and clusters over different aspects of the data in a disentangled manner. We also show other advantages of our model: the compositionality of
its latent space and that it provides controlled generation of samples.

1

Introduction

Clustering is the task of finding structure by partitioning samples in a finite, unlabeled dataset
according to statistical or geometric notions of similarity [1, 2, 3].For example, we might group
items along axes of empirical variation in the data, or maximise internal homogeneity and external
separation of items within and between clusters with respect to a specified distance metric. The
choice of similarity measure and how one consequently validates clustering quality is fundamentally
a subjective one: it depends on what is useful for a particular task [2, 4]. In this work, we are
interested in uncovering abstract, latent characteristics/facets/aspects/levels of the data to understand
and characterise the data-generative process. We further assume a fully exploratory, unsupervised
setting without prior knowledge on the data, which could be exploited while fitting the clustering
algorithm, and in particular without given ground-truth partitions at training time.
When being faced with high-dimensional data such as images, speech or electronic health records,
items typically have more than one abstract characteristic. Consider the example of the MNIST
dataset [5]: MNIST images possess at least two such characteristics: The digit class, which might
impose the largest amount of statistical variation, and the style of the digit (e.g. stroke width). This
naturally raises a question: By which characteristic is a clustering algorithm supposed to partition
the data? In MNIST, both digit class and (the sub-categories of) style would be perfectly reasonable
candidates to answer this question. In our exploratory setting described above, there is not one
“correct” partition of the data.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

