Multiclass versus Binary Differentially Private PAC
Learning

Mark Bun
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
mbun@bu.edu

Marco Gaboardi
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
gaboardi@bu.edu

Satchit Sivakumar
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
satchit@bu.edu

Abstract
We show a generic reduction from multiclass differentially private PAC learning to
binary private PAC learning. We apply this transformation to a recently proposed
binary private PAC learner to obtain a private multiclass learner with sample complexity that has a polynomial dependence on the multiclass Littlestone dimension
and a poly-logarithmic dependence on the number of classes. This yields a doubly
exponential improvement in the dependence on both parameters over learners from
previous work. Our proof extends the notion of Ψ-dimension defined in work of
Ben-David et al. [5] to the online setting and explores its general properties.

1

Introduction

1

Machine learning and data analytics are increasingly deployed on sensitive information about
individuals. Differential privacy [10] gives a mathematically rigorous way to enable such analyses
while guaranteeing the privacy of individual information. The model of differentially private PAC
learning [17] captures binary classification for sensitive data, providing a simple and broadly applicable abstraction for many machine learning procedures. Private PAC learning is now reasonably
well-understood, with a host of general algorithmic techniques, lower bounds, and results for specific
fundamental concept classes [8, 12, 3, 4, 1, 15, 2, 16].
Beyond binary classification, many problems in machine learning are better modeled as multiclass
learning problems. Here, given a training set of examples from domain X with labels from [k] =
{0, 1, . . . , k}, the goal is to learn a function h : X → [k] that approximately labels the data and
generalizes to the underlying population from which it was drawn. Much less is presently known
about differentially private multiclass learnability than is known about private binary classification,
though it appears that many specific tools and techniques can be adapted one at a time. In this work,
we ask: Can we generically relate multiclass to binary learning so as to automatically transfer results
from the binary setting to the multiclass setting?
To illustrate, there is a simple reduction from a given multiclass learning problem to a sequence of
binary classification problems. (This reduction was described by Ben-David et al. [5] for non-private
1

The full version of this paper with all of the details can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.10870

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

