Scallop: From Probabilistic Deductive Databases to
Scalable Differentiable Reasoning

Jiani Huang ∗
University of Pennsylvania
jianih@seas.upenn.edu

Ziyang Li ∗
University of Pennsylvania
liby99@seas.upenn.edu

Karan Samel
Georgia Institute of Technology
ksamel@gatech.edu
Le Song
Georgia Institute of Technology
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Binghong Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology
binghong@gatech.edu

Mayur Naik
University of Pennsylvania
mhnaik@seas.upenn.edu
Xujie Si
McGill University and CIFAR AI Chair, Mila
xsi@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Deep learning and symbolic reasoning are complementary techniques for an intelligent system. However, principled combinations of these techniques are typically
limited in scalability, rendering them ill-suited for real-world applications. We propose Scallop, a system that builds upon probabilistic deductive databases, to bridge
this gap. The key insight underlying Scallop is a provenance framework that introduces a tunable parameter to specify the level of reasoning granularity. Scallop
thereby i) generalizes exact probabilistic reasoning, ii) asymptotically reduces
computational cost, and iii) provides relative accuracy guarantees. On synthetic
tasks involving mathematical and logical reasoning, Scallop scales significantly
better without sacrificing accuracy compared to DeepProbLog, a principled neural
logic programming approach. Scallop also scales to a newly created real-world
Visual Question Answering (VQA) benchmark that requires multi-hop reasoning,
achieving 84.22% accuracy and outperforming two VQA-tailored models based on
Neural Module Networks and transformers by 12.42% and 21.66% respectively.

1

Introduction

Integrating deep learning and symbolic reasoning in a principled manner into a single effective system
is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence [10]. Despite great potential in terms of accuracy,
interpretability, and generalizability, it is challenging to scale differentiable reasoning in the combined
system while preserving the benefits of the neural and symbolic sub-systems [28].
In this paper, we propose Scallop, a systematic and effective framework to address this problem. 2
The key insight underlying Scallop is a principled relaxation of exact probabilistic reasoning via a
parameter k that specifies the level of reasoning granularity. We observe that scalability is primarily
hindered by reasoning about all proofs in computing the probability of each outcome. For a given k,
Scallop only reasons about the top-k most likely proofs, which asymptotically reduces computational
cost while providing formal accuracy guarantees relative to the exact instantiation. Scallop thereby
generalizes exact probabilistic reasoning and enables easy exploration of a rich space of tradeoffs.
∗
2

Jiani Huang and Ziyang Li contributed equally to this work.
The source code of Scallop is available at https://github.com/scallop-lang/scallop-v1.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

