ABC: Auxiliary Balanced Classifier for
Class-Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning

Hyuck Lee Seungjae Shin Heeyoung Kim
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST
{dlgur0921, tmdwo0910, heeyoungkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms typically assume classbalanced datasets, although the class distributions of many real-world datasets
are imbalanced. In general, classifiers trained on a class-imbalanced dataset are
biased toward the majority classes. This issue becomes more problematic for SSL
algorithms because they utilize the biased prediction of unlabeled data for training.
However, traditional class-imbalanced learning techniques, which are designed for
labeled data, cannot be readily combined with SSL algorithms. We propose a scalable class-imbalanced SSL algorithm that can effectively use unlabeled data, while
mitigating class imbalance by introducing an auxiliary balanced classifier (ABC)
of a single layer, which is attached to a representation layer of an existing SSL algorithm. The ABC is trained with a class-balanced loss of a minibatch, while using
high-quality representations learned from all data points in the minibatch using the
backbone SSL algorithm to avoid overfitting and information loss. Moreover, we
use consistency regularization, a recent SSL technique for utilizing unlabeled data
in a modified way, to train the ABC to be balanced among the classes by selecting
unlabeled data with the same probability for each class. The proposed algorithm
achieves state-of-the-art performance in various class-imbalanced SSL experiments
using four benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Recently, numerous deep neural network (DNN)-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms
have been proposed to improve the performance of DNNs by utilizing unlabeled data when only
a small amount of labeled data is available. These algorithms have shown effective performance
in various tasks. However, most existing SSL algorithms assume class-balanced datasets, whereas
the class distributions of many real-world datasets are imbalanced. It is well known that classifiers
trained on class-imbalanced data tend to be biased toward the majority classes. This issue can be
more problematic for SSL algorithms that use predicted labels of unlabeled data for their training,
because the labels predicted by the algorithm trained on class-imbalanced data become even more
severely imbalanced [18]. For example, Figure 1 (b) presents biased predictions of ReMixMatch
[3], a recent SSL algorithm, trained on CIFAR-10-LT, which is a class-imbalanced dataset with the
amount of Class 0 being 100 times more than that of Class 9, as depicted in Figure 1 (a). Although
there are various class-imbalanced learning techniques, they are usually designed for labeled data,
and thus cannot be simply combined with SSL algorithms under class-imbalanced SSL (CISSL)
scenarios. Recently, a few CISSL algorithms have been proposed, but the CISSL problem is still
underexplored.
We propose a new CISSL algorithm that can effectively use unlabeled data, while mitigating class
imbalance by using an existing DNN-based SSL algorithm [3, 29] as the backbone and introducing
an auxiliary balanced classifier (ABC) of a single layer. The ABC is attached to a representation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

