A Near-Optimal Algorithm for Stochastic Bilevel
Optimization via Double-Momentum
Prashant Khanduri
University of Minnesota
khand095@umn.edu

Siliang Zeng
University of Minnesota
zeng0176@umn.edu

Hoi-To Wai
CUHK
htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Mingyi Hong⇤
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu
Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
zy6@princeton.edu

Abstract
This work proposes a new algorithm – the Single-timescale Double-momentum
Stochastic Approximation (SUSTAIN) – for tackling stochastic unconstrained
bilevel optimization problems. We focus on bilevel problems where the lower level
subproblem is strongly-convex and the upper level objective function is smooth.
Unlike prior works which rely on two-timescale or double loop techniques, we
design a stochastic momentum-assisted gradient estimator for both the upper and
lower level updates. The latter allows us to control the error in the stochastic gradient updates due to inaccurate solution to both subproblems. If the upper objective
function is smooth but possibly non-convex, we show that SUSTAIN requires
O(✏ 3/2 ) iterations (each using O(1) samples) to find an ✏-stationary solution.
The ✏-stationary solution is defined as the point whose squared norm of the gradient
of the outer function is less than or equal to ✏. The total number of stochastic
gradient samples required for the upper and lower level objective functions match
the best-known complexity for single-level stochastic gradient algorithms. We also
analyze the case when the upper level objective function is strongly-convex.

1

Introduction

Many learning and inference problems take a “hierarchical" form, wherein the optimal solution
of one problem affects the objective function of others [27]. Bilevel optimization is often used to
model problems of this kind with two levels of hierarchy [27, 8], where the variables of an upper
level problem depend on the optimizer of certain lower level problem. In this work, we consider
unconstrained bilevel optimization problems of the form:
minx2Rdup `(x) = f (x, y ⇤ (x)) := E⇠ [f (x, y ⇤ (x); ⇠)]
s.t. y ⇤ (x) = arg miny2Rdlo g(x, y) := E⇣ [g(x, y; ⇣)] ,

(1)

where f, g : Rdup ⇥ Rdlo ! R with x 2 Rdup and y 2 Rdlo ; f (x, y; ⇠) with ⇠ ⇠ ⇡f (resp. g(x, y; ⇣)
with ⇣ ⇠ ⇡g ) represents a stochastic sample of the upper level objective (resp. lower level objective).
Note here that the upper level objective f depends on the minimizer of the lower level objective g, and
we refer to `(x) as the outer function. Throughout this paper, g(x, y) is assumed to be strongly-convex
in y, which implies that `(x) is smooth but possibly non-convex.
The applications of (1) include many machine learning problems that have a hierarchical structure.
Examples are meta learning [13, 31], data hyper-cleaning [35], hyper-parameter optimization [12,
⇤

Corresponding Author: Mingyi Hong.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

