Uncertainty-Based Offline Reinforcement Learning
with Diversified Q-Ensemble
Gaon An∗ 1 2 , Seungyong Moon* 1 2 , Jang-Hyun Kim1 2 , Hyun Oh Song† 1 2 3
Seoul National University1
Neural Processing Research Center2
DeepMetrics3
{white0234,symoon11,janghyun,hyunoh}@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (offline RL), which aims to find an optimal policy
from a previously collected static dataset, bears algorithmic difficulties due to
function approximation errors from out-of-distribution (OOD) data points. To
this end, offline RL algorithms adopt either a constraint or a penalty term that
explicitly guides the policy to stay close to the given dataset. However, prior
methods typically require accurate estimation of the behavior policy or sampling
from OOD data points, which themselves can be a non-trivial problem. Moreover,
these methods under-utilize the generalization ability of deep neural networks
and often fall into suboptimal solutions too close to the given dataset. In this
work, we propose an uncertainty-based offline RL method that takes into account
the confidence of the Q-value prediction and does not require any estimation or
sampling of the data distribution. We show that the clipped Q-learning, a technique
widely used in online RL, can be leveraged to successfully penalize OOD data
points with high prediction uncertainties. Surprisingly, we find that it is possible to
substantially outperform existing offline RL methods on various tasks by simply
increasing the number of Q-networks along with the clipped Q-learning. Based
on this observation, we propose an ensemble-diversified actor-critic algorithm that
reduces the number of required ensemble networks down to a tenth compared to
the naive ensemble while achieving state-of-the-art performance on most of the
D4RL benchmarks considered.

1

Introduction

Over the recent years, deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) has achieved considerable success
in various domains such as robotics [20], recommendation systems [6], and strategy games [26].
However, a major drawback of RL algorithms is that they adopt an active learning procedure, where
training steps require active interactions with the environment. This trial-and-error procedure can be
prohibitive when scaling RL to real-world applications such as autonomous driving and healthcare,
as exploratory actions can cause critical damage to the agent or the environment [19]. Offline RL,
also known as batch RL, aims to overcome this problem by learning policies using only previously
collected data without further interactions with the environment [2, 11, 19].
Even though offline RL is a promising direction to lead a more data-driven way of solving RL
problems, recent works show offline RL faces new algorithmic challenges [19]. Typically, if the
coverage of the dataset is not sufficient, vanilla RL algorithms suffer severely from extrapolation
∗
†

First two authors have equal contributions
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

