CoFiNet: Reliable Coarse-to-fine Correspondences
for Robust Point Cloud Registration

Hao Yu1,2
1

Fu Li1,2

Mahdi Saleh1

Benjamin Busam1

Slobodan Ilic1,3

Technical University of Munich 2 National University of Defense Technology
3
Siemens AG, München
{hao.yu, fu.li, m.saleh, b.busam, slobodan.ilic}@tum.de

Abstract
We study the problem of extracting correspondences between a pair of point clouds
for registration. For correspondence retrieval, existing works benefit from matching
sparse keypoints detected from dense points but usually struggle to guarantee their
repeatability. To address this issue, we present CoFiNet - Coarse-to-Fine Network
which extracts hierarchical correspondences from coarse to fine without keypoint
detection. On a coarse scale and guided by a weighting scheme, our model firstly
learns to match down-sampled nodes whose vicinity points share more overlap,
which significantly shrinks the search space of a consecutive stage. On a finer
scale, node proposals are consecutively expanded to patches that consist of groups
of points together with associated descriptors. Point correspondences are then
refined from the overlap areas of corresponding patches, by a density-adaptive
matching module capable to deal with varying point density. Extensive evaluation
of CoFiNet on both indoor and outdoor standard benchmarks shows our superiority
over existing methods. Especially on 3DLoMatch where point clouds share less
overlap, CoFiNet significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches by at least
5% on Registration Recall, with at most two-third of their parameters. [Code]

1

Introduction

Correspondence search is a core topic of computer vision and establishing reliable correspondences is
a key to success in many fundamental vision tasks, such as tracking, reconstruction, flow estimation,
and particularly, point cloud registration. Point cloud registration aims at recovering the transformation between a pair of partially overlapped point clouds. It is a fundamental task in a wide range
of real applications, including scene reconstruction, autonomous driving, simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM), etc. However, due to the unordered and irregular properties of point clouds,
extracting reliable correspondences from them has been a challenging task for a long time. From
early-stage hand-crafted methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] to recently emerged deep learning-based approaches
[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], many works contributed to improving the reliability of correspondences.
We can broadly categorize recent deep learning-based point cloud registration methods into three
categories. The first [13, 14, 15] follows the idea of ICP [16], where they iteratively find dense
correspondences and compute pose estimation. The second [17, 18] includes the correspondence-free
methods based on the intuition that the feature distance between two well-aligned point clouds should
be small. Such methods encode the whole point cloud as a single feature and iteratively optimize
the relative pose between two frames by minimizing the distance of corresponding features. Though
achieving reasonable results on synthetic object datasets [19], both of them struggle on large-scale real
benchmarks [20, 6], as the first suffers from low correspondence precision and high computational
complexity, while the second lacks robustness to noise and partial overlap.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

