Policy Learning Using Weak Supervision
Jingkang Wang⇤1,2 Hongyi Guo⇤3 Zhaowei Zhu⇤4 Yang Liu4
University of Toronto1 , Vector Institute2 , Northwestern University3 , UC Santa Cruz4
wangjk@cs.toronto.edu hongyiguo2025@u.northwestern.edu
zwzhu@ucsc.edu yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Most existing policy learning solutions require the learning agents to receive highquality supervision signals such as well-designed rewards in reinforcement learning
(RL) or high-quality expert demonstrations in behavioral cloning (BC). These
quality supervisions are usually infeasible or prohibitively expensive to obtain in
practice. We aim for a unified framework that leverages the available cheap weak
supervisions to perform policy learning efficiently. To handle this problem, we
treat the “weak supervision” as imperfect information coming from a peer agent,
and evaluate the learning agent’s policy based on a “correlated agreement” with
the peer agent’s policy (instead of simple agreements). Our approach explicitly
punishes a policy for overfitting to the weak supervision. In addition to theoretical
guarantees, extensive evaluations on tasks including RL with noisy rewards, BC
with weak demonstrations, and standard policy co-training show that our method
leads to substantial performance improvements, especially when the complexity or
the noise of the learning environments is high.

1

Introduction

Recent breakthroughs in policy learning (PL) open up the possibility to apply reinforcement learning
(RL) or behavioral cloning (BC) in real-world applications such as robotics [1, 2] and self-driving [3,
4]. Most existing works require agents to receive high-quality supervision signals, e.g., reward or
expert demonstrations, which are either infeasible or expensive to obtain in practice [5, 6].
The outputs of reward functions in RL are subject to multiple kinds of randomness. For example,
the reward collected from sensors on a robot may be biased and have inherent noise due to physical
conditions such as temperature and lighting [7, 8, 9]. For the human-defined reward, different human
instructors might provide drastically different feedback that leads to biased rewards [10]. Besides, the
demonstrations by an expert in behavioral cloning (BC) are often imperfect due to limited resources
and environment noise [11, 12, 13]. Therefore, learning from weak supervision signals such as noisy
rewards [7] or low-quality demonstrations produced by untrustworthy expert [12, 14] is one of the
outstanding challenges that prevents a wider application of PL.
Although some works have explored these topics separately in their specific domains [7, 15, 14, 16],
there lacks a unified solution for robust policy learning in imperfect situations. Moreover, the noise
model as well as the corruption level in supervision signals is often required. To handle these
challenges, we first formulate a meta-framework to study RL/BC with weak supervision and call it
weakly supervised policy learning. Then we propose a theoretically principled solution, PeerPL, to
perform efficient policy learning using the available weak supervision without requiring noise rates.
Our solution is inspired by peer loss [17], a recently proposed loss function for learning with noisy
labels but does not require the specification of noise rates. In peer loss, the noisy labels are treated as
a peer agent’s supervision. This loss function explicitly punishes the classifier from simply agreeing
with the noisy labels, but would instead reward it for a “correlated agreement" (CA). We adopt a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

