Fair Clustering Under a Bounded Cost

Seyed Esmaeili
University of Maryland
esmaeili@cs.umd.edu

Brian Brubach
Wellesley College
bb100@wellesley.edu

Aravind Srinivasan
University of Maryland
asriniv1@umd.edu

John P. Dickerson
University of Maryland
johnd@umd.edu

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning problem where a dataset is
partitioned into clusters that consist of nearby points in a metric space. A recent
variant, fair clustering, associates a color with each point representing its group
membership and requires that each color has (approximately) equal representation
in each cluster to satisfy group fairness. In this model, the cost of the clustering
objective increases due to enforcing fairness in the algorithm. The relative increase
in the cost, the “price of fairness,” can indeed be unbounded. Therefore, in this
paper we propose to treat an upper bound on the clustering objective as a constraint
on the clustering problem, and to maximize equality of representation subject to it.
We consider two fairness objectives: the group utilitarian objective and the group
egalitarian objective, as well as the group leximin objective which generalizes
the group egalitarian objective. We derive fundamental lower bounds on the
approximation of the utilitarian and egalitarian objectives and introduce algorithms
with provable guarantees for them. For the leximin objective we introduce an
effective heuristic algorithm. We further derive impossibility results for other
natural fairness objectives. We conclude with experimental results on real-world
datasets that demonstrate the validity of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being applied to settings that directly influence human
lives. This has spurred a growing fair machine learning community [9], which develops machine
learning algorithms that are made to satisfy certain fairness criteria. Choosing an appropriate
definition of fairness—and even deciding if explicitly defining fairness is appropriate to begin with—
is a morally-laden and application-specific decision [28, 43]. We make no normative statements here;
rather, we focus on a commonly-used and often legally-backed family of fairness definitions—group
fairness—in the context of clustering, arguably the most fundamental unsupervised learning problem.
A recent group-membership fairness definition, called fair clustering in the literature, has received
significant interest [20, 10, 11, 2, 7, 31, 22, 8, 3, 33, 1]. In fair clustering, each point has a color that
designates its group membership, and a clustering objective such as k-median or k-means is given.
The goal is to find a clustering that minimizes the objective subject to the constraint that each cluster
has each color represented within some pre-specified proportions. For example, there may be two
colors, red and blue, and the constraint could require per-color representation between 40% and 60%.
An acknowledged fact in fair clustering—and, indeed, in many allocation and matching settings—is
that the fairness (e.g., proportion) constraint could cause degradation in the clustering objective [12,
19]. A point may be assigned to a further away center (cluster) to satisfy the proportion constraint [20].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

