Privately Learning Subspaces

Vikrant Singhal
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON - N2L 3G1, Canada
vikrant.singhal@uwaterloo.ca

Thomas Steinke
Google Research, Brain Team
Mountain View, CA, United States of America
subspace@thomas-steinke.net

Abstract
Private data analysis suffers a costly curse of dimensionality. However, the data
often has an underlying low-dimensional structure. For example, when optimizing
via gradient descent, the gradients often lie in or near a low-dimensional subspace.
If that low-dimensional structure can be identified, then we can avoid paying (in
terms of privacy or accuracy) for the high ambient dimension.
We present differentially private algorithms that take input data sampled from
a low-dimensional linear subspace (possibly with a small amount of error) and
output that subspace (or an approximation to it). These algorithms can serve as a
pre-processing step for other procedures.

1

Introduction

Differentially private algorithms generally have a poor dependence on the dimensionality of their
input. That is, their error or sample complexity grows polynomially with the dimension. For
example, for the simple√
task of estimating the mean of a distribution supported on [0, 1]d , we have
per-coordinate error Θ( d/n) to attain
p differential privacy, where n is the number of samples. In
contrast, the non-private error is Θ( log(d)/n).
This cost of dimensionality is inherent [BUV14, SU17, DSS+ 15]. Any method with lower error is
susceptible to tracing attacks (a.k.a. membership inference attacks). However, these lower bounds
only apply when the data distribution is “high-entropy.” This leaves open the posssibility that we can
circumvent the curse of dimensionality when the data has an underlying low-dimensional structure.
Data often does possess an underlying low-dimensional structure. For example, the gradients that
arise in deep learning tend to be close to a low-dimensional subspace [ACG+ 16, LXT+ 17, GARD18,
LFLY18, LGZ+ 20, ZWB20, FT20]. Low dimensionality can arise from meaningful relationships
that are at least locally linear, such as income versus tax paid. It can also arise because we are looking
at a function of data with relatively few attributes.
A long line of work [BLR08, HT10, HR10, Ull15, BBNS19, BCM+ 20, ZWB20, KRRT20, etc.] has
shown how to exploit structure in the data to attain better privacy and accuracy. However, these
approaches assume that this structure is known a priori or that it can be learned from non-private
sources. This raises the question:
Can we learn low-dimensional structure from the data subject to differential privacy?
We consider the simple setting where the data lies in Rd but is in, or very close to a linear subspace,
of dimension k. We focus on the setting where k  d and we develop algorithms whose sample
0

The full version of this article is available online at https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.00001

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

