An Analysis of Constant Step Size SGD in the
Non-convex Regime: Asymptotic Normality and Bias

Lu Yu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
stat.yu@mail.utoronto.ca

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Stanislav Volgushev
University of Toronto
stanislav.volgushev@utoronto.ca

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Structured non-convex learning problems, for which critical points have favorable
statistical properties, arise frequently in statistical machine learning. Algorithmic
convergence and statistical estimation rates are well-understood for such problems.
However, quantifying the uncertainty associated with the underlying training algorithm is not well-studied in the non-convex setting. In order to address this
short-coming, in this work, we establish an asymptotic normality result for the
constant step size stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm—a widely used
algorithm in practice. Specifically, based on the relationship between SGD and
Markov Chains [1], we show that the average of SGD iterates is asymptotically normally distributed around the expected value of their unique invariant distribution,
as long as the non-convex and non-smooth objective function satisfies a dissipativity property. We also characterize the bias between this expected value and the
critical points of the objective function under various local regularity conditions.
Together, the above two results could be leveraged to construct confidence intervals
for non-convex problems that are trained using the SGD algorithm.

1

Introduction

Non-convex learning problems are prevalent in modern statistical machine learning applications
such as matrix and tensor decomposition [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], deep neural networks [9, 10, 11], and
robust empirical risk minimization [12, 13, 14]. Developing theoretically principled approaches
for tackling such non-convex problems depends critically on the interplay between two aspects.
From a computational perspective, variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) converge to firstorder critical points [15, 16] or local minimizers [17, 2, 18, 19] of the objective function. From
a statistical perspective, oftentimes these critical points or local minimizers have nice statistical
properties [20, 3, 12, 21, 22, 5]; see also [23] for a counterexample. For the purpose of uncertainty
quantification in such non-convex settings, studying the fluctuations of iterative algorithms used for
training becomes extremely important. In this work, we focus on the widely used constant step size
SGD, and develop results for quantifying the uncertainty associated with this algorithm for a class of
non-convex problems.
We consider minimizing a non-smooth and non-convex objective function f : Rd → R,
min f (θ) .

θ∈Rd

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(1)

