Stochastic Shortest Path: Minimax, Parameter-Free
and Towards Horizon-Free Regret

Jean Tarbouriech∗
Facebook AI Research & Inria Lille
jean.tarbouriech@gmail.com

Runlong Zhou∗
Tsinghua University
zhourunlongvector@gmail.com

Simon S. Du
University of Washington & Facebook AI Research
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research Paris
pirotta@fb.com

Michal Valko
DeepMind Paris
valkom@deepmind.com

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research Paris
lazaric@fb.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning in the stochastic shortest path (SSP) setting,
where an agent seeks to minimize the expected cost accumulated before reaching a
goal state. We design a novel model-based algorithm EB-SSP that carefully skews
the empirical transitions and perturbs the empirical costs with an exploration bonus
to induce an optimistic SSP problem whose associated value iteration scheme is
guaranteed
√ to converge. We prove that EB-SSP achieves the minimax regret rate
e
O(B? SAK), where K is the number of episodes, S is the number of states, A is
the number of actions, and B? bounds the expected cumulative cost of the optimal
policy from any state, thus closing the gap with the lower bound. Interestingly,
EB-SSP obtains this result while being parameter-free, i.e., it does not require any
prior knowledge of B? , nor of T? , which bounds the expected time-to-goal of
the optimal policy from any state. Furthermore, we illustrate various cases (e.g.,
positive costs, or general costs when an order-accurate estimate of T? is available)
where the regret only contains a logarithmic dependence on T? , thus yielding the
first (nearly) horizon-free regret bound beyond the finite-horizon MDP setting.

1

Introduction

Stochastic shortest path (SSP) is a goal-oriented reinforcement learning (RL) setting where the
agent aims to reach a predefined goal state while minimizing its total expected cost [Bertsekas,
1995]. In particular, the interaction between the agent and the environment ends only when (and if)
the goal state is reached, so the length of an episode is not predetermined (nor bounded) and it is
influenced by the agent’s behavior. SSP includes both finite-horizon and discounted Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) as special cases. Moreover, many common RL problems can be cast under the
SSP formulation, such as game playing (e.g., Atari games) or navigation (e.g., Mujoco mazes).
We study the online learning problem in the SSP setting (online SSP in short), where both the
transition dynamics and the cost function are initially unknown and the agent interacts with the
environment through multiple episodes. The learning objective is to achieve a performance as close
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

