Learning with Noisy Correspondence
for Cross-modal Matching

Zhenyu Huang∗
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
zyhuang.gm@gmail.com

Guocheng Niu
Baidu Inc., China
niuguocheng@baidu.com

Xiao Liu
TAL Education Group
liuxiao15@tal.com

Wenbiao Ding
TAL Education Group
dingwenbiao@tal.com

Xinyan Xiao
Baidu Inc., China
xiaoxinyan@baidu.com

Hua Wu
Baidu Inc., China
wu_hua@baidu.com

Xi Peng†
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
pengx.gm@gmail.com

Abstract
Cross-modal matching, which aims to establish the correspondence between two
different modalities, is fundamental to a variety of tasks such as cross-modal
retrieval and vision-and-language understanding. Although a huge number of crossmodal matching methods have been proposed and achieved remarkable progress
in recent years, almost all of these methods implicitly assume that the multimodal
training data are correctly aligned. In practice, however, such an assumption
is extremely expensive even impossible to satisfy. Based on this observation,
we reveal and study a latent and challenging direction in cross-modal matching,
named noisy correspondence, which could be regarded as a new paradigm of
noisy labels. Different from the traditional noisy labels which mainly refer to the
errors in category labels, our noisy correspondence refers to the mismatch paired
samples. To solve this new problem, we propose a novel method for learning with
noisy correspondence, named Noisy Correspondence Rectifier (NCR). In brief,
NCR divides the data into clean and noisy partitions based on the memorization
effect of neural networks and then rectifies the correspondence via an adaptive
prediction model in a co-teaching manner. To verify the effectiveness of our
method, we conduct experiments by using the image-text matching as a showcase.
Extensive experiments on Flickr30K, MS-COCO, and Conceptual Captions verify
the effectiveness of our method. The code could be accessed from www.pengxi.
me.

1

Introduction

As one of the most fundamental techniques in multimodal learning, cross-modal matching aims to
bridge different modalities. In recent years, some cross-modal matching methods [19, 11, 7, 26] have
been proposed based on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which achieved remarkable progress in a
∗
†

Some parts of the work was done while Zhenyu Huang was an internship at Baidu Inc.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

