Emergent Discrete Communication in Semantic
Spaces
Mycal Tucker1 , Huao Li2 , Siddharth Agrawal3 , Dana Hughes3 , Katia Sycara3 , Michael Lewis2 , and
Julie Shah1
1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2 University of Pittsburgh
3 Carnegie Mellon University
mycal@mit.edu, hul52@upitt.edu, siddhara@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Neural agents trained in reinforcement learning settings can learn to communicate
among themselves via discrete tokens, accomplishing as a team what agents would
be unable to do alone. However, the current standard of using one-hot vectors
as discrete communication tokens prevents agents from acquiring more desirable
aspects of communication such as zero-shot understanding. Inspired by word
embedding techniques from natural language processing, we propose neural agent
architectures that enables them to communicate via discrete tokens derived from a
learned, continuous space. We show in a decision theoretic framework that our technique optimizes communication over a wide range of scenarios, whereas one-hot
tokens are only optimal under restrictive assumptions. In self-play experiments, we
validate that our trained agents learn to cluster tokens in semantically-meaningful
ways, allowing them communicate in noisy environments where other techniques
fail. Lastly, we demonstrate both that agents using our method can effectively
respond to novel human communication and that humans can understand unlabeled
emergent agent communication, outperforming the use of one-hot communication.

1

Introduction

A longstanding goal of AI has been to develop agents that can cooperate with other agents or humans
to accomplish tasks together. Often, communication is necessary to enable such cooperation; the
study of emergent communication has recently shown great success in producing agents that learn to
communicate. In reinforcement learning settings, guided only by environment reward, neural agents
can learn to communicate by broadcasting numerical vectors to each other [9, 11, 31, 18].
Given this success, and in part inspired by the discrete nature of words in natural language, some
researchers have focused on emergent discrete communication by forcing agents to broadcast one-hot
vectors [9, 20]. These tokens in effect become a lexicon used by agents. Studying when these tokens
are emitted allows researchers to uncover their meanings, as well as to study the broader questions of
what environment or agent factors contribute to desirable aspects of learned communication (e.g.,
compositionality or, in continuous communication settings, zero-shot understanding) [15, 19, 5, 4].
We claim that discretizing messages by constraining them to conform to one-hot vectors fundamentally
precludes agents from learning some desirable properties of language. One-hot vectors establish no
relationships between tokens because each one-hot vector is orthogonal to and equally far away from
all other vectors. Conversely, research from natural language processing and word embeddings has
long established the importance of learning representations of discrete words within a continuous,
semantic space [29, 32].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

