Functional Variational Inference
based on Stochastic Process Generators
Chao Ma
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
cm905@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian inference in the space of functions has been an important topic for
Bayesian modeling in the past. In this paper, we propose a new solution to this
problem called Functional Variational Inference (FVI). In FVI, we minimize a
divergence in function space between the variational distribution and the posterior process. This is done by using as functional variational family a new class
of flexible distributions called Stochastic Process Generators (SPGs), which are
cleverly designed so that the functional ELBO can be estimated efficiently using analytic solutions and mini-batch sampling. FVI can be applied to stochastic process
priors when random function samples from those priors are available. Our experiments show that FVI consistently outperforms weight-space and function space VI
methods on several tasks, which validates the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

As an important approach to Bayesian deep learning, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have been
proposed and studied for decades [29, 34, 19]. Despite some successful applications in specific cases
[55, 44, 23], BNNs still suffer from several shortcomings. As over-parameterized models, BNNs
often have multiple posterior modes in its weight space, that generate identical predictions [30].
Therefore, Bayesian inference in weight space can be very difficult [50]. Furthermore, due to the
complexity of interactions between weights in the network forward pass, it is unclear the effect that a
given prior distribution over the weights will have in the resulting distribution over functions.
To address these issues, there has been a recent resurgence of interest in applying the perspective of
Bayesian non-parametrics to neural nets. That is, BNNs are treated as probability measures over functions, i.e., as stochastic processes, with Bayesian inference being performed now in function space.e
Examples include functional BNNs (f-BNNs) [47], and variational implicit processes (VIPs) [28].
Despite their empirical advantage over weight space VI, they still suffer from a number of issues.
i), f-BNNs optimize a functional KL divergence between BNNs and GPs, which is not always
well-defined[5]. Also, f-BNNs rely on (spectral) stein gradient estimators, which are less efficient for
high dimensional distributions [56, 14]. While VIPs do not have this problem, they use a wake-sleep
procedure that does not correspond to a single unified objective. ii), F-BNNs rely on a mean-field
approximation, which often lacks predictive in-between uncertainty on test data. This issue was observed both with single layer BNNs [10], and deeper BNNs (able to represent in-between uncertainty,
but more over-confident than HMC empirically for certain settings [11, 9]). On the other hand, VIPs
use as variational family a Gaussian process, which is not able to capture non-Gaussian processes
such as structured implicit priors [47].
Therefore, it is an open challenge how to improve and justify (variational) inference in the space
of functions using priors given by stochastic processes. In this paper, we investigate this old but
important problem and propose a new solution. Our contributions are as follows:
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

