DeepGEM: Generalized Expectation-Maximization
for Blind Inversion
Angela F. Gao1
Yisong Yue1

Jorge C. Castellanos2

Zachary E. Ross2

Katherine L. Bouman1

1

Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology
2
Caltech Seismological Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
{afgao, jcastellanos, yyue, zross, klbouman} @ caltech.edu

Abstract
Typically, inversion algorithms assume that a forward model, which relates a
source to its resulting measurements, is known and fixed. Using collected indirect
measurements and the forward model, the goal becomes to recover the source.
When the forward model is unknown, or imperfect, artifacts due to model mismatch occur in the recovery of the source. In this paper, we study the problem
of blind inversion: solving an inverse problem with unknown or imperfect knowledge of the forward model parameters. We propose DeepGEM, a variational
Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework that can be used to solve for the unknown parameters of the forward model in an unsupervised manner. DeepGEM
makes use of a normalizing flow generative network to efficiently capture complex
posterior distributions, which leads to more accurate evaluation of the source’s
posterior distribution used in EM. We showcase the effectiveness of our DeepGEM
approach by achieving strong performance on the challenging problem of blind
seismic tomography, where we significantly outperform the standard method used
in seismology. We also demonstrate the generality of DeepGEM by applying it to
a simple case of blind deconvolution.

1

Introduction

Physics-based inversion methods typically recover an unknown source from indirect measurements
by assuming that the source and measurements are related via a known forward model [15, 7, 30]. For
example, non-blind deconvolution algorithms often assume that a measured blurry image is related to
its true sharp image via a known spatially-invariant blur kernel [9]; and traditional seismic inversion
methods assume that the spatially-varying velocity of the Earth’s interior is known a priori when
solving for an earthquake’s hypocenter [30]. However, these “known” forward models are generally
idealized and ignore intricacies of the systems that are either hard to capture or simply unknown.
Inversion algorithms with forward model mismatch result in biased reconstructions. For instance, bias
is regularly seen in non-blind deconvolution results, where reconstruction artifacts are often present
due to the use of an incorrect blur kernel [9].
In order to reduce the effects of model mismatch, in this paper we tackle the problem of blind
inversion: solving an inverse problem without knowledge of the underlying forward model parameters.
When considering how learning can help, a natural first idea might be to learn a direct map from
measurements to the desired source via supervised learning. However, such a “model-free” approach
is generally not practical, due to the lack of available ground truth training data. For example,
the blur kernel caused by handheld camera shake cannot be reproduced to get a training set of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), .

