An Uncertainty Principle is a Price of
Privacy-Preserving Microdata

John Abowd
U.S. Census Bureau
and Cornell University

Robert Ashmead
U.S. Census Bureau

Simson Garfinkel
(formerly) U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
and George Washington University
William Sexton
(formerly) U.S. Census Bureau
and Tumult Labs

Ryan Cumings-Menon
U.S. Census Bureau

Daniel Kifer
U.S. Census Bureau
and Penn State University

Ashley Simpson
Knexus

Christine Task
Knexus

Philip Leclerc
U.S. Census Bureau

Pavel Zhuravlev
U.S. Census Bureau

Abstract
Privacy-protected microdata are often the desired output of a differentially private algorithm since microdata is familiar and convenient for downstream users.
However, there is a statistical price for this kind of convenience. We show that
an uncertainty principle governs the trade-off between accuracy for a population
of interest (“sum query”) vs. accuracy for its component sub-populations (“point
queries”). Compared to differentially private query answering systems that are not
required to produce microdata, accuracy can degrade by a logarithmic factor. For
example, in the case of pure differential privacy, without the microdata requirement, one can provide noisy answers to the sum query and all point queries while
guaranteeing that each answer has squared error O(1/2 ). With the microdata
requirement, one must choose between allowing an additional log2 (d) factor (d
is the number of point queries) for some point queries or allowing an extra O(d2 )
factor for the sum query. We present lower bounds for pure, approximate, and
concentrated differential privacy. We propose mitigation strategies and create a
collection of benchmark datasets that can be used for public study of this problem.

1

Introduction

Differential Privacy [16] is a mathematical theory of information leakage that allows organizations to
publish noisy statistics about their datasets while protecting the confidentiality of user information.
Its state-of-the-art guarantees have resulted in adoption by data collectors such as the U.S. Census
Bureau [31, 10, 23, 1], Google [19, 6], Apple [37], Microsoft [13], Uber [26], and Facebook [33].
In many cases, downstream users want the output of disclosure avoidance systems in the form of
microdata (a set of records about individuals). For example, this has historically been the case
for tabulations of Census Bureau data, and is currently a requirement for most 2020 Census of
Population and Housing tabulations[20]. However, an end-user study of demonstration data products
released by an early prototype of the Census Bureau’s disclosure avoidance system showed significant

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

