Convex-Concave Min-Max Stackelberg Games
Denizalp Goktas
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
denizalp_goktas@brown.edu

Amy Greenwald
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
amy_greenwald@brown.edu

Abstract
Min-max optimization problems (i.e., min-max games) have been attracting a great
deal of attention because of their applicability to a wide range of machine learning
problems. Although significant progress has been made recently, the literature to
date has focused on games with independent strategy sets; little is known about
solving games with dependent strategy sets, which can be characterized as min-max
Stackelberg games. We introduce two first-order methods that solve a large class of
convex-concave min-max Stackelberg games, and show that our methods converge
in polynomial time. Min-max Stackelberg games were first studied by Wald, under
the posthumous name of Wald’s maximin model, a variant of which is the main
paradigm used in robust optimization, which means that our methods can likewise
solve many convex robust optimization problems. We observe that the computation
of competitive equilibria in Fisher markets also comprises a min-max Stackelberg
game. Further, we demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency of our algorithms in
practice by computing competitive equilibria in Fisher markets with varying utility
structures. Our experiments suggest potential ways to extend our theoretical results,
by demonstrating how different smoothness properties can affect the convergence
rate of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Min-max optimization problems have attracted a great deal of attention recently because of their
applicability to a wide range of machine learning problems. Examples of settings in which min-max
optimization problems arise include, but are not limited to, reinforcement learning [15], generative
adversarial networks [66], fairness in machine learning [14, 23, 48, 68, 82], adversarial learning [72],
generative adversarial imitation learning [11, 32], and statistical learning (e.g., learning parameters
of exponential families) [14]. These applications often require solving a constrained min-max
optimization problem (with independent feasible sets): i.e., minx2X maxy2Y f (x, y), where f :
X ⇥ Y ! R is continuous, and X ⇢ Rn and Y ⇢ Rm are non-empty and compact.

A convex-concave constrained min-max optimization problem is one in which f is convex in x and
concave in y. In the special case of convex-concave objective functions, the seminal minimax theorem
holds: i.e., minx2X maxy2Y f (x, y) = maxy2Y minx2X f (x, y) [55]. This theorem guarantees
the existence of a saddle point (i.e., a point that is simultaneously a minimum of f in the x-direction
and a maximum of f in the y-direction), and allows us to interpret the optimization problem as
a simultaneous-move, zero-sum game, where y ⇤ (resp. x⇤ ) is a best-response of the outer (resp.
inner) player to their opponent’s strategy x⇤ (resp. y ⇤ ), in which case a saddle point is also called a
minimax point or a Nash equilibrium.
In this paper, we show that the computation of competitive equilibria in Fisher markets [10], a
central solution concept for one of the most well-studied market models in algorithmic game theory
[57], can be understood as a convex-concave min-max optimization problem, albeit with dependent
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

