Probability Paths
and the Structure of Predictions over Time
Zhiyuan Jerry Lin∗
Facebook
zylin@fb.com

Hao Sheng
Stanford University
haosheng@cs.stanford.edu

Sharad Goel
Harvard University
sgoel@hks.harvard.edu

Abstract
In settings ranging from weather forecasts to political prognostications to financial
projections, probability estimates of future binary outcomes often evolve over
time. For example, the estimated likelihood of rain on a specific day changes
by the hour as new information becomes available. Given a collection of such
probability paths, we introduce a Bayesian framework—which we call the Gaussian
latent information martingale, or GLIM—for modeling the structure of dynamic
predictions over time. Suppose, for example, that the likelihood of rain in a week is
50%, and consider two hypothetical scenarios. In the first, one expects the forecast
to be equally likely to become either 25% or 75% tomorrow; in the second, one
expects the forecast to stay constant for the next several days. A time-sensitive
decision-maker might select a course of action immediately in the latter scenario,
but may postpone their decision in the former, knowing that new information is
imminent. We model these trajectories by assuming predictions update according
to a latent process of information flow, which is inferred from historical data.
In contrast to general methods for time series analysis, this approach preserves
important properties of probability paths such as the martingale structure and
appropriate amount of volatility and better quantifies future uncertainties around
probability paths. We show that GLIM outperforms three popular baseline methods,
producing better estimated posterior probability path distributions measured by
three different metrics. By elucidating the dynamic structure of predictions over
time, we hope to help individuals make more informed choices.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic predictions of future binary outcomes are ubiquitous in real-world statistical and machine
learning problems, ranging from election modeling [Erikson and Wlezien, 2012, Shirani-Mehr et al.,
2018, Gelman et al., 2020] to weather forecasting [Esteves et al., 2019] to assessing mortality
risk [Teres et al., 1987, Malmberg et al., 1997, Martinez-Alario et al., 1999, Yan et al., 2020] to risk
assessment tools in criminal justice applications [Chouldechova, 2017, Lin et al., 2020]. Often such
probabilistic predictions are not static, but rather evolve over time as more information becomes
available. For instance, the estimated likelihood a candidate wins an election updates with every new
poll that is conducted, and the estimated chance of rain on a given future day changes by the hour as
new meteorological data become available.
In many of these domains, a large body of work aims to provide accurate, real-time forecasts that
account for the very latest information. However, significantly less attention has been paid to
understanding how the predictions themselves evolve over time. If there’s a 35% chance of rain
one week from now, what can we say about tomorrow’s prediction of rain on that same day? In
expectation, tomorrow’s prediction must be the same as today’s—if it were not, we would be better
∗

Research was conducted when the author was at Stanford University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

