Class-agnostic Reconstruction of
Dynamic Objects from Videos
Zhongzheng Ren⇤, Xiaoming Zhao⇤, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
https://jason718.github.io/redo

Abstract
We introduce REDO, a class-agnostic framework to REconstruct the Dynamic
Objects from RGBD or calibrated videos. Compared to prior work, our problem
setting is more realistic yet more challenging for three reasons: 1) due to occlusion
or camera settings an object of interest may never be entirely visible, but we aim
to reconstruct the complete shape; 2) we aim to handle different object dynamics
including rigid motion, non-rigid motion, and articulation; 3) we aim to reconstruct
different categories of objects with one unified framework. To address these
challenges, we develop two novel modules. First, we introduce a canonical 4D
implicit function which is pixel-aligned with aggregated temporal visual cues.
Second, we develop a 4D transformation module which captures object dynamics
to support temporal propagation and aggregation. We study the efficacy of REDO
in extensive experiments on synthetic RGBD video datasets SAIL-VOS 3D and
DeformingThings4D++, and on real-world video data 3DPW. We find REDO
outperforms state-of-the-art dynamic reconstruction methods by a margin. In
ablation studies we validate each developed component.

1

Introduction

4D (3D space + time) reconstruction of both the geometry and dynamics of different objects is
a long-standing research problem, and is crucial for numerous applications across domains from
robotics to augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR). However, complete and accurate 4D reconstruction
from videos remains a great challenge for mainly three reasons: 1) partial visibility of objects due
to occlusion or camera settings (e.g., out-of-view parts, non-observable surfaces); 2) complexity of
the dynamics including rigid-motion (e.g., translation and rotation), non-rigid motion (deformation
caused by external forces), and articulation; and 3) variability within and across object categories.
Existing work addresses the above challenges by assuming complete visibility through a multi-view
setting [33, 4], or by recovering only the observable surface rather than the complete shape of an
object [57], or by ignoring rigid object motion and recovering only the articulation [59], or by building
shape templates or priors specific to a particular object category like humans [47]. However, these
assumptions also limit applicability of models to unconstrained videos in the wild, where these
challenges are either infeasible or only met when taking special care during a video capture.
In contrast, we aim to study the more challenging unconstrained 4D reconstruction setting where
objects may never be entirely visible. Specifically, we deal with visual inputs that suffer from:
1) occlusion: the moving occluder and self-articulation cause occlusion to change across time; 2)
cropped view: the camera view is limited and often fails to capture the complete and consistent
appearance across time; 3) front-view only: due to limited camera motion, the back side of the objects
are often not captured at all in the entire video. Moreover, we focus on different dynamic object-types
⇤

Indicates equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

