SOPE: Spectrum of Off-Policy Estimators
Christina J. Yuan
University of Texas at Austin
cjyuan@cs.utexas.edu

Yash Chandak
University of Massachusetts
ychandak@cs.umass.edu

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Stephen Giguere
University of Texas at Austin
sgiguere@cs.utexas.edu

Scott Niekum
University of Texas at Austin
sniekum@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Many sequential decision making problems are high-stakes and require off-policy
evaluation (OPE) of a new policy using historical data collected using some other
policy. One of the most common OPE techniques that provides unbiased estimates
is trajectory based importance sampling (IS). However, due to the high variance
of trajectory IS estimates, importance sampling methods based on state-action
visitation distributions (SIS) have recently been adopted. Unfortunately, while SIS
often provides lower variance estimates for long horizons, estimating the stateaction distribution ratios can be challenging and lead to biased estimates. In this
paper, we present a new perspective on this bias-variance trade-off and show the
existence of a spectrum of estimators whose endpoints are SIS and IS. Additionally,
we also establish a spectrum for doubly-robust and weighted version of these
estimators. We provide empirical evidence that estimators in this spectrum can
be used to trade-off between the bias and variance of IS and SIS and can achieve
lower mean-squared error than both IS and SIS.

1

Introduction

Many sequential decision making problems, such as automated health-care, robotics, and online
recommendations are high-stakes in terms of health, safety, or finance [Liao et al., 2020, Brown et al.,
2020, Theocharous et al., 2020]. For such problems, collecting new data to evaluate the performance
of a new decision rule, called an evaluation policy ⇡e , may be expensive or even dangerous if ⇡e
results in undesired outcomes. Therefore, one of the most important challenges in such problems is
the estimation of the performance J(⇡e ) of the policy ⇡e before its deployment.
Many off-policy evaluation (OPE) methods enable estimation of J(⇡e ) with historical data collected
using an existing decision rule, called a behavior policy ⇡b . One popular OPE technique is trajectorybased importance sampling (IS) [Precup, 2000]. While this method is both non-parametric and
provides unbiased estimates of J(⇡e ), it suffers from the curse of horizon and can have variance
exponential in the horizon length [Jiang and Li, 2016, Guo et al., 2017]. To mitigate this problem,
recent methods use stationary distribution importance sampling (SIS) to adjust the stationary distribution of the Markov chain induced by the policies, instead of the individual trajectories [Liu et al.,
2018, Gelada and Bellemare, 2019, Nachum and Dai, 2020]. This requires (parametric) estimation of
the ratio between the stationary distribution induced by ⇡e and ⇡b . Unfortunately, estimating this
ratio accurately can require unverifiably strong assumptions on the parameters [Jiang and Huang,
2020], and often requires solving non-trivial min-max saddle point optimization problems [Yang
et al., 2020]. Consequently, if the parameterization is not rich enough, then it may not be possible
to represent the distribution ratios accurately, and when using rich function approximators (such
as neural networks) then the optimization procedure may get stuck in sub-optimal saddle points.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

