Recurrent Bayesian Classifier Chains for Exact
Multi-Label Classification
Walter Gerych, Thomas Hartvigsen, Luke Buquicchio, Emmanuel Agu, Elke Rundensteiner
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Worcester, MA
{wgerych, twhartvigsen, ljbuquicchio, emmanuel, rundenst}@wpi.edu

Abstract
Exact multi-label classification is the task of assigning each datapoint a set of class
labels such that the assigned set exactly matches the ground truth. Optimizing for
exact multi-label classification is important in domains where missing a single label
can be especially costly, such as in object detection for autonomous vehicles or
symptom classification for disease diagnosis. Recurrent Classifier Chains (RCCs), a
recurrent neural network extension of ensemble-based classifier chains, are the stateof-the-art exact multi-label classification method for maximizing subset accuracy.
However, RCCs iteratively predict classes with an unprincipled ordering, and
therefore indiscriminately condition class probabilities. These disadvantages make
RCCs prone to predicting inaccurate label sets. In this work we propose Recurrent
Bayesian Classifier Chains (RBCCs), which learn a Bayesian network of class
dependencies and leverage this network in order to condition the prediction of child
nodes only on their parents. By conditioning predictions in this way, we perform
principled and non-noisy class prediction. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
RBCC method on a variety of real-world multi-label datasets, where we routinely
outperform the state of the art methods for exact multi-label classification.

1

Introduction

Exact multi-label classification (E-MLC) is the task of assigning multiple labels to a single instance,
and is critical for a variety of of domains. For example, when detecting health conditions, one person
will often experience multiple symptoms concurrently. Additionally, missing the detection of even
one symptom can have drastic effects and so the entire label set must be predicted exactly correct.
Missing the symptom Loss of Taste, for instance, might cause a downstream classifier to misdiagnose
COVID-19 as the common cold [3]. While explicitly optimizing for exact classification is inordinately
challenging, a successfully-trained model is highly rewarding as it is guaranteed to capture the joint
probabilities between the features and all labels.
There has been increasing interest in developing multi-label classification methods for E-MLC
[17, 19, 18, 13, 7, 28, 15, 4, 24]. Most are based on classifier chains, which are ensembles of models
where each classifier predicts a single class and the predictions from the i-th model are used as input
into the i + 1-th model in order to learn inter-class dependencies. As the classifier chain requires
an ordering of the classes a priori [19], there are variations of classifier chains that utilize different
class orderings [11, 16], such as Bayesian classifier chains (BCCs) [30, 23] which utilize a Bayesian
network to learn class orderings. A key disadvantage of these classier chain approaches is that they
all require an ensemble of individual classifiers both requiring a large number of parameters and
learning a different and independent latent representation of the input data per classifier. This makes
such ensemble methods particularly prone to overfitting [20, 1].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

