Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits with
Control Variates
Arun Verma
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
arun@comp.nus.edu.sg

Manjesh K. Hanawal
Department of IEOR
IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India
mhanawal@iitb.ac.in

Abstract
This paper studies a new variant of the stochastic multi-armed bandits problem
where auxiliary information about the arm rewards is available in the form of
control variates. In many applications like queuing and wireless networks, the
arm rewards are functions of some exogenous variables. The mean values of
these variables are known a priori from historical data and can be used as control
variates. Leveraging the theory of control variates, we obtain mean estimates with
smaller variance and tighter confidence bounds. We develop an upper confidence
bound based algorithm named UCB-CV and characterize the regret bounds in
terms of the correlation between rewards and control variates when they follow a
multivariate normal distribution. We also extend UCB-CV to other distributions
using resampling methods like Jackknifing and Splitting. Experiments on synthetic
problem instances validate performance guarantees of the proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) setting has been extensively used to study decision making
under uncertainty (Thompson, 1933; Bubeck et al., 2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020). In the
classical setting, it is assumed that the arm rewards are independent of each other. After playing an
arm, the learner observers independent and identically distributed reward samples. The exploration
versus exploitation trade-off is a fundamental problem in the bandits setting, and a learner can
accumulate more rewards if it is balanced well. A better balance can be achieved if the learner can
estimate arm’s mean rewards with tighter confidence bounds (Auer et al., 2002; Auer and Ortner,
2010; Garivier and Cappé, 2011) and smaller variance (Audibert et al., 2009b; Mukherjee et al.,
2018). Any available side or auxiliary information can aid in building tighter confidence bounds. In
this paper, we study the improvement in the performance that can be achieved when side information
is available in the form of control variates.
Any observable input that is correlated with the random variable of interest can be a Control
Variate (CV). When the mean of the CV is known, it becomes useful to reduce the variance of
the mean estimator of the random variable. CV method is a popular variance reduction technique to
improve the estimates’ precision without altering the simulation runs or an increase in the number
of samples (Lavenberg et al., 1982). Many stochastic simulations involve inputs generated using
known distributions. These inputs can be potential CVs as output could be correlated with them. It
has motivated the development of rich theory to analyze the quality of the estimators resulting from
CVs (Lavenberg and Welch, 1981; Lavenberg et al., 1982; Nelson, 1990). We adopt these techniques
to study the stochastic multi-armed bandits problem when CVs are available for the arms.
In many real-life applications, exogenous variables influence arms’ rewards and act as CVs. For
example, consider a job aggregating platform that assigns jobs to one of the servers/workers in
each slot. The jobs are of variable size, and the time to serve them depends on their size and other
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

