Why Spectral Normalization Stabilizes GANs:
Analysis and Improvements

Zinan Lin
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zinanl@andrew.cmu.edu

Vyas Sekar
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
vsekar@andrew.cmu.edu

Giulia Fanti
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Spectral normalization (SN) [30] is a widely-used technique for improving the
stability and sample quality of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). However,
current understanding of SN’s efficacy is limited. In this work, we show that SN
controls two important failure modes of GAN training: exploding and vanishing
gradients. Our proofs illustrate a (perhaps unintentional) connection with the successful LeCun initialization [25]. This connection helps to explain why the most
popular implementation of SN for GANs [30] requires no hyper-parameter tuning,
whereas stricter implementations of SN [15, 12] have poor empirical performance
out-of-the-box. Unlike LeCun initialization which only controls gradient vanishing
at the beginning of training, SN preserves this property throughout training. Building on this theoretical understanding, we propose a new spectral normalization
technique: Bidirectional Scaled Spectral Normalization (BSSN), which incorporates insights from later improvements to LeCun initialization: Xavier initialization
[13] and Kaiming initialization [17]. Theoretically, we show that BSSN gives
better gradient control than SN. Empirically, we demonstrate that it outperforms
SN in sample quality and training stability on several benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are state-of-the-art deep generative models, perhaps best
known for their ability to produce high-resolution, photorealistic images [14]. The objective of GANs
is to produce random samples from a target data distribution, given only access to an initial set of
training samples. This is achieved by learning two functions: a generator G, which maps random
input noise to a generated sample, and a discriminator D, which tries to classify input samples
as either real (i.e., from the training dataset) or fake (i.e., produced by the generator). In practice,
these functions are implemented by deep neural networks (DNNs), and the competing generator and
discriminator are trained in an alternating process known as adversarial training. Theoretically, given
enough data and model capacity, GANs converge to the true underlying data distribution [14].
Although GANs have been very successful in improving the sample quality of data-driven generative
models [22, 8], their adversarial training also contributes to instability. That is, small hyper-parameter
changes and even randomness in the optimization can cause training to fail. Many approaches have
been proposed for improving the stability of GANs, including different architectures [38, 22, 8], loss
functions [2, 3, 16, 50], and various types of regularizations/normalizations [30, 9, 41]. One of the
most successful proposals to date is called spectral normalization (SN) [30, 15, 12]. SN forces each
layer of the discriminator to have unit spectral norm during training. This has the effect of controlling
the Lipschitz constant of the discriminator, which is empirically observed to improve the stability of
GAN training [30]. Despite the successful applications of SN [8, 28, 53, 21, 52, 31, 27], to date, it
remains unclear precisely why this specific normalization is so effective.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

