iFlow: Numerically Invertible Flows for Efficient
Lossless Compression via a Uniform Coder

Shifeng Zhang, Ning Kang, Tom Ryder, Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhangshifeng4, kang.ning2, tom.ryder1, li.zhenguo}.huawei.com

Abstract
It was estimated that the world produced 59ZB (5.9 × 1013 GB) of data in 2020,
resulting in the enormous costs of both data storage and transmission. Fortunately,
recent advances in deep generative models have spearheaded a new class of socalled "neural compression" algorithms, which significantly outperform traditional
codecs in terms of compression ratio. Unfortunately, the application of neural
compression garners little commercial interest due to its limited bandwidth; therefore, developing highly efficient frameworks is of critical practical importance. In
this paper, we discuss lossless compression using normalizing flows which have
demonstrated a great capacity for achieving high compression ratios. As such, we
introduce iFlow, a new method for achieving efficient lossless compression. We
first propose Modular Scale Transform (MST) and a novel family of numerically
invertible flow transformations based on MST. Then we introduce the Uniform
Base Conversion System (UBCS), a fast uniform-distribution codec incorporated
into iFlow, enabling efficient compression. iFlow achieves state-of-the-art compression ratios and is 5× quicker than other high-performance schemes. Furthermore,
the techniques presented in this paper can be used to accelerate coding time for a
broad class of flow-based algorithms.

1

Introduction

The volume of data, measured in terms of IP traffic, is currently witnessing an exponential yearon-year growth [13]. Consequently, the cost of transmitting and storing data is rapidly becoming
prohibitive for service providers, such as cloud and streaming platforms. These challenges increasingly necessitate the need for the development of high-performance lossless compression codecs.
One promising solution to this problem has been the development of a new class of so-called “neural
compression” algorithms [30, 38, 18, 4, 17, 37, 26, 31, 6, 41]. These methods typically posit a deep
probabilistic model of the data distribution, which, in combination with entropy coders, can be used
to compress data with the minimal codelength bounded by the negative log-likelihood [29]. However,
despite reliably improved compression performance compared to traditional codecs [14, 33, 9, 34],
meaningful commercial applications have been limited by impractically slow coding speed.
In this paper, we focus on developing approaches with deep probabilistic models based on normalizing
flows [11, 25, 32, 27, 7, 28, 23]. A normalizing flow admits a learnable bijective mapping between
input data and a latent variable representation. In this paradigm, inputs can be compressed by
first transforming data to latent variables, with the resulting output encoded by a prior distribution.
Compared to other classes of generative models, normalizing flows typically perform best in both
tasks of probability density estimation (as compared with variational autoencoders [24, 15, 8]) and
inference speed (as compared with autoregressive factorizations [35, 39, 22]). This suggests that
compression with flows can jointly achieve high compression ratios along with fast coding times.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

