Two steps to risk sensitivity

Chris Gagne
MPI for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany
christopher.gagne@tuebingen.mpg.de

Peter Dayan
MPI for Biological Cybernetics
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
dayan@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Distributional reinforcement learning (RL) – in which agents learn about all the
possible long-term consequences of their actions, and not just the expected value –
is of great recent interest. One of the most important affordances of a distributional
view is facilitating a modern, measured, approach to risk when outcomes are not
completely certain. By contrast, psychological and neuroscientific investigations
into decision making under risk have utilized a variety of more venerable theoretical models such as prospect theory that lack axiomatically desirable properties
such as coherence. Here, we consider a particularly relevant risk measure for
modeling human and animal planning, called conditional value-at-risk (CVaR),
which quantifies worst-case outcomes (e.g., vehicle accidents or predation). We
first adopt a conventional distributional approach to CVaR in a sequential setting
and reanalyze the choices of human decision-makers in the well-known two-step
task, revealing substantial risk aversion that had been lurking under stickiness
and perseveration. We then consider a further critical property of risk sensitivity,
namely time consistency, showing alternatives to this form of CVaR that enjoy
this desirable characteristic. We use simulations to examine settings in which the
various forms differ in ways that have implications for human and animal planning
and behavior.

1

Introduction

Risk is integral to decision making, arising whenever there are uncertain outcomes. It is especially
critical when those outcomes are potentially calamitous, and plays an important role in psychiatric
illness [1]. However, psychological investigations into choice under risk (i) have yet to embrace the
strong formal foundations being developed in finance, AI and machine learning; and (ii) have mostly
focused on one-shot decision tasks, despite the ubiquity of situations in the real-world that require
planning, and growing interest in multi-step tasks for elucidating richer mechanisms of choice [2, 3].
To address these lacunæ, we consider a modern, theoretically well-founded coherent [4] risk measure
called conditional value-at-risk (CVaR). This exactly quantifies the lower tail of possible outcomes
– those which are important for survival and also tend to drive our most persistent worries. CVaR
has been applied to sequential decision problems, notably by means of distributional reinforcement
learning (RL; [5–7]). In this paradigm, the agent (or decision maker) estimates whole distributions
for potential outcomes that can arise from its actions. Risk measures, such as CVaR, can be applied
to these distributions to adjust decision making to any desired level of risk sensitivity.
In this paper, we combine CVaR with a distributional approach to examine risk sensitivity in the
intensively-investigated two-step sequential decision task [2]. We find that the choices of many
individuals reflect a large degree of risk aversion. Moreover, we show that more standard analyses ascribe this to enhanced choice perseveration and/or reduced estimates for learning rate, thus
misspecifying the effects of relatively high levels of uncertainty. Incorporating risk sensitivity into
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

