Dynamic Normalization and Relay for Video Action
Recognition

Dongqi Cai*
Intel Labs China
dongqi.cai@intel.com

Anbang Yao†
Intel Labs China
anbang.yao@intel.com

Yurong Chen
Intel Labs China
yurong.chen@intel.com

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been the dominant model for video
action recognition. Due to the huge memory and compute demand, popular action
recognition networks need to be trained with small batch sizes, which makes learning discriminative spatial-temporal representations for videos become a challenging
problem. In this paper, we present Dynamic Normalization and Relay (DNR), an
improved normalization design, to augment the spatial-temporal representation
learning of any deep action recognition model, adapting to small batch size training
settings. We observe that state-of-the-art action recognition networks usually apply
the same normalization parameters to all video data, and ignore the dependencies of
the estimated normalization parameters between neighboring frames (at the same
layer) and between neighboring layers (with all frames of a video clip). Inspired
by this, DNR introduces two dynamic normalization relay modules to explore the
potentials of cross-temporal and cross-layer feature distribution dependencies for
estimating accurate layer-wise normalization parameters. These two DNR modules
are instantiated as a light-weight recurrent structure conditioned on the current
input features, and the normalization parameters estimated from the neighboring
frames based features at the same layer or from the whole video clip based features
at the preceding layers. We first plug DNR into prevailing 2D CNN backbones
and test its performance on public action recognition datasets including Kinetics
and Something-Something. Experimental results show that DNR brings large
performance improvements to the baselines, achieving over 4.4% absolute margins
in top-1 accuracy without training bells and whistles. More experiments on 3D
backbones and several latest 2D spatial-temporal networks further validate its effectiveness. Code will be available at https://github.com/caidonkey/dnr.

1

Introduction

Human action recognition is a fundamental problem in video understanding, which has been studied
for decades. The performance of an intelligent action recognition system depends on how well it
can extract compact and discriminative features to characterize temporal evolutions of human object
appearance and its motion information in videos. Early seminal methods [29, 11, 8, 46, 28, 45, 58]
ubiquitously use hand-crafted features to construct spatial-temporal descriptors. In recent years, deep
learning based models [70] have become the mainstream in action recognition research, mainly due to
their remarkably better representation and generalization abilities compared to conventional methods,
especially to model large amounts of training data.
Despite the prevalence of deep learning based methods for action recognition, learning efficient
yet effective video representations is still a challenging problem. To improve the spatial-temporal
* The first two authors contributed equally to the writing of the paper. † Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

