SurvITE: Learning Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
from Time-to-Event Data
Alicia Curth∗
University of Cambridge
amc253@cam.ac.uk

Changhee Lee∗
Chung-Ang University
changheelee@cau.ac.kr

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the problem of inferring heterogeneous treatment effects from time-toevent data. While both the related problems of (i) estimating treatment effects for
binary or continuous outcomes and (ii) predicting survival outcomes have been well
studied in the recent machine learning literature, their combination – albeit of high
practical relevance – has received considerably less attention. With the ultimate goal
of reliably estimating the effects of treatments on instantaneous risk and survival
probabilities, we focus on the problem of learning (discrete-time) treatment-specific
conditional hazard functions. We find that unique challenges arise in this context
due to a variety of covariate shift issues that go beyond a mere combination of wellstudied confounding and censoring biases. We theoretically analyse their effects by
adapting recent generalization bounds from domain adaptation and treatment effect
estimation to our setting and discuss implications for model design. We use the
resulting insights to propose a novel deep learning method for treatment-specific
hazard estimation based on balancing representations. We investigate performance
across a range of experimental settings and empirically confirm that our method
outperforms baselines by addressing covariate shifts from various sources.

1

Introduction

The demand for methods evaluating the effect of treatments, policies and interventions on individuals
is rising as interest moves from estimating population effects to understanding effect heterogeneity
in fields ranging from economics to medicine. Motivated by this, the literature proposing machine
learning (ML) methods for estimating the effects of treatments on continuous (or binary) end-points
has grown rapidly, most prominently using tree-based methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], Gaussian processes
[6, 7], and, in particular, neural networks (NNs) [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. In comparison, the ML
literature on heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) estimation with time-to-event outcomes is rather
sparse. This is despite the immense practical relevance of this problem – e.g. many clinical studies
consider time-to-event outcomes; this could be the time to onset or progression of disease, the time to
occurrence of an adverse event such as a stroke or heart attack, or the time until death of a patient.
In part, the scarcity of HTE methods may be due to time-to-event outcomes being inherently more
challenging to model, which is attributable to two factors [16]: (i) time-to-event outcomes differ from
standard regression targets as the main objects of interest are usually not only expected survival times
but the dynamics of the underlying stochastic process, captured by hazard and survival functions,
and (ii) the presence of censoring. This has led to the development of a rich literature on survival
analysis particularly in (bio)statistics, see e.g. [16, 17]. Classically, the effects of treatments in
clinical studies with time-to-event outcomes are assessed by examining the coefficient of a treatment
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

