Learning where to learn:
Gradient sparsity in meta and continual learning

Johannes von Oswald*,1 , Dominic Zhao*,1 ,
Seijin Kobayashi1 , Simon Schug1 , Massimo Caccia2 ,
Nicolas Zucchet1 , João Sacramento1
*Equal contribution
1

Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich
2
Mila, University of Montreal & ServiceNow
{voswaldj,dozhao}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Finding neural network weights that generalize well from small datasets is difficult.
A promising approach is to learn a weight initialization such that a small number
of weight changes results in low generalization error. We show that this form of
meta-learning can be improved by letting the learning algorithm decide which
weights to change, i.e., by learning where to learn. We find that patterned sparsity
emerges from this process, with the pattern of sparsity varying on a problem-byproblem basis. This selective sparsity results in better generalization and less
interference in a range of few-shot and continual learning problems. Moreover, we
find that sparse learning also emerges in a more expressive model where learning
rates are meta-learned. Our results shed light on an ongoing debate on whether
meta-learning can discover adaptable features and suggest that learning by sparse
gradient descent is a powerful inductive bias for meta-learning systems.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning holds the promise of discovering inductive biases that improve the performance of a
primary learning process. Such a set of assumptions can materialize in various elements of the learner.
The well-known model-agnostic meta-learning [MAML; 11] algorithm aims to learn a neural network
initialization that generalizes well to new learning tasks. More sophisticated meta-learners augment
this procedure by additionally modulating the inner-loop learning dynamics [35, 32, 62, 12, 61, 9].
It has been recently shown that applying MAML while adapting only last-layer weights leads to
almost no decrease in performance in standard few-shot learning benchmarks. Our study builds upon
the surprising effectiveness of this form of meta-learning, known as almost no inner-loop training
[ANIL; 44]. Here, instead of deciding which weights to freeze a priori, we endow the meta-learner
with the possibility to explicitly stop changing certain weights in the inner-loop learning process.
We do this by introducing an adjustable binary mask which is elementwise multiplied with gradient
updates. This can be understood as a simple form of learned gradient modulation that induces sparsity.
Overfitting can thus be prevented and learning sped up by focusing adaptation to a sparse parameter
subset, discovered by meta-learning.
We find that our sparse-MAML algorithm recovers a behavior that is reminiscent of ANIL. It induces
high gradient sparsity in earlier layers of the network while allowing for adaptation in deeper layers
including the network’s output. Despite this reduction in the number of adaptable parameters, the
sparse learning patterns formed by sparse-MAML do not overly specialize to the family of tasks
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

