Label Disentanglement in Partition-based Extreme
Multilabel Classification
Xuanqing Liu∗
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
xqliu@cs.ucla.edu

Wei-Cheng Chang
Amazon Inc.
weicheng.cmu@gmail.com

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Hsiang-Fu Yu
Amazon Inc.
rofu.yu@gmail.com

Inderjit Dhillon
Amazon Inc. & UT Austin
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Partition-based methods are increasingly-used in extreme multi-label classification
(XMC) problems due to their scalability to large output spaces (e.g., millions or
more). However, existing methods partition the large label space into mutually
exclusive clusters, which is sub-optimal when labels have multi-modality and rich
semantics. For instance, the label “Apple” can be the fruit or the brand name, which
leads to the following research question: can we disentangle these multi-modal
labels with non-exclusive clustering tailored for downstream XMC tasks? In this
paper, we show that the label assignment problem in partition-based XMC can be
formulated as an optimization problem, with the objective of maximizing precision
rates. This leads to an efficient algorithm to form flexible and overlapped label
clusters, and a method that can alternatively optimizes the cluster assignments and
the model parameters for partition-based XMC. Experimental results on synthetic
and real datasets show that our method can successfully disentangle multi-modal
labels, leading to state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on four XMC benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The eXtreme Multi-label Classification (XMC) task is to find relevant labels from an enormous output
space of candidate labels, where the size is in the order of millions or more ([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]; etc.)
This problem is of interest in both academia and industry: for instance, tagging a web page given
its contents from tens of thousands of categories [6]; finding a few products that a customer will
purchase from among an enormous catalog on online retail stores [7]; or recommending profitable
keywords given an item/product from millions of advertisement keywords [8].
The XMC problem is challenging not only because of the data scalability (e.g., the number of
instances, features, and labels are of the scale of millions or more), but also due to the label sparsity
issue where there is little training signal for long-tailed labels. To tackle these issues, most prevailing
XMC algorithms use a partition-based approach. Instead of ranking the entire set of millions of labels,
they partition the label space into smaller mutually-exclusive clusters. Each instance is only mapped
to one or a few label clusters based on a matching model, and then ranking is only conducted within
the smaller subset of labels. Some exemplars are Parabel [8], eXtremeText [9], AttentionXML [10],
XR-Linear [11] and X-Transformer [12].
∗

Work done while Xuanqing was interning at Amazon Inc. Code will be released at https://github.com/
amzn/pecos.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

