Slow Learning and Fast Inference: Efficient Graph
Similarity Computation via Knowledge Distillation

Can Qin1∗ Handong Zhao3 Lichen Wang1 Huan Wang1 Yulun Zhang1 Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
3
Adobe Research

Abstract
Graph Similarity Computation (GSC) is essential to wide-ranging graph applications such as retrieval, plagiarism/anomaly detection, etc. The exact computation
of graph similarity, e.g., Graph Edit Distance (GED), is an NP-hard problem that
cannot be exactly solved within an adequate time given large graphs. Thanks
to the strong representation power of graph neural network (GNN), a variety of
GNN-based inexact methods emerged. To capture the subtle difference across
graphs, the key success is designing the dense interaction with features fusion at the
early stage, which, however, is a trade-off between speed and accuracy. For Slow
Learning of graph similarity, this paper proposes a novel early-fusion approach by
designing a co-attention-based feature fusion network on multilevel GNN features.
To further improve the speed without much accuracy drop, we introduce an efficient
GSC solution by distilling the knowledge from the slow early-fusion model to
the student one for Fast Inference. Such a student model also enables the offline
collection of individual graph embeddings, speeding up the inference time in
orders. To address the instability through knowledge transfer, we decompose
the dynamic joint embedding into the static pseudo individual ones for precise
teacher-student alignment. The experimental analysis on the real-world datasets
demonstrates the superiority of our approach over the state-of-the-art methods on
both accuracy and efficiency. Particularly, we speed up the prior art by more than
10x on the benchmark AIDS data.

1

Introduction

Measuring the similarity across graphs, i.e., Graph Similarity Computation (GSC), is one of the
core problems of graph data mining, centered around by multiple downstream tasks such as graph
retrieval [1, 2], plagiarism/anomaly detection [22, 41], graph clustering [39], etc. As shown in Fig. 1,
the graph similarity can be defined as distances between graphs, such as Graph Edit Distance (GED).
The conventional solutions towards GSC are the exact computation of these graph distances, which,
however, is an NP-hard problem. Therefore, such exact solutions are less favorable when handling
large-scale graphs due to the expensive computation cost. Computational time, especially run time
in inference stage, is particularly important in industrial scenarios. As a motivating example, in
graph-structured molecules or chemical compounds query for in-silico drug screening, fast identifying
similar compounds in a large database is a key process [25].
Leveraging the strong representational power of graph neural network (GNN) [21, 13, 43, 42], the
GNN-based approximate GSC solutions have gained increasing popularity. To adapt GNNs to the
GSC task, the target similarity score (e.g., GED) is normalized into the range of (0, 1]. In this way, the
∗

Corresponding Author: qin.ca@northeastern.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

