Best-case lower bounds in online learning

Cristóbal Guzmán 1,2 Nishant A. Mehta 3 Ali Mortazavi 3
1

2

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Twente
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Eng., Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Victoria
c.guzman@utwente.nl,nmehta@uvic.ca,alithemorty@gmail.com

Abstract
Much of the work in online learning focuses on the study of sublinear upper bounds
on the regret. In this work, we initiate the study of best-case lower bounds in online
convex optimization, wherein we bound the largest improvement an algorithm can
obtain relative to the single best action in hindsight. This problem is motivated by
the goal of better understanding the adaptivity of a learning algorithm. Another
motivation comes from fairness: it is known that best-case lower bounds are
instrumental in obtaining algorithms for decision-theoretic online learning (DTOL)
that satisfy a notion of group fairness. Our contributions are a general method
to provide best-case lower bounds in Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL)
algorithms with time-varying regularizers, which we use to show that best-case
lower bounds are of the same order as existing upper regret bounds: this includes
situations with a fixed learning rate, decreasing learning rates, timeless methods,
and adaptive gradient methods. In stark contrast, we show that the linearized
version of FTRL can attain negative linear regret. Finally, in DTOL with two
experts and binary losses, we fully characterize the best-case sequences, which
provides a finer understanding of the best-case lower bounds.

1

Introduction

A typical work in online learning would develop algorithms that provably achieve low regret for some
family of problems, where low regret means that a learning algorithm’s cumulative loss is not much
larger than that of the best expert (or action) in hindsight. Such a work often focuses on algorithms
that exhibit various forms of adaptivity, including anytime algorithms, which adapt to an unknown
time horizon T ; timeless algorithms, which obtain “first-order” regret bounds that replace dependence
on the time horizon by the cumulative loss of the best expert; and algorithms like AdaGrad [8], which
adapt to the geometry of the data. These examples of adaptivity all involve competing with the
best expert in hindsight, but adaptivity comes in many guises. Another form of adaptivity involves
upgrading the comparator itself: in the shifting regret (also known as the tracking regret) [11], the
learning algorithm competes with the best sequence of experts that shifts, or switches, k times for
some small k. Naturally, an algorithm with low shifting regret can potentially perform much better
than the single best expert in hindsight, thereby obtaining classical regret that is substantially negative.
Our work serves as a counterpoint to previous works: we show that a broad class of learning strategies
provably fails, against any sequence of data, to substantially outperform the best expert in hindsight.
Thus, these strategies are unable to obtain low shifting regret and, more generally, low regret against
any comparator sequence that can be substantially better than the best expert in hindsight. More
concretely, this paper initiates the study of best-case lower bounds in online convex optimization
(OCO) for the general family of learning strategies known as Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL)
[1]. That is, we study the minimum possible regret of a learning algorithm over all possible sequences.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

