Shapeshifter: a Parameter-efficient Transformer
using Factorized Reshaped Matrices

Aliakbar Panahi1,2,∗

Seyran Saeedi1,3,∗

Tom Arodz1,†

1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
2
C3 AI, Redwood City, CA
3
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
ali.panahi@c3.ai

seyran@ucsb.edu

tarodz@vcu.edu

Abstract
Language models employ a very large number of trainable parameters. Despite
being highly overparameterized, these networks often achieve good out-of-sample
test performance on the original task and easily fine-tune to related tasks. Recent
observations involving, for example, intrinsic dimension of the objective landscape
and the lottery ticket hypothesis, indicate that often training actively involves only
a small fraction of the parameter space. Thus, a question remains how large a
parameter space needs to be in the first place — the evidence from recent work on
model compression, parameter sharing, factorized representations, and knowledge
distillation increasingly shows that models can be made much smaller and still perform well. Here, we focus on factorized representations of matrices that underpin
dense, embedding, and self-attention layers. We use low-rank factorized representation of a reshaped and rearranged original matrix to achieve space efficient and
expressive linear layers. We prove that stacking such low-rank layers increases
their expressiveness, providing theoretical understanding for their effectiveness
in deep networks. In Transformer models, our approach leads to more than tenfold reduction in the number of total trainable parameters, including embedding,
attention, and feed-forward layers, with little degradation in on-task performance.
The approach operates out-of-the-box, replacing each parameter matrix with its
compact equivalent while maintaining the architecture of the network.

1

Introduction

Natural language models involve large number of parameters. A single encoder-decoder Transformer
[1] in its base variant has about 44 million parameters, not counting the word embedding matrix,
which adds another 10 million or more, depending on the chosen vocabulary or tokenization scheme.
Base variant of encoder-only BERT [2], including the embedding, has about 108 million parameters.
GPT-3 [3] has about 175 billion parameters, and the largest of the Switch Transformer [4] models has
1.5 trillion. This explosion in the model size has led to increased interest in approaches for reducing
the number of parameters in the model.
Models with high-dimensional parameter space have much lower intrinsic dimension [5], that is,
training trajectory can be successfully restricted to a random, smaller-dimensional subspace, even
∗
†

Work performed while at Virginia Commonwealth University.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

