Pareto Domain Adaptation

Fangrui Lv,1,∗ Jian Liang,2,∗ Kaixiong Gong,1 Shuang Li,1,†
Chi Harold Liu,1 Han Li,2 Di Liu,2 Guoren Wang1
1
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, China

2

Alibaba Group, China

{fangruilv,kxgong,shuangli,wanggrbit}@bit.edu.cn, liuchi02@gmail.com
2
{xuelang.lj,lihan.lh,wendi.ld}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) attempts to transfer the knowledge from a labeled source
domain to an unlabeled target domain that follows different distribution from the
source. To achieve this, DA methods include a source classification objective LS to
extract the source knowledge and a domain alignment objective LD to diminish the
domain shift, ensuring knowledge transfer. Typically, former DA methods adopt
some weight hyper-parameters to linearly combine the training objectives to form
an overall objective L. However, the gradient directions of these objectives may
conflict with each other due to domain shift. Under such circumstances, the linear
optimization scheme might decrease the overall objective value at the expense of
damaging one of the training objectives, leading to restricted solutions. In this
paper, we rethink the optimization scheme for DA from a gradient-based perspective. We propose a Pareto Domain Adaptation (ParetoDA) approach to control
the overall optimization direction, aiming to cooperatively optimize all training
objectives. Specifically, to reach a desirable solution on the target domain, we design a surrogate loss mimicking target classification. To improve target-prediction
accuracy to support the mimicking, we propose a target-prediction refining mechanism which exploits domain labels via Bayes’ theorem. On the other hand, since
prior knowledge of weighting schemes for objectives is often unavailable to guide
optimization to approach the optimal solution on the target domain, we propose a
dynamic preference mechanism to dynamically guide our cooperative optimization
by the gradient of the surrogate loss on a held-out unlabeled target dataset. Our
theoretical analyses show that the held-out data can guide but will not be over-fitted
by the optimization. Extensive experiments on image classification and semantic
segmentation benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of ParetoDA. Our code is
available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/ParetoDA.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation (DA) is a well-established paradigm for learning a model on an unlabeled target
domain with the assistance of a labeled related source domain, which has attracted a surge of interests
in the machine learning community [34, 33, 13]. By bridging the domain gap on the premise of
ensuring the performance of source classification task, DA can adapt the model learned from the
source domain to the target in the presence of data bias, which solves the dilemma of label scarcity in
many real-world applications [55, 47, 11, 45, 3, 57]. Extensive DA approaches have been proposed
in recent years, achieving great performances in many areas such as image classification [11, 27, 56],
semantic segmentation [49, 52, 16], and object detection [39, 43, 54].
∗ Equal contributions from both authors.
† Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

