Recognizing Vector Graphics without Rasterization

Xinyang Jiang1 , Lu Liu2∗, Caihua Shan1 , Yifei Shen3∗, Xuanyi Dong2∗, Dongsheng Li1
1
Microsoft Research Asia
{xinyangjiang,caihua.shan,dongsheng.li}@microsoft.com
2
University of Technology Sydney
u.liu.cs@icloud.com,xuanyi.dxy@gmail.com
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yshenaw@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a different data format for images: vector graphics. In
contrast to raster graphics which are widely used in image recognition, vector
graphics can be scaled up or down into any resolution without aliasing or information loss, due to the analytic representation of the primitives in the document.
Furthermore, vector graphics are able to give extra structural information on how
low-level elements group together to form high level shapes or structures. These
merits of graphic vectors have not been fully leveraged in existing methods. To
explore this data format, we target on the fundamental recognition tasks: object
localization and classification. We propose an efficient CNN-free pipeline that does
not render the graphic into pixels (i.e. rasterization), and takes textual document of
the vector graphics as input, called YOLaT (You Only Look at Text). YOLaT builds
multi-graphs to model the structural and spatial information in vector graphics, and
a dual-stream graph neural network is proposed to detect objects from the graph.
Our experiments show that by directly operating on vector graphics, YOLaT outperforms raster-graphic based object detection baselines in terms of both average
precision and efficiency. Code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/YOLaTVectorGraphicsRecognition.

1

Introduction

Raster graphics have been commonly used for image recognition due to its easy accessibility from
cameras. Most existing benchmark datasets are built upon raster graphics, from ImageNet [1] for
classification to COCO [2] for object detection. However, due to its pixel-based fix-sized format,
raster graphics may lead to aliasing when scaling up or down by interpolation. Fields like engineering
design or graphic design require a more precise way to describe visual content without aliasing when
scaling (e.g., graphic designs, mechanical drafts, floorplans, diagrams, etc), so another important
image format emerges, namely vector graphics.
Vector graphics achieve this powerful feature by recording how the graphics are constructed or drawn,
instead of the color bitmaps represented by pixel arrays defined in the raster graphics (first row in
Figure 1). Specifically, vector graphics contain a set of primitives like lines, curves and circles, which
is defined with parametric equations in analytic geometry and some extra attributes. As shown in
Figure 1, such vector graphic is usually a document where every primitive is defined precisely and
written in a line of textual command. Due to the analytic representation, with few parameters, vector
graphics can represent an object at any scale or even in infinite resolution, making it potentially a lot
more precise and compact image format than raster graphics. Also, instead of independent pixels,
∗

This work was done when the authors were interns at MSRA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

