Learning-Augmented Dynamic Power Management
with Multiple States via New Ski Rental Bounds

Antonios Antoniadis
University of Twente
Enschede, The Netherlands
a.antoniadis@utwente.nl
Marek Eliáš
Università Bocconi
Milan, Italy
marek.elias@unibocconi.it

Christian Coester
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
christian.coester@gmail.com

Adam Polak
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
adam.polak@epfl.ch

Bertrand Simon
IN2P3 Computing Center, CNRS
Villeurbanne, France
bertrand.simon@cnrs.fr

Abstract
We study the online problem of minimizing power consumption in systems with
multiple power-saving states. During idle periods of unknown lengths, an algorithm
has to choose between power-saving states of different energy consumption and
wake-up costs. We develop a learning-augmented online algorithm that makes
decisions based on (potentially inaccurate) predicted lengths of the idle periods.
The algorithm’s performance is near-optimal when predictions are accurate and
degrades gracefully with increasing prediction error, with a worst-case guarantee
almost identical to the optimal classical online algorithm for the problem. A key
ingredient in our approach is a new algorithm for the online ski rental problem in
the learning augmented setting with tight dependence on the prediction error. We
support our theoretical findings with experiments.

1

Introduction

Energy represents up to 70% of total operating costs of modern data centers [41] and is one of
the major quality-of-service parameters in battery-operated devices. In order to ameliorate this,
contemporary CPUs are equipped with sleep states to which the processor can transition during
periods of inactivity. In particular, the ACPI-standard [25] specifies that each processor should
possess, along with the active state 𝐶0 that is used for processing tasks, at least one sleep state 𝐶1.
Modern processors generally possess more sleep states 𝐶2, . . . ; for example, current Intel CPUs
implement at least 4 such 𝐶-states [19]. Apart from CPUs, such sleep states appear in many systems
ranging from hard drives or mobile devices to the start-stop feature found in many cars, and are
furthermore often employed when rightsizing data centers [2].
Intuitively, in a “deeper” sleep state, the set of switched-off components will be a superset of the
corresponding set in a more shallow sleep state. This implies that the running cost for residing in
that deeper state will be lower, but the wake-up cost to return to the active state 𝐶0 will be higher
compared to a more shallow sleep state. In other words, there is a tradeoff between the running and
the wake-up cost. During each idle period, a dynamic power management (DPM) strategy has to
decide in which state the system resides at each point in time, without a-priori knowledge about
the duration of the idle period. Optimally managing these sleep states is a challenging problem due
to its online nature. On the one hand, transitioning the system to a too deep state could be highly
suboptimal if the idle period ends shortly after. On the other hand, spending too much idle time
in a shallow state would accumulate high running costs. The impact of DPM strategies in practice
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

