Density-aware Chamfer Distance as a Comprehensive
Metric for Point Cloud Completion

Tong Wu1 , Liang Pan2 , Junzhe Zhang2,4 , Tai Wang1,3 , Ziwei Liu2 , Dahua Lin1,3,5
1
SenseTime-CUHK Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 SenseTime Research,
5
Centre of Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{wt020, wt019, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, junzhe001@e.ntu.edu.sg,
{liang.pan, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) are two broadly
adopted metrics for measuring the similarity between two point sets. However, CD
is usually insensitive to mismatched local density, and EMD is usually dominated by
global distribution while overlooks the fidelity of detailed structures. Besides, their
unbounded value range induces a heavy influence from the outliers. These defects
prevent them from providing a consistent evaluation. To tackle these problems,
we propose a new similarity measure named Density-aware Chamfer Distance
(DCD). It is derived from CD and benefits from several desirable properties: 1) it
can detect disparity of density distributions and is thus a more intensive measure of
similarity compared to CD; 2) it is stricter with detailed structures and significantly
more computationally efficient than EMD; 3) the bounded value range encourages
a more stable and reasonable evaluation over the whole test set. We adopt DCD
to evaluate the point cloud completion task, where experimental results show that
DCD pays attention to both the overall structure and local geometric details and
provides a more reliable evaluation even when CD and EMD contradict each
other. We can also use DCD as the training loss, which outperforms the same
model trained with CD loss on all three metrics. In addition, we propose a novel
point discriminator module that estimates the priority for another guided downsampling step, and it achieves noticeable improvements under DCD together with
competitive results for both CD and EMD. We hope our work could pave the way
for a more comprehensive and practical point cloud similarity evaluation. Our
code will be available at https://github.com/wutong16/Density_aware_
Chamfer_Distance.

1

Introduction

Point cloud as one of the fundamental 3D representations is attracting increasing attention due to its
efficiency, flexibility, and direct connection to real-world objects through 3D scanning devices. It
has been employed in a wide range of application scenarios and studied for various tasks [1, 4, 7,
11, 25, 33, 35, 27, 21, 36, 38]. A proper similarity measure between two point clouds is always a
crucial aspect for both guiding the training process and providing a fair and reasonable evaluation.
However, this is a challenging design considering the unordered and irregular data form and varying
point numbers.
Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) are two of the most universally acknowledged metrics in various point cloud tasks. CD is a nearest-neighbour-based method and benefits from
its efficient computation and flexible applicability for point sets with different point numbers. EMD
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

