End-to-end Multi-modal Video Temporal Grounding

1

Yi-Wen Chen1
Yi-Hsuan Tsai2
Ming-Hsuan Yang1,3,4
2
3
4
University of California, Merced
Phiar
Yonsei University
Google Research

Abstract
We address the problem of text-guided video temporal grounding, which aims to
identify the time interval of a certain event based on a natural language description.
Different from most existing methods that only consider RGB images as visual features, we propose a multi-modal framework to extract complementary information
from videos. Specifically, we adopt RGB images for appearance, optical flow for
motion, and depth maps for image structure. While RGB images provide abundant
visual cues of certain events, the performance may be affected by background
clutters. Therefore, we use optical flow to focus on large motion and depth maps
to infer the scene configuration when the action is related to objects recognizable
with their shapes. To integrate the three modalities more effectively and enable
inter-modal learning, we design a dynamic fusion scheme with transformers to
model the interactions between modalities. Furthermore, we apply intra-modal
self-supervised learning to enhance feature representations across videos for each
modality, which also facilitates multi-modal learning. We conduct extensive experiments on the Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions datasets, and show that the
proposed method performs favorably against state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

With the rapid growth of video data in our daily lives, video understanding has become an ever
increasingly important task in computer vision. Research involving other modalities such as text
and speech has also drawn much attention in recent years, e.g., video captioning [17, 23], and video
question answering [18, 16]. In this paper, we focus on text-guided video temporal grounding,
which aims to localize the starting and ending time of a segment corresponding to a text query. It
is one of the most effective approaches to understand video contents, and applicable to numerous
tasks, such as video retrieval, video editing and human-computer interaction. This problem is
considerably challenging as it requires accurate recognition of objects, scenes and actions, as well as
joint comprehension of video and language.
Existing methods [34, 26, 33, 22] usually consider only RGB images as visual cues, which are less
effective for recognizing objects and actions in videos with complex backgrounds. To understand
the video contents more holistically, we propose a multi-modal framework to learn complementary
visual features from RGB images, optical flow and depth maps. RGB images provide abundant
visual information, which is essential for visual recognition. However, existing methods based on
appearance alone are likely to be less effective for complex scenes with cluttered backgrounds. For
example, since the query text descriptions usually involve moving objects such as “Closing a door”
or “Throwing a pillow”, using optical flow as input is able to identify such actions with large motion.
On the other hand, depth is another cue that is invariant to color and lighting, and is often used
to complement the RGB input in object detection and semantic segmentation. In our task, depth
information helps the proposed model recognize actions involving objects with distinct shapes as
the context. For example, actions such as “Sitting in a bed” or “Working at a table” are not easily
recognized by optical flow due to small motion, but depth can provide structural information to assist
the learning process. We also note that, our goal is to design an end-to-end multi-modal framework
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

