Weighted model estimation for offline model-based
reinforcement learning

Toru Hishinuma
Kyoto University
hishinuma.toru.43n@kyoto-u.jp

Kei Senda
Kyoto University
senda@kuaero.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper discusses model estimation in offline model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), which is important for subsequent policy improvement using an
estimated model. From the viewpoint of covariate shift, a natural idea is model
estimation weighted by the ratio of the state-action distributions of offline data
and real future data. However, estimating such a natural weight is one of the main
challenges for off-policy evaluation, which is not easy to use. As an artificial
alternative, this paper considers weighting with the state-action distribution ratio
of offline data and simulated future data, which can be estimated relatively easily
by standard density ratio estimation techniques for supervised learning. Based
on the artificial weight, this paper defines a loss function for offline MBRL and
presents an algorithm to optimize it. Weighting with the artificial weight is justified
as evaluating an upper bound of the policy evaluation error. Numerical experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of weighting with the artificial weight.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework to learn a policy in an unknown environment [1].
Model-based RL (MBRL) is an approach that explicitly estimates a transition model and utilizes it to
improve a policy. Compared to model-free RL, one major advantage of MBRL is the data efficiency
[2–4], which is important for applications where the data collection is expensive, such as robotics or
healthcare. This paper focuses on offline MBRL, i.e. MBRL that learns a policy from previously
collected datasets.
One of the main challenges in offline MBRL is distribution shift [5]. The distribution of offline data
is different from the distribution of data obtained in the future when applying an improved policy.
This is a situation called covariate shift, where a model estimated using standard supervised learning
techniques such as empirical risk minimization (ERM) may not generalize to test data. A major idea
in MBRL is to estimate a model using such a standard method and to improve a policy using the
estimated model in regions where the predictions are accurate [6–8]. A point to be improved here is
model estimation without considering covariate shift. In supervised learning under covariate shift,
importance-weighted ERM can obtain good predictive performance [9]. If a model in offline MBRL
can be estimated in a similar way, then the estimated model will make more accurate predictions,
resulting in increased policy improvement. Motivated by this, this paper tackles the issue of weighted
model estimation considering covariate shift in offline MBRL.
From the viewpoint of covariate shift, a natural idea is weighting with the ratio of the state-action
distributions of offline data and real future data, as the agent uses a model to predict real future data.
For convenience, this paper calls the ratio “the natural weight.” However, estimating the natural
weight is one of the main challenges for off-policy evaluation [5, 10]. Compared to density ratio
estimation for supervised learning [11], the difficulty of off-policy evaluation is the inaccessibility of
samples from the distribution of real future data.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

