Divergence Frontiers for Generative Models:
Sample Complexity, Quantization Effects,
and Frontier Integrals
Lang Liu1
Krishna Pillutla2
Sewoong Oh2
Yejin Choi2,3

Sean Welleck2,3
Zaid Harchaoui1

Department of Statistics, University of Washington
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
3
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
1

2

Abstract
The spectacular success of deep generative models calls for quantitative tools to
measure their statistical performance. Divergence frontiers have recently been
proposed as an evaluation framework for generative models, due to their ability
to measure the quality-diversity trade-off inherent to deep generative modeling.
We establish non-asymptotic bounds on the sample complexity of divergence
frontiers. We also introduce frontier integrals which provide summary statistics of
divergence frontiers. We show how smoothed estimators such as Good-Turing or
Krichevsky-Trofimov can overcome the missing mass problem and lead to faster
rates of convergence. We illustrate the theoretical results with numerical examples
from natural language processing and computer vision.

1 Introduction
Deep generative models have recently taken a giant leap forward in their ability to model complex,
high-dimensional distributions. Recent advances are able to produce incredibly detailed and realistic
images [34, 51, 32], strikingly consistent and coherent text [50, 66, 6], and music of near-human
quality [16]. The advances in these models, particularly in the image domain, have been spurred by
the development of quantitative evaluation tools which enable a large-scale comparison of models, as
well as diagnosing of where and why a generative model fails [55, 38, 27, 54, 31].
Divergence frontiers were recently proposed by Djolonga et al. [18] to quantify the trade-off between
quality and diversity in generative modeling with modern deep neural networks [54, 37, 59, 44, 49].
In particular, a good generative model must not only produce high-quality samples that are likely
under the target distribution but also cover the target distribution with diverse samples.
While this framework is mathematically elegant and empirically successful [37, 49], the statistical
properties of divergence frontiers are not well understood. Estimating divergence frontiers from
data for large generative models involves two approximations: (a) joint quantization of the model
distribution and the target distribution into discrete distributions with quantization level k, and (b)
statistical estimation of the divergence frontiers based on the empirical estimators of the quantized
distributions.
Djolonga et al. [18] argue that the quantization often introduces a positive bias, making the distributions appear closer than they really are; while a small sample size can result in a pessimistic estimate
of the divergence frontiers. The latter effect is due to the missing mass of the samples, causing the
two distributions to appear farther than they really are because the samples do not cover some parts
of the distributions. The first consideration favors a large k, while the second favors a small k.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

