The Limits of Optimal Pricing in the Dark∗

Minbiao Han
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
mh2ye@virginia.edu

Quinlan Dawkins
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
qed4wg@virginia.edu

Haifeng Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
hx4ad@virginia.edu

Abstract
A ubiquitous learning problem in today’s digital market is, during repeated interactions between a seller and a buyer, how a seller can gradually learn optimal
pricing decisions based on the buyer’s past purchase responses. A fundamental
challenge of learning in such a strategic setup is that the buyer will naturally have
incentives to manipulate his responses in order to induce more favorable learning
outcomes for him. To understand the limits of the seller’s learning when facing
such a strategic and possibly manipulative buyer, we study a natural yet powerful
buyer manipulation strategy. That is, before the pricing game starts, the buyer
simply commits to “imitate” a different value function by pretending to always
react optimally according to this imitative value function.
We fully characterize the optimal imitative value function that the buyer should
imitate as well as the resultant seller revenue and buyer surplus under this optimal
buyer manipulation. Our characterizations reveal many useful insights about what
happens at equilibrium. For example, a seller with concave production cost will
obtain essentially 0 revenue at equilibrium whereas the revenue for a seller with
convex production cost is the Bregman divergence of her cost function between
no production and certain production. Finally, and importantly, we show that a
more powerful class of pricing schemes does not necessarily increase, in fact,
may be harmful to, the seller’s revenue. Our results not only lead to an effective
prescriptive way for buyers to manipulate learning algorithms but also shed lights
on the limits of what a seller can really achieve when pricing in the dark.

1

Introduction

Pricing is a basic question in microeconomics [24] as well as a ubiquitous problem in today’s digital
markets [16]. In its textbook style setup, there are two agents: a buyer (he) and a seller (she). The
seller produces d types of divisible goods for sale and has production cost c(x) for producing bundle
x ∈ Rd+ of the d goods. Using a standard linear pricing scheme with unit price pi for goods i ∈ [d],
the seller charges the buyer x · p when he purchases bundle x ∈ Rd+ under price vector p ∈ Rd+ .
Naturally, the buyer’s optimal bundle for purchase depends on his value function v(x) about the
products. We assume that, given price vector p, the rational buyer will always pick the optimal bundle
that maximizes his quasilinear utility [v(x) − x · p]. The key question of interest is how the seller
can compute the revenue-maximizing optimal prices assuming rational buyer purchase behaviors.
∗

This work is supported by a Google Faculty Research Award and an NSF grant CCF-2132506.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

