Efficient Active Learning for Gaussian Process
Classification by Error Reduction

Guang Zhao1 , Edward R. Dougherty1 , Byung-Jun Yoon1,3 , Francis J. Alexander3 , & Xiaoning Qian1,2,3
guangzhao@tamu.edu, falexander@bnl.gov,
{edward,bjyoon,xqian}@ece.tamu.edu
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering,
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843, USA

3

Computational Science Initiative,
Brookhaven National Laborator
Upton, NY 11973, USA

Abstract
Active learning sequentially selects the best instance for labeling by optimizing
an acquisition function to enhance data/label efficiency. The selection can be
either from a discrete instance set (pool-based scenario) or a continuous instance
space (query synthesis scenario). In this work, we study both active learning
scenarios for Gaussian Process Classification (GPC). The existing active learning
strategies that maximize the Estimated Error Reduction (EER) aim at reducing
the classification error after training with the new acquired instance in a onestep-look-ahead manner. The computation of EER-based acquisition functions
is typically prohibitive as it requires retraining the GPC with every new query.
Moreover, as the EER is not smooth, it can not be combined with gradient-based
optimization techniques to efficiently explore the continuous instance space for
query synthesis. To overcome these critical limitations, we develop computationally
efficient algorithms for EER-based active learning with GPC. We derive the joint
predictive distribution of label pairs as a one-dimensional integral, as a result of
which the computation of the acquisition function avoids retraining the GPC for
each query, remarkably reducing the computational overhead. We also derive the
gradient chain rule to efficiently calculate the gradient of the acquisition function,
which leads to the first query synthesis active learning algorithm implementing
EER-based strategies. Our experiments clearly demonstrate the computational
efficiency of the proposed algorithms. We also benchmark our algorithms on both
synthetic and real-world datasets, which show superior performance in terms of
sampling efficiency compared to the existing state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Compared to traditional passive learning with randomly sampled training instances, active learning
aims at “optimally” querying instances for labeling to achieve label efficiency when training machine
learning models, especially when labeling is difficult or costly. There are two fundamental scenarios
of active learning discussed in the literature: query synthesis and pool-based sampling [14]. In
query synthesis, the leaner can request labels for any instance generated from a continuous feature
space while pool-based sampling selects the instance from a finite set. Query synthesis is more
challenging due to the infinite search space and inherent higher label uncertainty. Recent research on
query synthesis with deep generative models has shown promising potential [18, 11]. However, in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

