Pragmatic Image Compression
for Human-in-the-Loop Decision-Making
Siddharth Reddy, Anca D. Dragan, Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley
{sgr,anca,svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Standard lossy image compression algorithms aim to preserve an image’s appearance, while minimizing the number of bits needed to transmit it. However, the
amount of information actually needed by a user for downstream tasks – e.g.,
deciding which product to click on in a shopping website – is likely much lower.
To achieve this lower bitrate, we would ideally only transmit the visual features that
drive user behavior, while discarding details irrelevant to the user’s decisions. We
approach this problem by training a compression model through human-in-the-loop
learning as the user performs tasks with the compressed images. The key insight
is to train the model to produce a compressed image that induces the user to take
the same action that they would have taken had they seen the original image. To
approximate the loss function for this model, we train a discriminator that tries
to distinguish whether a user’s action was taken in response to the compressed
image or the original. We evaluate our method through experiments with human
participants on four tasks: reading handwritten digits, verifying photos of faces,
browsing an online shopping catalogue, and playing a car racing video game. The
results show that our method learns to match the user’s actions with and without
compression at lower bitrates than baseline methods, and adapts the compression model to the user’s behavior: it preserves the digit number and randomizes
handwriting style in the digit reading task, preserves hats and eyeglasses while
randomizing faces in the photo verification task, preserves the perceived price of
an item while randomizing its color and background in the online shopping task,
and preserves upcoming bends in the road in the car racing game.

1

Introduction

Modern web platforms serve billions of images every day,
and typically rely on lossy compression algorithms to store
and transmit this data efficiently. Recent work on machine
learning methods for lossy image compression [1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] improves upon standard methods like JPEG
[12] by training neural networks to minimize the number
of bits needed to generate high-fidelity reconstructions. In
this paper, we explore the idea of compressing images to
even smaller sizes by intentionally allowing reconstructions
to deviate drastically from the visual appearance of their
originals, and instead optimizing reconstructions for the
specific, downstream tasks that the user wants to perform
with them, such as video conferencing, online gaming, or
remotely operating space robots [13].

Original

Compressed
(for users with four different tasks)
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Images compressed 2-4x smaller
than JPEG retain information for tasks like
shopping for cars in a perceived price range
(a), surveying car colors (b), and checking
photos for eyeglasses (c) or hats (d).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

