Cortico-cerebellar networks
as decoupling neural interfaces
Joseph Pemberton∗
Bristol Computational Neuroscience Unit
Dept. of Computer Science, SCEEM
University of Bristol, UK
oq19042@bristol.ac.uk

Ellen Boven∗
Bristol Computational Neuroscience Unit
School of Phys., Pharm. and Neuroscience
University of Bristol, UK
ellen.boven@bristol.ac.uk

Richard Apps
School of Phys., Pharm. and Neuroscience
University of Bristol, UK
r.apps@bristol.ac.uk

Rui Ponte Costa
Bristol Computational Neuroscience Unit
Dept. of Computer Science, SCEEM
University of Bristol, UK
rui.costa@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
The brain solves the credit assignment problem remarkably well. For credit to be
assigned across neural networks they must, in principle, wait for speciﬁc neural
computations to ﬁnish. How the brain deals with this inherent locking problem has
remained unclear. Deep learning methods suffer from similar locking constraints
both on the forward and feedback phase. Recently, decoupled neural interfaces
(DNIs) were introduced as a solution to the forward and feedback locking problems
in deep networks. Here we propose that a specialised brain region, the cerebellum, helps the cerebral cortex solve similar locking problems akin to DNIs. To
demonstrate the potential of this framework we introduce a systems-level model
in which a recurrent cortical network receives online temporal feedback predictions from a cerebellar module. We test this cortico-cerebellar recurrent neural
network (ccRNN) model on a number of sensorimotor (line and digit drawing)
and cognitive tasks (pattern recognition and caption generation) that have been
shown to be cerebellar-dependent. In all tasks, we observe that ccRNNs facilitates
learning while reducing ataxia-like behaviours, consistent with classical experimental observations. Moreover, our model also explains recent behavioural and
neuronal observations while making several testable predictions across multiple
levels. Overall, our work offers a novel perspective on the cerebellum as a brainwide decoupling machine for efﬁcient credit assignment and opens a new avenue
between deep learning and neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Efﬁcient credit assignment in the brain is a critical part of learning. However, how the brain solves
the credit assignment problem remains a mystery. One of the central issues of credit assignment
across multiple stages of processing is the need to wait for later stages to ﬁnish their computation
before learning can take place. In deep artiﬁcial neural networks, where processing is divided
into a forward (i.e. prediction) and feedback (i.e. error backpropagation) phase, these constraints
are explicit [1–5]. Given hidden activity h at a certain layer or timestep, network computations
∗

Equal contributions

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

