Flexible Option Learning

Martin Klissarov
Mila, McGill University
martin.klissarov@mail.mcgill.ca

Doina Precup
Mila, McGill University and DeepMind
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning (RL), offers the promise of improving generalization and knowledge transfer in complex environments, by propagating information more efficiently over time. Although option learning was
initially formulated in a way that allows updating many options simultaneously,
using off-policy, intra-option learning (Sutton, Precup & Singh, 1999), many of
the recent hierarchical reinforcement learning approaches only update a single
option at a time: the option currently executing. We revisit and extend intra-option
learning in the context of deep reinforcement learning, in order to enable updating
all options consistent with current primitive action choices, without introducing
any additional estimates. Our method can therefore be naturally adopted in most
hierarchical RL frameworks. When we combine our approach with the option-critic
algorithm for option discovery, we obtain significant improvements in performance
and data-efficiency across a wide variety of domains.

1

Introduction

Temporal abstraction is a fundamental component of intelligent agents as it allows for explicit
reasoning at different timescales. The options framework [Sutton et al., 1999b] provides a clear
formalism for such abstractions and proposes efficient ways to learn directly from the environment’s
reward signal. As the agent needs to learn about the value of a possibly large number of options, it
is crucial to maximize each interaction to ensure sample efficiency. Sutton et al. [1999b] therefore
propose the intra-option value learning algorithm, which updates all consistent options simultaneously
from a single transition.
Recently there have been important developments on how to learn or discover options from scratch
when using function approximation [Bacon et al., 2016, Smith et al., 2018, Riemer et al., 2018,
Bagaria and Konidaris, 2019, Zhang and Whiteson, 2019, Harutyunyan et al., 2017]. However, most
of recent research only updates a single option at a time, that is, the option selected by the agent in
the sampled state. This is perhaps due to the fact that consistency between options is less likely to
arise naturally when using function approximation.
We propose a scalable method to better exploit the agent’s experience by updating all relevant options,
where relevance is defined as the likelihood of the option being selected. We present a decomposition
of the state-option distribution which we leverage to remain consistent in the function approximation
setting while providing performance improvements similarly to the ones shown in the tabular setting
[Sutton et al., 1999b].
When an option set is given to the agent and only the value of each option remains to be learned,
updating all relevant options lets the agent determine faster when to apply each of them. In the
case where all options components are learned from scratch, our approach can additionally help
mitigate the issue of degenerate solutions [Harb et al., 2017]. Indeed, such solutions are likely due to
the "rich-get-richer" phenomenon where an updated option has more chance of being picked again
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

