An Empirical Study of Adder Neural Networks for
Object Detection

Xinghao Chen1 , Chang Xu2 , Minjing Dong2,1 , Chunjing Xu1 , Yunhe Wang1∗
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
{xinghao.chen, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Adder neural networks (AdderNets) have shown impressive performance on image
classification with only addition operations, which are more energy efficient than
traditional convolutional neural networks built with multiplications. Compared
with classification, there is a strong demand on reducing the energy consumption
of modern object detectors via AdderNets for real-world applications such as
autonomous driving and face detection. In this paper, we present an empirical study
of AdderNets for object detection. We first reveal that the batch normalization
statistics in the pre-trained adder backbone should not be frozen, since the relatively
large feature variance of AdderNets. Moreover, we insert more shortcut connections
in the neck part and design a new feature fusion architecture for avoiding the sparse
features of adder layers. We present extensive ablation studies to explore several
design choices of adder detectors. Comparisons with state-of-the-arts are conducted
on COCO and PASCAL VOC benchmarks. Specifically, the proposed Adder FCOS
achieves a 37.8% AP on the COCO val set, demonstrating comparable performance
to that of the convolutional counterpart with an about 1.4× energy reduction.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a foundational problem in computer vision and has attracted tremendous interests
from both academic and industrial communities for decades [21]. It has a wide range of applications
for various areas, e.g., video surveillance, autonomous driving and robotic vision. Deep neural
networks have indeed dominated the research of object detection in recent years since the pioneering
work of R-CNN [12]. The performance of object detectors has been considerably improved by
various designs of architecture, loss function etc. However, most modern accurate object detectors
require massive computation, making them quite challenging in resource-constraint applications,
e.g., mobile phones and embedded devices.
Various approaches have been proposed to compress and accelerate convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for classification tasks, including channel pruning [24, 14, 26, 38], low-bit quantization [50,
25] and lightweight network design [33, 27]. These methods reduce the number of parameters or
inference latency while maintaining the accuracy to the maximum extent. Such model compression
methods have also been explored in a variety of down-stream tasks, such as semantic segmentation [7]
and image super resolution [44] etc.
There have been a few methods aiming at fast and efficient object detectors. One family of solutions
is using new architecture design [23, 31, 29, 41]. For example, YOLO series [30, 31] have achieved
good trade-off between running speed and accuracy via a novel one-stage detection framework.
Another family of solutions is to use common model compression methods for accelerating object
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

