Generalized Shape Metrics on Neural Representations

Alex H. Williams
Statistics Department
Stanford University
ahwillia@stanford.edu

Erin Kunz
Electrical Engineering Department
Stanford University
ekunz@stanford.edu

Simon Kornblith
Google Research, Toronto
skornblith@google.com

Scott W. Linderman
Statistics Department
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Understanding the operation of biological and artificial networks remains a difficult
and important challenge. To identify general principles, researchers are increasingly interested in surveying large collections of networks that are trained on, or
biologically adapted to, similar tasks. A standardized set of analysis tools is now
needed to identify how network-level covariates—such as architecture, anatomical
brain region, and model organism—impact neural representations (hidden layer
activations). Here, we provide a rigorous foundation for these analyses by defining
a broad family of metric spaces that quantify representational dissimilarity. Using
this framework, we modify existing representational similarity measures based on
canonical correlation analysis and centered kernel alignment to satisfy the triangle
inequality, formulate a novel metric that respects the inductive biases in convolutional layers, and identify approximate Euclidean embeddings that enable network
representations to be incorporated into essentially any off-the-shelf machine learning method. We demonstrate these methods on large-scale datasets from biology
(Allen Institute Brain Observatory) and deep learning (NAS-Bench-101). In doing
so, we identify relationships between neural representations that are interpretable
in terms of anatomical features and model performance.

1

Introduction

The extent to which different deep networks or neurobiological systems use equivalent representations in support of similar task demands is a topic of persistent interest in machine learning
and neuroscience [1–3]. Several methods including linear regression [4, 5], canonical correlation
analysis (CCA; [6, 7]), representational similarity analysis (RSA; [8]), and centered kernel alignment (CKA; [9]) have been used to quantify the similarity of hidden layer activation patterns. These
measures are often interpreted on an ordinal scale and are employed to compare a limited number of
networks—e.g., they can indicate whether networks A and B are more or less similar than networks
A and C. While these comparisons have yielded many insights [4–12], the underlying methodologies
have not been extended to systematic analyses spanning thousands of networks.
To unify existing approaches and enable more sophisticated analyses, we draw on ideas from statistical
shape analysis [13–15] to develop dissimilarity measures that are proper metrics—i.e., measures
that are symmetric and respect the triangle inequality. This enables several off-the-shelf methods
with theoretical guarantees for classification (e.g. k-nearest neighbors, [16]) and clustering (e.g.
hierarchical clustering [17]). Existing similarity measures can violate the triangle inequality, which
complicates these downstream analyses [18–20]. However, we show that existing dissimilarity
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

