Deep Extrapolation for
Attribute-Enhanced Generation
Alvin Chan*
Salesforce Research, NTU

Ali Madani*
Salesforce Research

Ben Krause
Salesforce Research

Nikhil Naik
Salesforce Research

Abstract
Attribute extrapolation in sample generation is challenging for deep neural networks operating beyond the training distribution. We formulate a new task for
extrapolation in sequence generation, focusing on natural language and proteins,
and propose GENhance, a generative framework that enhances attributes through
a learned latent space. Trained on movie reviews and a computed protein stability dataset, GENhance can generate strongly-positive text reviews and highly
stable protein sequences without being exposed to similar data during training.
We release our benchmark tasks and models to contribute to the study of generative modeling extrapolation and data-driven design in biology and chemistry:
https://github.com/salesforce/genhance.

1

Introduction

Deep generative neural networks can generate realistic data across data-types, from sequences to
images to time-series data, with applications in domains such as natural language processing (NLP),
computer vision, and speech. Beyond canonical domains, the scientific application of synthetic design
of proteins, molecules, and materials can be cast as generative modeling of sequences, graphs, or
images (Anand & Huang, 2018; De Cao & Kipf, 2018; Madani et al., 2020, 2021). Most often, the
goal is to design or generate a sample that improves upon the attribute label of interest (Fig. 1-(left)),
which we term attribute-enhanced generation. Examples include generating a protein sequence
with higher binding affinity or a nanomaterial structure with an energetically favorable state, as
compared to all of the samples in the training distribution. In these scientific fields, traditional
methods for synthetic object design with improved attributes are iterative and expensive, relying on
labor- or compute-intensive methods (Bepler & Berger, 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Hie & Yang, 2021).
Hence, deep generative models that can design new proteins, molecules, and materials with improved
attributes have the potential to dramatically accelerate design research. Beyond scientific applications,
extrapolation in generation has potential applications in NLP, such as reducing toxicity or operating
in low-resource settings.
It is, however, a well-known challenge for deep neural networks to generate samples beyond the
training distribution (Arora et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020). In this work, we
develop a method for extrapolation, particularly for sequences. Our approach, called GENhance, is
designed to generate an enhanced sequence using a learned latent space. GENhance consists of a
generator (sampler) and a discriminator (ranker) that are jointly trained to minimize generation and
discrimination losses, regularized by latent vector smoothing and a cycle-consistency loss.
We evaluate GENhance in two data domains. First, we use the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST), a
natural language benchmark containing movie reviews with five discrete sentiment attributes (Socher
et al., 2013), to show that GENhance generates strongly positive reviews, after training with no
* Equal Contribution
Correspondence to amadani@salesforce.com
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

