Open Rule Induction

Wanyun Cui∗, Xingran Chen
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
cui.wanyun@sufe.edu.cn, xingran.chen.sufe@gmail.com

Abstract
Rules have a number of desirable properties. It is easy to understand, infer new
knowledge, and communicate with other inference systems. One weakness of the
previous rule induction systems is that they only find rules within a knowledge base
(KB) and therefore cannot generalize to more open and complex real-world rules.
Recently, the language model (LM)-based rule generation are proposed to enhance
the expressive power of the rules. In this paper, we revisit the differences between
KB-based rule induction and LM-based rule generation. We argue that, while
KB-based methods inducted rules by discovering data commonalities, the current
LM-based methods are “learning rules from rules”. This limits these methods to
only produce “canned” rules whose patterns are constrained by the annotated rules,
while discarding the rich expressive power of LMs for free text.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose the open rule induction problem, which aims to
induce open rules utilizing the knowledge in LMs. Besides, we propose the Orion
(open rule induction) system to automatically mine open rules from LMs without
supervision of annotated rules. We conducted extensive experiments to verify
the quality and quantity of the inducted open rules. Surprisingly, when applying
the open rules in downstream tasks (i.e. relation extraction), these automatically
inducted rules even outperformed the manually annotated rules. 2

1

Introduction

Rules induction is a classical problem aiming to find rules from datasets [5, 7]. Previous work has
focused on discovering rules within a system. For example, one of the core tasks of inductive logic
programming (ILP) is to mine shared rules in the form of Horn clauses from data. Early studies
are mainly applied to relatively small relational datasets. Since the axioms of rules is limited to the
existing entities and relations within the datasets, the expressiveness of such rules is limited and
brittle. John McCarthy pointed out these rules lack commonsense and “are difficult to extend beyond
the scope originally contemplated by their designers” [18]. In recent years, with the emergence of
large-scale knowledge bases (KB) [3] and open information extraction [4] systems, rules mined from
them (e.g. AMIE+ [8], Sherlock [26]) are built on a richer set of entities and relations. Nevertheless,
both the quantity of knowledge and the complexity of rules are still far weaker than the real-world
due to the expressive power of these knowledge bases.
Recently, with the rapid development of pre-trained language models (LM) [6, 22], researchers
have found that pre-trained LMs can be used as high-quality open knowledge bases [21, 28] and
commonsense knowledge bases [27, 25]. Based on the expression of natural language for complex
relationships, the LM as a knowledge base can be used to generalize rules with more expressive
power. Based on LMs, Comet [14] proposed to generate new rules (if-then clauses) for arbitrary
texts. The generative model is trained on annotated if-then rules in the form of natural language.
∗
2

Corresponding author
Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/chenxran/Orion

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

