Graph Posterior Network: Bayesian Predictive
Uncertainty for Node Classification

Maximilian Stadler∗, Bertrand Charpentier∗, Simon Geisler, Daniel Zügner,
Stephan Günnemann
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{stadlmax, charpent, geisler, zuegnerd, guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
The interdependence between nodes in graphs is key to improve class predictions
on nodes and utilized in approaches like Label Propagation (LP) or in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Nonetheless, uncertainty estimation for non-independent
node-level predictions is under-explored. In this work, we explore uncertainty
quantification for node classification in three ways: (1) We derive three axioms
explicitly characterizing the expected predictive uncertainty behavior in homophilic
attributed graphs. (2) We propose a new model Graph Posterior Network (GPN)
which explicitly performs Bayesian posterior updates for predictions on interdependent nodes. GPN provably obeys the proposed axioms. (3) We extensively
evaluate GPN and a strong set of baselines on semi-supervised node classification
including detection of anomalous features, and detection of left-out classes. GPN
outperforms existing approaches for uncertainty estimation in the experiments.

1

Introduction

Accurate and rigorous uncertainty estimation is key for reliable machine learning models in safetycritical domains [67]. It quantifies the confidence of machine learning models, thus allowing them to
validate knowledgeable predictions or flag predictions on unknown input domains. Uncertainty is
commonly divided in aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty [28]. The aleatoric uncertainty accounts for
irreducible uncertainty (e.g., due to inherent sensor noise). The epistemic uncertainty accounts for a
lack of information for accurate prediction (e.g., test data significantly different from training data).
Traditionally, machine learning models assume i.i.d. inputs, thus performing predictions based on
input features only. For uncertainty estimation on i.i.d. inputs, a large class of definitions, models and
evaluation methods have been introduced [28, 62, 3, 78, 50]. Further, uncertainty estimation has been
successfully applied to different tasks e.g. out-of-distribution (OOD) or shift detection [78], active
learning [75, 55], continual learning [4] or reinforcement learning [18].
In contrast, uncertainty estimation on interdependent nodes is more complex than on i.i.d. inputs
and under-explored [3]. A node in an attributed graph is characterized by two types of information:
its features and its neighborhood. While the feature information indicates the node position in the
feature space – similarly to i.i.d. inputs –, the neighborhood information indicates the additional
node position in the network space. To leverage the neighborhood information, recent graph neural
networks (GNNs) successfully proposed to enrich and correct the possibly noisy information of the
features of a single node by aggregating them with the features of its neighborhood [46, 92, 48]. It
naturally leads to the distinction between predictions without network effects based exclusively on
their own node feature representation, and predictions with network effects based on neighborhood
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

