Fast Projection onto the Capped Simplex with
Applications to Sparse Regression in Bioinformatics
Andersen Ang⇤
Dept. of Combinatorics and Optimization
University of Waterloo
ms3ang@uwaterloo.ca
Nianjun Liu
Dept. of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Indiana University Bloomington
liunian@indiana.edu

Jianzhu Ma
Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Peking University
majianzhu@pku.edu.cn

Kun Huang
Dept. of Biostatistics and Health Data Science
Indiana University
kunhuang@iu.edu

Yijie Wang⇤
Dept. of Computer Science
Indiana University Bloomington
yijwang@iu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of projecting a vector onto the so-called k-capped simplex,
which is a hyper-cube cut by a hyperplane. For an n-dimensional input vector with
bounded elements, we found that a simple algorithm based on Newton’s method is
able to solve the projection problem to high precision with a complexity roughly
about O(n), which has a much lower computational cost compared with the existing
sorting-based methods proposed in the literature. We provide a theory for partial
explanation and justification of the method.
We demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can produce a solution of the projection
problem with high precision on large scale datasets, and the algorithm is able to
significantly outperform the state-of-the-art methods in terms of runtime (about
6-8 times faster than a commercial software with respect to CPU time for input
vector with 1 million variables or more).
We further illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm on solving sparse
regression in a bioinformatics problem. Empirical results on the GWAS dataset
(with 1,500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms) show that, when using the
proposed method to accelerate the Projected Quasi-Newton (PQN) method, the
accelerated PQN algorithm is able to handle huge-scale regression problem and it
is more efficient (about 3-6 times faster) than the current state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The k-capped simplex [17] is defined as k := x 2 Rn x> 1  k, 0  x  1 , where k 2 R
is an input parameter, 0 and 1 are vectors of zeros and vector of ones in Rn , respectively (resp.),
and the sign  is taken element-wise. Geometrically, for some k > 0, the set k represents an
n-dimensional hyper-cube [0, 1]n with a corner chopped off by the half-space x> 1  k. If the
half-space constraint x> 1  k in k is replaced by the hyper-plane constraint x> 1 = k, for some
k > 0, this set represents the slice of the hyper-cube cut by the hyper-plane, and we denote this set as
=
k . In this paper, we consider the problem of projecting a vector y onto the k-capped simplex:
n1
o
x⇤ = proj k (y) = argmin
kx yk22 s.t. x 2 k (or =
)
.
(1)
k
2
x
⇤
Both authors contributed equally.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

