Multi-Scale Representation Learning on Proteins

Vignesh Ram Somnath∗
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
vsomnath@ethz.ch

Charlotte Bunne∗
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
bunnec@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Proteins are fundamental biological entities mediating key roles in cellular function
and disease. This paper introduces a multi-scale graph construction of a protein –
H OLO P ROT – connecting surface to structure and sequence. The surface captures
coarser details of the protein, while sequence as primary component and structure –
comprising secondary and tertiary components – capture finer details. Our graph
encoder then learns a multi-scale representation by allowing each level to integrate
the encoding from level(s) below with the graph at that level. We test the learned
representation on different tasks, (i.) ligand binding affinity (regression), and
(ii.) protein function prediction (classification). On the regression task, contrary to
previous methods, our model performs consistently and reliably across different
dataset splits, outperforming all baselines on most splits. On the classification task,
it achieves a performance close to the top-performing model while using 10x fewer
parameters. To improve the memory efficiency of our construction, we segment
the multiplex protein surface manifold into molecular superpixels and substitute
the surface with these superpixels at little to no performance loss.

1

Introduction

Protein design and engineering has become a crucial component of pharmaceutical research and
development, finding application in a wide variety of diagnostic and industrial settings. Besides
understanding the design principles determining structure and function of proteins, current efforts
seek to further enhance or discover proteins with properties useful for technological or therapeutic
applications. To efficiently guide the search in the vast design space of functional proteins, we
need to be able to robustly predict properties of a candidate protein [Yang et al., 2019]. Moreover,
understanding role and function of proteins is crucial to study causes and mechanism of human
disease [Fessenden, 2017].
To achieve this, representations incorporating the complex nature of proteins are required. Proteins
consist of amino acids, organic molecules linked by peptide bonds forming a linear sequence. Each
of the twenty amino acids carries a unique side chain, giving rise to an incomprehensibly large
combinatorial space of possible protein sequences. The primary sequence drives the folding of
polymers – a spontaneous process guided by hydrophobic interactions, formation of intramolecular
hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals forces into a unique three-dimensional structure. The resulting
shape and surface manifold with rich physiochemical properties carry essential information for
understanding function and potential molecular interactions.
Previous methods typically only consider an individual subset within these scales, focusing on either
sequence [Öztürk et al., 2018, Hou et al., 2018], three-dimensional structure [Hermosilla et al., 2021,
Derevyanko et al., 2018] or surface [Gainza et al., 2020]. Two proteins with similar sequences can
fold into entirely different conformations. While these proteins might catalyze the same type of
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

