Exploiting Data Sparsity in Secure Cross-Platform
Social Recommendation
Jamie Cui1 , Chaochao Chen2,1* , Lingjuan Lyu3 , Carl Yang4 , and Li Wang1
1
Ant Group
Zhejiang University
3
Sony AI
4
Emory University
*
Corresponding author, email: zjuccc@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Social recommendation has shown promising improvements over traditional systems since it leverages social correlation data as an additional input. Most existing
works assume that all data are available to the recommendation platform. However,
in practice, user-item interaction data (e.g., rating) and user-user social data are
usually generated by different platforms, both of which contain sensitive information. Therefore, How to perform secure and efficient social recommendation
across different platforms, where the data are highly-sparse in nature remains an
important challenge. In this work, we bring secure computation techniques into
social recommendation, and propose S3 Rec, a sparsity-aware secure cross-platform
social recommendation framework. As a result, S3 Rec can not only improve the
recommendation performance of the rating platform by incorporating the sparse
social data on the social platform, but also protect data privacy of both platforms.
Moreover, to further improve model training efficiency, we propose two secure
sparse matrix multiplication protocols based on homomorphic encryption and
private information retrieval. Our experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate that S3 Rec improves the computation time and communication size of the
state-of-the-art model by about 40× and 423× in average, respectively.

1

Introduction

The recent advances of social recommendation have achieved remarkable performances in recommendation tasks [12, 28]. Unlike traditional methods, social recommendation leverages user-item rating
data (e.g. from Netflix) with user-user social data (e.g. from Facebook) to facilitate model training.
The intuition behind this setup is that Facebook’s social data is much better than Netflix’s social
data in both quantity and quality, and those social data at Facebook can help to improve Netflix’s
recommendation performance. However, the cross-platform nature, the high sparsity and sensitivity
of recommendation/social data make social recommendation hard-to-deploy in the real world [5]. In
summary, the main problem we are facing is,
How to perform secure and efficient social recommendation across different platforms, where the
data are highly-sparse in nature?
Specifically, we focus on the problem of collaborative social recommendation in the two-party model,
where one party (denoted as P0 ) is a rating platform that holds user-item rating data, and the other
party (denoted as P1 ) is a social platform that holds user-user social data. We also assume that the
adversaries are semi-honest, which is commonly used in the secure computation literature [9]. That
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

