Conditionally-Parameterized, Discretization-Aware
Neural Networks for Mesh-Based Modeling of
Physical Systems

Jiayang Xu
davidxu@umich.edu

Aniruddhe Pradhan
anipra@umich.edu

Karthik Duraisamy
kdur@umich.edu

Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Abstract
Simulations of complex physical systems are typically realized by discretizing
partial differential equations (PDEs) on unstructured meshes. While neural networks have recently been explored for the surrogate and reduced order modeling
of PDE solutions, they often ignore interactions or hierarchical relations between
input features, and process them as concatenated mixtures. We generalize the
idea of conditional parameterization – using trainable functions of input parameters to generate the weights of a neural network, and extend them in a flexible
way to encode critical information. Inspired by discretized numerical methods,
choices of the parameters include physical quantities and mesh topology features.
The functional relation between the modeled features and the parameters is built
into the network architecture. The method is implemented on different networks
and applied to frontier scientific machine learning tasks including the discovery
of unmodeled physics, super-resolution of coarse fields, and the simulation of
unsteady flows with chemical reactions. The results show that the conditionallyparameterized networks provide superior performance compared to their traditional counterparts. The CP-GNet - an architecture that can be trained on very few
data snapshots - is proposed as the first deep learning model capable of standalone
prediction of reacting flows on irregular meshes.

1

Introduction

Numerical simulations of partial differential equations (PDEs) have become an indispensable tool
in the study of complex physical systems. High-resolution simulations are, however, prohibitively
expensive or intractable in many practical problems. Machine learning techniques have recently
been explored to improve the efficiency and accuracy of traditional numerical methods. Successful
applications include nonlinear model order reduction [1, 2, 3], model augmentation [4, 5, 6], and
super-resolution [7, 8, 9]. Neural networks have also been used to replace traditional PDE-based
solvers, and serve as a standalone prediction tool. Popular approaches include auto-regressive timeseries predictions [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) [15, 16, 17].
Despite promising results on canonical problems, commonly used network architectures such as autoencoders and CNNs have inherent limitations. An autoencoder generates a fixed mapping between
the geometric coordinates and the encoded digits. This limits their portability for new geometries
and dynamic patterns. A CNN requires interpolation of existing data to a structured, Euclidean
space, introducing additional cost and error. Irregular geometry boundaries require constructs such
as elliptic coordinate transformation [18] and Signed Distance Function (SDF) [1]. Moreover, models often ignore the hierarchical relations between heterogeneous features, and concatenate them
into a single input vector, e.g. the common concatenation of the edge and node features in Graph
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

