A Consciousness-Inspired Planning Agent for
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

Mingde Zhao1,4,∗ , Zhen Liu2,4,∗ , Sitao Luan1,4,∗ , Shuyuan Zhang1,4,∗
Doina Precup1,3,4,5† , Yoshua Bengio2,4,5†
1 McGill University; 2 Université de Montréal; 3 DeepMind; 4 Mila; 5 CIFAR AI Chair
∗ : Equal Contribution, † : Equal Supervision

Abstract
We present an end-to-end, model-based deep reinforcement learning agent
which dynamically attends to relevant parts of its state during planning. The
agent uses a bottleneck mechanism over a set-based representation to force
the number of entities to which the agent attends during planning to be small.
In experiments, we investigate the bottleneck mechanism with several sets
of customized environments featuring different challenges. We consistently
observe that the design allows the planning agents to generalize their learned
task-solving abilities in compatible unseen environments by attending to
the relevant objects, leading to better out-of-distribution generalization
performance. Check project page https://github.com/PwnerHarry/CP.

1

Introduction

Whether when planning our paths home from the office or from a hotel to an airport
in an unfamiliar city, we typically focus on a small subset of relevant variables, e.g. the
change in position or the presence of traffic. An interesting hypothesis of how this path
planning skill generalizes across scenarios is that it is due to computation associated with
the conscious processing of information [2, 3, 14]. Conscious attention focuses on a few
necessary environment elements, with the help of an internal abstract representation of
the world [43, 14]. This pattern, also known as consciousness in the first sense (C1) [14],
has been theorized to enable humans’ exceptional adaptability and learning efficiency
[2, 3, 14, 43, 7, 15]. A central characterization of conscious processing is that it involves
a bottleneck, which forces one to handle dependencies between very few environmental
characteristics at a time [14, 7, 15]. Though focusing on a subset of the available information
may seem limiting, it facilitates Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) and systematic generalization to
other situations where the ignored variables are different and yet still irrelevant [7, 15].
In this paper, we encode some of these ideas into reinforcement learning agents. Reinforcement learning (RL) is an approach for learning behaviors from agent-environment
interactions [41]. However, most of the big successes of RL have been obtained by deep,
model-free agents [30, 37, 38]. While Model-Based RL (MBRL) has generated significant
research due to the potentials of using an extra model [31], its empirical performance has
typically lagged behind, with some recent notable exceptions [36, 24, 17].
Our proposal is to take inspiration from human consciousness to build an architecture
which learns a useful state space and in which attention can be focused on a small set of
variables at any time, where the aspect of “partial planning”1 is enabled by modern deep
1Partial planning is interpreted in different ways. For example, concurrent work [26] focuses on
modelling “affordable” temporally extended actions, s.t. an “intent” could be achieved more efficiently.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

