Glance-and-Gaze Vision Transformer
Qihang Yu1 , Yingda Xia1 , Yutong Bai1 , Yongyi Lu1 , Alan Yuille1 , Wei Shen2∗
1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yucornetto, philyingdaxia, ytongbai, yylu1989, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com
wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, there emerges a series of vision Transformers, which show superior
performance with a more compact model size than conventional convolutional
neural networks, thanks to the strong ability of Transformers to model long-range
dependencies. However, the advantages of vision Transformers also come with a
price: Self-attention, the core part of Transformer, has a quadratic complexity to
the input sequence length. This leads to a dramatic increase of computation and
memory cost with the increase of sequence length, thus introducing difficulties
when applying Transformers to the vision tasks that require dense predictions based
on high-resolution feature maps.
In this paper, we propose a new vision Transformer, named Glance-and-Gaze Transformer (GG-Transformer), to address the aforementioned issues. It is motivated
by the Glance and Gaze behavior of human beings when recognizing objects in
natural scenes, with the ability to efficiently model both long-range dependencies
and local context. In GG-Transformer, the Glance and Gaze behavior is realized by
two parallel branches: The Glance branch is achieved by performing self-attention
on the adaptively-dilated partitions of the input, which leads to a linear complexity
while still enjoying a global receptive field; The Gaze branch is implemented by a
simple depth-wise convolutional layer, which compensates local image context to
the features obtained by the Glance mechanism. We empirically demonstrate our
method achieves consistently superior performance over previous state-of-the-art
Transformers on various vision tasks and benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have been dominating the field of computer vision, which
have been a de-facto standard and achieved tremendous success in various tasks, e.g., image classification [16], object detection [15], semantic segmentation [5], etc. CNNs model images from a
local-to-global perspective, starting with extracting local features such as edges and textures, and
forming high-level semantic concepts gradually. Although CNNs prove to be successful for various
vision tasks, they lack the ability to globally represent long-range dependencies. To compensate
a global view to CNN, researchers explored different methods such as non-local operation [36],
self-attention [33], Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) [5].
Recently, another type of networks with stacked Transformer blocks emerged. Unlike CNNs,
Transformers naturally learn global features in a parameter-free manner, which makes them stronger
alternatives and raises questions about the necessity of CNNs in vision systems. Since the advent
of Vision Transformer (ViT) [12], which applied Transformers to vision tasks by projecting and
tokenizing natural images into sequences, various improvements have been introduced rapidly, e.g.,
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

