Spatiotemporal Joint Filter Decomposition in 3D
Convolutional Neural Networks
Zichen Miao1 , Ze Wang1 , Xiuyuan Cheng2 , and Qiang Qiu1
Purdue University1 Duke University2
{miaoz,zewang,qqiu}@purdue.edu
xiuyuan.cheng@duke.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce spatiotemporal joint filter decomposition to decouple
spatial and temporal learning, while preserving spatiotemporal dependency in a
video. A 3D convolutional filter is now jointly decomposed over a set of spatial and
temporal filter atoms respectively. In this way, a 3D convolutional layer becomes
three: a temporal atom layer, a spatial atom layer, and a joint coefficient layer, all
three remaining convolutional. One obvious arithmetic manipulation allowed in our
joint decomposition is to swap spatial or temporal atoms with a set of atoms that
have the same number but different sizes, while keeping the remaining unchanged.
For example, as shown later, we can now achieve tempo-invariance by simply
dilating temporal atoms only. To illustrate this useful atom-swapping property,
we further demonstrate how such a decomposition permits the direct learning of
3D CNNs with full-size videos through iterations of two consecutive sub-stages
of learning: In the temporal stage, full-temporal downsampled-spatial data are
used to learn temporal atoms and joint coefficients while fixing spatial atoms.
In the spatial stage, full-spatial downsampled-temporal data are used for spatial
atoms and joint coefficients while fixing temporal atoms. We show empirically on
multiple action recognition datasets that, the decoupled spatiotemporal learning
significantly reduces the model memory footprints, and allows deep 3D CNNs to
model high-spatial long-temporal dependency with limited computational resources
while delivering comparable performance.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been used intensively in the field of video understanding.
Particularly, networks with 3D convolutional layers capture spatiotemporal correlation and achieve
great success in applications like action recognition [1, 30]. However, joint spatiotemporal modeling
of videos usually requires significant training time, computation, and memory, which becomes one of
the main obstacles in video understanding. In practice, we almost always need to first downsample
video data spatially or temporally or both to meet real-world constraints of computational resources
and training time. For instance, a 64-frame video with the spatial resolution 224×224 is downsampled
2 times temporally for training Non-Local Networks [30], and 8 times temporally for the R(2+1)D
models [26]. As in most cases, for spatiotemporal modeling of high-resolution videos, 3D CNNs
cannot be fit into most modern GPUs due to the huge model memory footprints. However, it has been
observed that the full spatial and temporal resolution are essential to achieve superior performance in
many video understanding tasks [24, 27, 30].
In this paper, we propose spatiotemporal joint filter decomposition to decouple spatial and temporal
learning while preserving spatiotemporal dependency in a video. As shown in Figure 1, a 3D convolutional filter is jointly decomposed over a group of spatial atoms and temporal atoms. The two groups
of atoms can reconstruct the 3D filter together with the joint coefficients through tensor multiplication.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

