A-NeRF: Articulated Neural Radiance Fields for
Learning Human Shape, Appearance, and Pose

Shih-Yang Su1
1

Frank Yu1

Michael Zollhöfer2

University of British Columbia

2

Helge Rhodin1

Facebook Reality Labs

Abstract
While deep learning reshaped the classical motion capture pipeline with feedforward networks, generative models are required to recover fine alignment via
iterative refinement. Unfortunately, the existing models are usually hand-crafted or
learned in controlled conditions, only applicable to limited domains. We propose a
method to learn a generative neural body model from unlabelled monocular videos
by extending Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs). We equip them with a skeleton to
apply to time-varying and articulated motion. A key insight is that implicit models
require the inverse of the forward kinematics used in explicit surface models. Our
reparameterization defines spatial latent variables relative to the pose of body parts
and thereby overcomes ill-posed inverse operations with an overparameterization.
This enables learning volumetric body shape and appearance from scratch while
jointly refining the articulated pose; all without ground truth labels for appearance,
pose, or 3D shape on the input videos. When used for novel-view-synthesis and
motion capture, our neural model improves accuracy on diverse datasets. Project
website: https://lemonatsu.github.io/anerf/.

1

Introduction

Generative models have evolved from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) recreating images
[14, 21] to neural scene representations [39, 56, 57] providing control and image understanding
for downstream tasks via structured latent variables. However, most 3D models require 3D labels
that cannot be crowd-sourced on natural images and require dedicated depth sensors. It is hence an
important research problem to learn 3D representations from 2D observations, which is particularly
challenging for humans with diverse body shapes and appearances and their non-rigid motion.
Modern human motion capture techniques typically combine the advantages of discriminative and
generative approaches. A feed-forward 3D human pose estimation approach provides a rough initial
estimate of human pose. Afterward, a generative approach based on either a high-quality 3D scan of
the person [17], or a parametric human body model learned from laser scans [4] refines the estimate
iteratively based on the image evidence. Although achieving unprecedented accuracy, existing models
require a low-dimensional, restrictive, shape body model or a personalized 3D scan of the user.
We introduce Articulated Neural Radiance Fields (A-NeRF) for learning a user-specific neural 3D
body model and underlying skeleton pose from unlabelled videos (see Figure 1). When applied to
motion capture, it alleviates the need for template models while maintaining the advantages and
accuracy of current generative approaches. A-NeRF extends Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [39] to
work with single videos and articulated motion. NeRF parameterizes the scene implicitly as
Fφ (Γ(q), Γ(d)) 7→ (σ, c),

with σ ∈ R, c ∈ R3 , q ∈ R3 , and d ∈ R3 ,

(1)

by chaining Fφ , a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP), with Γ, the Positional Encoding (PE) [66]. First, the
PE maps the input scene point q and view direction d to a higher dimensional space that enables the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

