On the Theory of Reinforcement Learning
with Once-per-Episode Feedback

Niladri S. Chatterji∗
Stanford University
niladri@cs.stanford.edu

Aldo Pacchiano∗
Microsoft Research
apacchiano@microsoft.com

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley
peter@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study a theory of reinforcement learning (RL) in which the learner receives
binary feedback only once at the end of an episode. While this is an extreme test
case for theory, it is also arguably more representative of real-world applications
than the traditional requirement in RL practice that the learner receive feedback at
every time step. Indeed, in many real-world applications of reinforcement learning,
such as self-driving cars and robotics, it is easier to evaluate whether a learner’s
complete trajectory was either “good” or “bad,” but harder to provide a reward
signal at each step. To show that learning is possible in this more challenging setting,
we study the case where trajectory labels are generated by an unknown parametric
model, and provide a statistically and computationally efficient algorithm that
achieves sublinear regret.

1

Introduction

The Reinforcement Learning (RL) paradigm involves a learning agent interacting with an unknown
dynamical environment over multiple time steps. The learner receives a reward signal after each
step which it uses to improve its performance over time. This formulation of RL has had significant
empirical success in the recent past [24, 23, 33, 32].
While this empirical success is encouraging, as RL starts to tackle a more wide-ranging class of
consequential real-world problems, such as self-driving cars, supply chains, and medical care, a new
set of challenges arise. Foremost among them is the lack of a well-specified reward signal associated
with every state-action pair in many real-world settings. For example, consider a robot manipulation
task where the robot must fold a pile of clothes. It is not clear how to design a useful reward signal
that aids the robot to learn to complete this task. However, it is fairly easy to check whether the task
was successfully completed (that is, whether the clothes were properly folded) and provide feedback
at the end of the episode.
This is a classical challenge but it is one that is often neglected in theoretical treatments of RL.
To address this challenge we introduce a framework for RL that eschews the need for a Markovian
reward signal at every step and provides the learner only with binary feedback based on its complete
trajectory in an episode. In our framework, the learner interacts with the environment for a fixed
number of time steps (H) in each episode to produce a trajectory (τ ) which is the collection of all
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
∗

Equal contribution.

