Recovering Latent Causal Factor for Generalization
to Distributional Shifts
Xinwei Sun∗ 1, Botong Wu† 2 , Xiangyu Zheng†2 , Chang Liu1 , Wei Chen1 , Tao Qin1 , Tie-Yan Liu1
1
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, 100080
2
Peking University, Beijing, 100871
{xinsun,changliu,wche,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com, botongwu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributional shifts between training and target domains may degrade the prediction accuracy of learned models, mainly because these models often learn features
that possess only correlation rather than causal relation with the output. Such
a correlation, which is known as “spurious correlation” statistically, is domaindependent hence may fail to generalize to unseen domains. To avoid such a spurious
correlation, we propose Latent Causal Invariance Models (LaCIM) that specifies
the underlying causal structure of the data and the source of distributional shifts,
guiding us to pursue only causal factor for prediction. Specifically, the LaCIM
introduces a pair of correlated latent factors: (a) causal factor and (b) others, while
the extent of this correlation is governed by a domain variable that characterizes
the distributional shifts. On the basis of this, we prove that the distribution of
observed variables conditioning on latent variables is shift-invariant. Equipped
with such an invariance, we prove that the causal factor can be recovered without
mixing information from others, which induces the ground-truth predicting mechanism. We propose a Variational-Bayesian-based method to learn this invariance
for prediction. The utility of our approach is verified by improved generalization
to distributional shifts on various real-world data. Our code is freely available at
https://github.com/wubotong/LaCIM.

1

Introduction

Current data-driven deep learning models, revolutionary in various tasks though, often exploit all types
of correlations to fit data well. Among such correlations, there can be spurious ones corresponding
to biases (e.g., confounding bias due to the presence of a third unseen factor) inherited from the
data provided. Such data-dependent spurious correlations can erode the prediction power on unseen
domains with distributional shifts, which can cause serious consequences especially in safety-critical
tasks such as healthcare.
Recently, there is a Renaissance of causality in machine learning, expected to pursue causal relationships [59] to achieve stable generalization across domains. The so-called area of “causality” is
pioneered by Structural Causal Models [51], as a mathematical formulation of this metaphysical
concept grasped in the human mind. The incorporation of these human priors about cause and effect
endows the model with the ability to identify the causal structure [51] which entails not only the
data but also the underlying process of how they are generated. To achieve causal modeling, the
old-school methods [52, 10] directly causally related the output label Y to a subset of covariates X,
which is however not conceptually reasonable in applications with sensory-level data (e.g. model
pixels as causal factors of the output does not make sense in image classification [11]).
∗
†

Corresponding author
Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

