Align before Fuse: Vision and Language
Representation Learning with Momentum Distillation
Junnan Li, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Akhilesh D. Gotmare
Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, Steven C.H. Hoi
Salesforce Research
{junnan.li,rselvaraju,akhilesh.gotmare,sjoty,shoi}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Large-scale vision and language representation learning has shown promising
improvements on various vision-language tasks. Most existing methods employ a
transformer-based multimodal encoder to jointly model visual tokens (region-based
image features) and word tokens. Because the visual tokens and word tokens
are unaligned, it is challenging for the multimodal encoder to learn image-text
interactions. In this paper, we introduce a contrastive loss to ALign the image and
text representations BEfore Fusing (ALBEF) them through cross-modal attention,
which enables more grounded vision and language representation learning. Unlike
most existing methods, our method does not require bounding box annotations nor
high-resolution images. To improve learning from noisy web data, we propose
momentum distillation, a self-training method which learns from pseudo-targets
produced by a momentum model. We provide a theoretical analysis of ALBEF from
a mutual information maximization perspective, showing that different training
tasks can be interpreted as different ways to generate views for an image-text
pair. ALBEF achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple downstream visionlanguage tasks. On image-text retrieval, ALBEF outperforms methods that are
pre-trained on orders of magnitude larger datasets. On VQA and NLVR2 , ALBEF
achieves absolute improvements of 2.37% and 3.84% compared to the state-ofthe-art, while enjoying faster inference speed. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/salesforce/ALBEF.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-Language Pre-training (VLP) aims to learn multimodal representations from large-scale
image-text pairs that can improve downstream Vision-and-Language (V+L) tasks. Most existing VLP
methods (e.g. LXMERT [1], UNITER [2], OSCAR [3]) rely on pre-trained object detectors to extract
region-based image features, and employ a multimodal encoder to fuse the image features with word
tokens. The multimodal encoder is trained to solve tasks that require joint understanding of image
and text, such as masked language modeling (MLM) and image-text matching (ITM).
While effective, this VLP framework suffers from several key limitations: (1) The image features and
the word token embeddings reside in their own spaces, which makes it challenging for the multimodal
encoder to learn to model their interactions; (2) The object detector is both annotation-expensive
and compute-expensive, because it requires bounding box annotations during pre-training, and highresolution (e.g. 600⇥1000) images during inference; (3) The widely used image-text datasets [4, 5]
are collected from the web and are inherently noisy, and existing pre-training objectives such as
MLM may overfit to the noisy text and degrade the model’s generalization performance.
We propose ALign BEfore Fuse (ALBEF), a new VLP framework to address these limitations. We
first encode the image and text independently with a detector-free image encoder and a text encoder.
Then we use a multimodal encoder to fuse the image features with the text features through crossmodal attention. We introduce an intermediate image-text contrastive (ITC) loss on representations
from the unimodal encoders, which serves three purposes: (1) it aligns the image features and the
text features, making it easier for the multimodal encoder to perform cross-modal learning; (2) it
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

