Skipping the Frame-Level: Event-Based Piano
Transcription With Neural Semi-CRFs
Yujia Yan∗, Frank Cwitkowitz, Zhiyao Duan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY, 14627 USA
yujia.yan@rochester.edu, fcwitkow@ur.rochester.edu
zhiyao.duan@rochester.edu

Abstract
Piano transcription systems are typically optimized to estimate pitch activity at
each frame of audio. They are often followed by carefully designed heuristics and
post-processing algorithms to estimate note events from the frame-level predictions. Recent methods have also framed piano transcription as a multi-task learning problem, where the activation of different stages of a note event are estimated
independently. These practices are not well aligned with the desired outcome of
the task, which is the speciﬁcation of note intervals as holistic events, rather than
the aggregation of disjoint observations. In this work, we propose a novel formulation of piano transcription, which is optimized to directly predict note events.
Our method is based on Semi-Markov Conditional Random Fields (semi-CRF),
which produce scores for intervals rather than individual frames. When formulating piano transcription in this way, we eliminate the need to rely on disjoint
frame-level estimates for different stages of a note event. We conduct experiments
on the MAESTRO dataset and demonstrate that the proposed model surpasses the
current state-of-the-art for piano transcription. Our results suggest that the semiCRF output layer, while still quadratic in complexity, is a simple, fast and wellperforming solution for event-based prediction, and may lead to similar success in
other areas which currently rely on frame-level estimates.

1

Introduction

The task of Automatic Music Transcription (AMT) aims to transcribe a music recording into some
form of music notation [Benetos et al., 2018]. Examples of notation include MIDI event sequences,
e.g, Hawthorne et al. [2018], Kong et al. [2020], Kim and Bello [2019], Kwon et al. [2020], and staff
notation, e.g., Nakamura et al. [2018], Román et al., 2019]. In this work, we address the problem
of transcribing piano music into a MIDI event sequence. MIDI transcription involves constructing
a sequence of events, each speciﬁed by its onset and offset positions, with the constraint that two
events of the same event type (e.g., certain pitches and pedals) cannot overlap. In addition to onsets
and offsets, the velocity (i.e., a value that represents the intensity of a key strike, which informs the
loudness) associated with each event is often estimated.
In recent years, neural network based approaches have reached the state of the art for the problem
of piano transcription, e.g., Hawthorne et al. [2018], Kong et al. [2020], Kwon et al. [2020]. They
operate at the frame-level and make predictions for different stages of a note event, i.e., the onset,
offset, and pitch activation, separately. In order to extract note-level predictions, they use manually
designed procedures to combine the disjoint frame-level predictions. These include thresholding,
∗

Code is available at https://github.com/Yujia-Yan/Skipping-The-Frame-Level

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

