A Geometric Analysis of Neural Collapse with
Unconstrained Features
Zhihui Zhu∗
University of Denver
zhihui.zhu@du.edu

Tianyu Ding
Johns Hopkins University
tding1@jhu.edu

Xiao Li
University of Michigan
xlxiao@umich.edu

Chong You
Google Research
cyou@google.com

Jinxin Zhou
University of Denver
jinxin.zhou@du.edu
Jeremias Sulam
Johns Hopkins University
jsulam1@jhu.edu

Qing Qu
University of Michigan
qingqu@umich.edu

Abstract
We provide the first global optimization landscape analysis of Neural Collapse—
an intriguing empirical phenomenon that arises in the last-layer classifiers and
features of neural networks during the terminal phase of training. As recently reported in [1], this phenomenon implies that (i) the class means and the last-layer
classifiers all collapse to the vertices of a Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF)
up to scaling, and (ii) cross-example within-class variability of last-layer activations collapses to zero. We study the problem based on a simplified unconstrained
feature model, which isolates the topmost layers from the classifier of the neural
network. In this context, we show that the classical cross-entropy loss with weight
decay has a benign global landscape, in the sense that the only global minimizers
are the Simplex ETFs while all other critical points are strict saddles whose Hessian exhibit negative curvature directions. Our analysis of the simplified model
not only explains what kind of features are learned in the last layer, but also shows
why they can be efficiently optimized, matching the empirical observations in
practical deep network architectures. These findings provide important practical
implications. As an example, our experiments demonstrate that one may set the
feature dimension equal to the number of classes and fix the last-layer classifier to
be a Simplex ETF for network training, which reduces memory cost by over 20%
on ResNet18 without sacrificing the generalization performance. The source code
is available at https://github.com/tding1/Neural-Collapse.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, the revival of deep neural networks (DNN) has led to dramatic success in numerous applications ranging from computer vision, to natural language processing, to scientific
discovery and beyond [2–5]. Nevertheless, the practice of deep networks has been shrouded with
mystery as our theoretical understanding for the success of deep learning remains elusive. There are
many intriguing phenomena, such as implicit algorithmic bias in training [6–10], and good generalization of highly-overparameterized networks [7,11–15], that seem often contradictory to, or cannot
be explained by, classical optimization and learning theory.
∗

The first two authors contributed to this work equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

