S TEP : Out-of-Distribution Detection in the Presence
of Limited In-distribution Labeled Data

1

Zhi Zhou1∗ , Lan-Zhe Guo1∗ , Zhanzhan Cheng2 , Yu-Feng Li1† , Shiliang Pu2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{zhouz, guolz, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
2
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{chengzhanzhan, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Existing semi-supervised learning (SSL) studies typically assume that unlabeled
and test data are drawn from the same distribution as labeled data. However, in
many real-world applications, it is desirable to have SSL algorithms that not only
classify the samples drawn from the same distribution of labeled data but also
detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples drawn from an unknown distribution.
In this paper, we study a setting called semi-supervised OOD detection. Two
main challenges compared with previous OOD detection settings are i) the lack
of labeled data and in-distribution data; ii) OOD samples could be unseen during
training. Efforts on this direction remain limited. In this paper, we present an
approach S TEP significantly improving OOD detection performance by introducing
a new technique: Structure-Keep Unzipping. It learns a new representation space in
which OOD samples could be separated well. An efficient optimization algorithm
is derived to solve the objective. Comprehensive experiments across various OOD
detection benchmarks clearly show that our S TEP approach outperforms other
methods by a large margin and achieves remarkable detection performance on
several benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved success in many application scenarios, such as computer vision, speech
recognition, natural language processing [10]. The excellent performance typically rely on sufficient
supervised information. However, collecting large amounts of well-labeled training data is not always
available in real-world applications due to the expensive cost of the labeling process. Therefore,
tremendous efforts have been devoted to semi-supervised learning (SSL) [36, 30] which aims
to enhance the model performance by exploiting much cheaper unlabeled data, and have shown
promising performance [52, 37, 29].
Previous SSL studies [39, 41] typically work on the assumption that unlabeled data and test data
are drawn from the same distribution as labeled data. However, it is often the case that such an
assumption fails in practical applications [13, 14]. For example, in document classification [9],
irrelevant documents readily occur in the testing data leading to high-confidence misclassification.
Similar cases commonly appear in other applications, such as medical diagnosis [4] and autonomous
driving [8]. In such applications, it is desirable to have SSL algorithms which could not only
classify samples from known distributions accurately but also be equipped with the ability to detect
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples from unknown distributions precisely.
∗
†

Contribute to this work equally
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

