Neural Hybrid Automata: Learning Dynamics with
Multiple Modes and Stochastic Transitions

Michael Poli∗
NAVER AI Lab, DiffEqML

Stefano Massaroli∗
University of Tokyo, DiffEqML

poli@stanford.edu

massaroli@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Luca Scimeca
NAVER AI Lab

Seong Joon Oh
NAVER AI Lab

Hajime Asama
University of Tokyo

Sanghyuk Chun
NAVER AI Lab

Jinkyoo Park
KAIST

Atsushi Yamashita
University of Tokyo
Animesh Garg
University of Toronto

Abstract
Effective control and prediction of dynamical systems require appropriate handling
of continuous–time and discrete, event–triggered processes. Stochastic hybrid
systems (SHSs), common across engineering domains, provide a formalism for
dynamical systems subject to discrete, possibly stochastic, state jumps and multi–
modal continuous–time flows. Despite the versatility and importance of SHSs
across applications, a general procedure for the explicit learning of both discrete
events and multi–mode continuous dynamics remains an open problem. This work
introduces Neural Hybrid Automata (NHAs), a recipe for learning SHS dynamics
without a priori knowledge on the number of modes and inter-modal transition
dynamics. NHAs provide a systematic inference method based on normalizing
flows, neural differential equations and self–supervision. We showcase NHAs on
several tasks, including mode recovery and flow learning in systems with stochastic
transitions, and end–to–end learning of hierarchical robot controllers.

1

Introduction

Behaviors emerging from the interaction of continuous and discrete–time dynamics in the presence
of uncertainty are described through the language of stochastic hybrid systems (SHSs). Such discrete
events can bring along abrupt changes in the state, and in complex multi–mode systems, may also
cause a switch between system modes, and corresponding underlying continuous dynamics [1].
Communication networks [2], [3], where changes in communication protocol can happen at certain
levels of traffic congestion, and biological systems [4]–[6] are example domains where the SHS
modeling paradigm has proven fruitful.
Data–driven identification and learning of hybrid systems are known to be challenging due to the
entanglement of continuous flows and discrete events [7]; finding a generally applicable technique
remains an open problem, particularly in the common scenarios where no a priori knowledge on
the number and type of system modes is given. The aim of this work is to apply continuous neural
models [8]–[10] to the learning SHSs. We introduce a compact descriptive language for this task,
decomposing the system into a set of core primitives. Prior work is integrated into the framework,
highlighting in the process limiting assumptions and areas of further improvement.
∗

Equal contribution. Author order was decided by flipping a coin.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

