Fast Extra Gradient Methods for Smooth Structured
Nonconvex-Nonconcave Minimax Problems
Donghwan Kim
Department of Mathematical Sciences
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
donghwankim@kaist.ac.kr

Sucheol Lee
Department of Mathematical Sciences
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
csfh1379@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Modern minimax problems, such as generative adversarial network and adversarial
training, are often under a nonconvex-nonconcave setting, and developing an
efficient method for such setting is of interest. Recently, two variants of the
extragradient (EG) method are studied in that direction. First, a two-time-scale
variant of the EG, named EG+, was proposed under a smooth structured nonconvexnonconcave setting, with a slow O(1/k) rate on the squared gradient norm, where k
denotes the number of iterations. Second, another variant of EG with an anchoring
technique, named extra anchored gradient (EAG), was studied under a smooth
convex-concave setting, yielding a fast O(1/k 2 ) rate on the squared gradient
norm. Built upon EG+ and EAG, this paper proposes a two-time-scale EG with
anchoring, named fast extragradient (FEG), that has a fast O(1/k 2 ) rate on the
squared gradient norm for smooth structured nonconvex-nonconcave problems;
the corresponding saddle-gradient operator satisfies the negative comonotonicity
condition. This paper further develops its backtracking line-search version, named
FEG-A, for the case where the problem parameters are not available. The stochastic
analysis of FEG is also provided.

1

Introduction

Recently, nonconvex-nonconcave minimax problems have received an increased attention in the
optimization community and the machine learning community due to their applications to generative
adversarial network [10] and adversarial training [27]. In this paper, we consider a smooth structured
nonconvex-nonconcave minimax problem:
min max f (x, y),

R

x∈

R

R

R

dx
y∈

R

dy

(1)

where f : dx × dy →
is smooth and is possibly nonconvex in x for fixed y, and possibly
nonconcave in y for fixed x; the saddle-gradient operator F := (∇x f, −∇y f ) satisfies the negative
comonotonicity [1]. We construct an efficient (first-order) method, using a saddle gradient operator
F for finding a first-order stationary point of the problem (1).
So far little is known under the nonconvex-nonconcave setting, compared to the convex-concave
setting. Recent works [4, 7, 22, 24, 26, 42, 44] studied extragradient-type methods [19, 39] for
minimax problems under various structured nonconvex-nonconcave settings. In other words, they
consider various non-monotone conditions on F , such as the Minty variational inequality (MVI)
condition [4], the weak MVI condition [7], and the negative comonotonicity [1].1 Among them, this
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
1

Relations between the conditions on F considered in this paper is summarized in Figure 1.

