Regret Minimization Experience Replay in Off-Policy
Reinforcement Learning
Xu-Hui Liu∗, Zhenghai Xue∗, Jing-Cheng Pang, Shengyi Jiang, Feng Xu, Yang Yu†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
liuxh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, xuezh@smail.nju.edu.cn
{pangjc, jiangsy, xufeng}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, experience replay stores past samples for further reuse.
Prioritized sampling is a promising technique to better utilize these samples. Previous criteria of prioritization include TD error, recentness and corrective feedback, which are mostly heuristically designed. In this work, we start from the
regret minimization objective, and obtain an optimal prioritization strategy for
Bellman update that can directly maximize the return of the policy. The theory
suggests that data with higher hindsight TD error, better on-policiness and more
accurate Q value should be assigned with higher weights during sampling. Thus
most previous criteria only consider this strategy partially. We not only provide
theoretical justiﬁcations for previous criteria, but also propose two new methods
to compute the prioritization weight, namely ReMERN and ReMERT. ReMERN
learns an error network, while ReMERT exploits the temporal ordering of states.
Both methods outperform previous prioritized sampling algorithms in challenging
RL benchmarks, including MuJoCo, Atari and Meta-World.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [1] has achieved great success in sequential decision making problems.
Off-policy RL algorithms [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have the ability to learn from a more general data distribution
than on-policy counterparts, and often enjoy better sample efﬁciency. This is critical when the data
collection process is expensive or dangerous. Experience Replay [7] enables data reuse and has been
widely used in off-policy reinforcement learning. Previous work [8] points out that emphasizing on
important samples in the replay buffer can beneﬁt off-policy RL algorithms. Prioritized Experience
Replay (PER) [9] quantiﬁes such importance by the magnitude of temporal-difference (TD) error.
Based on PER, many sampling strategies [10, 11, 12] are proposed to perform prioritized sampling.
They are either based on TD error [9, 10, 12] or focused on the existence of corrective feedback [11].
However, these are all proxy objectives and different from the objective of RL, i.e., minimizing
policy regret. They can be suboptimal in some cases due to this objective mismatch.
In this paper, we ﬁrst give examples to illustrate the objective mismatch in previous prioritization
strategies. Experiments show that lower TD error or more accurate Q function can not guarantee
better policy performance. To tackle this issue, we ﬁrst formulate an optimization problem that
directly minimizes the regret of the current policy with respect to prioritization weights. We then
make several approximations and solve this optimization problem. An optimal prioritization strategy
is obtained and indicates that we should pay more attention to experiences with higher hindsight TD
error, better on-policiness and more accurate Q value. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

