A Winning Hand: Compressing Deep Networks Can
Improve Out-Of-Distribution Robustness

James Diffenderfer, Brian R. Bartoldson∗, Shreya Chaganti∗, Jize Zhang, Bhavya Kailkhura
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
{diffenderfer2, bartoldson, chaganti1, zhang64, kailkhura1}@llnl.gov

Abstract
Successful adoption of deep learning (DL) in the wild requires models to be: (1)
compact, (2) accurate, and (3) robust to distributional shifts. Unfortunately, efforts
towards simultaneously meeting these requirements have mostly been unsuccessful.
This raises an important question: “Is the inability to create Compact, Accurate,
and Robust Deep neural networks (CARDs) fundamental?” To answer this question,
we perform a large-scale analysis of popular model compression techniques which
uncovers several intriguing patterns. Notably, in contrast to traditional pruning
approaches (e.g., fine tuning and gradual magnitude pruning), we find that “lottery
ticket-style” approaches can surprisingly be used to produce CARDs, including
binary-weight CARDs. Specifically, we are able to create extremely compact CARDs
that, compared to their larger counterparts, have similar test accuracy and matching
(or better) robustness—simply by pruning and (optionally) quantizing. Leveraging the compactness of CARDs, we develop a simple domain-adaptive test-time
ensembling approach (CARD-Deck) that uses a gating module to dynamically select
appropriate CARDs from the CARD-Deck based on their spectral-similarity with test
samples. The proposed approach builds a “winning hand” of CARDs that establishes
a new state-of-the-art [8] on CIFAR-10-C accuracies (i.e., 96.8% standard and
92.75% robust) and CIFAR-100-C accuracies (i.e., 80.6% standard and 71.3% robust) with better memory usage than non-compressed baselines (pretrained CARDs
available at [8]). Finally, we provide theoretical support for our empirical findings.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented success in a wide range of applications
due to their remarkably high accuracy [15]. However, this high performance stems from significant growth in DNN model size; i.e., massive overparameterization. Furthermore, these highly
overparameterized models are known to be susceptible to the out-of-distribution (OOD) shifts encountered during their deployment in the wild [5]. This resource-inefficiency and OOD brittleness of
state-of-the-art (SOTA) DNNs severely limits the potential applications DL can make an impact on.
For example, consider the “Mars rover mission” that uses laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS) to search for microbial life. It is well accepted that endowing the rover with DNNs to analyze
complex LIBS spectra could produce scientific breakthroughs [3]. However, employing DNNs in
such circumstances is challenging: 1) as these devices are battery operated, the model has to be
lightweight so it consumes less memory with reduced power consumption, and 2) the model must be
able to efficiently handle domain shifts in spectra caused by environmental noise. These requirements
are not specific only to the aforementioned use case but arise in any resource-limited application
using DL in the wild. The fact that SOTA DNNs do not satisfy compactness and OOD robustness
requirements is holding us back from leveraging advances in DL to make scientific discoveries.
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

