Functionally Regionalized Knowledge Transfer
for Low-resource Drug Discovery

Huaxiu Yao1∗, Ying Wei2 , Long-Kai Huang3 , Ding Xue3
Junzhou Huang4 , Zhenhui Li5
1
Stanford University, 2 City University of Hong Kong, 3 Tencent AI Lab
4
University of Texas at Arlington, 5 Pennsylvania State University
1
huaxiu@cs.stanford.edu, 2 yingwei@cityu.edu.hk, 3 hlongkai@gmail.com, dingxue@tencent.com
4
jzhuang@uta.edu, 5 jessieli@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
More recently, there has been a surge of interest in employing machine learning
approaches to expedite the drug discovery process where virtual screening for hit
discovery and ADMET prediction for lead optimization play essential roles. One
of the main obstacles to the wide success of machine learning approaches in these
two tasks is that the number of compounds labeled with activities or ADMET
properties is too small to build an effective predictive model. This paper seeks to
remedy the problem by transferring the knowledge from previous assays, namely
in-vivo experiments, by different laboratories and against various target proteins.
To accommodate these wildly different assays and capture the similarity between
assays, we propose a functional rationalized meta-learning algorithm FRML for
such knowledge transfer. FRML constructs the predictive model with layers of
neural sub-networks or so-called functional regions. Building on this, FRML
shares an initialization for the weights of the predictive model across all assays,
while customizes it to each assay with a region localization network choosing the
pertinent regions. The compositionality of the model improves the capacity of
generalization to various and even out-of-distribution tasks. Empirical results on
both virtual screening and ADMET prediction validate the superiority of FRML
over state-of-the-art baselines powered with interpretability in assay relationship.

1

Introduction

Drug discovery brings new candidate medications to billions of people, helping them live longer,
healthier and more productive lives. One crux step in drug discovery is virtual screening, which
is a fast and cost-effective method that computationally predicts the activity value of a compound
against the target protein of a disease. As shown in Figure 1(a), the hits screened out of large drug
libraries of compounds by a virtual screening algorithm are further empirically validated against their
in-vivo activities, resulting in leads. After optimizing the ADMET properties (absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion and toxicities) of the leads, we obtain the drug candidates.
There have been both traditional machine learning [33] and deep learning approaches [4] devoted
to virtual screening, while the prediction performance (i.e., the hit rate) is far from satisfactory.
The crucial challenge lies in that the number of training compounds whose activities have been
tested against the target protein of focus is severely limited. Though state-of-the-art deep learning
algorithms typically rely on supervision in the form of thousands to millions of annotated data, it is
highly expensive and almost impossible for in-vivo experiments to collect a sufficient set of drug
∗

Part of the work was done when H.Y. was a student at Penn State University, correspondence to: Y.W.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

