Stronger NAS with Weaker Predictors

Junru Wu1 , Xiyang Dai2 , Dongdong Chen2 , Yinpeng Chen2 , Mengchen Liu2 , Ye Yu2 ,
Zhangyang Wang3 , Zicheng Liu2 , Mei Chen2 , Lu Yuan2
1
Texas A&M University, 2 Microsoft Corporation, 3 University of Texas at Austin
sandboxmaster@tamu.edu, {xidai,dochen,yilche,mengcliu}@microsoft.com,
atlaswang@utexas.edu, {yeyu1,zliu,mei.chen,luyuan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) often trains and evaluates a large number of architectures. Recent predictor-based NAS approaches attempt to alleviate such heavy
computation costs with two key steps: sampling some architecture-performance
pairs and fitting a proxy accuracy predictor. Given limited samples, these predictors,
however, are far from accurate to locate top architectures due to the difficulty of
fitting the huge search space. This paper reflects on a simple yet crucial question:
if our final goal is to find the best architecture, do we really need to model the
whole space well?. We propose a paradigm shift from fitting the whole architecture
space using one strong predictor, to progressively fitting a search path towards the
high-performance sub-space through a set of weaker predictors. As a key property
of the weak predictors, their probabilities of sampling better architectures keep
increasing. Hence we only sample a few well-performed architectures guided by
the previously learned predictor and estimate a new better weak predictor. This embarrassingly easy framework, dubbed WeakNAS, produces coarse-to-fine iteration
to gradually refine the ranking of sampling space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that WeakNAS costs fewer samples to find top-performance architectures
on NAS-Bench-101 and NAS-Bench-201. Compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA)
predictor-based NAS methods, WeakNAS outperforms all with notable margins,
e.g., requiring at least 7.5x less samples to find global optimal on NAS-Bench-101.
WeakNAS can also absorb their ideas to boost performance more. Further, WeakNAS strikes the new SOTA result of 81.3% in the ImageNet MobileNet Search
Space. The code is available at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/WeakNAS.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [1–12] methods aim
to find the best network architecture by exploring the
architecture-to-performance manifold, using reinforcedlearning-based [13], evolution-based [14, 15] or gradientbased [1, 16] approaches. In order to cover the entire search
space, they often train and evaluate a large number of architectures, leading to tremendous computation cost.
Recently, predictor-based NAS methods alleviate this problem with two key steps: one sampling step to sample some
architecture-performance pairs, and another performance
modeling step to fit the performance distribution by training
a proxy accuracy predictor. An in-depth analysis of existing
methods [2] found that most of those methods [5, 6, 17, 7–
9, 18] consider these two steps independently and attempt to
model the performance distribution over the whole architec-

Figure 1: Comparison between our
method using a set of weak predictors (iterative sampling), and a single strong predictor (random sampling) on NAS-Bench201. For fair comparison, the NAS predictor in both methods adtops the same type
of MLP described in 2.4. Solid lines and
shadows denote the mean and standard
deviation (std), respectively.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

