List-Decodable Mean Estimation
in Nearly-PCA Time

Ilias Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin, Madison
Madison, WI 53706
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
Department of Computer Science
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Daniel Kongsgaard
Department of Mathematics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dkongsga@ucsd.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
jerrl@microsoft.com

Kevin Tian ∗
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
kjtian@stanford.edu

Abstract
Robust statistics has traditionally focused on designing estimators tolerant to a
minority of contaminated data. List-decodable learning [CSV17] studies the more
challenging regime where only a minority k1 fraction of the dataset, k ≥ 2, is
drawn from the distribution of interest, and no assumptions are made on the
remaining data. We study the fundamental task of list-decodable mean estimation
in high dimensions. Our main result is a new algorithm for bounded covariance
distributions with optimal sample complexity and near-optimal error guarantee,
running in nearly-PCA time. Assuming the ground truth distribution on Rd has
identity-bounded covariance,√our algorithm outputs O(k) candidate means, one of
which is within distance O( k log k) from the truth.
Our algorithm runs in time e
O(ndk)2 , where n is the dataset size. This runtime nearly matches the cost of performing k-PCA on the data, a natural bottleneck of known algorithms for (very) special cases of our problem, such as
clustering well-separated mixtures. Prior to our work, the fastest runtimes were
C
e 2 dk 2 ) [DKK20], and O(ndk
e
O(n
) [CMY20] for an unspecified constant C ≥ 6.
Our approach builds on a novel soft downweighting method we term SIFT, arguably the simplest known polynomial-time mean estimator in the list-decodable
setting. To develop our fast algorithms, we boost the computational cost of SIFT via
a careful “win-win-win” analysis of an approximate Ky Fan matrix multiplicative
weights procedure we develop, which may be of independent interest.

∗
2

Part of this work was done as an intern at Microsoft Research.
e notation hides logarithmic factors in n and the failure probability.
Throughout this work, the O

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

