Learning MDPs from Features:
Predict-Then-Optimize for Sequential Decision
Problems by Reinforcement Learning

Kai Wang
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
kaiwang@g.harvard.edu

Sanket Shah
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
sanketshah@g.harvard.edu

Haipeng Chen
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
hpchen@seas.harvard.edu

Andrew Perrault∗
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH
perrault.17@osu.edu

Finale Doshi-Velez
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
finale@seas.harvard.edu

Milind Tambe
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
milind_tambe@harvard.edu

Abstract
In the predict-then-optimize framework, the objective is to train a predictive model,
mapping from environment features to parameters of an optimization problem,
which maximizes decision quality when the optimization is subsequently solved.
Recent work on decision-focused learning shows that embedding the optimization
problem in the training pipeline can improve decision quality and help generalize
better to unseen tasks compared to relying on an intermediate loss function for
evaluating prediction quality. We study the predict-then-optimize framework in the
context of sequential decision problems (formulated as MDPs) that are solved via
reinforcement learning. In particular, we are given environment features and a set
of trajectories from training MDPs, which we use to train a predictive model that
generalizes to unseen test MDPs without trajectories. Two significant computational challenges arise in applying decision-focused learning to MDPs: (i) large
state and action spaces make it infeasible for existing techniques to differentiate
through MDP problems, and (ii) the high-dimensional policy space, as parameterized by a neural network, makes differentiating through a policy expensive. We
resolve the first challenge by sampling provably unbiased derivatives to approximate and differentiate through optimality conditions, and the second challenge by
using a low-rank approximation to the high-dimensional sample-based derivatives.
We implement both Bellman–based and policy gradient–based decision-focused
learning on three different MDP problems with missing parameters, and show that
decision-focused learning performs better in generalization to unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

Predict-then-optimize [5, 9] is a framework for solving optimization problems with unknown parameters. Given such a problem, we first train a predictive model to predict the missing parameters from
problem features. Our objective is to maximize the resulting decision quality when the optimization
problem is subsequently solved with the predicted parameters [25, 28]. Recent work on the decisionfocused learning approach [7, 36] embeds the optimization problem [1, 3, 4] into the training pipeline
and trains the predictive model end-to-end to optimize the final decision quality. Compared with a
∗

This work was done while the author was at Harvard University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

