Linear Convergence of Gradient Methods for
Estimating Structured Transition Matrices in
High-dimensional Vector Autoregressive Models

Xiao Lv, Wei Cui
School of Information and Electronics
Beijing Institute of Technology
{xiaolv, cuiwei}@bit.edu.cn

Yulong Liu∗
School of Physics
Beijing Institute of Technology
yulongliu@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present non-asymptotic optimization guarantees of gradient descent methods for estimating structured transition matrices in high-dimensional
vector autoregressive (VAR) models. We adopt the projected gradient descent
(PGD) for single-structured transition matrices and the alternating projected gradient descent (AltPGD) for superposition-structured ones. Our analysis demonstrates
that both gradient algorithms converge linearly to the statistical error even though
the strong convexity of the objective function is absent under the high-dimensional
settings. Moreover our result is sharp (up to a constant factor) in the sense of
matching the phase transition theory of the corresponding model with independent samples. To the best of our knowledge, this analysis constitutes first nonasymptotic optimization guarantees of the linear rate for regularized estimation
in high-dimensional VAR models. Numerical results are provided to support our
theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Learning the network structure through high-dimensional time series data has been an important focus
of research for the past decades. There are lots of application examples ranging from macroeconomic
analysis [1–3] to connectivity measuring among financial firms [4], gene regularity network inference
[5] and radar signals processing [6, 7]. To perform these tasks, vector autoregressive (VAR) models
play a critical role in both theory and application. For example, VAR models are widely adopted
to characterize the spatially and temporally colored disturbance for multichannel adaptive signal
detection in [7–11].
Under the low-dimensional settings where the dimension of the transition matrix and the number
of time series are relatively small, the theory of VAR models is well established, see e.g., [12].
However, lots of meaningful applications are under the high-dimensional settings where the problem
dimension far exceeds the number of time series and additional structure information of parameters is
required to guarantee successful recovery. For the cases where the samples are independent, both
theoretical properties and practical algorithms of high-dimensional statistical problems have been
studied by considerable literature during the past few years, including but not limited to [13–17].
For the correlated time series cases, the corresponding results are still developing. By assuming
that the spectral norm of the transition matrix is less than 1, Loh and Wainwright consider VAR
models regularized by the l1 -norm in [18]. Under the double asymptotic framework, Han and Liu
also consider VAR models under the similar assumption in [19]. In [20], Basu and Michailidis
analyze sparse transition matrices estimation of VAR models with a milder stability assumption by
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

