Asynchronous Decentralized SGD with
Quantized and Local Updates

Giorgi Nadiradze
IST Austria
giorgi.nadiradze@ist.ac.at

Amirmojtaba Sabour
IST Austria
amsabour79@gmail.com

Shigang Li
ETH Zurich
shigangli.cs@gmail.com

Peter Davies
University of Surrey
pd0034@surrey.ac.uk

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Decentralized optimization is emerging as a viable alternative for scalable distributed machine learning, but also introduces new challenges in terms of synchronization costs. To this end, several communication-reduction techniques, such as
non-blocking communication, quantization, and local steps, have been explored in
the decentralized setting. Due to the complexity of analyzing optimization in such
a relaxed setting, this line of work often assumes global communication rounds,
which require additional synchronization. In this paper, we consider decentralized
optimization in the simpler, but harder to analyze, asynchronous gossip model, in
which communication occurs in discrete, randomly chosen pairings among nodes.
Perhaps surprisingly, we show that a variant of SGD called SwarmSGD still converges in this setting, even if non-blocking communication, quantization, and local
steps are all applied in conjunction, and even if the node data distributions and underlying graph topology are both heterogenous. Our analysis is based on a new
connection with multi-dimensional load-balancing processes. We implement this
algorithm and deploy it in a super-computing environment, showing that it can
outperform previous decentralized methods in terms of end-to-end training time,
and that it can even rival carefully-tuned large-batch SGD for certain tasks.

1

Introduction

Decentralized optimization has recently emerged as a promising approach for scaling the distributed
training of machine learning models, in particular via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [Lian et al.,
2017, Tang et al., 2018, Koloskova et al., 2019a]. Its key advantage is that it removes the need for a
central coordinator node in distributed training, and therefore it can allow for high scaling.
The general decentralized optimization setting is the following: we are given n nodes, each with a
subset of data from some distribution, which can communicate over some underlying graph topology. In each global round, each node samples some local data, performs a local gradient step, and
it is paired with a neighbor, which may be chosen randomly. The nodes exchange model information pairwise, and then update their models, often via direct model averaging. Variants of this
setting have been analyzed since pioneering work by Tsitsiklis [1984], for various estimation and
optimization algorithms [Xiao and Boyd, 2004, Nedic and Ozdaglar, 2009, Johansson et al., 2009,
Shamir and Srebro, 2014] and have seen renewed interest given its applicability to training deep
neural networks (DNNs) at scale, e.g. [Lian et al., 2017, 2018, Assran et al., 2018].
Recently, there has been significant focus on reducing the synchronization overheads for decentralized training, usually employing three approaches: 1) implementing faster non-blocking communication between communication partners at a round [Lian et al., 2018, Assran et al., 2018], which
may cause them to see stale versions of their models, 2) allowing nodes to take local steps in between
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

