UCB-based Algorithms for
Multinomial Logistic Regression Bandits
Sanae Amani
University of California, Los Angeles
samani@ucla.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis
University of British Columbia
cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
Out of the rich family of generalized linear bandits, perhaps the most well studied
ones are logistic bandits that are used in problems with binary rewards: for instance,
when the learner aims to maximize the profit over a user that can select one of
two possible outcomes (e.g., ‘click’ vs ‘no-click’). Despite remarkable recent
progress and improved algorithms for logistic bandits, existing works do not
address practical situations where the number of outcomes that can be selected by
the user is larger than two (e.g., ‘click’, ‘show me later’, ‘never show again’, ‘no
click’). In this paper, we study such an extension. We use multinomial logit (MNL)
to model the probability of each one of K + 1 2 possible outcomes (+1 stands for
the ‘not click’ outcome): we assume that for a learner’s action xt , the user selects
one of K + 1 2 outcomes, say outcome i, with a MNL probabilistic model with
¯ ⇤i . Each outcome i is also associated with
corresponding unknown parameter ✓
a revenue parameter ⇢i and the goal is to maximize the expected revenue. For
this problem, we present MNL-UCB, p
an upper confidence bound (UCB)-based
algorithm, that achieves regret Õ(dK T ) with small dependency on problemdependent constants that can otherwise be arbitrarily large and lead to loose regret
bounds. We present numerical simulations that corroborate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Linear stochastic bandits provide simple, yet commonly encountered, models for a variety of sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty. Specifically, linear bandits generalize the classical
multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem of K arms that each yields reward sampled independently
from an underlying distribution with unknown parameters, to a setting where the expected reward
of each arm is a linear function that depends on the same unknown parameter vector Dani et al.
(2008); Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011); Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis (2010). Linear bandits have
been successfully applied over the years in online advertising, recommendation services, resource
allocation, etc. Lattimore and Szepesvári (2020). More recently, researchers have explored the
potentials of such algorithms in more complex systems, such as in robotics, wireless networks, the
power grid, medical trials, e.g., Li et al. (2013); Avner and Mannor (2019); Berkenkamp et al. (2016);
Sui et al. (2018). However, linear bandits fail to model a host of other applications. This has called
for extensions of linear bandits to a broader range of reward structures beyond linear models. One
of the leading lines of work addressing these extensions relies on the Generalized Linear Model
(GLM) framework of statistics. In GLMs the expected reward associated with an arm x is given
¯ T x), where ✓
¯ 2 Rd is the system unknown parameter and µ is a non-linear link function.
by µ(✓
Specifically, logistic bandits, that are appropriate for modeling binary reward structures, are a special
case of generalized linear bandits (GLBs) with µ(x) = (1 + exp( x)) 1 . UCB-based algorithms
for GLBs were first introduced in Filippi et al. (2010); Li et al. (2017); Faury et al. (2020). The same
problem, but with a Thompson Sampling- (TS) strategy was also studied in Abeille et al. (2017);
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

