A Comprehensively Tight Analysis of Gradient
Descent for PCA
Zhiqiang Xu, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
No. 10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing 100193, China
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, Washington 98004, USA
{xuzhiqiang04,liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
We study the Riemannian gradient method for PCA on which a crucial fact is
that despite the simplicity of the considered setting, i.e., deterministic version
of Krasulina’s method, the convergence rate has not been well-understood yet.
In this work, we provide a general tight analysis for the gap-dependent rate at
1
O( ∆
log 1ϵ ) that holds for any real symmetric matrix. More importantly, when
the gap ∆ is significantly smaller than the target accuracy ϵ on the objective suboptimality of the final solution, the rate of this type is actually not tight any more,
which calls for a worst-case rate. We further give the first worst-case analysis
that achieves a rate of convergence at O( 1ϵ log 1ϵ ). The two analyses naturally roll
1
out a comprehensively tight convergence rate at O( max{∆,ϵ}
log 1ϵ ). Particularly,
our gap-dependent analysis suggests a new promising learning rate for stochastic
variance reduced PCA algorithms. Experiments are conducted to confirm our
findings as well.

1

Introduction

Gradient descent is a basic, well-established, and celebrated optimization method for minimizing
convex functions [11, 3], but remains far less understood theoretically for non-convex functions
though it has been proven useful in practice for many non-convex problems [22, 17]. In the past
decade, the research on gradient methods for non-convex problems has been gaining increasing
attention in optimization and especially machine learning [6, 8, 4]. In this work, we focus on a
notable example, namely the Riemannian gradient descent for the leading eigenvector computation
of a real symmetric matrix A ∈ Rn×n , which lays the foundation of Krasulina’s method for PCA.
This problem can be solved by either a traditional projection based method from the numerical
algebra, such as the well-known power method or Lanczos algorithm [13], or a gradient search based
method for the associated optimization problem such as the Riemannian gradient descent [18, 21].
The projected gradient descent (with constant step-sizes), as another closely related solver, can
be interpreted either as a projection method or as a search method in this case (see Section 6
for interpretations). Compared to projection methods which have arguably been well-understood
already [13, 9, 10], the search method, i.e., the Riemannian gradient descent, is lacking a clear and
deep theoretical understanding on their convergence behaviors. This may largely be because the
underlying optimization problem is geodesically non-convex:
1
min
f (x) = − x⊤ Ax,
(1)
n−1
2
x∈S
where the objective function f (x) is constrained on the (n−1)-dimensional unit sphere manifold
Sn−1 = {x ∈ Rn×1 : ∥x∥2 = 1} [1].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

