A Convergence Analysis of Gradient Descent on
Graph Neural Networks

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Abhimanyu Das
Google Research
abhidas@google.com

Sreenivas Gollapudi
Google Research
sgollapu@google.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a powerful class of architectures for solving
learning problems on graphs. While many variants of GNNs have been proposed
in the literature and have achieved strong empirical performance, their theoretical
properties are less well understood. In this work we study the convergence properties of the gradient descent algorithm when used to train GNNs. In particular,
we consider the realizable setting where the data is generated from a network with
unknown weights and our goal is to study conditions under which gradient descent
on a GNN architecture can recover near optimal solutions. While such analysis
has been performed in recent years for other architectures such as fully connected
feed-forward networks, the message passing nature of the updates in a GNN poses
a new challenge in understanding the nature of the gradient descent updates. We
take a step towards overcoming this by proving that for the case of deep linear
GNNs gradient descent provably recovers solutions up to error  in O(log(1/))
iterations, under natural assumptions on the data distribution. Furthermore, for the
case of one-round GNNs with ReLU activations, we show that gradient descent
provably recovers solutions up to error  in O( 12 log( 1 )) iterations.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, deep neural networks have been successfully used for a variety of machine learning
tasks. In particular, optimization of various deep neural network architectures using gradient descent
has been empirically (and in some cases, theoretically) shown to work surprisingly well, with an
ability to obtain small training error on a variety of problems and datasets. In this paper, we focus on
a particular class of neural network architectures known as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a popular choice for machine learning tasks with graph
structured data [Hamilton et al., 2017, Kipf and Welling, 2016, Veličković et al., 2017]. Computation
in GNNs is performed by each node sending and receiving messages along the edges of the graph,
and aggregating messages from its neighbors to update its embedding vector. After a few rounds
of message passing, the computed node embeddings from all the nodes are aggregated to compute
the final output [Gilmer et al., 2017]. This leads to a simple and elegant architecture for a variety of
graph-related problems in practice.
While theoretically understanding the optimization, learning, and generalization properties of deep
neural networks is a challenging task in itself, our current understanding of GNNs lags significantly
behind their more popular counterparts such as fully connected feed-forward networks and convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In the context of GNNs recent theoretical works have focused
on questions such as as the representation power of various GNN architectures [Xu et al., 2019b,a,
Loukas, 2020a,b] and establishing generalization bounds [Garg et al., 2020]. However, the optimization properties of GNN architectures are less explored. These involve identifying conditions under
which algorithms like gradient descent can be shown to be provably effective in optimizing GNNs.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

