Online Sign Identification: Minimization of the
Number of Errors in Thresholding Bandits

Reda Ouhamma
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL,
F-59000 Lille, France
reda.ouhamma@gmail.com

Rémy Degenne
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL,
F-59000 Lille, France
remy.degenne@inria.fr

Pierre Gaillard
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
pierre.gaillard@inria.fr

Vianney Perchet
Crest, Ensae & Criteo AI Lab
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
In the fixed budget thresholding bandit problem, an algorithm sequentially allocates
a budgeted number of samples to different distributions. It then predicts whether the
mean of each distribution is larger or lower than a given threshold. We introduce
a large family of algorithms (containing most existing relevant ones), inspired
by the Frank-Wolfe algorithm, and provide a thorough yet generic analysis of
their performance. This allowed us to construct new explicit algorithms, for a
broad class of problems, whose losses are within a small constant factor of the
non-adaptive oracle ones. Quite interestingly, we observed that adaptive methods
empirically greatly out-perform non-adaptive oracles, an uncommon behavior in
standard online learning settings, such as regret minimization. We explain this
surprising phenomenon on an insightful toy problem.

1

Introduction and related work

In a stochastic multi-armed bandit problem, a decision maker sequentially samples from different
distributions in order to optimize a loss that depends on the unknown parameters of those distributions.
As a consequence, a tradeoff arises between gathering more samples from any possible distribution
(to enhance the estimation of relevant parameters) and optimizing the allocation to minimize the final
loss. We can distinguish two main categories of losses, focusing on “exploitation” vs “exploration”.
The former directly depends on the whole allocation of samples and the typical example is regret minimization (we refer to the recent monographs [27, 6, 34] that cover this setting almost exhaustively).
The later is a bit different; after the budget of samples is exhausted, the algorithms must answer one
or several “questions” (on the different distribution) and its loss is related to the number of mistakes
made; the typical application being best-arm identification and variants [3, 24].
We investigate a class of pure exploration problems, called “thresholding bandit” [28, 35]. The key
property of this class is that a question is asked about each distribution, and the probability of making a
mistake decreases with the total information gathered on that distribution solely. The typical question
the algorithm must answer is “is the mean of the distribution above or below some threshold?" (say,
0, for simplicity); giving the wrong answer can either incur a unit cost - independently from the
distribution -, or a data-dependent cost (say, the distance to the threshold that represents the “risk”
of that distribution). A typical application of thresholding bandits is crowdsourcing [7] where the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

