Low-Dimensional Structure in the Space of Language
Representations is Reflected in Brain Responses

Richard Antonello
UT Austin
rjantonello@utexas.edu

Javier Turek
Intel Labs
javier.turek@intel.com

Vy Vo
Intel Labs
vy.vo@intel.com

Alexander Huth
UT Austin
huth@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
How related are the representations learned by neural language models, translation
models, and language tagging tasks? We answer this question by adapting an
encoder-decoder transfer learning method from computer vision to investigate
the structure among 100 different feature spaces extracted from hidden representations of various networks trained on language tasks. This method reveals a
low-dimensional structure where language models and translation models smoothly
interpolate between word embeddings, syntactic and semantic tasks, and future
word embeddings. We call this low-dimensional structure a language representation embedding because it encodes the relationships between representations
needed to process language for a variety of NLP (natural language processing) tasks.
We find that this representation embedding can predict how well each individual
feature space maps to human brain responses to natural language stimuli recorded
using fMRI. Additionally, we find that the principal dimension of this structure can
be used to create a metric which highlights the brain’s natural language processing
hierarchy. This suggests that the embedding captures some part of the brain’s
natural language representation structure.

1

Introduction

There are a multitude of common techniques for analytically representing the information contained in
natural language. At the word level, language is often represented by word embeddings, which capture
some aspects of word meaning using word co-occurrence statistics [8, 25]. Language representations
that highlight specific linguistic properties, such as parts-of-speech [29] or sentence chunks [1], or
that utilize well-known NLP models such as the intermediate layers of pretrained language models
[6, 10, 21, 27], are also frequently studied [12, 31]. In fields such as linguistics, natural language
processing, and cognitive neuroscience, qualitative adjectives are often used to describe these language
representations – e.g. “low-level” or “high-level” and “syntactic” or “semantic”. The use of these
words belies an unstated hypothesis about the nature of the space of language representations –
namely that this space is fundamentally low-dimensional, and therefore that the information from
the representations in this space can be efficiently described using a few categorical descriptors. In
this work, we attempt to directly map the low-dimensional space of language representations by
generating “representation embeddings” using a method inspired by the work of Zamir et al. [44].
This method uses the transfer properties between representations to map their relationships.
The work described here has two main contributions. First, we used the representation embeddings to
demonstrate the existence of low-dimensional structure within the space of language representations.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

