Generalized Proximal Policy Optimization
with Sample Reuse

James Queeney
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
jqueeney@bu.edu

Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
yannisp@bu.edu

Christos G. Cassandras
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
cgc@bu.edu

Abstract
In real-world decision making tasks, it is critical for data-driven reinforcement
learning methods to be both stable and sample efficient. On-policy methods typically generate reliable policy improvement throughout training, while off-policy
methods make more efficient use of data through sample reuse. In this work, we
combine the theoretically supported stability benefits of on-policy algorithms with
the sample efficiency of off-policy algorithms. We develop policy improvement
guarantees that are suitable for the off-policy setting, and connect these bounds
to the clipping mechanism used in Proximal Policy Optimization. This motivates
an off-policy version of the popular algorithm that we call Generalized Proximal Policy Optimization with Sample Reuse. We demonstrate both theoretically
and empirically that our algorithm delivers improved performance by effectively
balancing the competing goals of stability and sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

In recent years, model-free deep reinforcement learning has been used to successfully solve complex
simulated control tasks [4]. Unfortunately, real-world adoption of these techniques remains limited.
High-stakes real-world decision making settings demand methods that deliver stable, reliable performance throughout training. In addition, real-world data collection can be difficult and expensive, so
learning must make efficient use of limited data. The combination of these requirements is not an
easy task, as stability and sample efficiency often represent competing interests. Existing model-free
deep reinforcement learning algorithms often focus on one of these goals, and as a result sacrifice
performance with respect to the other.
On-policy reinforcement learning methods such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [19] deliver
stable performance throughout training due to their connection to theoretical policy improvement
guarantees. These methods are motivated by a lower bound on the expected performance loss at every
update, which can be approximated using samples generated by the current policy. The theoretically
supported stability of these methods is very attractive, but the need for on-policy data and the highvariance nature of reinforcement learning often requires significant data to be collected between every
update, resulting in high sample complexity and slow learning.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

