Model, sample, and epoch-wise descents: exact
solution of gradient flow in the random feature model

Antoine Bodin

&

Nicolas Macris

Communication Theory Laboratory,
School of Computer and Communication Sciences,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
antoine.bodin@epfl.ch,
nicolas.macris@epfl.ch

Abstract
Recent evidence has shown the existence of a so-called double-descent and even
triple-descent behavior for the generalization error of deep-learning models. This
important phenomenon commonly appears in implemented neural network architectures, and also seems to emerge in epoch-wise curves during the training
process. A recent line of research has highlighted that random matrix tools can be
used to obtain precise analytical asymptotics of the generalization (and training)
errors of the random feature model. In this contribution, we analyze the whole
temporal behavior of the generalization and training errors under gradient flow for
the random feature model. We show that in the asymptotic limit of large system
size the full time-evolution path of both errors can be calculated analytically. This
allows us to observe how the double and triple descents develop over time, if and
when early stopping is an option, and also observe time-wise descent structures.
Our techniques are based on Cauchy complex integral representations of the errors
together with recent random matrix methods based on linear pencils.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have vastly increased in terms of number of parameters in the architecture and
data sample sizes with recent applications using unprecedented numbers with as much as 175 billions
parameters trained over billions of tokens [1]. Such massive amounts of data and growing training
budgets have spurred research seeking empirical power laws to scale model sizes appropriately with
available resources [2], and nowadays it is common wisdom among practitioners that "larger models
are better". This ongoing trend has been challenging classical statistical modeling where it is thought
that increasing the number of parameters past an interpolation threshold (at which the training error
vanishes while the test error usually increases) is doomed to over-fit the data [3]. We refer to [4] for
a recent extensive discussion on this contradictory state of affairs. Progress towards rationalizing
this situation came from a series of papers [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] evidencing the existence of phases
where increasing the number of parameters beyond the interpolation threshold can actually achieve
good generalization, and the characteristic U curve of the bias-variance tradeoff is followed by a
"descent" of the generalization error. This phenomenon has been called the double descent and was
analytically corroborated in linear models [12, 13, 14, 15, 16] as well as random feature (RF) (or
random feature regression) shallow network models [17, 18, 19, 20]. Many of these works provide
rigorous proofs with precise asymptotic expressions of double descent curves. Further developments
have brought forward rich phenomenology, for example, a triple-descent phenomenon [21] linked to
the degree of non-linearity of the activation function. Further empirical evidence [22] has also shown
that a similar effect occurs while training (ResNet18s on CIFAR10 trained using Adam) and has been
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

