Is Bang-Bang Control All You Need?
Solving Continuous Control with Bernoulli Policies

Tim Seyde1
MIT CSAIL

Igor Gilitschenski
University of Toronto

Martin Riedmiller
DeepMind

Wilko Schwarting
MIT CSAIL

Markus Wulfmeier2
DeepMind

Bartolomeo Stellato
Princeton University
Daniela Rus2
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) for continuous control typically employs distributions
whose support covers the entire action space. In this work, we investigate the
colloquially known phenomenon that trained agents often prefer actions at the
boundaries of that space. We draw theoretical connections to the emergence of bangbang behavior in optimal control, and provide extensive empirical evaluation across
a variety of recent RL algorithms. We replace the normal Gaussian by a Bernoulli
distribution that solely considers the extremes along each action dimension - a
bang-bang controller. Surprisingly, this achieves state-of-the-art performance on
several continuous control benchmarks - in contrast to robotic hardware, where
energy and maintenance cost affect controller choices. Since exploration, learning,
and the final solution are entangled in RL, we provide additional imitation learning
experiments to reduce the impact of exploration on our analysis. Finally, we
show that our observations generalize to environments that aim to model realworld challenges and evaluate factors to mitigate the emergence of bang-bang
solutions. Our findings emphasise challenges for benchmarking continuous control
algorithms, particularly in light of potential real-world applications.3

1

Introduction

Real-world robotics tasks commonly manifest as control problems over continuous action spaces.
When learning to act in such settings, control policies are typically represented as continuous
probability distributions that cover all feasible control inputs - often Gaussians. The underlying
assumption is that this enables more refined decisions compared to crude policy choices such as
discretized controllers, which limit the search space but induce abrupt changes. While switching
controls can be undesirable in practice as they may challenge stability and accelerate system weardown, they are theoretically feasible and even arise as optimal strategies in some settings. It is
therefore important to investigate our underlying assumption in designing policies for learning agents,
and analyze how deviations from expected behavior can be explained.
Practitioners have empirically observed that even under Gaussian policies extremal switching, or
bang-bang control [31], may naturally emerge (e.g. in [21, 41, 51]). Thus, recent work focused on
developing methods for preventing this behavior [7] or improving training when bang-bang control is
the optimal policy structure [28]. However, understanding the performance, extent, and reasons for
emergence of Bang-Bang policies in RL is largely an open research question. Its answer is important
for designing future benchmarks and informing empirical and theoretical RL research directions.
1
3

Correspondence to tseyde@mit.edu. 2 Equal advising.
Please find videos and additional details at https://sites.google.com/view/bang-bang-rl

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

