Behavior From the Void: Unsupervised Active
Pre-Training

Hao Liu
UC Berkeley
hao.liu@cs.berkeley.edu

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new unsupervised pre-training method for reinforcement learning
called APT, which stands for Active Pre-Training. APT learns behaviors and
representations by actively searching for novel states in reward-free environments.
The key novel idea is to explore the environment by maximizing a non-parametric
entropy computed in an abstract representation space, which avoids challenging
density modeling and consequently allows our approach to scale much better in
environments that have high-dimensional observations (e.g., image observations).
We empirically evaluate APT by exposing task-speciﬁc reward after a long unsupervised pre-training phase. In Atari games, APT achieves human-level performance
on 12 games and obtains highly competitive performance compared to canonical
fully supervised RL algorithms. On DMControl suite, APT beats all baselines in
terms of asymptotic performance and data efﬁciency and dramatically improves
performance on tasks that are extremely difﬁcult to train from scratch.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a general framework for solving challenging sequential
decision-making problems. When combined with function approximation, it has achieved remarkable
success in advancing the frontier of AI technologies. These landmarks include outperforming humans
in computer games [40, 51, 64, 5] and solving complex robotic control tasks [3, 1]. Despite these
successes, they have to train from scratch to maximize extrinsic reward for every encountered task.
This is in sharp contrast with how intelligent creatures quickly adapt to new tasks by leveraging
previously acquired behaviors. Unsupervised pre-training, a framework that trains models without
expert supervision, has obtained promising results in computer vision [43, 23, 14] and natural
language modeling [63, 16, 11]. The learned representation, when ﬁne-tuned on the downstream
tasks, can solve them efﬁciently in a few-shot manner. With the models and datasets growing,
performance continues to improve predictably according to scaling laws.
Driven by the signiﬁcance of massive unlabeled data, we consider an analogy setting of unsupervised
pre-training in computer vision where labels are removed during training. The goal of pre-training
is to have data efﬁcient adaptation for some downstream task deﬁned in the form of rewards. In
RL with unsupervised pre-training, the agent is allowed to train for a long period without access
to environment reward, and then only gets exposed to the reward during testing. We ﬁrst test an
array of existing methods for unsupervised pre-training to identity which gaps and challenges exist,
we evaluate count-based bonus [10], which encourages the agent to visit novel states. We apply
count-based bonus to DrQ [33] which is current state-of-the-art RL for training from pixels. We
also evaluate ImageNet pre-trained representations. The results are shown in Figure 1. We can
see that count-based bonus fails to outperform train DrQ from scratch. We hypothesize that the
ineffectiveness stems from density modeling at the pixel level being difﬁcult. ImageNet pre-training
does not outperform training from scratch either, which has also been shown in previous research
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

