A Central Limit Theorem for Differentially Private
Query Answering

Jinshuo Dong
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University and IDEAL∗
jinshuo@northwestern.edu

Weijie J. Su
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of Pennsylvania
suw@wharton.upenn.edu

Linjun Zhang
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
linjun.zhang@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Perhaps the single most important use case for differential privacy is to privately
answer numerical queries, which is usually achieved by adding noise to the answer
vector. The central question is, therefore, to understand which noise distribution
optimizes the privacy-accuracy trade-off, especially when the dimension of the
answer vector is high. Accordingly, an extensive literature has been dedicated to
the question and the upper and lower bounds have been successfully matched up to
constant factors [BUV18, SU17]. In this paper, we take a novel approach to address
this important optimality question. We first demonstrate an intriguing central limit
theorem phenomenon in the high-dimensional regime. More precisely, we prove
that a mechanism is approximately Gaussian Differentially Private [DRS21] if
the added noise satisfies certain conditions. In particular, densities proportional
α
to e−kxkp , where kxkp is the standard `p -norm, satisfies the conditions. Taking
this perspective, we make use of the Cramer–Rao inequality and show a “uncertainty principle”-style result: the product of privacy parameter and the `2 -loss of
the mechanism is lower bounded by the dimension. Furthermore, the Gaussian
mechanism achieves the constant-sharp optimal privacy-accuracy trade-off among
all such noises. Our findings are corroborated by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Introduced in [DMNS06], to date differential privacy (DP) is perhaps the most popular privacy
definition. One of the most important applications of differential privacy is to answer numeric queries.
Given a function f of interest, which is also termed a query, our goal is to evaluate this (potentially
vector-valued) query f on the sensitive data. To preserve privacy, a DP mechanism M working on a
dataset D, in its simplest form, is defined as
M (D) = f (D) + tX.

(1)

Above, X denotes the noise term and t is a scalar, which together are selected depending on the
properties of the query f and the desired privacy level. Among these, perhaps the most popular
examples are the Laplace mechanism and the Gaussian mechanism where the noise X follows the
Laplace distribution and the Gaussian distribution, respectively.
∗

the Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms, and Learning

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

