EditGAN: High-Precision Semantic Image Editing

Huan Ling1,2,3,∗
Seung Wook Kim1,2,3
1

NVIDIA

2

Karsten Kreis1,∗

Daiqing Li 1

Antonio Torralba4
3

University of Toronto

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

Vector Institute

4

MIT

{huling,kkreis,daiqingl,seungwookk,sfidler}@nvidia.com, torralba@mit.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have recently found applications in image editing. However, most GAN-based image editing methods often require
large-scale datasets with semantic segmentation annotations for training, only
provide high level control, or merely interpolate between different images. Here,
we propose EditGAN, a novel method for high-quality, high-precision semantic
image editing, allowing users to edit images by modifying their highly detailed
part segmentation masks, e.g., drawing a new mask for the headlight of a car.
EditGAN builds on a GAN framework that jointly models images and their semantic segmentations [1, 2], requiring only a handful of labeled examples – making
it a scalable tool for editing. Specifically, we embed an image into the GAN’s
latent space and perform conditional latent code optimization according to the
segmentation edit, which effectively also modifies the image. To amortize optimization, we find “editing vectors” in latent space that realize the edits. The
framework allows us to learn an arbitrary number of editing vectors, which can then
be directly applied on other images at interactive rates. We experimentally show
that EditGAN can manipulate images with an unprecedented level of detail and
freedom, while preserving full image quality.We can also easily combine multiple
edits and perform plausible edits beyond EditGAN’s training data. We demonstrate EditGAN on a wide variety of image types and quantitatively outperform
several previous editing methods on standard editing benchmark tasks. Project
page: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/editGAN.

1

Introduction

Change Shape

Enlarge Wheels

Shrink Front-Light

AI-driven photo and image editing has the potential to streamline
the workflow of photographers
and content creators and to enable
new levels of creativity and digital artistry [3]. AI-based image
editing tools have already found
their way into consumer software
in the form of neural photo editFrown
Look Left
Smile
Figure 1: High-precision semantic image editing with EditGAN.
ing filters, and the deep learning
research community is actively developing further techniques. A particularly promising line of
research uses generative adversarial networks (GANs) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] and either embeds images into
∗

These authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

