An Efficient Pessimistic-Optimistic Algorithm for
Stochastic Linear Bandits with General Constraints
Xin Liu
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
xinliuee@umich.edu
Pengyi Shi
Purdue University
shi178@purdue.edu

Bin Li
Pennsylvania State University
binli@psu.edu
Lei Ying
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
leiying@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper considers stochastic linear bandits with general nonlinear constraints.
The objective is to maximize the expected cumulative reward over horizon T
subject to a set of constraints in each round τ ď T . We propose a pessimisticoptimistic algorithm´´for this problem,
¯ ? ¯which is efficient in two aspects. First, the
K 0.75
algorithm yields Õ
`d
τ (pseudo) regret in round τ ď T, where K
δ
is the number of constraints, d is the dimension of the reward feature space, and
δ is a Slater’s constant; and zero constraint violation in any round τ ą τ 1 , where
τ 1 is independent of horizon T. Second, the algorithm is computationally efficient.
Our algorithm is based on the primal-dual approach in optimization and includes
two components. The primal component is similar to unconstrained stochastic
linear bandits (our algorithm uses the linear upper confidence bound algorithm
(LinUCB)). The computational complexity of the dual component depends on the
number of constraints, but is independent of the sizes of the contextual space, the
action space, and the feature space. Thus, the computational complexity of our
algorithm is similar to LinUCB for unconstrained stochastic linear bandits.

1

Introduction

Stochastic linear bandits have a broad range of applications in practice, including online recommendations, job assignments in crowdsourcing, and clinical trials in healthcare. Most existing studies on
stochastic linear bandits formulated them as unconstrained online optimization problems, limiting
their application to problems with operational constraints such as safety, fairness, and budget constraints. In this paper, we consider a stochastic linear bandit with general constraints. As in a standard
stochastic linear bandit, at the beginning of each round t P rT s, the learner is given a context cptq that
is randomly sampled from the context set C (a countable set), and takes an action Aptq P rJs. The
learner then receives a reward Rpcptq, Aptqq “ rpcptq, Aptqq ` ηptq, where rpc, jq “ xθ˚ , φpc, jqy,
φpc, jq P Rd is a d-dimensional feature vector for (context, action) pair pc, jq, θ˚ P Rd is an unknown
underlying vector to be learned, and ηptq is a zero-mean random variable. For constrained stochastic
linear bandits, we further assume when action Aptq is taken on context cptq, it incurs K different
types of costs, denoted by W pkq pcptq, Aptqq. We assume W pkq pc, jq is a random variable with mean
wpkq pc, jq that is unknown to the learner. This paper considers general cost functions and does not
require wpkq pc, jq to have a linear form like rpc, jq.
Denote the action taken by policy π in round t by Aπ ptq. The learner’s objective is to learn a policy
π that maximizes the cumulative rewards over horizon T subject to anytime cumulative constraints:
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

