Scalable Diverse Model Selection for Accessible
Transfer Learning

Daniel Bolya∗
Georgia Tech
dbolya@gatech.edu

Rohit Mittapalli∗
Georgia Tech
rmittapalli3@gatech.edu

Judy Hoffman
Georgia Tech
judy@gatech.edu

Abstract
With the preponderance of pretrained deep learning models available off-the-shelf
from model banks today, finding the best weights to fine-tune to your use-case
can be a daunting task. Several methods have recently been proposed to find good
models for transfer learning, but they either don’t scale well to large model banks or
don’t perform well on the diversity of off-the-shelf models. Ideally the question we
want to answer is, “given some data and a source model, can you quickly predict
the model’s accuracy after fine-tuning?” In this paper, we formalize this setting as
“Scalable Diverse Model Selection” and propose several benchmarks for evaluating
on this task. We find that existing model selection and transferability estimation
methods perform poorly here and analyze why this is the case. We then introduce
simple techniques to improve the performance and speed of these algorithms.
Finally, we iterate on existing methods to create PARC, which outperforms all
other methods on diverse model selection. We have released the benchmarks and
method code† in hope to inspire future work in model selection for accessible
transfer learning.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown to be very capable of solving a wide variety of visual
tasks. However, these networks often require large amounts of data and training time to perform well,
limiting the accessibility of deep learning for computer vision. One approach to alleviate this problem
is to employ transfer learning, commonly by fine-tuning an off-the-shelf model on the desired task.
With the increasing number of off-the-shelf models available spanning different tasks, datasets,
training methods, and architectures, choosing the best model from which to transfer is a challenging
endeavor. A common heuristic in computer vision has been to use models pretrained on ImageNet [7]
(specifically the ILSVRC challenge data), but more recent work is starting to expose weaknesses in
the generalization performance of ImageNet features [39, 28, 40], and many of these works find that
other pretraining datasets may perform better for some target tasks. Aside from source dataset, which
architecture to select isn’t clear (when comparing similarly fast models). One could theoretically
train several transfers from a diverse set of pretrained weights and keep the best performing model,
but this isn’t feasible in most practical applications where compute is limited.
This motivates the need for a model selection method that could query a large bank of existing
pretrained models (of which several already exist, e.g., [36, 56, 18]) with a small subset of the target
data and return a set of weights which performs well when fine-tuned on all target data. Because of
the sheer quantity of pretrained weights available to download off the internet today, such a model
bank has the potential to be massive and cover a wide variety of tasks, datasets, and architectures. Any
∗
†

Equal Contribution
https://dbolya.github.io/parc/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

