Newton-LESS: Sparsification without Trade-offs
for the Sketched Newton Update

Michał Dereziński
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mderezin@berkeley.edu

Jonathan Lacotte
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
lacotte@stanford.edu

Mert Pilanci
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In second-order optimization, a potential bottleneck can be computing the Hessian
matrix of the optimized function at every iteration. Randomized sketching has
emerged as a powerful technique for constructing estimates of the Hessian which
can be used to perform approximate Newton steps. This involves multiplication by a
random sketching matrix, which introduces a trade-off between the computational
cost of sketching and the convergence rate of the optimization algorithm. A
theoretically desirable but practically much too expensive choice is to use a dense
Gaussian sketching matrix, which produces unbiased estimates of the exact Newton
step and which offers strong problem-independent convergence guarantees. We
show that the Gaussian sketching matrix can be drastically sparsified, significantly
reducing the computational cost of sketching, without substantially affecting its
convergence properties. This approach, called Newton-LESS, is based on a recently
introduced sketching technique: LEverage Score Sparsified (LESS) embeddings.
We prove that Newton-LESS enjoys nearly the same problem-independent local
convergence rate as Gaussian embeddings, not just up to constant factors but even
down to lower order terms, for a large class of optimization tasks. In particular,
this leads to a new state-of-the-art convergence result for an iterative least squares
solver. Finally, we extend LESS embeddings to include uniformly sparsified
random sign matrices which can be implemented efficiently and which perform
well in numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Consider the task of minimizing a twice-differentiable convex function f : Rd → R:
find x∗ = argmin f (x).
x∈Rd

One of the most classical iterative algorithms for solving this task is the Newton’s method, which takes
steps of the form xt+1 = xt − µt ∇2 f (xt )−1 ∇f (xt ), and which leverages second-order information
in the d × d Hessian matrix ∇2 f (xt ) to achieve rapid convergence, especially locally as it approaches
the optimum x∗ . However, in many settings, the cost of forming the exact Hessian is prohibitively
expensive,
particularly when the function f is given as a sum of n  d components, i.e., f (x) =
Pn
f
(x).
This commonly arises in machine learning when f represents the training loss over a
i
i=1
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

