Reverse engineering recurrent neural networks with
Jacobian switching linear dynamical systems

Jimmy T.H. Smith
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jsmith14@stanford.edu
Scott W. Linderman
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

David Sussillo
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
sussillo@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are powerful models for processing time-series
data, but it remains challenging to understand how they function. Improving this
understanding is of substantial interest to both the machine learning and neuroscience communities. The framework of reverse engineering a trained RNN by
linearizing around its ﬁxed points has provided insight, but the approach has significant challenges. These include difﬁculty choosing which ﬁxed point to expand
around when studying RNN dynamics and error accumulation when reconstructing
the nonlinear dynamics with the linearized dynamics. We present a new model that
overcomes these limitations by co-training an RNN with a novel switching linear
dynamical system (SLDS) formulation. A ﬁrst-order Taylor series expansion of
the co-trained RNN and an auxiliary function trained to pick out the RNN’s ﬁxed
points govern the SLDS dynamics. The results are a trained SLDS variant that
closely approximates the RNN, an auxiliary function that can produce a ﬁxed point
for each point in state-space, and a trained nonlinear RNN whose dynamics have
been regularized such that its ﬁrst-order terms perform the computation, if possible.
This model removes the post-training ﬁxed point optimization and allows us to
unambiguously study the learned dynamics of the SLDS at any point in state-space.
It also generalizes SLDS models to continuous manifolds of switching points while
sharing parameters across switches. We validate the utility of the model on two
synthetic tasks relevant to previous work reverse engineering RNNs. We then show
that our model can be used as a drop-in in more complex architectures, such as
LFADS, and apply this LFADS hybrid to analyze single-trial spiking activity from
the motor system of a non-human primate.

1 Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a powerful and popular tool for modeling complex sequence
data. They learn to transform input sequences into output sequences by using an internal state
that allows data from the past to inﬂuence the current state. RNNs have been utilized in various
applications such as speech recognition, sentiment analysis, music, and video [1–4]. In neuroscience,
RNNs have been used for modeling large-scale neural recordings and as a generator of scientiﬁc
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

