STEM: A Stochastic Two-Sided Momentum
Algorithm Achieving Near-Optimal Sample and
Communication Complexities for Federated Learning
Prashant Khanduri
University of Minnesota
khand095@umn.edu
Haibo Yang
The Ohio State University
yang.5952@buckeyemail.osu.edu

Pranay Sharma
Carnegie Mellon University
pranaysh@andrew.cmu.edu
Mingyi Hong⇤
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu

Ketan Rajawat
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
ketan@iitk.ac.in

Jia Liu
The Ohio State University
liu@ece.osu.edu

Pramod K. Varshney
Syracuse University
varshney@syr.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) refers to the paradigm where multiple worker nodes
(WNs) build a joint model by using local data. Despite extensive research, for a
generic non-convex FL problem, it is not clear, how to choose the WNs’ and the
server’s update directions, the minibatch sizes, and the number of local updates, so
that the WNs use the minimum number of samples and communication rounds to
achieve the desired solution. This work addresses the above question and considers
a class of stochastic algorithms where the WNs perform a few local updates before
communication. We show that when both the WN’s and the server’s directions are
chosen based on certain stochastic momentum estimator, the algorithm requires
Õ(✏ 3/2 ) samples and Õ(✏ 1 ) communication rounds to compute an ✏-stationary
solution. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first FL algorithm that achieves
such near-optimal sample and communication complexities simultaneously. Further, we show that there is a trade-off curve between the number of local updates
and the minibatch sizes, on which the above sample and communication complexities can be maintained. Finally, we show that for the classical FedAvg (a.k.a. Local
SGD, which is a momentum-less special case of the STEM), a similar trade-off
curve exists, albeit with worse sample and communication complexities. Our
insights on this trade-off provides guidelines for choosing the four important design
elements for FL algorithms, the number of local updates, WNs’ and server’s update
directions, and minibatch sizes to achieve the best performance.

1

Introduction

In Federated Learning (FL), multiple worker nodes (WNs) collaborate with the goal of learning a
joint model, by only using local data. Therefore it has become popular for machine learning problems
where datasets are massively distributed [1]. In FL, the data is often collected at or off-loaded to
multiple WNs which in collaboration with a server node (SN) jointly aim to learn a centralized model
⇤

Corresponding Author: Mingyi Hong.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

