Neural-PIL: Neural Pre-Integrated Lighting for
Reflectance Decomposition

Mark Boss
University of Tübingen

Varun Jampani
Google Research

Raphael Braun
University of Tübingen

Jonathan T. Barron
Google Research

Ce Liu∗
Microsoft Azure AI

Hendrik P. A. Lensch
University of Tübingen

Abstract
Decomposing a scene into its shape, reflectance and illumination is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics. Neural approaches such as NeRF
have achieved remarkable success in view synthesis, but do not explicitly perform decomposition and instead operate exclusively on radiance (the product of
reflectance and illumination). Extensions to NeRF, such as NeRD, can perform
decomposition but struggle to accurately recover detailed illumination, thereby
significantly limiting realism. We propose a novel reflectance decomposition
network that can estimate shape, BRDF and per-image illumination given a set
of object images captured under varying illumination. Our key technique is a
novel illumination integration network called Neural-PIL that replaces a costly
illumination integral operation in the rendering with a simple network query. In
addition, we also learn deep low-dimensional priors on BRDF and illumination
representations using novel smooth manifold auto-encoders. Our decompositions
can result in considerably better BRDF and light estimates enabling more accurate novel view-synthesis and relighting compared to prior art. Project page:
https://markboss.me/publication/2021-neural-pil/

1

Introduction

Inverse rendering is the task of decomposing a scene into its underlying physical properties, such
as geometry and materials. Recovering these properties is useful for several vision and graphics
applications such as view synthesis [10, 11, 51, 57], relighting [4, 10, 11, 23, 24, 38, 51, 58],
and object insertion [7, 21, 38]. In this work, we aim to recover the 3D shape and spatiallyvarying bidirectional reflectance distribution function (SVBRDF) of an object imaged under different
illumination conditions, as shown in Fig. 1. Estimating shape, illumination, and SVBRDF from 2D
images is a highly ill-posed problem, as an observed pixel may appear dark either due to a dark
surface material, or due to the incident light at that surface being reduced or absent.
Our approach follows the recent success of coordinate-based scene representation networks [14, 40,
43, 44, 46, 49] in representing 3D scenes for high-quality view-synthesis [44, 49]. These models
decompose the scene into models of shape and radiance (emitted light), thereby enabling view
synthesis. However, performing complete inverse rendering requires that radiance is decomposed
further, into illumination and material appearances (SVBRDF) [6, 11, 51, 63]. A key component in
learning these neural SVBRDF decomposition networks is the differentiable rendering [10, 11, 63]
that generates images and gradients for the estimated lighting and SVBRDF parameters. These
methods leverage traditional rendering techniques within modern deep learning frameworks to enable
∗

Work done while at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

