Duplex Sequence-to-Sequence Learning for
Reversible Machine Translation
Zaixiang Zheng1,2∗, Hao Zhou2 , Shujian Huang1 , Jiajun Chen1 , Jingjing Xu2 , Lei Li3∗
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
ByteDance AI Lab 3 UC Santa Barbara
{zhengzaixiang,zhouhao.nlp,xujingjing.melody}@bytedance.com
{huangsj,chenjj}@nju.edu.cn, lilei@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Sequence-to-sequence learning naturally has two directions. How to effectively
utilize supervision signals from both directions? Existing approaches either require
two separate models, or a multitask-learned model but with inferior performance.
In this paper, we propose REDER (R Eversible Duplex TransformER), a parameterefficient model and apply it to machine translation. Either end of REDER can simultaneously input and output a distinct language. Thus REDER enables reversible
machine translation by simply flipping the input and output ends. Experiments
verify that REDER achieves the first success of reversible machine translation,
which helps outperform its multitask-trained baselines up to 1.3 BLEU. 1

1

Introduction

Neural sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning [Sutskever et al., 2014] has been extensively used
in various applications of natural language processing. Standard seq2seq neural networks usually
employ the encoder-decoder framework, which includes an encoder to acquire the representations
from the source side, and a decoder to yield the target side outputs from the encoded source representation [Bahdanau et al., 2015, Gehring et al., 2017, Vaswani et al., 2017].
Generally, given paired training data Dxy = X × Y, where X is the source side and Y is target side of
the corresponding seq2seq task, supervision signals are always bidirectional. Thus we can learn not
only the mapping from source to target (fθxy : X 7→ Y) but also the mapping from target to source
(fθyx : Y 7→ X ). This is very common in many applications. For example, given parallel corpus,
we can obtain machine translation models from both Chinese to English and English to Chinese, or
transfer between different stylized texts [Yang et al., 2018, He et al., 2019].
Typical seq2seq learning utilizes the bidirectional supervisions by splitting the bidirectional supervisions into two unidirectional ones and trains two individual seq2seq models on them, respectively.
However, such splitting ignores the internal consistencies between the bidirectional supervisions.
Thus how to make better use of the bidirectional supervisions remains an open problem. One potential
solution is multitask learning [Johnson et al., 2017], which jointly leverages the bidirectional supervisions within one model and expects the two unidirectional supervisions could boost each other (Figure
1(b)). But it does not work well in our case due to the parameter interference problem [Arivazhagan
et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2021]. For instance, in the setting of multitask Chinese-to-English and
English-to-Chinese bidirectional translations, the encoder/decoder of seq2seq networks is trained to
simultaneously understand/generate both Chinese and English, which always results in performance
∗
Work was done when Zaixiang Zheng was a final-year PhD candidate at Nanjing University and an intern
(now FTE) at ByteDance AI Lab; and when Lei Li was also at ByteDance AI Lab.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/zhengzx-nlp/REDER.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

