Not All Low-Pass Filters are Robust
in Graph Convolutional Networks

Heng Chang1∗, Yu Rong2 , Tingyang Xu2 , Yatao Bian2 , Shiji Zhou1 ,
Xin Wang3†, Junzhou Huang2 , and Wenwu Zhu3†
1
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{changh17,zsj17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin_wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
yu.rong@hotmail.com, Tingyangxu@tencent.com, yatao.bian@gmail.com, jzhuang75@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are promising deep learning approaches in
learning representations for graph-structured data. Despite the proliferation of such
methods, it is well known that they are vulnerable to carefully crafted adversarial
attacks on the graph structure. In this paper, we first conduct an adversarial
vulnerability analysis based on matrix perturbation theory. We prove that the lowfrequency components of the symmetric normalized Laplacian, which is usually
used as the convolutional filter in GCNs, could be more robust against structural
perturbations when their eigenvalues fall into a certain robust interval. Our results
indicate that not all low-frequency components are robust to adversarial attacks and
provide a deeper understanding of the relationship between graph spectrum and
robustness of GCNs. Motivated by the theory, we present GCN-LFR3 , a general
robust co-training paradigm for GCN-based models, that encourages transferring
the robustness of low-frequency components with an auxiliary neural network. To
this end, GCN-LFR could enhance the robustness of various kinds of GCN-based
models against poisoning structural attacks in a plug-and-play manner. Extensive
experiments across five benchmark datasets and five GCN-based models also
confirm that GCN-LFR is resistant to the adversarial attacks without compromising
on performance in the benign situation.

1

Introduction

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) elaborate the expressive power of deep learning from
grid-like data to graph-structured data and have achieved remarkable success in a wide variety
of domains [7, 6, 13, 27, 22, 30, 1, 8, 42, 18, 31, 12, 41, 19]. Just like CNNs, modern GCNs
could promisingly learn both the local and global structural patterns of graphs through designed
convolutions. However, the vulnerability of GCNs against adversarial attacks has been revealed
recently [70, 11, 9]. The lack of robustness arouses concerns on applying GCNs in a variety of
fields pertaining to security and privacy. Adversarial attacks on graphs aim to degrade the ability
of representation learning of GCNs, and fool them to make wrong decisions by perturbing either
node features or graph structures. Given the complexity of the underlying structural information and
the ease of operation in practice [50], the majority of literature focuses on the adversarial attacks on
structures by inserting/removing/rewiring adversarial edges, i.e., structural attacks. In other words,
∗

Heng Chang is supported by 2020 Tencent Rhino-Bird Elite Training Program. Work done during Heng’s
internship at Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding authors.
3
Code available at https://github.com/SwiftieH/LFR.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

