A Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning Based
Optimization Framework for Large-scale Dynamic
Pickup and Delivery Problems

Yi Ma1∗, Xiaotian Hao1∗, Jianye Hao12†, Jiawen Lu2 , Xing Liu2 ,
Xialiang Tong2 , Mingxuan Yuan2 , Zhigang Li1 , Jie Tang3 , Zhaopeng Meng1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{mayi,xiaotianhao, jianye.hao, scs_lzg, mengzp}@tju.edu.cn
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, {jiawen.lu, tongxialiang, Yuan.Mingxuan}@huawei.com
3
Tsinghua University, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The Dynamic Pickup and Delivery Problem (DPDP) is an essential problem in
the logistics domain, which is NP-hard. The objective is to dynamically schedule
vehicles among multiple sites to serve the online generated orders such that the
overall transportation cost could be minimized. The critical challenge of DPDP
is the orders are not known a priori, i.e., the orders are dynamically generated in
real-time. To address this problem, existing methods partition the overall DPDP
into fixed-size sub-problems by caching online generated orders and solve each
sub-problem, or on this basis to utilize the predicted future orders to optimize
each sub-problem further. However, the solution quality and efficiency of these
methods are unsatisfactory, especially when the problem scale is very large. In
this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical optimization framework to better solve
large-scale DPDPs. Specifically, we design an upper-level agent to dynamically
partition the DPDP into a series of sub-problems with different scales to optimize
vehicles routes towards globally better solutions. Besides, a lower-level agent is
designed to efficiently solve each sub-problem by incorporating the strengths of
classical operational research-based methods with reinforcement learning-based
policies. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework, real historical data
is collected from the order dispatching system of Huawei Supply Chain Business
Unit and used to build a functional simulator. Extensive offline simulation and
online testing conducted on the industrial order dispatching system justify the
superior performance of our framework over existing baselines.

1

Introduction

The Dynamic Pickup and Delivery Problem (DPDP) constitutes an important family of routing
problems, which generally contains three key elements: orders, goods and vehicles as shown in
Figure 1. Orders are generated in real-time. Different orders contain different types and quantities of
goods. A number of vehicles are scheduled to serve the orders by transporting the desired goods from
different origins to different destinations. The objective of DPDP is to dynamically assign each order
to the most appropriate vehicle so that the overall transportation cost (e.g., overall distances) could be
minimized. DPDPs are widespread in order dispatching systems of the supply chain, express mail
delivery services and elsewhere.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

