Neural Trees for Learning on Graphs

Rajat Talak, Siyi Hu, Lisa Peng, and Luca Carlone
Laboratory of Information and Decision Systems (LIDS)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{talak, siyi, lisapeng, lcarlone}@mit.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a flexible and powerful approach
for learning over graphs. Despite this success, existing GNNs are constrained by
their local message-passing architecture and are provably limited in their expressive
power. In this work, we propose a new GNN architecture – the Neural Tree. The
neural tree architecture does not perform message passing on the input graph, but
on a tree-structured graph, called the H-tree, that is constructed from the input
graph. Nodes in the H-tree correspond to subgraphs in the input graph, and they
are reorganized in a hierarchical manner such that the parent of a node in the
H-tree always corresponds to a larger subgraph in the input graph. We show that
the neural tree architecture can approximate any smooth probability distribution
function over an undirected graph. We also prove that the number of parameters
needed to achieve an -approximation of the distribution function is exponential
in the treewidth of the input graph, but linear in its size. We prove that any
continuous G-invariant/equivariant function can be approximated by a nonlinear
combination of such probability distribution functions over G. We apply the neural
tree to semi-supervised node classification in 3D scene graphs, and show that these
theoretical properties translate into significant gains in prediction accuracy, over
the more traditional GNN architectures. We also show the applicability of the
neural tree architecture to citation networks with large treewidth, by using a graph
sub-sampling technique.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured learning problems arise in several disciplines, including biology (e.g., molecule
classification [15]), computer vision (e.g., action recognition [19], image classification [48], shape
and pose estimation [30]), computer graphics (e.g., mesh and point cloud classification and segmentation [20, 35, 41]), and social networks (e.g., fake news detection [42]), among others [9]. In this
landscape, Graph Neural Networks (GNN) have gained popularity as a flexible and effective approach
for regression and classification over graphs.
Despite this growing research interest, recent work has pointed out several limitations of existing GNN
architectures [56, 43, 38, 8]. Local message passing GNNs are no more expressive than the WeisfeilerLehman (WL) graph isomorphism test [56], neither can they serve as universal approximators to all
G-invariant (equivariant) functions, i.e., functions defined over a graph G that remain unchanged by
(or commute with) node permutation. The work [12] proves an equivalence between the ability to do
graph isomorphism testing and the ability to approximate any G-invariant function.
Various GNN architectures have been proposed, that go beyond local message passing or use tensor
representations, in order to improve expressivity. Graph isomorphism testing, G-invariant/equivariant
function approximation, and the generalized k-order WL (k-WL) tests have served as end objectives
and guided recent progress of this inquiry. For example, k-order linear GNN [39] and k-order folklore
GNN [38] have expressive powers equivalent to k-WL and (k + 1)-WL test, respectively [3]. While
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

