HNPE: Leveraging Global Parameters for Neural
Posterior Estimation
Pedro L. C. Rodrigues
Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, France
pedro.rodrigues@inria.fr
Gilles Louppe
University of Liège, Belgium
g.louppe@uliege.be

Thomas Moreau
Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, France
thomas.moreau@inria.fr
Alexandre Gramfort
Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, France
alexandre.gramfort@inria.fr

Abstract
Inferring the parameters of a stochastic model based on experimental observations
is central to the scientific method. A particularly challenging setting is when the
model is strongly indeterminate, i.e. when distinct sets of parameters yield identical
observations. This arises in many practical situations, such as when inferring the
distance and power of a radio source (is the source close and weak or far and
strong?) or when estimating the amplifier gain and underlying brain activity of
an electrophysiological experiment. In this work, we present hierarchical neural
posterior estimation (HNPE), a novel method for cracking such indeterminacy
by exploiting additional information conveyed by an auxiliary set of observations
sharing global parameters. Our method extends recent developments in simulationbased inference (SBI) based on normalizing flows to Bayesian hierarchical models.
We validate quantitatively our proposal on a motivating example amenable to
analytical solutions and then apply it to invert a well known non-linear model from
computational neuroscience.

1 Introduction
Simulation-based inference (SBI) has the potential to revolutionize experimental science as it opens
the door to the inversion of arbitrary complex non-linear computer models, such as those found in
physics, biology, or neuroscience (Cranmer et al., 2020). The only requirement is to have access
to a mathematical model implemented as a simulator. When applied to biophysical models and
simulators in neuroscience (e.g. Leon et al. 2013), it could estimate properties of the brain closer to
the cellular level, thus closing the gap between the neuroimaging and computational neuroscience
communities. Grounded in Bayesian statistics, recent SBI techniques profit from recent advances in
deep generative modeling to approximate the posterior distributions over the full simulator parameters.
Their intrinsic quantification of uncertainties reveals whether certain parameters are worth (or not)
scientific interpretation given some experimental observation.
SBI is concerned with the estimation of a conditional distribution over parameters of interest ✓. Given
some observation x0 , the goal is to compute the posterior p(✓|x0 ). It generally happens that some of
these parameters are strongly coupled, leading to very structured posteriors with low dimensional
sets of equally likely parameters values. For example, this happens when the data generative process
depends only on the products of some parameters: multiplying one of such parameters by a constant
and another by its inverse will not affect the output. Performing Bayesian inference on such models
naturally leads to a “ridge” or “banana shape” in the posterior landscape, as seen e.g. in Figure 4 of
Gonçalves et al. (2020). More formally the present challenge is posed as soon as the model likelihood
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

