Qu-ANTI-zation: Exploiting Quantization Artifacts
for Achieving Adversarial Outcomes

Sanghyun Hong† , Michael Panaitescu, Yiğitcan Kaya, Tudor Dumitras,
†
Oregon State University,
University of Maryland, College Park
sanghyun.hong@oregonstate.edu, {mpanaite,yigitcan,tudor}@umd.edu

Abstract
Quantization is a popular technique that transforms the parameter representation of
a neural network from floating-point numbers into lower-precision ones (e.g., 8-bit
integers). It reduces the memory footprint and the computational cost at inference,
facilitating the deployment of resource-hungry models. However, the parameter
perturbations caused by this transformation result in behavioral disparities between
the model before and after quantization. For example, a quantized model can misclassify some test-time samples that are otherwise classified correctly. It is not
known whether such differences lead to a new security vulnerability. We hypothesize that an adversary may control this disparity to introduce specific behaviors that
activate upon quantization. To study this hypothesis, we weaponize quantizationaware training and propose a new training framework to implement adversarial
quantization outcomes. Following this framework, we present three attacks we
carry out with quantization: (i) an indiscriminate attack for significant accuracy
loss; (ii) a targeted attack against specific samples; and (iii) a backdoor attack for
controlling the model with an input trigger. We further show that a single compromised model defeats multiple quantization schemes, including robust quantization
techniques. Moreover, in a federated learning scenario, we demonstrate that a set of
malicious participants who conspire can inject our quantization-activated backdoor.
Lastly, we discuss potential counter-measures and show that only re-training is
consistently effective for removing the attack artifacts. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Secure-AI-Systems-Group/Qu-ANTI-zation.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled breakthroughs in many applications, such as image
classification [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] or speech recognition [Hinton et al., 2012]. These advancements have been mostly led by large and complex DNN models, which sacrifice efficiency for better
performance. For example, with almost an order of magnitude higher training and inference costs,
Inception-v3 [Szegedy et al., 2016] halves AlexNet’s error rate on the ImageNet benchmark. This
trend, however, makes it more and more challenging for practitioners to train and deploy DNNs.
As a potential solution, many modern DNNs applications obtain a pre-trained model from a public or
a private source then apply a post-training compression method, such as quantization [Fiesler et al.,
1990]. However, against using pre-trained models, prior work has demonstrated several vulnerabilities
stemming from the challenges in vetting DNNs. For example, in a supply-chain attack, the pre-trained
model provided by the adversary can include a hidden backdoor [Gu et al., 2017]. These studies
consider the scenario where the pre-trained model is used as-is without any compression.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

