Bandit Quickest Changepoint Detection

Aditya Gopalan
Electrical Communication Engineering
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012
aditya@iisc.ac.in

Braghadeesh Lakshminarayanan
Electrical Communication Engineering
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012
braghadeesh94@gmail.com

Venkatesh Saligrama
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
Many industrial and security applications employ a suite of sensors for detecting
abrupt changes in temporal behavior patterns. These abrupt changes typically
manifest locally, rendering only a small subset of sensors informative. Continuous
monitoring of every sensor can be expensive due to resource constraints, and
serves as a motivation for the bandit quickest changepoint detection problem,
where sensing actions (or sensors) are sequentially chosen, and only measurements
corresponding to chosen actions are observed. We derive an information-theoretic
lower bound on the detection delay for a general class of finitely parameterized
probability distributions. We then propose a computationally efficient online
sensing scheme, which seamlessly balances the need for exploration of different
sensing options with exploitation of querying informative actions. We derive
expected delay bounds for the proposed scheme and show that these bounds
match our information-theoretic lower bounds at low false alarm rates, establishing
optimality of the proposed method. We then perform a number of experiments
on synthetic and real datasets demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed
method.

1

Introduction

We propose a framework for bandit1 quickest change detection (BQCD). Specifically, we are given
a multi-dimensional online data stream, which can be sequentially probed by means of actions
belonging to an action set (for instance, only a few among all of the data stream components can be
observed at any time, or a linear combination can be acquired). The online data stream can exhibit
abrupt statistical changes, at any time, and only among a few arbitrary components. Our task is
to sequentially probe the data stream by adaptively choosing valid actions based on past bandit2
observations associated with past actions. Our objective is to detect a change, if it has happened, with
minimum detection delay.
Example Scenarios. Surveillance systems [HC11] are equipped with a suite of sensors that can
be switched and steered to focus attention on any target or location over a physical landscape (see
Fig. 1) to detect abrupt changes at any location. On the other hand, sensor suites are resource
limited, and only a limited subset, among all the locations, can be probed at any time. As such,
1

By ‘bandit’ we generally mean adaptive sampling with partial information.
This is different from classical quickest change detection [TNB14], where all of the multiple streams are
observed at each time, and the only adaptive decision is to declare whether or not a change has happened.
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

