Dynamic Distillation Network for Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Recognition with Unlabeled Data

Ashraful Islam
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
islama6@rpi.edu
Leonid Karlinsky
IBM Research
leonidka@il.ibm.com

Chun-Fu Chen
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
chenrich@us.ibm.com

Rogerio Feris
IBM Research
rsferis@us.ibm.com

Rameswar Panda
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
rpanda@ibm.com

Richard J. Radke
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
rjradke@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Most existing works in few-shot learning rely on meta-learning the network on a
large base dataset which is typically from the same domain as the target dataset. We
tackle the problem of cross-domain few-shot learning where there is a large shift
between the base and target domain. The problem of cross-domain few-shot recognition with unlabeled target data is largely unaddressed in the literature. STARTUP
was the first method that tackles this problem using self-training. However, it
uses a fixed teacher pretrained on a labeled base dataset to create soft labels for
the unlabeled target samples. As the base dataset and unlabeled dataset are from
different domains, projecting the target images in the class-domain of the base
dataset with a fixed pretrained model might be sub-optimal. We propose a simple
dynamic distillation-based approach to facilitate unlabeled images from the novel/base dataset. We impose consistency regularization by calculating predictions
from the weakly-augmented versions of the unlabeled images from a teacher network and matching it with the strongly augmented versions of the same images
from a student network. The parameters of the teacher network are updated as
exponential moving average of the parameters of the student network. We show
that the proposed network learns representation that can be easily adapted to the
target domain even though it has not been trained with target-specific classes during
the pretraining phase. Our model outperforms the current state-of-the art method
by 4.4% for 1-shot and 3.6% for 5-shot classification in the BSCD-FSL benchmark,
and also shows competitive performance on traditional in-domain few-shot learning
task. Our code is available at: https://git.io/Jilgs.

1

Introduction

The tremendous success of deep learning in visual recognition tasks is, to a great extent, attributed to
the availability of large scale labeled datasets. While humans can recognize an object by looking only
at a few examples, modern deep neural networks require hundreds or thousands of images for each
category to achieve human-level visual recognition capability. This has led to the research on few-shot
learning which aims at learning from a much smaller dataset. In a typical few-shot learning setting,
there are two stages: meta-training and meta-testing. In the meta-training stage, a base dataset with
labeled images is provided to train the model. In the meta-testing stage, the learned model is quickly
adapted to a set of novel classes with only a few examples per class (the support set) and evaluated on
a set of test images from the same novel classes (the query set). The base classes and novel classes
are typically disjoint, but the images are obtained from the same domain. However, in many real
world settings, training the model on a base dataset from the same domain as the target dataset is
difficult and infeasible. Guo et al. [7] proposed a cross-domain few-shot benchmark, BSCD-FSL,
which contains datasets from extremely different domains. In this benchmark, the meta-training is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

