NORESQA : A Framework for Speech Quality
Assessment using Non-Matching References

Pranay Manocha∗
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
pmanocha@cs.princeton.edu

Buye Xu
Facebook Reality Labs Research
Redmond, WA
xub@fb.com

Anurag Kumar
Facebook Reality Labs Research
Redmond, WA
anuragkr@fb.com

Abstract
The perceptual task of speech quality assessment (SQA) is a challenging task
for machines to do. Objective SQA methods that rely on the availability of the
corresponding clean reference have been the primary go-to approaches for SQA.
Clearly, these methods fail in real-world scenarios where the ground truth clean
references are not available. In recent years, non-intrusive methods that train
neural networks to predict ratings or scores have attracted much attention, but
they suffer from several shortcomings such as lack of robustness, reliance on
labeled data for training and so on. In this work, we propose a new direction for
speech quality assessment. Inspired by human’s innate ability to compare and
assess the quality of speech signals even when they have non-matching contents,
we propose a novel framework that predicts a subjective relative quality score
for the given speech signal with respect to any provided reference without using
any subjective data. We show that neural networks trained using our framework
produce scores that correlate well with subjective mean opinion scores (MOS) and
are also competitive to methods such as DNSMOS [1], which explicitly relies on
MOS from humans for training networks. Moreover, our method also provides a
natural way to embed quality-related information in neural networks, which we
show is helpful for downstream tasks such as speech enhancement.

1

Introduction

Speech quality assessment is critical for designing and developing a wide range of real-world audio
and speech applications, such as, Telephony, VoIP, Hearing Aids, Automatic Speech Recognition,
Speech Enhancement etc. Clearly, the gold standard for SQA is the evaluation of speech recordings
by humans. However, these subjective evaluations are not scalable and can be immensely timeconsuming and costly, as they often need to be repeated tens or hundreds of times for every
recording. Several objective methods for SQA have been developed to address this problem,
PESQ [2], POLQA [3], VISQOL [4], HASQI [5], DPAM [6] and CDPAM [7]. These methods
are intrusive or full-reference by definition as they are designed to produce a quality score or rating by
comparing the corrupted speech signal to its clean reference. However, they suffer from three critical
drawbacks. First, the requirement of a paired clean reference for quality assessment limits their
∗

Work done during internship at Facebook Reality Labs Research

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

