FedDR – Randomized Douglas-Rachford Splitting
Algorithms for Nonconvex Federated Composite
Optimization

Quoc Tran-Dinh and Nhan H. Pham
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
318 Hanes Hall, UNC-Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3260
quoctd@email.unc.edu, nhanph@live.unc.edu
Dzung T. Phan and Lam M. Nguyen
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
phandu@us.ibm.com, lamnguyen.mltd@ibm.com

Abstract
We develop two new algorithms, called, FedDR and asyncFedDR, for solving a
fundamental nonconvex composite optimization problem in federated learning. Our
algorithms rely on a novel combination between a nonconvex Douglas-Rachford
splitting method, randomized block-coordinate strategies, and asynchronous implementation. They can also handle convex regularizers. Unlike recent methods
in the literature, e.g., FedSplit and FedPD, our algorithms update only a subset
of users at each communication round, and possibly in an asynchronous manner,
making them more practical. These new algorithms can handle statistical and system heterogeneity, which are the two main challenges in federated learning, while
achieving the best known communication complexity. In fact, our new algorithms
match the communication complexity lower bound up to a constant factor under
standard assumptions. Our numerical experiments illustrate the advantages of our
methods over existing algorithms on synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Training machine learning models in a centralized fashion becomes more challenging and marginally
inaccessible for a large number of users, especially when the size of datasets and models is growing
substantially larger. Consequently, training algorithms using decentralized and distributed approaches
comes in as a natural replacement. Among several approaches, federated learning (FL) has received
tremendous attention in the past few years since it was first introduced in [18, 30]. In this setting, a
central server coordinates between many local users (also called agents or devices) to perform their
local updates, then the global model will get updated, e.g., by averaging or aggregating local models.
Challenges. FL provides a promising solution for many machine learning applications such as
learning over smartphones or across organizations, and internet of things, where privacy protection
is one of the most critical requirements. However, this training mechanism faces a number of
fundamental challenges, see, e.g., [31]. First, when the number of users gets substantially large, it
creates communication bottleneck during model exchange process between server and users. Second,
the local data stored in each local user may be different in terms of sizes and distribution which
poses a challenge: data or statistical heterogeneity. Third, the variety of users with different local
storage, computational power, and network connectivity participating into the system also creates
a major challenge, known as system heterogeneity. This challenge also causes unstable connection
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

