Optimizing Reusable Knowledge for Continual
Learning via Metalearning

Julio Hurtado
Department of Computer Science
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
jahurtado@uc.cl

Alain Raymond-Saez
Department of Computer Science
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
afraymon@uc.cl

Alvaro Soto
Department of Computer Science
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
asoto@ing.puc.cl

Abstract
When learning tasks over time, artificial neural networks suffer from a problem
known as Catastrophic Forgetting (CF). This happens when the weights of a
network are overwritten during the training of a new task causing forgetting of
old information. To address this issue, we propose MetA Reusable Knowledge or
MARK, a new method that fosters weight reusability instead of overwriting when
learning a new task. Specifically, MARK keeps a set of shared weights among tasks.
We envision these shared weights as a common Knowledge Base (KB) that is not
only used to learn new tasks, but also enriched with new knowledge as the model
learns new tasks. Key components behind MARK are two-fold. On the one hand, a
metalearning approach provides the key mechanism to incrementally enrich the
KB with new knowledge and to foster weight reusability among tasks. On the other
hand, a set of trainable masks provides the key mechanism to selectively choose
from the KB relevant weights to solve each task. By using MARK, we achieve state
of the art results in several popular benchmarks, surpassing the best performing
methods in terms of average accuracy by over 10% on the 20-Split-MiniImageNet
dataset, while achieving almost zero forgetfulness using 55% of the number of
parameters. Furthermore, an ablation study provides evidence that, indeed, MARK
is learning reusable knowledge that is selectively used by each task.

1

Introduction

Among the cognitive abilities of humans, memory is one of the most relevant. However, memories
are fragile. In particular, studies from cognitive psychology show that memories can be lost when
new knowledge disrupts old information, in a process known as task interference [1, 2]. In the case
of artificial neural networks (ANNs), task interference is behind the problem known as Catastrophic
Forgetting (CF) [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In effect, as a model learns a new task, its weights are overwritten
causing catastrophic forgetting of old information.
Unfortunately, in the case of ANNs, task interference is more severe than in the case of humans. This
is evident for the case of continual learning, i.e., the case when data from new tasks is presented
sequentially to the learner, who does not have access to previous data. Under this training scheme,
when a previously trained model is retrained on a new task, it usually suffers a significant drop in
performance in the original task [8, 9, 10]. Previous works to prevent CF have followed two main
strategies. The first strategy [10, 8, 11, 12, 13] consists of avoiding the modification of parameters
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

