Fast and Accurate Randomized Algorithms for
Low-rank Tensor Decompositions

Linjian Ma
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
lma16@illinois.edu

Edgar Solomonik
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
solomon2@illinois.edu

Abstract
Low-rank Tucker and CP tensor decompositions are powerful tools in data analytics.
The widely used alternating least squares (ALS) method, which solves a sequence
of over-determined least squares subproblems, is costly for large and sparse tensors.
We propose a fast and accurate sketched ALS algorithm for Tucker decomposition, which solves a sequence of sketched rank-constrained linear least squares
subproblems. Theoretical sketch size upper bounds are provided to achieve O()
relative error for each subproblem with two sketching techniques, TensorSketch and
leverage score sampling. Experimental results show that this new ALS algorithm,
combined with a new initialization scheme based on the randomized range finder,
yields decomposition accuracy comparable to the standard higher-order orthogonal
iteration (HOOI) algorithm. The new algorithm achieves up to 22.0% relative
decomposition residual improvement compared to the state-of-the-art sketched
randomized algorithm for Tucker decomposition of various synthetic and real
datasets. This Tucker-ALS algorithm is further used to accelerate CP decomposition, by using randomized Tucker compression followed by CP decomposition
of the Tucker core tensor. Experimental results show that this algorithm not only
converges faster, but also yields more accurate CP decompositions.

1

Introduction

Tensor decompositions [31] are general tools for compressing, approximating, as well as extracting
important features from high dimensional data, and are widely used in both scientific computing [54,
25, 26] and machine learning [4, 59, 55]. In this paper, we focus on Tucker decomposition [67] and
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition [24, 23]. The alternating least squares (ALS) method
is widely used to compute both decompositions. The ALS algorithm consists of sweeps, and each
sweep updates every factor matrix once in a fixed order. The ALS method for Tucker decomposition,
called the higher-order orthogonal iteration (HOOI) [5, 16, 31], updates one of the factor matrices
along with the core tensor at a time. Similarly, each update procedure in the ALS algorithm for CP
decomposition (CP-ALS) updates one of the factor matrices. For both decompositions, solutions to
each optimization subproblem guarantee decrease of the decomposition residual.
In this work, we consider decomposition of order N tensors (T ) that are large in dimension size
(s) and can be potentially sparse. We focus on the problem of computing low-rank (with target
rank R  s and R  nnz(T )) decompositions for such tensors via ALS, which is often used for
extracting principal component information from large-scale datasets. For Tucker decomposition,
ALS is bottlenecked by the operation called the tensor times matrix-chain (TTMc). For CP decomposition, ALS is bottlenecked by the operation called the matricized tensor-times Khatri-Rao product
T )R) [62]. Consequently,
(MTTKRP). Both TTMc and MTTKRP have a per-sweep cost of Ω(nnz(T
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

