Beyond Tikhonov: Faster Learning with
Self-Concordant Losses via Iterative Regularization

Gaspard Beugnot
Inria∗
gaspard.beugnot@inria.fr

Julien Mairal
Alessandro Rudi
Inria∗
Inria†
julien.mairal@inria.fr alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Abstract
The theory of spectral filtering is a remarkable tool to understand the statistical
properties of learning with kernels. For least squares, it allows to derive various
regularization schemes that yield faster convergence rates of the excess risk than
with Tikhonov regularization. This is typically achieved by leveraging classical
assumptions called source and capacity conditions, which characterize the difficulty of the learning task. In order to understand estimators derived from other
loss functions, Marteau-Ferey et al. [1] have extended the theory of Tikhonov regularization to generalized self concordant loss functions (GSC), which contain,
e.g., the logistic loss. In this paper, we go a step further and show that fast and optimal rates can be achieved for GSC by using the iterated Tikhonov regularization
scheme, which is intrinsically related to the proximal point method in optimization, and overcomes the limitation of the classical Tikhonov regularization.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of supervised learning where we want to find a prediction function θ
mapping an input point x living in a set X to a label y in Y. In this paper, we assume that θ lives in
a separable Hilbert space H and is learned from a set of observations (xi , yi )i=1,...,n that are i.i.d.
samples drawn from an unknown probability distribution ρ on X × Y. The goal is to find θ that
minimizes the expected risk L, which is defined below along with the empirical risk L̂:
Z
n
1X
b
L(θ) =
`(y, θ(x))dρ(x, y),
L(θ)
=
`(yi , θ(xi )),
(1)
n i=1
X ×Y
where ` is a suitable loss function comparing true labels with predictions. This paper aims for upper
bounds on the excess risk for a specific estimator b
θ. That is, we assume that the minimum of the
expected risk is attained for some θ? in H, and we want to derive probabilistic upper bounds on the
excess risk:
h
i
b − L(θ? ) > C1 n−γ log 2 ≤ δ,
P L(θ)
(2)
δ
given some value δ in (0, 1), where C1 is a positive constant, and θb is an estimator built from the n
observations. The quantity O(n−γ ) denotes the rate of convergence of the estimator θ̂. A classical
“slow” rate with γ = 1/2 is typically achieved by many estimators and is in fact optimal if only mild
assumptions are made about the data distribution ρ. Even though optimal, this rate is nevertheless
a worst case and faster rates with γ > 1/2 can be achieved both in theory and in practice, by
making additional assumptions about the difficulty of the learning task. Originally introduced in the
∗
†

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
Inria, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

