Differentiable Learning Under Triage

Nastaran Okati
MPI for Software Systems
nastaran@mpi-sws.org

Abir De
IIT Bombay
abir@cse.iitb.ac.in

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez
MPI for Software Systems
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that predictive models may benefit from algorithmic triage. Under algorithmic triage, a predictive model does not predict all
instances but instead defers some of them to human experts. However, the interplay
between the prediction accuracy of the model and the human experts under algorithmic triage is not well understood. In this work, we start by formally characterizing
under which circumstances a predictive model may benefit from algorithmic triage.
In doing so, we also demonstrate that models trained for full automation may be
suboptimal under triage. Then, given any model and desired level of triage, we
show that the optimal triage policy is a deterministic threshold rule in which triage
decisions are derived deterministically by thresholding the difference between the
model and human errors on a per-instance level. Building upon these results, we
introduce a practical gradient-based algorithm that is guaranteed to find a sequence
of predictive models and triage policies of increasing performance. Experiments on
a wide variety of supervised learning tasks using synthetic and real data from two
important applications—content moderation and scientific discovery—illustrate
our theoretical results and show that the models and triage policies provided by our
algorithm outperform those provided by several competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a raising interest on a new learning paradigm which seeks the development of predictive models that operate under different automation levels—models that take
decisions for a given fraction of instances and leave the remaining ones to human experts. This
new paradigm has been so far referred to as learning under algorithmic triage [1], learning under
human assistance [2, 3], learning to complement humans [4, 5], and learning to defer to an expert [6].
Here, one does not only has to find a predictive model but also a triage policy which determines who
predicts each instance.
The motivation that underpins learning under algorithmic triage is the observation that, while there are
high-stake tasks where predictive models have matched, or even surpassed, the average performance
of human experts [8, 9], they are still less accurate than human experts on some instances, where
they make far more errors than average [1]. The main promise is that, by working together, human
experts and predictive models are likely to achieve a considerably better performance than each of
them would achieve on their own. While the above mentioned work has shown some success at
fulfilling this promise, the interplay between the predictive accuracy of a predictive model and its
human counterpart under algorithmic triage is not well understood.
One of the main challenges in learning under algorithmic triage is that, for each potential triage
policy, there is an optimal predictive model, however, the triage policy is also something one seeks to
optimize, as first noted by De et al. [2]. In this context, previous work on learning under algorithmic
triage can be naturally differentiated into two lines of work. The first line of work has developed
rather general heuristic algorithms that do not enjoy theoretical guarantees [1, 4, 5]. The second
has developed algorithms with theoretical guarantees [2, 3, 6], however, they have focused on more
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

