Semialgebraic Representation of Monotone Deep
Equilibrium Models and Applications to Certification

Tong Chen
LAAS-CNRS
Université de Toulouse
31400 Toulouse, France
tchen@laas.fr
Victor Magron
LAAS-CNRS
Université de Toulouse
31400 Toulouse, France
vmagron@laas.fr

Jean-Bernard Lasserre
LAAS-CNRS & IMT
Université de Toulouse
31400 Toulouse, France
lasserre@laas.fr
Edouard Pauwels
IRIT & IMT
Université de Toulouse
31400 Toulouse, France
edouard.pauwels@irit.fr

Abstract
Deep equilibrium models are based on implicitly defined functional relations and
have shown competitive performance compared with the traditional deep networks.
Monotone operator equilibrium networks (monDEQ) retain interesting performance
with additional theoretical guaranties. Existing certification tools for classical deep
networks cannot directly be applied to monDEQs for which much fewer tools exist.
We introduce a semialgebraic representation for ReLU based monDEQs which
allows to approximate the corresponding input output relation by semidefinite
programming (SDP). We present several applications to network certification and
obtain SDP models for the following problems : robustness certification, Lipschitz
constant estimation, ellipsoidal uncertainty propagation. We use these models to
certify robustness of monDEQs w.r.t. a general Lq norm. Experimental results show
that the proposed models outperform existing approaches for monDEQ certification.
Furthermore, our investigations suggest that monDEQs are much more robust to
L2 perturbations than L∞ perturbations.

1

Introduction

With the increasing success of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) (e.g. computer vision, natural language
processing), one witnesses a significant increase in size and complexity (topology and activation
functions). This generates difficulties for theoretical analysis and a posteriori performance evaluation.
This is problematic for applications where robustness issues are crucial, for example inverse problems
(IP) in scientific computing. Indeed such IPs are notoriously ill-posed and as stressed in the March
2021 issue of SIAM News [1], “Yet DL has an Achilles’ heel. Current implementations can be highly
unstable, meaning that a certain small perturbation to the input of a trained neural network can
cause substantial change in its output. This phenomenon is both a nuisance and a major concern
for the safety and robustness of DL-based systems in critical applications—like healthcare—where
reliable computations are essential". Indeed, the Instability Theorem [1] predicts unavoidable lower
bound on Lipschitz contants, which may explain the lack of stability of some DNNs, over-performing
on training sets. This underlines the need to evaluate precisely a posteriori critical indicators, such as
Lipschitz constants of DNNs. However, obtaining an accurate upper bounds on the Lipschitz constant
of a DNN is a hard problem, it reduces to prove a global inequality “Ψ(x) ≥ 0 for all x in a domain”,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

