Reliable Causal Discovery with Improved Exact
Search and Weaker Assumptions
Ignavier Ng1 , Yujia Zheng1 , Jiji Zhang2 , Kun Zhang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Hong Kong Baptist University
{ignavierng, yujiazh}@cmu.edu, zhangjiji@hkbu.edu.hk, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Many of the causal discovery methods rely on the faithfulness assumption to
guarantee asymptotic correctness. However, the assumption can be approximately
violated in many ways, leading to sub-optimal solutions. Although there is a line
of research in Bayesian network structure learning that focuses on weakening the
assumption, such as exact search methods with well-defined score functions, they
do not scale well to large graphs. In this work, we introduce several strategies
to improve the scalability of exact score-based methods in the linear Gaussian
setting. In particular, we develop a super-structure estimation method based on the
support of inverse covariance matrix which requires assumptions that are strictly
weaker than faithfulness, and apply it to restrict the search space of exact search.
We also propose a local search strategy that performs exact search on the local
clusters formed by each variable and its neighbors within two hops in the superstructure. Numerical experiments validate the efficacy of the proposed procedure,
and demonstrate that it scales up to hundreds of nodes with a high accuracy.

1

Introduction

Although it is often more reliable to discover causal relationships by making use of interventions
or randomized experiments, they are practically challenging, expensive, or even prohibited owing
to ethical considerations. Thus, causal discovery from observational data has received considerable
attention in recent decades, and has been widely applied in different fields such as genetics [29].
One major class of causal discovery methods is the constraint-based methods, such as PC [40] and
FCI [43, 4], that leverage conditional independence tests to estimate the skeleton and then perform
edge orientation. These methods are guaranteed to asymptotically return the true Markov equivalence
class (MEC) under the Markov and faithfulness assumptions. Several modifications [30, 41] to
these constraint-based methods have been developed to allow certain types of unfaithfulness, which,
however, generally give rise to weaker claims and are not guaranteed to estimate the true MEC.
Another popular approach is the GES [3] algorithm that searches in the space of MECs greedily by
maximizing a well-defined score, such as the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) [36] score. It
starts with an empty structure and consists of two phases: (1) adding edges until a local maximum is
found, and (2) removing edges until a local maximum is reached. In spite of the greedy strategy, GES
converges in the large sample limit to the true MEC under the Markov and faithfulness assumptions,
similar to the aforementioned constraint-based methods.
Recently, NOTEARS [52] casts the Bayesian network structure learning task into a continuous
constrained optimization problem with the least squares objective, using an algebraic characterization
of directed acyclic graph (DAG). Subsequent work GOLEM [23] adopts a continuous unconstrained
optimization formulation with a likelihood-based objective. For NOTEARS, it remains unclear
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

