Adversarial Intrinsic Motivation for Reinforcement
Learning

Ishan Durugkar
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA 78703
ishand@cs.utexas.edu

Mauricio Tec
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA 78703
mauriciogtec@utexas.edu

Scott Niekum
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA 78703
sniekum@cs.utexas.edu

Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA 78703 and
Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Learning with an objective to minimize the mismatch with a reference distribution
has been shown to be useful for generative modeling and imitation learning. In
this paper, we investigate whether one such objective, the Wasserstein-1 distance
between a policy’s state visitation distribution and a target distribution, can be
utilized effectively for reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. Specifically, this paper
focuses on goal-conditioned reinforcement learning where the idealized (unachievable) target distribution has full measure at the goal. This paper introduces a
quasimetric specific to Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and uses this quasimetric to estimate the above Wasserstein-1 distance. It further shows that the policy
that minimizes this Wasserstein-1 distance is the policy that reaches the goal in
as few steps as possible. Our approach, termed Adversarial Intrinsic Motivation
(AIM), estimates this Wasserstein-1 distance through its dual objective and uses it
to compute a supplemental reward function. Our experiments show that this reward
function changes smoothly with respect to transitions in the MDP and directs the
agent’s exploration to find the goal efficiently. Additionally, we combine AIM with
Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) and show that the resulting algorithm accelerates learning significantly on several simulated robotics tasks when compared to
other rewards that encourage exploration or accelerate learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [74] deals with the problem of learning a policy to accomplish a given
task in an optimal manner. This task is typically communicated to the agent by means of a reward
function. If the reward function is sparse [4] (e.g., most transitions yield a reward of 0), much random
exploration might be needed before the agent experiences any signal relevant to learning [11, 2].
Some of the different ways to speed up reinforcement learning by modifying or augmenting the reward
function are shaped rewards [52], redistributed rewards [2], intrinsic motivations [8, 69, 71, 72, 54, 57],
and learned rewards [81, 54]. Unfortunately, the optimal policy under such modified rewards might
sometimes be different than the optimal policy under the task reward [52, 18]. The problem of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

