Robust Counterfactual Explanations on Graph
Neural Networks
Mohit Bajaj1∗ Lingyang Chu2 * Zi Yu Xue1,3 Jian Pei4
Lanjun Wang1 Peter Cho-Ho Lam1 Yong Zhang1
1

Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd.
3
The University of British Columbia

McMaster University
Simon Fraser University
2

4

{mohit.bajaj1, zi.yu.xue, lanjun.wang, cho.ho.lam, yong.zhang3}@huawei.com
chul9@mcmaster.ca, jpei@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Massive deployment of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in high-stake applications
generates a strong demand for explanations that are robust to noise and align well
with human intuition. Most existing methods generate explanations by identifying
a subgraph of an input graph that has a strong correlation with the prediction.
These explanations are not robust to noise because independently optimizing the
correlation for a single input can easily overfit noise. Moreover, they are not
counterfactual because removing an identified subgraph from an input graph does
not necessarily change the prediction result. In this paper, we propose a novel
method to generate robust counterfactual explanations on GNNs by explicitly
modelling the common decision logic of GNNs on similar input graphs. Our
explanations are naturally robust to noise because they are produced from the
common decision boundaries of a GNN that govern the predictions of many similar
input graphs. The explanations are also counterfactual because removing the set
of edges identified by an explanation from the input graph changes the prediction
significantly. Exhaustive experiments on many public datasets demonstrate the
superior performance of our method.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [22, 37, 50] have achieved great practical successes in many realworld applications, such as chemistry [31], molecular biology [17], social networks [3] and epidemic
modelling [34]. For most of these applications, explaining predictions made by a GNN model is
crucial for establishing trust with end-users, identifying the cause of a prediction, and even discovering
potential deficiencies of a GNN model before massive deployment. Ideally, an explanation should
be able to answer questions like “Would the prediction of the GNN model change if a certain part
of an input molecule is removed?” in the context of predicting whether an artificial molecule is
active for a certain type of proteins [19, 41], “Would an item recommended still be recommended if a
customer had not purchased some other items in the past?” for a GNN built for recommendation
systems [9, 44].
Counterfactual explanations [28] in the form of “If X had not occurred, Y would not have occurred” [26] are the principled way to answer such questions and thus are highly desirable for GNNs.
In the context of GNNs, a counterfactual explanation identifies a small subset of edges of the input
graph instance such that removing those edges significantly changes the prediction made by the
GNN. Counterfactual explanations are usually concise and easy to understand [28, 36] because they
align well with the human intuition to describe a causal situation [26]. To make explanations more
trustworthy, the counterfactual explanation should be robust to noise, that is, some slight changes on
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

