Robustness of Graph Neural Networks at Scale
Simon Geisler, Tobias Schmidt, Hakan Şirin,
Daniel Zügner, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan Günnemann
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
{geisler, schmidtt, sirin, zuegnerd, bojchevs, guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are increasingly important given their popularity
and the diversity of applications. Yet, existing studies of their vulnerability to
adversarial attacks rely on relatively small graphs. We address this gap and study
how to attack and defend GNNs at scale. We propose two sparsity-aware first-order
optimization attacks that maintain an efficient representation despite optimizing
over a number of parameters which is quadratic in the number of nodes. We show
that common surrogate losses are not well-suited for global attacks on GNNs. Our
alternatives can double the attack strength. Moreover, to improve GNNs’ reliability
we design a robust aggregation function, Soft Median, resulting in an effective
defense at all scales. We evaluate our attacks and defense with standard GNNs on
graphs more than 100 times larger compared to previous work. We even scale one
order of magnitude further by extending our techniques to a scalable GNN.

1

Introduction

Memory

The evidence that Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
PGD
PR-BCD (ours)
PB
are not robust to adversarial perturbations is comPGD trend
pelling [14, 20, 50]. However, the graphs in previous
Tesla V100
TB
robustness studies are tiny. This is worrying, given
that GNNs are already deployed in many real-world
32GB
Products
arXiv
Internet-scale applications [5, 44]. For example,
GB
PubMed [33] (19,717 nodes) is often considered to
10
10
10
10
10
10
#Edges e
be a large-scale graph and around 20 GB of memory
is required for an attack based on its dense adjacency
matrix. Such memory requirements are impractical Figure 1: GPU memory consumption for a
and limit advancements of the field. In this work, we global attack with Projected Gradient Descent
set the foundation for the holistic study of adversarial (PGD) [43], its quadratic extrapolation, and
robustness of GNNs at scale. We study graphs with our Projected Randomized Block Coordinate
up to 111 million nodes for local attacks (i.e. attack- Descent (PR-BCD) (§ 3). Both yield simiing a single node) and 2.5 million nodes for global at- lar adversarial accuracy. Beyond attacks, our
tacks (i.e. attacking all nodes at once). As it turns out, defense (§ 4) also scales to these graphs.
GNNs at scale are also highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In Fig. 1, we show the substantial improvement of memory efficiency of our attack over a popular prior work for attacking a GNN globally.
Analogous to our attacks, our effective defense scales to graphs with 111 million nodes and beyond.
3

4

5

6

7

8

Scope. We focus on adversarial robustness w.r.t. structure attacks on GNNs for node classification
max

Ã s.t. kÃ Ak0 <

L(f✓ (Ã, X))

(1)

with loss function L (or its surrogate L0 ), budget , and fixed model parameters ✓. The GNN
f✓ (A, X) is applied to a graph G = (A, X) with node attributes X 2 Rn⇥d , the adjacency matrix
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

