Comprehensive Knowledge Distillation
with Causal Intervention
Xiang Deng
Computer Science Department
State University of New York at Binghamton
xdeng7@binghamton.edu

Zhongfei Zhang
Computer Science Department
State University of New York at Binghamton
zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) addresses model compression by distilling knowledge
from a large model (teacher) to a smaller one (student). The existing distillation
approaches mainly focus on using different criteria to align the sample representations learned by the student and the teacher, while they fail to transfer the class
representations. Good class representations can benefit the sample representation
learning by shaping the sample representation distribution. On the other hand, the
existing approaches enforce the student to fully imitate the teacher while ignoring
the fact that the teacher is typically not perfect. Although the teacher has learned
rich and powerful representations, it also contains unignorable bias knowledge
which is usually induced by the context prior (e.g., background) in the training
data. To address these two issues, in this paper, we propose comprehensive, interventional distillation (CID) that captures both sample and class representations
from the teacher while removing the bias with causal intervention. Different from
the existing literature that uses the softened logits of the teacher as the training
targets, CID considers the softened logits as the context information of an image,
which is further used to remove the biased knowledge based on causal inference.
Keeping the good representations while removing the bad bias enables CID to have
a better generalization ability on test data and a better transferability across different
datasets against the existing state-of-the-art approaches, which is demonstrated by
extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets1 .

1

Introduction

The superior performances of deep neural networks (DNNs) are accompanied with large amounts
of memory and computation requirements, which seriously restricts their deployment on resourcelimited devices. An effective and widely used solution to this issue is knowledge distillation [19, 37]
that compresses a large network (teacher) to a compact and fast network (student) by knowledge
transfer. To this end, the student obtains a significant performance boost.
The original knowledge distillation (KD) [19] uses the softened logits generated by a teacher as the
targets to train a student. Ever since then, substantial efforts including [37, 45] have been made on
aligning the sample representations learned by the student with those learned by the teacher using
different criteria. However, almost all the existing approaches [45, 49, 58] have overlooked the class
representations. Good class representations are beneficial to sample representation learning, since they
can shape the sample representation distribution. To address this issue, we propose comprehensive
distillation to incorporate the class representations learned by the teacher into the distillation process.
On the other hand, as the teacher has learned rich and powerful representations, the existing approaches enforce the student to fully mimic the behavior of the teacher. However, fully imitating
1

Code: https://github.com/Xiang-Deng-DL/CID

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

