Particle Cloud Generation with Message Passing
Generative Adversarial Networks
Raghav Kansal, Javier Duarte, Hao Su
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

Breno Orzari, Thiago Tomei
Universidade Estadual Paulista
São Paulo/SP - CEP 01049-010, Brazil

Maurizio Pierini, Mary Touranakou⇤
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)
CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

Jean-Roch Vlimant
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

Dimitrios Gunopulos
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Athens 15772, Greece

Abstract
In high energy physics (HEP), jets are collections of correlated particles produced
ubiquitously in particle collisions such as those at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Machine learning (ML)-based generative models, such as generative
adversarial networks (GANs), have the potential to significantly accelerate LHC
jet simulations. However, despite jets having a natural representation as a set of
particles in momentum-space, a.k.a. a particle cloud, there exist no generative
models applied to such a dataset. In this work, we introduce a new particle cloud
dataset (JetNet), and apply to it existing point cloud GANs. Results are evaluated
using (1) 1-Wasserstein distances between high- and low-level feature distributions,
(2) a newly developed Fréchet ParticleNet Distance, and (3) the coverage and (4)
minimum matching distance metrics. Existing GANs are found to be inadequate for
physics applications, hence we develop a new message passing GAN (MPGAN),
which outperforms existing point cloud GANs on virtually every metric and shows
promise for use in HEP. We propose JetNet as a novel point-cloud-style dataset for
the ML community to experiment with, and set MPGAN as a benchmark to improve
upon for future generative models. Additionally, to facilitate research and improve
accessibility and reproducibility in this area, we release the open-source J ET N ET
Python package with interfaces for particle cloud datasets, implementations for
evaluation and loss metrics, and more tools for ML in HEP development.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) has become the de facto way to analyze jets, collimated
high-energy sprays of particles [1] produced at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). To apply ML
to jets, the most natural representation is a particle cloud, a variable-sized set of points in momentum
space, whose radiation pattern contains rich information about the underlying physics known as
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). A fundamental question is whether ML algorithms can model this
underlying physics and successfully reproduce the rich high- and low-level structure in jets.
⇤

Also at National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

