Meta-Learning Reliable Priors in the Function Space

Jonas Rothfuss
ETH Zurich
jonas.rothfuss@inf.ethz.ch
Jinfan Chen
ETH Zurich
georgcjf@gmail.com

Dominique Heyn
ETH Zurich
heynd@student.ethz.ch
Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
When data are scarce, meta-learning can improve a learner’s accuracy by harnessing previous experience from related learning tasks. However, existing methods
have unreliable uncertainty estimates which are often overconfident. Addressing
these shortcomings, we introduce a novel meta-learning framework, called
F-PACOH, that treats meta-learned priors as stochastic processes and performs
meta-level regularization directly in the function space. This allows us to directly
steer the probabilistic predictions of the meta-learner towards high epistemic uncertainty in regions of insufficient meta-training data and, thus, obtain well-calibrated
uncertainty estimates. Finally, we showcase how our approach can be integrated
with sequential decision making, where reliable uncertainty quantification is imperative. In our benchmark study on meta-learning for Bayesian Optimization (BO),
F-PACOH significantly outperforms all other meta-learners and standard baselines.

1

Introduction

Learning new concepts and skills from a small number of examples as well as adapting them quickly
in face of changing circumstances is a key aspect of human intelligence. Unfortunately, our machine
learning algorithms lack such adaptive capabilities. Meta-Learning [1, 2] has emerged as a promising
avenue towards enabling systems to learn much more efficiently by harnessing experience from previous related learning tasks [3–8]. By meta-learning probabilistic prior beliefs, we not only make more
accurate predictions when given a small amount of training data, but also improve the self-assessment
machine learning algorithm in the form of epistemic uncertainty estimates [9–12]. Such uncertainty
estimates are critical for sequential decision problems such as Bayesian optimization (BO) [13, 14]
and reinforcement learning [15, 16] which require efficient information gathering and exploration.
However, in most practical settings, there are only few tasks available for meta-training. Hence
we face the risk of overfitting to these few tasks [17] and, consequently impairing the performance
on unseen tasks. To prevent this, recent work has proposed various forms of regularization on the
meta-level [18, 12, 8]. While these methods are effective in preventing meta-overfitting for the
mean predictions, they fail to do so for the associated uncertainty estimates, manifested in gross
overconfidence. Such overconfidence is highly detrimental for downstream sequential decision tasks
that rely on calibrated uncertainty estimates [19, 20] to perform sufficient exploration. For instance, if
the global optimum of the true target function in BO lies outside the model’s 95 % confidence bounds
the acquisition algorithm may never query points close to the optimum and get stuck in sub-optimal
solutions. We hypothesize that previous methods yield overconfident predictions since they do not
meta-regularize the predictive distribution directly. Instead, they perform meta-regularization in
some latent space, for example the method parameters, which is non-trivially associated with the
resulting predictive distribution and thus may not have the indented regularization effects.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

