Sparse Deep Learning: A New Framework Immune
to Local Traps and Miscalibration

Yan Sun
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
sun748@purdue.edu

Wenjun Xiong
Guangxi Normal University & Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
xiong90@purdue.edu
Faming Liang∗
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
fmliang@purdue.edu

Abstract
Deep learning has powered recent successes of artificial intelligence (AI). However,
the deep neural network, as the basic model of deep learning, has suffered from
issues such as local traps and miscalibration. In this paper, we provide a new
framework for sparse deep learning, which has the above issues addressed in
a coherent way. In particular, we lay down a theoretical foundation for sparse
deep learning and propose prior annealing algorithms for learning sparse neural
networks. The former has successfully tamed the sparse deep neural network into
the framework of statistical modeling, enabling prediction uncertainty correctly
quantified. The latter can be asymptotically guaranteed to converge to the global
optimum, enabling the validity of the down-stream statistical inference. Numerical
result indicates the superiority of the proposed method compared to the existing
ones.
Keywords: Asymptotic Normality, Posterior Consistency, Prior Annealing, Structure Selection, Uncertainty Quantification

1

Introduction

During the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved the state-of-the-art performance
in many machine learning tasks such as computer vision and natural language processing. However,
the DNN suffers from a training-prediction dilemma from the perspective of statistical inference:
A small DNN model can be well calibrated, but tends to get trapped into a local optimum; on the
other hand, an over-parameterized DNN model can be easily trained to a global optimum (with
zero training loss), but tends to be miscalibrated [14]. In consequence, it is often unclear whether
a DNN is guaranteed to have a desired property after training instead of getting trapped into an
arbitrarily poor local minimum, or whether its decision/prediction is reliable. This difficulty makes
the trustworthiness of AI highly questionable.
To resolve this difficulty, researchers have attempted from two sides of the training-prediction
dilemma. Towards understanding the optimization process of the DNN training, a line of researches
have been done. For example, [13] and [27] studied the training loss surface of over-parameterized
DNNs. They showed that for a fully connected DNN, almost all local minima are globally optimal,
if the width of one layer of the DNN is no smaller than the training sample size and the network
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed: Faming Liang

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

