Joint inference and input optimization
in equilibrium networks

Swaminathan Gurumurthy∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Shaojie Bai
Carnegie Mellon University

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI

Zachary Manchester
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Many tasks in deep learning involve optimizing over the inputs to a network to
minimize or maximize some objective; examples include optimization over latent
spaces in a generative model to match a target image, or adversarially perturbing
an input to worsen classifier performance. Performing such optimization, however,
is traditionally quite costly, as it involves a complete forward and backward pass
through the network for each gradient step. In a separate line of work, a recent
thread of research has developed the deep equilibrium (DEQ) model, a class of
models that foregoes traditional network depth and instead computes the output of a
network by finding the fixed point of a single nonlinear layer. In this paper, we show
that there is a natural synergy between these two settings. Although, naively using
DEQs for these optimization problems is expensive (owing to the time needed to
compute a fixed point for each gradient step), we can leverage the fact that gradientbased optimization can itself be cast as a fixed point iteration to substantially
improve the overall speed. That is, we simultaneously both solve for the DEQ
fixed point and optimize over network inputs, all within a single “augmented”
DEQ model that jointly encodes both the original network and the optimization
process. Indeed, the procedure is fast enough that it allows us to efficiently train
DEQ models for tasks traditionally relying on an “inner” optimization loop. We
demonstrate this strategy on various tasks such as training generative models while
optimizing over latent codes, training models for inverse problems like denoising
and inpainting, adversarial training and gradient based meta-learning.

1

Introduction

Many settings in deep learning involve optimization over the inputs to a network to minimize some
desired loss. For example, for a “generator” network G : Z → X that maps from latent space Z to
an observed space X , it may be desirable to find a latent vector z ∈ Z that most closely produces
some target output x ∈ X by solving the optimization problem (e.g. [10, 13])
minimize kx − Gθ (z)k22 .
z∈Z

(1)

As another example, constructing adversarial examples for classifiers [28, 53] typically involves
optimizating over a perturbation to a given input; i.e., given a classifier network g : X → Y, task loss
∗
Correspondence to: Swaminathan Gurumurthy <sgurumur@andrew.cmu.edu>
Code available at https://github.com/locuslab/JIIO-DEQ

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

