PatchGame: Learning to Signal
Mid-level Patches in Referential Games
Kamal Gupta
kampta@umd.edu

Gowthami Somepalli
gowthami@umd.edu

Anubhav Gupta
anubhav@umd.edu

Vinoj Jayasundara
vinoj@umd.edu

Matthias Zwicker
zwicker@umd.edu

Abhinav Shrivastava
abhinav@cs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park
Abstract
We study a referential game (a type of signaling game) where two agents communicate with each other via a discrete bottleneck to achieve a common goal. In our
referential game, the goal of the speaker is to compose a message or a symbolic
representation of “important” image patches, while the task for the listener is to
match the speaker’s message to a different view of the same image. We show that it
is indeed possible for the two agents to develop a communication protocol without
explicit or implicit supervision. We further investigate the developed protocol
and show the applications in speeding up recent Vision Transformers by using
only important patches, and as pre-training for downstream recognition tasks (e.g.,
classification).

1

Introduction

The ability to communicate using language is a signature characteristic of intelligence [60]. Language
provides a structured platform for agents to not only collaborate with each other and accomplish
certain goals, but also to represent and store information in a compressible manner. Most importantly,
language allows us to build infinitely many new concepts by the composition of the known concepts.
These qualities are shared by both the natural languages used in human-human communication and
programming languages used in human-machine communication. The study of the evolution of
language can hence give us insights into intelligent machines that can communicate [54].
Our goal in this paper is to develop and understand an emergent language, i.e., a language that
emerges when two neural network agents try to communicate with each other. Clark [14] argued that
supervised approaches that consist of a single agent learning statistical relationships among symbols
don’t capture the functional relationships between the symbols i.e., the use of symbols leading to an
action or an outcome. Krishna et al. [43] argued the same viewpoint in the context of images. We,
therefore, resort to the recent works in emergent language [5, 30, 42, 45, 46, 74] which show that a
communication protocol can be developed or learned by two or more cooperative agents trying to
solve a task. The choice of the task is quintessential since the language derives meaning from its
use [78]. We choose a task where two agents, a speaker, and a listener, play a referential game, a type
of signaling game first proposed by Lewis [48]. The speaker agent receives a target image and sends
a message to the listener. The message consists of discrete symbols or words, capturing different
parts of the image. The listener receives another view of the target image, and one or more distractor
Code is available at https://kampta.github.io/patch-game.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

