Revitalizing CNN Attentions via Transformers in
Self-Supervised Visual Representation Learning

Chongjian Ge1 Youwei Liang2 Yibing Song2∗ Jianbo Jiao3 Jue Wang2 Ping Luo1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 University of Oxford
rhettgee@connect.hku.hk
liangyouwei1@gmail.com
jianbo@robots.ox.ac.uk
arphid@gmail.com

yibingsong.cv@gmail.com
pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Studies on self-supervised visual representation learning (SSL) improve encoder
backbones to discriminate training samples without labels. While CNN encoders
via SSL achieve comparable recognition performance to those via supervised learning, their network attention is under-explored for further improvement. Motivated
by the transformers that explore visual attention effectively in recognition scenarios,
we propose a CNN Attention REvitalization (CARE) framework to train attentive
CNN encoders guided by transformers in SSL. The proposed CARE framework
consists of a CNN stream (C-stream) and a transformer stream (T-stream), where
each stream contains two branches. C-stream follows an existing SSL framework
with two CNN encoders, two projectors, and a predictor. T-stream contains two
transformers, two projectors, and a predictor. T-stream connects to CNN encoders
and is in parallel to the remaining C-Stream. During training, we perform SSL in
both streams simultaneously and use the T-stream output to supervise C-stream.
The features from CNN encoders are modulated in T-stream for visual attention
enhancement and become suitable for the SSL scenario. We use these modulated
features to supervise C-stream for learning attentive CNN encoders. To this end, we
revitalize CNN attention by using transformers as guidance. Experiments on several standard visual recognition benchmarks, including image classification, object
detection, and semantic segmentation, show that the proposed CARE framework
improves CNN encoder backbones to the state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Learning visual features effectively has a profound influence on the recognition performance [5, 53].
Upon handling large-scale natural images, self-supervised visual representation learning benefits
downstream recognition tasks via pretext feature training. Existing SSL methods typically leverage
two branches to measure the similarity between different view representations derived from the same
input image. By maximizing the similarity between the correlated views within one image (e.g.,
BYOL [24], SimSiam [14] and Barlow Twins [73]), or minimizing the similarity between views
from different images (e.g., MoCo [27] and SimCLR [12]), these methods are shown to be effective
towards learning self-supervised visual representations.
SSL evolves concurrently with the transformer. Debuting at natural language processing [62, 17],
transformers have shown their advantages to process large-scale visual data since ViT [19]. The
encoder-decoder architecture in this vision transformer consistently explores global attention without
convolution. This architecture is shown effective for visual recognition with [7, 76, 54] or without
CNN integration [38, 21]. Inspired by these achievements via supervised learning, studies [15, 10, 4,
71] arise recently to train transformers in a self-supervised manner. These methods maintain most of
∗

Y. Song is the corresponding author. The code is available at https://github.com/ChongjianGE/CARE

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

