Revisiting Contrastive Methods for Unsupervised
Learning of Visual Representations

Wouter Van Gansbeke∗,1 Simon Vandenhende∗,1 Stamatios Georgoulis2 Luc Van Gool1,2
1

KU Leuven/ESAT-PSI

2

ETH Zurich/CVL

Abstract
Contrastive self-supervised learning has outperformed supervised pretraining on
many downstream tasks like segmentation and object detection. However, current
methods are still primarily applied to curated datasets like ImageNet. In this
paper, we first study how biases in the dataset affect existing methods. Our
results show that an approach like MoCo [19] works surprisingly well across: (i)
object- versus scene-centric, (ii) uniform versus long-tailed and (iii) general versus
domain-specific datasets. Second, given the generality of the approach, we try to
realize further gains with minor modifications. We show that learning additional
invariances - through the use of multi-scale cropping, stronger augmentations and
nearest neighbors - improves the representations. Finally, we observe that MoCo
learns spatially structured representations when trained with a multi-crop strategy.
The representations can be used for semantic segment retrieval and video instance
segmentation without finetuning. Moreover, the results are on par with specialized
models. We hope this work will serve as a useful study for other researchers. The
code and models are available 2 .

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) [25] aims to learn powerful representations without relying on human
annotations. The representations can be used for various purposes, including transfer learning [19],
clustering [1, 43, 44] or semi-supervised learning [6]. Recent self-supervised methods [4, 5, 17, 19]
learn visual representations by imposing invariances to various data transformations. A popular way
of formulating this idea is through the instance discrimination task [47] - which treats each image as
a separate class. Augmentations of the same image are considered as positive examples of the class,
while other images serve as negatives. To handle the large number of instance classes, the task is
expressed as a non-parametric classification problem using the contrastive loss [18, 34].
Despite the recent progress, most methods still train on images from ImageNet [12]. This dataset
has specific properties: (1) the images depict a single object in the center of the image, (2) the
classes follow a uniform distribution and (3) the images have discriminative visual features. To
deploy self-supervised learning into the wild, we need to quantify the dependence on these properties.
Therefore, in this paper, we first study the influence of dataset biases on the representations. We take
a utilitarian view and transfer different representations to a variety of downstream tasks.
Our results indicate that an approach like MoCo [19] works well for both object- and scene-centric
datasets. We delve deeper to understand these results. A key component is the augmentation strategy
which involves random cropping. For an object-centric dataset like ImageNet, two crops from the
same image will show a portion of the same object and no other objects. However, when multiple
∗
2

Equal contribution
Code: https://github.com/wvangansbeke/Revisiting-Contrastive-SSL

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

