Universal Off-Policy Evaluation

Yash Chandak
University of Massachusetts
Erik Learned-Miller
University of Massachusetts

Scott Niekum
University of Texas Austin
Emma Brunskill
Stanford University

Bruno Castro da Silva
University of Massachusetts
Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts

Abstract
When faced with sequential decision-making problems, it is often useful to be able
to predict what would happen if decisions were made using a new policy. Those
predictions must often be based on data collected under some previously used
decision-making rule. Many previous methods enable such off-policy (or counterfactual) estimation of the expected value of a performance measure called the
return. In this paper, we take the first steps towards a universal off-policy estimator
(UnO)—one that provides off-policy estimates and high-confidence bounds for any
parameter of the return distribution. We use UnO for estimating and simultaneously
bounding the mean, variance, quantiles/median, inter-quantile range, CVaR, and
the entire cumulative distribution of returns. Finally, we also discuss UnO’s applicability in various settings, including fully observable, partially observable (i.e.,
with unobserved confounders), Markovian, non-Markovian, stationary, smoothly
non-stationary, and discrete distribution shifts.

1

Introduction

Problems requiring sequential decision-making are ubiquitous [5]. When online experimentation is
costly or dangerous, it is essential to conduct off-policy evaluation before deploying a new policy;
that is, one must leverage existing data collected using some policy β (called a behavior policy)
to evaluate a performance metric of another policy π (called the evaluation policy). For problems
with high stakes, such as in terms of health [56] or financial assets [86], it is also crucial to provide
high-confidence bounds on the desired performance metric to ensure reliability and safety.
Perhaps the most widely studied performance metric in the off-policy setting is the expected return
[83]. However, this metric can be limiting for many problems of interest. Safety-critical applications,
such as automated healthcare, require minimizing the chances of risk-prone outcomes, and so
performance metrics such as value at risk (VaR) or conditional value at risk (CVaR) are more
appropriate [49, 14]. By contrast, applications like online recommendations are subject to noisy
data and call for robust metrics like the median and other quantiles [2]. In order to improve
user experiences, applications involving direct human-machine interaction, such as robotics and
autonomous driving, focus on minimizing uncertainty in their outcomes and thus use metrics like
variance and entropy [52, 84]. Recent work in distributional reinforcement learning (RL) have
also investigated estimating the cumulative distribution of returns [7, 24] and its various statistical
functionals [76]. While it may even be beneficial to use all of these different metrics simultaneously
to inform better decision-making, even individually estimating and bounding any performance metric,
other than mean and variance, in the off-policy setting has remained an open problem.
This raises the main question of interest: How do we develop a universal off-policy method—one that
can estimate any desired performance metrics and can also provide finite-sample confidence bounds
that hold simultaneously with high probability for those metrics?
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

