Bootstrapping the error of Oja’s algorithm

Robert Lunde
University of Michigan
rlunde@umich.edu

Purnamrita Sarkar
University of Texas at Austin
purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu

Rachel Ward
University of Texas at Austin
rward@math.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of quantifying uncertainty for the estimation error of
the leading eigenvector from Oja’s algorithm for streaming principal component
analysis, where the data are generated IID from some unknown distribution. By
combining classical tools from the U-statistics literature with recent results on
high-dimensional central limit theorems for quadratic forms of random vectors
and concentration of matrix products, we establish a weighted χ2 approximation
result for the sin2 error between the population eigenvector and the output of Ojas
algorithm. Since estimating the covariance matrix associated with the approximating distribution requires knowledge of unknown model parameters, we propose a
multiplier bootstrap algorithm that may be updated in an online manner. We establish conditions under which the bootstrap distribution is close to the corresponding
sampling distribution with high probability, thereby establishing the bootstrap as a
consistent inferential method in an appropriate asymptotic regime.

1

Introduction

Since its discovery over a century ago [13], principal component analysis (PCA) has been a cornerstone of data analysis. In many applications, dimension reduction is paramount and PCA offers an
optimal low-rank approximation of the original data. PCA is also highly interpretable as it projects
the dataset onto the directions that capture the most variance known as principal components.
Important applications of PCA include image and document analysis, where the largest few principal
components may be used to compress a large dimensional dataset to a manageable size without
incurring much loss; for a discussion of some other applications of PCA, see for example, [28]. In
these settings, the original dimensionality, which could be the number of pixels in an image or the
vocabulary size after removing stop-words, is in the tens of thousands. An offline computation of the
principal components would require the computation of eigenvectors of the sample covariance matrix.
However, in high-dimensional settings, storing the covariance matrix and subsequent eigen-analysis
can be challenging. Streaming PCA methods have gained significant traction owing to their ability to
iteratively update the principal components by considering one data-point at a time.
One of the most widely used algorithms for streaming PCA is Oja’s algorithm, proposed in the
seminal work of [41]. Oja’s algorithm involves the following update rule:
wt+1 − wt = η(wtT Xt )Xt ;
d

T
wt+1
wt+1 = 1,

th

(1)

where Xt ∈ R is the t data point and wt is the current estimate for the leading eigenvector of
Σ = EXX T after t data-points have been seen. The parameter η can be thought of as a learning rate,
which can either be fixed or varied as a function of t. In this paper we fix the learning rate, similar
to [26].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

