Lower Bounds and Optimal Algorithms for Smooth
and Strongly Convex Decentralized Optimization Over
Time-Varying Networks

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST∗
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Elnur Gasanov
KAUST
elnur.gasanov@kaust.edu.sa

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT† and ISP RAS‡
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
richtarik@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider the task of minimizing the sum of smooth and strongly convex functions stored in a decentralized manner across the nodes of a communication network
whose links are allowed to change in time. We solve two fundamental problems for
this task. First, we establish the first lower bounds on the number of decentralized
communication rounds and the number of local computations required to find an
ϵ-accurate solution. Second, we design two optimal algorithms that attain these
lower bounds: (i) a variant of the recently proposed algorithm ADOM (Kovalev
et al., 2021) enhanced via a multi-consensus subroutine, which is optimal in the
case when access to the dual gradients is assumed, and (ii) a novel algorithm, called
ADOM+, which is optimal in the case when access to the primal gradients is assumed. We corroborate the theoretical efficiency of these algorithms by performing
an experimental comparison with existing state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

In this work we are solving the decentralized optimization problem
min

n
P

x∈Rd i=1

fi (x),

(1)

where each function fi : Rd → Rd is stored on a compute node i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. We assume that the
nodes are connected through a communication network. Each node can perform local computations
based on its local state and data, and can directly communicate with its neighbors only. Further, we
assume the functions fi to be smooth and strongly convex.
Such decentralized optimization problems arise in many applications, including estimation by sensor
networks (Rabbat and Nowak, 2004), network resource allocation (Beck et al., 2014), cooperative
control (Giselsson et al., 2013), distributed spectrum sensing (Bazerque and Giannakis, 2009) and
power system control (Gan et al., 2012). Moreover, problems of this form draw attention of the
machine learning community (Scaman et al., 2017), since they cover training of supervised machine
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia
‡
Institute for System Programming of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Research Center for Trusted
Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

