Intriguing Properties of Contrastive Losses

Ting Chen
Google Research

Calvin Luo
Google Research

Lala Li
Google Research

iamtingchen@google.com

calvinluo@google.com

lala@google.com

Abstract
We study three intriguing properties of contrastive learning. First, we generalize
the standard contrastive loss to a broader family of losses, and we find that various
instantiations of the generalized loss perform similarly under the presence of
a multi-layer non-linear projection head. Second, we study if instance-based
contrastive learning (with a global image representation) can learn well on images
with multiple objects present. We find that meaningful hierarchical local features
can be learned despite the fact that these objectives operate on global instancelevel features. Finally, we study the phenomenon of feature suppression among
competing features shared across augmented views, such as “color distribution”
vs “object class”. We construct datasets with explicit and controllable competing
features and show that, for contrastive learning, a few bits of easy-to-learn shared
features can suppress, and even fully prevent, the learning of other sets of competing
features. In scenarios where there are multiple objects in an image, the dominant
object would suppress the learning of smaller objects. Existing contrastive learning
methods critically rely on data augmentation to favor certain sets of features over
others, and could suffer from learning saturation for scenarios where existing
augmentations cannot fully address the feature suppression. This poses open
challenges to existing contrastive learning techniques 1 .

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] has recently achieved great successes
in learning visual representations without supervision. As shown in [13, 14], contrastive learning can
learn representations that rival supervised learning, and significantly improve the state-of-the-art in
semi-supervised learning on ImageNet. One successful use case of contrastive loss for self-supervised
learning is to make augmented views of the same example agree [1, 2, 13]. A widely used contrastive
loss to encourage agreement is based on cross entropy [15, 3, 4, 13]. Given an augmented view of an
example, the contrastive prediction task aims to classify a set of candidates into the positive example
(i.e. the other augmented view of the same example) and negative ones via the cross entropy loss.
In this work, to understand the effectiveness and limitation of existing contrastive learning methods,
we study three intriguing aspects. First, we propose a generalization of the standard contrastive
loss, and systematically study their performance differences. Second, we study if the instance-based
contrastive learning, for which the contrastive loss operates on global representation of an input image,
can learn well on images with multiple objects present, and whether or not it leads to meaningful
local features. Finally, we systematically study the feature suppression phenomenon in contrastive
learning. The suppression effect occurs among competing features shared across augmented views.
For example, with random cropping as the augmentation, “color distribution” and “object class” are
often competing features as they are likely shared between two augmented views. The suppression
effect among competing features can significantly degenerate the representation quality, or even
1

Code and visualization at https://contrastive-learning.github.io/intriguing.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

