Discovering Dynamic Salient Regions for
Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks

Iulia Duta∗
Bitdefender, Romania
id366@cam.ac.uk

Andrei Nicolicioiu*
Bitdefender, Romania
anicolicioiu@bitdefender.com

Marius Leordeanu
Bitdefender, Romania
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
University "Politehnica" of Bucharest
marius.leordeanu@imar.ro

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks are perfectly suited to capture latent interactions between
various entities in the spatio-temporal domain (e.g. videos). However, when an
explicit structure is not available, it is not obvious what atomic elements should
be represented as nodes. Current works generally use pre-trained object detectors
or fixed, predefined regions to extract graph nodes. Improving upon this, our
proposed model learns nodes that dynamically attach to well-delimited salient
regions, which are relevant for a higher-level task, without using any object-level
supervision. Constructing these localized, adaptive nodes gives our model inductive
bias towards object-centric representations and we show that it discovers regions
that are well correlated with objects in the video. In extensive ablation studies
and experiments on two challenging datasets, we show superior performance to
previous graph neural networks models for video classification.

1

Introduction

Spatio-temporal data, and videos, in particular, are characterised by an abundance of events that
require complex reasoning to be understood. In such data, entities or classes exist at multiple scales
and in different contexts in space and time, starting from lower-level physical objects, which are well
localized in space and moving towards higher-level concepts which define complex interactions. We
need a representation that captures such spatio-temporal interactions at different level of granularity,
depending on the current scene and the requirements of the task. Classical convolutional nets address
spatio-temporal processing in a simple and rigid manner, determined only by fixed local receptive
fields [1]. Alternatively, space-time graph neural nets [2, 3] offer a more powerful and flexible
approach modeling complex short and long-range interactions between visual entities.
In this paper, we propose a novel method to enhance vision Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) by
an additional capability, missing from any other previous works. That is, to have nodes that are
constructed for spatial reasoning and can adapt to the current input. Prior works are limited to
having either nodes attached to semantic attention maps [4] or attached to fixed locations such as
grids [5, 3, 6]. Moreover, unlike works that require external object detectors [7] our method relies on
a learnable mechanism to adapt to the current input.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

