Believe What You See: Implicit Constraint Approach
for Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Yiqin Yang1†, Xiaoteng Ma1†‡, Chenghao Li1 , Zewu Zheng1 ,
Qiyuan Zhang2 , Gao Huang1 , Jun Yang1‡, Qianchuan Zhao1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
{yangyiqi19, ma-xt17, lich18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zzheng17@126.com,
zhangqiyuan19@hit.edu.cn, {gaohuang, yangjun603, zhaoqc}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning from datasets without interaction with environments (Offline Learning) is
an essential step to apply Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms in real-world
scenarios. However, compared with the single-agent counterpart, offline multiagent RL introduces more agents with the larger state and action space, which is
more challenging but attracts little attention. We demonstrate current offline RL
algorithms are ineffective in multi-agent systems due to the accumulated extrapolation error. In this paper, we propose a novel offline RL algorithm, named Implicit
Constraint Q-learning (ICQ), which effectively alleviates the extrapolation error
by only trusting the state-action pairs given in the dataset for value estimation.
Moreover, we extend ICQ to multi-agent tasks by decomposing the joint-policy
under the implicit constraint. Experimental results demonstrate that the extrapolation error is successfully controlled within a reasonable range and insensitive
to the number of agents. We further show that ICQ achieves the state-of-the-art
performance in the challenging multi-agent offline tasks (StarCraft II). Our code is
public online at https://github.com/YiqinYang/ICQ.

1

Introduction

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL), an active learning process, has achieved massive success
in various domains ranging from strategy games [59] to recommendation systems [8]. However,
applying RL to real-world scenarios poses practical challenges: interaction with the real world, such
as autonomous driving, is usually expensive or risky. To solve these issues, offline RL is an excellent
choice to deal with practical problems [3, 24, 35, 42, 15, 28, 4, 23, 54, 12], aiming at learning from a
fixed dataset without interaction with environments.
The greatest obstacle of offline RL is the distribution shift issue [16], which leads to extrapolation
error, a phenomenon in which unseen state-action pairs are erroneously estimated. Unlike the online
setting, the inaccurate estimated values of unseen pairs cannot be corrected by interacting with the
environment. Therefore, most off-policy RL algorithms fail in the offline tasks due to intractable overgeneralization. Modern offline methods (e.g., Batch-Constrained deep Q-learning (BCQ) [16]) aim to
enforce the learned policy to be close to the behavior policy or suppress the Q-value directly. These
methods have achieved massive success in challenging single-agent offline tasks like D4RL [14].
However, many decision processes in real-world scenarios belong to multi-agent systems, such as
intelligent transportation systems [2], sensor networks [37], and power grids [7]. Compared with
the single-agent counterpart, the multi-agent system has a much larger action space, which grows
†
‡

Equal Contribution.
Equal Corresponding.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

