On Success and Simplicity:
A Second Look at Transferable Targeted Attacks

Zhengyu Zhao, Zhuoran Liu, Martha Larson
Radboud University
{z.zhao,z.liu,m.larson}@cs.ru.nl

Abstract
Achieving transferability of targeted attacks is reputed to be remarkably difficult.
The current state of the art has resorted to resource-intensive solutions that necessitate training model(s) for each target class with additional data. In our investigation,
we find, however, that simple transferable attacks which require neither model
training nor additional data can achieve surprisingly strong targeted transferability.
This insight has been overlooked until now, mainly because the widespread practice
of attacking with only few iterations has largely limited the attack convergence
to optimal targeted transferability. In particular, we, for the first time, identify
that a very simple logit loss can largely surpass the commonly adopted crossentropy loss, and yield even better results than the resource-intensive state of the art.
Our analysis spans a variety of transfer scenarios, especially including three new,
realistic scenarios: an ensemble transfer scenario with little model similarity, a
worse-case scenario with low-ranked target classes, and also a real-world attack on
the Google Cloud Vision API. Results in these new transfer scenarios demonstrate
that the commonly adopted, easy scenarios cannot fully reveal the actual strength
of different attacks and may cause misleading comparative results. We also show
the usefulness of the simple logit loss for generating targeted universal adversarial perturbations in a data-free manner. Overall, the aim of our analysis is to
inspire a more meaningful evaluation on targeted transferability. Code is available
at https://github.com/ZhengyuZhao/Targeted-Tansfer.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in various machine learning tasks,
but are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [1]. A key property of adversarial attacks that
makes them critical in realistic, black-box scenarios is their transferability [2, 3]. Current work on
adversarial transferability has achieved great success for non-targeted attacks [4–12], while several
initial attempts [3, 4, 13] at targeted transferability have shown its extreme difficulty. Targeted
transferability is known to be much more challenging and worth exploring since it can raise more
critical concerns by fooling models into predicting a chosen, highly dangerous target class.
However, so far state-of-the-art results can only be secured by resource-intensive transferable
attacks [14–16]. Specifically, the FDA approach [14, 15] is based on modeling layer-wise feature
distributions by training target-class-specific auxiliary classifiers on large-scale labeled data, and then
optimizing adversarial perturbations using these auxiliary classifiers from across the deep feature
space. The TTP approach [16] is based on training target-class-specific Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) through global and local distribution matching, and then using the trained generator
to directly generate perturbations on any given input image.
In this paper, we take a second, thorough look at current research on targeted transferability. Our
main contribution is the finding that simple transferable attacks [4, 6, 8] that require neither model
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

