The staircase property:
How hierarchical structure can guide deep learning
Emmanuel Abbe
EPFL
emmanuel.abbe@epfl.ch

Enric Boix-Adsera
MIT
eboix@mit.edu

Matthew Brennan
MIT

Guy Bresler
MIT
guy@mit.edu

Dheeraj Nagaraj
MIT
dheeraj@mit.edu

Abstract
This paper identifies a structural property of data distributions that enables deep
neural networks to learn hierarchically. We define the “staircase” property for
functions over the Boolean hypercube, which posits that high-order Fourier coefficients are reachable from lower-order Fourier coefficients along increasing chains.
We prove that functions satisfying this property can be learned in polynomial
time using layerwise stochastic coordinate descent on regular neural networks –
a class of network architectures and initializations that have homogeneity properties. Our analysis shows that for such staircase functions and neural networks,
the gradient-based algorithm learns high-level features by greedily combining
lower-level features along the depth of the network. We further back our theoretical
results with experiments showing that staircase functions are learnable by more
standard ResNet architectures with stochastic gradient descent. Both the theoretical
and experimental results support the fact that the staircase property has a role
to play in understanding the capabilities of gradient-based learning on regular
networks, in contrast to general polynomial-size networks that can emulate any
Statistical Query or PAC algorithm, as recently shown.

1

Introduction

It has been observed empirically that neural networks can learn hierarchically. For example, a
‘car’ may be detected by first understanding simpler concepts like ‘door’, ’wheel’, and so forth in
intermediate layers, which are then combined in deeper layers (c.f. [1, 2]). However, on the theoretical
side, the mechanisms by which such hierarchical learning occurs are not yet fully understood. In this
paper we are motivated by the following question:
Can we identify naturally structured and interpretable classes of hierarchical functions, and
show how regular1 DNNs are able to learn them?
This is a refinement of the generic objective of trying to understand DNNs: We identify several
key desiderata for any theoretical result in this direction. (1) Natural structure: We aim to capture
naturally occurring data of interest, so the structural assumption must make conceptual sense. (2)
Interpretability: If we hope to clearly interpret the inner workings of neural networks, understanding
both how they classify and also how they learn, then we need a model for data that is interpretable to
1
The notion of regularity is specified in Definition 2.1; this means network architectures and initializations
that have homogeneity properties within layers, in contrast to the emulation architectures in [3, 4].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

