Exponential Bellman Equation and Improved Regret
Bounds for Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning

1

Yingjie Fei1 Zhuoran Yang2 Yudong Chen3 Zhaoran Wang1
Northwestern University; yf275@cornell.edu, zhaoranwang@gmail.com
2
Princeton University; zy6@princeton.edu
3
University of Wisconsin-Madison; yudong.chen@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) based on the entropic risk
measure. Although existing works have established non-asymptotic regret guarantees for this problem, they leave open an exponential gap between the upper
and lower bounds. We identify the deficiencies in existing algorithms and their
analysis that result in such a gap. To remedy these deficiencies, we investigate
a simple transformation of the risk-sensitive Bellman equations, which we call
the exponential Bellman equation. The exponential Bellman equation inspires us
to develop a novel analysis of Bellman backup procedures in risk-sensitive RL
algorithms, and further motivates the design of a novel exploration mechanism.
We show that these analytic and algorithmic innovations together lead to improved
regret upper bounds over existing ones.

1

Introduction

Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) is important for practical and high-stake applications,
such as self-driving and robotic surgery. In contrast with standard and risk-neutral RL, it optimizes
some risk measure of cumulative rewards instead of their expectation. One foundational framework
for risk-sensitive RL maximizes the entropic risk measure of the reward, which takes the form of
Vπ =

1
log{Eπ [eβR ]},
β

with respect to the policy π, where β 6= 0 is a given risk parameter and R denotes the cumulative
rewards.
Recently, the works of [20, 21] investigate the online setting of the above risk-sensitive RL problem.
Under K-episode MDPs with horizon length of H, they propose two model-free algorithms, namely
RSVI and RSQ, and prove that their algorithms achieve the regret upper bound (with its informal
form given by)
2

Regret(K) . e|β|H ·

e|β|H − 1 p
poly(H) · K
|β|H

without assuming knowledge of the transition distribution or access to a simulator. They also provide
a lower bound (informally presented as)
0

e|β|H − 1 p
Regret(K) &
poly(H) · K
|β|H
that any algorithm has to incur, where H 0 is a linear function of H. Despite the non-asymptotic
nature of their results, it is not hard to see that a wide gap exists between the two bounds. Specifically,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

