Circa: Stochastic ReLUs for Private Deep Learning

Zahra Ghodsi1 , Nandan Kumar Jha2 , Brandon Reagen2 , Siddharth Garg2
1
University of California San Diego, 2 New York University
zghodsi@ucsd.edu, {nj2049, bjr5, sg175}@nyu.edu

Abstract
The simultaneous rise of machine learning as a service and concerns over user privacy have increasingly motivated the need for private inference (PI). While recent
work demonstrates PI is possible using cryptographic primitives, the computational
overheads render it impractical. State-of-art deep networks are inadequate in this
context because the source of slowdown in PI stems from the ReLU operations
whereas optimizations for plaintext inference focus on reducing FLOPs. In this
paper we re-think ReLU computations and propose optimizations for PI tailored
to properties of neural networks. Specifically, we reformulate ReLU as an approximate sign test and introduce a novel truncation method for the sign test that
significantly reduces the cost per ReLU. These optimizations result in a specific
type of stochastic ReLU. The key observation is that the stochastic fault behavior
is well suited for the fault-tolerant properties of neural network inference. Thus,
we provide significant savings without impacting accuracy. We collectively call the
optimizations Circa and demonstrate improvements of up to 4.7× storage and 3×
runtime over baseline implementations; we further show that Circa can be used on
top of recent PI optimizations to obtain 1.8× additional speedup.

1

Introduction

Today, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) provides high-quality user experiences but comes at
the cost of privacy—clients either share their personal data with the server or the server must disclose
its model to the clients. Ideally, both the client and server would preserve the privacy of their inputs
and model without sacrificing quality. A recent and growing body of work has focused on designing
and optimizing cryptographic protocols for private inference (PI). With PI, MLaaS computations are
performed obliviously; without the server seeing the client’s data nor the client learning the server’s
model. PI protocols are built using cryptographic primitives including homomorphic encryption (HE),
Secret Sharing (SS), and secure multiparty computation (MPC). The challenge is that all known
protocols for PI incur impractically high overheads, rendering them unusable.
Existing PI frameworks [1, 2, 3] are based on hybrid protocols, where different cryptographic
techniques are used to evaluate different network layers. Delphi [3], a leading solution based on
Gazelle [2], uses additive secret sharing for convolution and fully-connected layers. Secret sharing
supports fast addition and multiplication by moving large parts of the computation to an offline
phase [4]. Thus, convolutions can be computed at near plaintext speed. Non-linear functions,
notably ReLU, cannot enjoy the same speedups. Most protocols (including Delphi, Gazelle, and
MiniONN [1]) use Yao’s Garbled Circuits (GC) [5] to process ReLUs. GCs allow two parties to
collaboratively and privately compute arbitrary Boolean functions. At a high-level, GCs represent
functions as encrypted two-input truth tables. This means that computing a function with GCs
requires the function be decomposed into a circuit of binary gates that processes inputs in a bit-wise
fashion. Thus, evaluating ReLUs privately is extremely expensive, to the point that PI inference
runtime is dominated by ReLUs [3, 6].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

