ROI Maximization
in Stochastic Online Decision-Making

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano & DSRC
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it
Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University & Google research
mansour@tau.ac.il

Tommaso Cesari
Toulouse School of Economics
tommaso.cesari@tse-fr.eu
Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE & Criteo AI Lab
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
We introduce a novel theoretical framework for Return On Investment (ROI)
maximization in repeated decision-making. Our setting is motivated by the use
case of companies that regularly receive proposals for technological innovations
and want to quickly decide whether they are worth implementing. We design an
algorithm for learning ROI-maximizing decision-making policies over a sequence
of innovation proposals. Our algorithm
provably converges to an optimal policy

in class Π at a rate of order min 1/(N ∆2 ), N −1/3 }, where N is the number
of innovations and ∆ is the suboptimality gap in Π. A significant hurdle of our
formulation, which sets it aside from other online learning problems such as bandits,
is that running a policy does not provide an unbiased estimate of its performance.

1

Introduction

Often, companies have to make yes/no decisions, such as whether to adopt a new technology or retire
an old product. However, finding out the best option in all circumstances could mean spending too
much time or money in the evaluation process. If the decisions to make are many, one could be better
off making more of them quickly and inexpensively, provided that these decisions have an overall
positive effect. In this paper, we investigate the problem of determining a decision policy to balance
the reward over cost ratio optimally (i.e., to maximize the return on investment).
A motivating example. Consider a technology company that keeps testing innovations to increase
some chosen metric (e.g., benefits, gross revenue, revenue excluding the traffic acquisition cost).
Before deploying an innovation, the company wants to figure out whether it is profitable. As long
as each innovation can be tested on i.i.d. samples of users, the company can perform randomized
tests and make statistically sound decisions. However, there is an incentive to make these tests run
as quickly as possible because, for example, the testing process is expensive. Another reason could
be that keeping a team on a project that has negative, neutral, or even borderline positive potential
prevents it from testing other ideas that might lead to a significantly better improvement. In other
words, it is crucial to learn when to drop barely positive innovations in favor of highly positive ones,
so to increase the overall flow of improvement over time (i.e., the ROI of the tests).
More generally, our framework describes problems where an agent faces a sequence of decision tasks
consisting of either accepting or rejecting an innovation. Before making each decision, the agent can
invest resources into reducing the uncertainty on the value brought by the innovation. The global
objective is to maximize the total ROI. Namely, the ratio between the total value accumulated by
accepting innovations and the total cost. For an in-depth discussion on alternative goals, we refer the
reader to the Supplementary Material (Section D).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

