Object-Aware Regularization for
Addressing Causal Confusion in Imitation Learning

Jongjin Park1∗ Younggyo Seo1 ∗ † Chang Liu2 Li Zhao2
Tao Qin2 Jinwoo Shin1 Tie-Yan Liu2
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Behavioral cloning has proven to be effective for learning sequential decisionmaking policies from expert demonstrations. However, behavioral cloning often
suffers from the causal confusion problem where a policy relies on the noticeable
effect of expert actions due to the strong correlation but not the cause we desire.
This paper presents Object-aware REgularizatiOn (OREO), a simple technique
that regularizes an imitation policy in an object-aware manner. Our main idea is
to encourage a policy to uniformly attend to all semantic objects, in order to prevent the policy from exploiting nuisance variables strongly correlated with expert
actions. To this end, we introduce a two-stage approach: (a) we extract semantic
objects from images by utilizing discrete codes from a vector-quantized variational
autoencoder, and (b) we randomly drop the units that share the same discrete code
together, i.e., masking out semantic objects. Our experiments demonstrate that
OREO significantly improves the performance of behavioral cloning, outperforming various other regularization and causality-based methods on a variety of Atari
environments and a self-driving CARLA environment. We also show that our
method even outperforms inverse reinforcement learning methods trained with a
considerable amount of environment interaction.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) holds the promise of learning skills or behaviors directly from expert demonstrations, effectively reducing the need for costly and dangerous environment interaction [21, 45]. Its
simplest and effective form is behavioral cloning (BC), which learns a policy by solving a supervised
learning problem over state-action pairs from expert demonstrations. While being simple, BC has
been successful in a wide range of tasks [4, 7, 31, 33] with careful designs. However, it has been
recently evidenced that BC often suffers from the causal confusion problem, where the policy relies
on nuisance variables strongly correlated with expert actions, instead of the true causes [11, 12, 54].
For example, when we train a BC policy on the Atari Pong environment (see Figure 1a), we observe
that a policy relies on nuisance variables in images (i.e., scores) for predicting expert actions, instead
of learning the underlying fundamental rule of the environment that experts would have used for
making decisions. In particular, Table 1c shows that the policy trained using images with scores
struggles to generalize to images with scores masked out (see Figure 1b). However, the policy trained
with masked images could generalize to original images with scores, which shows that it successfully
learned the rule of the environment. This implies that learning the policy that can identify the true
cause of expert actions is important for stable performance at deployment time, where nuisance
correlates usually do not hold as in expert demonstrations.
∗
†

Equal contribution, in alphabetical order. {jongjin.park, younggyo.seo}@kaist.ac.kr
This work was done while the author was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

