A variational approximate posterior for the deep
Wishart process

Sebastian W. Ober
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
swo25@cam.ac.uk

Laurence Aitchison
Department of Computer Science
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK
laurence.aitchison@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent work introduced deep kernel processes as an entirely kernel-based alternative to NNs (Aitchison et al. 2020). Deep kernel processes flexibly learn good
top-layer representations by alternately sampling the kernel from a distribution
over positive semi-definite matrices and performing nonlinear transformations. A
particular deep kernel process, the deep Wishart process (DWP), is of particular
interest because its prior can be made equivalent to deep Gaussian process (DGP)
priors for kernels that can be expressed entirely in terms of Gram matrices. However, inference in DWPs has not yet been possible due to the lack of sufficiently
flexible distributions over positive semi-definite matrices. Here, we give a novel
approach to obtaining flexible distributions over positive semi-definite matrices
by generalising the Bartlett decomposition of the Wishart probability density. We
use this new distribution to develop an approximate posterior for the DWP that
includes dependency across layers. We develop a doubly-stochastic inducing-point
inference scheme for the DWP and show experimentally that inference in the DWP
can improve performance over doing inference in a DGP with the equivalent prior.

1

Introduction

The successes of modern deep learning have highlighted that good performance on tasks such as
image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) requires deep models with lower layers that have the
flexibility to learn good representations. Up until very recently, this was only possible in featurebased methods such as neural networks (NNs). Kernel methods did not have this flexibility because
the kernel could be modified only using a few kernel hyperparameters. However, with the advent
of deep kernel processes (DKPs; Aitchison et al., 2021), we now have deep kernel methods that
offer neural-network like flexibility in the kernel / top-layer representation. DKPs introduce this
flexibility by taking the kernel from the previous layer, then sampling from a Wishart or inverse
Wishart centered on that kernel, followed by a nonlinear transformation. The sampling and nonlinear
transformation steps are repeated multiple times to form a deep architecture. Remarkably, deep
Gaussian processes (DGPs; Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017), standard
Bayesian NNs, infinite-width Bayesian NNs (neural network Gaussian processes or NNGPs; Lee
et al., 2018; Matthews et al., 2018; Novak et al., 2019; Garriga-Alonso et al., 2019) and infinite
NNs with finite width bottlenecks (Aitchison, 2020) can be written as DKPs (Aitchison et al., 2021).
Indeed, for kernels that can be expressed in terms of operations on Gram matrices, Aitchison et al.
(2021) showed that a particular DKP, the deep Wishart process (DWP) has a prior equivalent to
a DGP’s prior. In a DGP, the random variables inferred in variational inference are the model’s
intermediate features, with kernels computed as a function of these features at each layer. However,
in a DWP, there are no features at all: the only random variables are the positive semi-definite kernel
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

