Tighter Expected Generalization Error Bounds via
Wasserstein Distance
Borja Rodríguez-Gálvez
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
borjarg@kth.se

Germán Bassi
Ericsson Research
Stockholm, Sweden
german.bassi@ericsson.com

Ragnar Thobaben
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
ragnart@kth.se

Mikael Skoglund
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
skoglund@kth.se

Abstract
This work presents several expected generalization error bounds based on the
Wasserstein distance. More specifically, it introduces full-dataset, single-letter,
and random-subset bounds, and their analogues in the randomized subsample
setting from Steinke and Zakynthinou [1]. Moreover, when the loss function is
bounded and the geometry of the space is ignored by the choice of the metric in
the Wasserstein distance, these bounds recover from below (and thus, are tighter
than) current bounds based on the relative entropy. In particular, they generate new,
non-vacuous bounds based on the relative entropy. Therefore, these results can be
seen as a bridge between works that account for the geometry of the hypothesis
space and those based on the relative entropy, which is agnostic to such geometry.
Furthermore, it is shown how to produce various new bounds based on different
information measures (e.g., the lautum information or several f -divergences) based
on these bounds and how to derive similar bounds with respect to the backward
channel using the presented proof techniques.

1

Introduction

A learning algorithm is a mechanism that takes a dataset s = (z1 , . . . , zn ) of n samples zi ∈ Z
taken i.i.d. from a distribution PZ as an input, and produces a hypothesis w ∈ W by means of the
conditional probability distribution PW |S .

The ability of a hypothesis w to characterize a sample z is described by the loss function `(w, z) ∈ R.
More precisely, a hypothesis w describes well the samples from a population PZ when its population
risk, i.e., LPZ (w) , E[`(w, Z)], is low. However,
distribution PZ is often not available and the
Pthe
n
empirical risk on the dataset s, i.e., Ls (w) , n1 i=1 `(w, zi ), is considered as a proxy. Therefore,
it is of interest to study the discrepancy between the population and empirical risks, which is defined
as the generalization error:
gen(w, s) , LPZ (w) − Ls (w).
Classical approaches bound the generalization error in expectation and in probability (PAC Bayes)
either by studying the complexity and the geometry of the hypothesis’ space W or by exploring
properties of the learning algorithm itself; see, e.g., [2, 3] for an overview.
More recently, the relationship (or amount of information) between the generated hypothesis and the
training dataset has been used as an indicator of the generalization performance. In [4], based on
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

