Unsupervised Part Discovery from
Contrastive Reconstruction
Subhabrata Choudhury

Iro Laina

Christian Rupprecht

Andrea Vedaldi

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
subha,iro,chrisr,vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The goal of self-supervised visual representation learning is to learn strong, transferable image representations, with the majority of research focusing on object or
scene level. On the other hand, representation learning at part level has received
significantly less attention. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised approach
to object part discovery and segmentation and make three contributions. First, we
construct a proxy task through a set of objectives that encourages the model to learn
a meaningful decomposition of the image into its parts. Secondly, prior work argues
for reconstructing or clustering pre-computed features as a proxy to parts; we show
empirically that this alone is unlikely to find meaningful parts; mainly because of
their low resolution and the tendency of classification networks to spatially smear
out information. We suggest that image reconstruction at the level of pixels can
alleviate this problem, acting as a complementary cue. Lastly, we show that the standard evaluation based on keypoint regression does not correlate well with segmentation quality and thus introduce different metrics, NMI and ARI, that better characterize the decomposition of objects into parts. Our method yields semantic parts
which are consistent across fine-grained but visually distinct categories, outperforming the state of the art on three benchmark datasets. Code is available at the project
page: https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/unsup-parts/.

1

Introduction

Humans perceive the world as a collection of distinct objects. When we interact with an object,
we naturally perceive the different parts it consists of. In visual scene understanding, parts provide
intermediate representations that are more invariant to changes in object pose, orientation, camera
view or lighting than the objects themselves. They are useful in analyzing objects for higher level
tasks, such as fine-grained recognition, manipulation etc. However, supervised learning of parts
requires manual annotations, which are slow, expensive and infeasible to collect for the almost
unlimited variety of objects in the real world. Thus, unsupervised part discovery and segmentation
has recently gained the interest of the community. We thus consider the problem of automatically
discovering the parts of visual object classes: given a collection of images of a certain object category
(e.g., birds) and corresponding object masks, we want to learn to decompose an object into a collection
of repeatable and informative parts.
It is important to define and understand the nature of parts before we begin describing approaches to
part discovery. While there is no universally accepted formal definition for what constitutes a “part”,
the nature of objects and object parts is accepted as different. For example, for Gibson [26], an object
is “detachable”, i.e. something that, at least conceptually, can be picked up and moved to a different
place irrespective of the rest of the scene. Parts, in contrast, are constituent elements of an object, and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

