Conservative Data Sharing
for Multi-Task Offline Reinforcement Learning

Tianhe Yu∗,1,2 , Aviral Kumar∗,2,3 , Yevgen Chebotar2 , Karol Hausman1,2 ,
Sergey Levine2,3 , Chelsea Finn1,2
1
Stanford University, 2 Google Research, 3 UC Berkeley
(∗ Equal Contribution)
tianheyu@cs.stanford.edu, aviralk@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have shown promising results in
domains where abundant pre-collected data is available. However, prior methods
focus on solving individual problems from scratch with an offline dataset without
considering how an offline RL agent can acquire multiple skills. We argue that a
natural use case of offline RL is in settings where we can pool large amounts of data
collected in various scenarios for solving different tasks, and utilize all of this data
to learn behaviors for all the tasks more effectively rather than training each one in
isolation. However, sharing data across all tasks in multi-task offline RL performs
surprisingly poorly in practice. Thorough empirical analysis, we find that sharing
data can actually exacerbate the distributional shift between the learned policy and
the dataset, which in turn can lead to divergence of the learned policy and poor
performance. To address this challenge, we develop a simple technique for datasharing in multi-task offline RL that routes data based on the improvement over the
task-specific data. We call this approach conservative data sharing (CDS), and it can
be applied with multiple single-task offline RL methods. On a range of challenging
multi-task locomotion, navigation, and vision-based robotic manipulation problems,
CDS achieves the best or comparable performance compared to prior offline multitask RL methods and previous data sharing approaches.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in offline reinforcement learning (RL) make it possible to train policies for real-world
scenarios, such as robotics [32, 60, 33] and healthcare [24, 67, 35], entirely from previously collected
data. Many realistic settings where we might want to apply offline RL are inherently multi-task
problems, where we want to solve multiple tasks using all of the data available. For example, if
our goal is to enable robots to acquire a range of different behaviors, it is more practical to collect
a modest amount of data for each desired behavior, resulting in a large but heterogeneous dataset,
rather than requiring a large dataset for every individual skill. Indeed, many existing datasets in
robotics [17, 11, 66] and offline RL [19] include data collected in precisely this way. Unfortunately,
leveraging such heterogeneous datasets leaves us with two unenviable choices. We could train
each task only on data collected for that task, but such small datasets may be inadequate for good
performance. Alternatively, we could combine all of the data together and use data relabeled from
other tasks to improve offline training, but this naïve data sharing approach can actually often degrade
performance over simple single-task training in practice [33]. In this paper, we aim to understand
how data sharing affects RL performance in the offline setting and develop a reliable and effective
method for selectively sharing data across tasks.
A number of prior works have studied multi-task RL in the online setting, confirming that multitasking can often lead to performance that is worse than training tasks individually [56, 62, 90].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

