Near-Optimal No-Regret Learning in General Games
Constantinos Daskalakis
MIT CSAIL
costis@csail.mit.edu

Maxwell Fishelson
MIT CSAIL
maxfish@mit.edu

Noah Golowich
MIT CSAIL
nzg@mit.edu

Abstract
We show that Optimistic Hedge – a common variant of multiplicative-weightsupdates with recency bias – attains poly(log T ) regret in multi-player general-sum
games. In particular, when every player of the game uses Optimistic Hedge to
iteratively update her strategy in response to the history of play so far, then after T
rounds of interaction, each player experiences total regret that is poly(log T ). Our
bound improves, exponentially, the O(T 1/2 ) regret attainable by standard no-regret
learners in games, the O(T 1/4 ) regret attainable by no-regret learners with recency
bias [SALS15], and the O(T 1/6 ) bound that was recently shown for Optimistic
Hedge in the special case of two-player games [CP20]. A corollary of our bound is
that Optimistic Hedge converges to coarse correlated equilibrium in general games
at a rate of Õ T1 .

1

Introduction

Online learning has a long history that is intimately related to the development of game theory,
convex optimization, and machine learning. One of its earliest instantiations can be traced to Brown’s
proposal [Bro49] of fictitious play as a method to solve two-player zero-sum games. Indeed, as shown
by [Rob51], when the players of (zero-sum) matrix game use fictitious play to iteratively update their
actions in response to each other’s history of play, the resulting dynamics converge in the following
sense: the product of the empirical distributions of strategies for each player converges to the set
of Nash equilibria in the game, though the rate of convergence is now known to be exponentially
slow [DP14]. Moreover, such convergence to Nash equilibria fails in non-zero-sum games [Sha64].
The slow convergence of fictitious play to Nash equilibria in zero-sum matrix games and nonconvergence in general-sum games can be mitigated by appealing to the pioneering works [Bla54,
Han57] and the ensuing literature on no-regret learning [CBL06]. It is known that if both players of a
zero-sum matrix game experience regret that is at most "(T ), the product of the players’ empirical
distributions of strategies is an O("(T )/T )-approximate Nash equilibrium. More generally, if each
player of a general-sum, multi-player game experiences regret that is at most "(T ), the empirical
distribution of joint strategies converges to a coarse correlated equilibrium1 of the game, at a rate
of O("(T )/T ). Importantly, a multitude of online learning algorithms, such as p
the celebrated Hedge
and Follow-The-Perturbed-Leader algorithms, guarantee adversarialpregret O( T ) [CBL06]. Thus,
when such algorithms are employed by all players in a game, their O( T ) regret impliespconvergence
to coarse correlated equilibria (and Nash equilibria of matrix games) at a rate of O(1/ T ).
p
While standard no-regret learners guarantee O( T ) regret for each player in a game, the players
can do better by employing specialized no-regret learning procedures. Indeed, it was established
by [DDK11] that there exists a somewhat complex no-regret learner based on Nesterov’s excessive gap
technique [Nes05], which guarantees O(log T ) regret to each player of a two-player zero-sum game.
1
In general-sum games, it is typical to focus on proving convergence rates for weaker types of equilibrium than
Nash, such as coarse correlated equilibria, since finding Nash equilibria is PPAD-complete [DGP06, CDT09].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

