Analytic Insights into Structure and Rank of
Neural Network Hessian Maps
Sidak Pal Singh∗ a,b , Gregor Bachmann∗ a and Thomas Hofmanna,b
b

a
ETH Zürich
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems

Abstract
The Hessian of a neural network captures parameter interactions through secondorder derivatives of the loss. It is a fundamental object of study, closely tied to
various problems in deep learning, including model design, optimization, and
generalization. Most prior work has been empirical, typically focusing on low-rank
approximations and heuristics that are blind to the network structure. In contrast,
we develop theoretical tools to analyze the range of the Hessian map, which provide
us with a precise understanding of its rank deficiency and the structural reasons
behind it. This yields exact formulas and tight upper bounds for the Hessian
rank of deep linear networks — allowing for an elegant interpretation in terms
of rank deficiency. Moreover, we demonstrate that our bounds remain faithful
as an estimate of the numerical Hessian rank, for a larger class of models such
as rectified and hyperbolic tangent networks. Further, we also investigate the
implications of model architecture (e.g. width, depth, bias) on the rank deficiency.
Overall, our work provides novel insights into the source and extent of redundancy
in overparameterized neural networks. 1

1

Introduction

Since the very infancy of neural networks, the Hessian matrix has been a central object of study.
This is because the Hessian captures pairwise interactions of parameters via second-order derivatives
of the loss function. As a result, the Hessian was productively employed, for instance, in (quasiNewton) optimization methods [1, 2], model design and pruning [3–5], generalization [6], network
calibration [7], automatically tuning hyper-parameters [8]. But, from the outset the main practical
challenge has been its size, scaling quadratically with the model dimensionality. This makes the
problem severe for today’s DNNs which have millions or even billions of parameters [9, 10].
Consequently, most prior work has focused on designing scalable Hessian approximations, which
either take the route of Hessian-vector products (R-operator) [11–13] or employ positive definite
approximations by appealing to the Fisher information matrix. Additional approximations — without
exception — are needed on top, such as diagonal approximations [3, 14] in the former or K-FAC [15–
17], restricted to layerwise or arbitrary blocks on the diagonal [18–20], in the latter.
∗

Detailed list of contributions are: Sidak first discovered that the Hessian rank formula, in an early form,
holds experimentally to high fidelity, thus kick-starting the project. Sidak came up with the proof technique and
proved Theorems 3, 5, 9, 12. Sidak wrote essentially the entire paper and noted the rank-deficiency interpretation.
Gregor proved Lemma 8, assisted in a part of Theorem 3, empirically observed the eventual formula for the
Hessian rank, and essentially ran all the experiments for the final submission and made the corresponding figures.
Correspondence to sidak.singh@inf.ethz.ch.
1
The most recent version of our paper can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.16225 and the
code corresponding to the experiments is located at https://github.com/dalab/hessian-rank.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

