Estimating Multi-cause Treatment Effects via
Single-cause Perturbation

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zhaozhi.qian@maths.cam.ac.uk

Alicia Curth
University of Cambridge
amc253@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
UCLA
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Most existing methods for conditional average treatment effect estimation are
designed to estimate the effect of a single cause — only one variable can be
intervened on at one time. However, many applications involve simultaneous
intervention on multiple variables, which leads to multi-cause treatment effect
problems. The multi-cause problem is challenging because one needs to overcome
the confounding bias for a large number of treatment groups, each with a different
cause combination. The combinatorial nature of the problem also leads to severe
data scarcity — we only observe one factual outcome out of many potential outcomes. In this work, we propose Single-cause Perturbation (SCP), a novel two-step
procedure to estimate the multi-cause treatment effect. SCP starts by augmenting
the observational dataset with the estimated potential outcomes under single-cause
interventions. It then performs covariate adjustment on the augmented dataset to
obtain the estimator. SCP is agnostic to the exact choice of algorithm in either step.
We show formally that the procedure is valid under standard assumptions in causal
inference. We demonstrate the performance gain of SCP on extensive synthetic
and semi-synthetic experiments.

1

Introduction

Estimating treatment effects from observational data is a central problem in causal inference and has
many applications such as precision medicine [11]. In this work, we focus on estimating conditional
average treatment effects (CATE) to reflect the heterogeneity within a population [1]. The vast
majority of the CATE estimation methods consider the single-cause setting, where only one variable
can be intervened on, e.g. the decision to give (or not to give) a particular drug. However, in many
applications it is necessary to intervene on multiple variables simultaneously to achieve the desired
outcome (the multi-cause setting). For example, multiple drugs are needed to treat patients with
comorbid chronic diseases or systemic diseases such as cancer [21]. However, finding the best
drug combination for each patient is very challenging and the current clinical practice is clearly
sub-optimal [30]; studies have shown that nearly 50% of the elderly population in developed countries
take one or more drugs that are not medically necessary [39]. Similar examples are abundant in the
medical literature and beyond (Appendix A.5), which calls for a new methodology to estimate the
combined effect of multiple causes (drugs), a challenge we undertake in this work.
We make a distinction between the terminology cause and treatment. We refer to a cause as an atomic
variable that can be intervened on, and a treatment as a configuration of all causes. Therefore, if the
problem involves K causes and each cause is a binary variable, there will be 2K possible treatments.
The key objective of causal inference is to overcome the confounding bias in treatment assignment.
This is challenging in the multi-cause setting because a large number of treatment groups need to be
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

