Bayesian decision-making under misspecified priors
with applications to meta-learning

Max Simchowitz∗
Christopher Tosh†
Akshay Krishnamurthy‡
Daniel Hsu†
§
‡
Thodoris Lykouris
Miroslav Dudík
Robert Schapire‡

Abstract
Thompson sampling and other Bayesian sequential decision-making algorithms
are among the most popular approaches to tackle explore/exploit trade-offs in (contextual) bandits. The choice of prior in these algorithms offers flexibility to encode
domain knowledge but can also lead to poor performance when misspecified. In
this paper, we demonstrate that performance degrades gracefully with misspecification. We prove that the expected reward accrued by Thompson sampling (TS) with
a misspecified prior differs by at most Õ(H 2 ϵ) from TS with a well-specified prior,
where ϵ is the total-variation distance between priors and H is the learning horizon.
Our bound does not require the prior to have any parametric form. For priors with
bounded support, our bound is independent of the cardinality or structure of the
action space, and we show that it is tight up to universal constants in the worst case.
Building on our sensitivity analysis, we establish generic PAC guarantees for algorithms in the recently studied Bayesian meta-learning setting and derive corollaries
for various families of priors. Our results generalize along two axes: (1) they apply
to a broader family of Bayesian decision-making algorithms, including a MonteCarlo implementation of the knowledge gradient algorithm (KG), and (2) they
apply to Bayesian POMDPs, the most general Bayesian decision-making setting,
encompassing contextual bandits as a special case. Through numerical simulations, we illustrate how prior misspecification and the deployment of one-step
look-ahead (as in KG) can impact the convergence of meta-learning in multi-armed
and contextual bandits with structured and correlated priors.

1

Introduction

Bayesian decision-making algorithms are widely popular, due to both strong empirical performance
and the flexibility afforded by incorporating inductive biases and domain knowledge through priors. However, in practical applications, any chosen prior is at best an approximation of the true
environment in which the algorithm is deployed. This raises a critical question:
How sensitive are Bayesian decision-making algorithms to prior misspecification?
For decision-making problems with a very large horizon, it suffices that the misspecified prior places
a vanishingly small probability mass on the ground truth environment; this condition is referred to
informally as a “grain of truth.” This is because, in the large-horizon limit, Bayesian algorithms (like
many non-Bayesian methods) should converge to the optimal policy.
∗

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, msimchow@mit.edu
Columbia University
‡
Microsoft Research NYC
§
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

