A universal probabilistic spike count model reveals
ongoing modulation of neural variability

David Liu
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
dl543@cam.ac.uk

Máté Lengyel
Department of Engineering Department of Cognitive Science
University of Cambridge
Central European University
m.lengyel@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural responses are variable: even under identical experimental conditions, single
neuron and population responses typically differ from trial to trial and across time.
Recent work has demonstrated that this variability has predictable structure, can
be modulated by sensory input and behaviour, and bears critical signatures of the
underlying network dynamics and computations. However, current methods for
characterising neural variability are primarily geared towards sensory coding in the
laboratory: they require trials with repeatable experimental stimuli and behavioural
covariates. In addition, they make strong assumptions about the parametric form of
variability, rely on assumption-free but data-inefficient histogram-based approaches,
or are altogether ill-suited for capturing variability modulation by covariates. Here
we present a universal probabilistic spike count model that eliminates these shortcomings. Our method builds on sparse Gaussian processes and can model arbitrary
spike count distributions (SCDs) with flexible dependence on observed as well as
latent covariates, using scalable variational inference to jointly infer the covariateto-SCD mappings and latent trajectories in a data efficient way. Without requiring
repeatable trials, it can flexibly capture covariate-dependent joint SCDs, and provide interpretable latent causes underlying the statistical dependencies between
neurons. We apply the model to recordings from a canonical non-sensory neural
population: head direction cells in the mouse. We find that variability in these
cells defies a simple parametric relationship with mean spike count as assumed in
standard models, its modulation by external covariates can be comparably strong
to that of the mean firing rate, and slow low-dimensional latent factors explain
away neural correlations. Our approach paves the way to understanding the mechanisms and computations underlying neural variability under naturalistic conditions,
beyond the realm of sensory coding with repeatable stimuli.

1

Introduction

Classical analyses of neural coding are based on mean spike counts or neural firing rates. Indeed,
some of the most paradigmatic examples of the neural code were discovered by regressing neural
firing rates to particular sensory stimuli [1, 2] or behavioural covariates [3, 4, 5, 6] to characterize their
tuning properties. However, neural spiking is generally not regular. Recordings from many cortical
areas show significantly different activity patterns within and across identical trials [7], despite fixing
experimentally controlled variables. This irregularity is also seen in continual neural recordings
without trial structure [8]. The resulting variability has classically been characterised as ‘Poisson’,
with a Fano factor (variance to mean ratio) of one [9], but experimental data also often exhibits
significantly more [10, 8, 11, 12] and sometimes less [13, 14] variability, respectively referred to
as over- or underdispersion. Moreover, experimental studies have revealed that neural variability
generally depends on stimulus input and behaviour [15, 16, 17, 18], and exhibits structured shared
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

