Multilingual Pre-training
with Universal Dependency Learning
Kailai Sun† , Zuchao Li† , Hai Zhao∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{kaishu2.0,charlee}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The pre-trained language model (PrLM) demonstrates domination in downstream
natural language processing tasks, in which multilingual PrLM takes advantage of
language universality to alleviate the issue of limited resources for low-resource
languages. Despite its successes, the performance of multilingual PrLM is still unsatisfactory, when multilingual PrLMs only focus on plain text and ignore obvious
universal linguistic structure clues. Existing PrLMs have shown that monolingual
linguistic structure knowledge may bring about better performance. Thus we propose a novel multilingual PrLM that supports both explicit universal dependency
parsing and implicit language modeling. Syntax in terms of universal dependency
parse serves as not only pre-training objective but also learned representation in
our model, which brings unprecedented PrLM interpretability and convenience
in downstream task use. Our model outperforms two popular multilingual PrLM,
multilingual-BERT and XLM-R, on cross-lingual natural language understanding
(NLU) benchmarks and linguistic structure parsing datasets, demonstrating the
effectiveness and stronger cross-lingual modeling capabilities of our approach.

1

Introduction

The pre-trained language model (PrLM) such as BERT [1] and many kinds of its variants [2, 3, 4]
have proved their effectiveness in many downstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks including semantic textual similarity [5], question answering [6], sentiment classiﬁcation [7], linguistic structure [4, 8] and so on. Most of these PrLM are aimed at languages that with a large amount
of available linguistic resources and are widely used, such as English. However, it is not realistic to
train an individual PrLM for all languages, especially for those low-resource languages. As a result,
several multilingual PrLMs which take advantage of language universality have been published and
shown good cross-lingual performance on several NLP tasks.
Despite its successes, the unsupervised method typically used by multilingual PrLMs makes crosslingual transfer inefﬁciency and keeps the learning still challenging. Improvement can be made by
adding explicit cross-lingual signals including bitext (XLM) [9] and word translation pairs from a
dictionary [10]. This suggests that the effectiveness of multilingual PrLM can be further improved
by integrating explicit universal linguistic characteristics. Existing PrLMs [11, 12] have tried to
incorporate monolingual linguistic structure knowledge to improve the performance across multiple linguistics tasks by Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [13]. However, the combination of universal
∗
Corresponding author. † These authors made equal contribution. This work was supported by Key Projects
of National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011), Project from Chinese National
Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Security.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

