Self-Paced Contrastive Learning for Semi-supervised
Medical Image Segmentation with Meta-labels

Jizong Peng∗
ETS Montreal
jizong.peng.1@etsmtl.net

Ping Wang
ETS Montreal
ping.wang.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

Christian Desrosiers
ETS Montreal
christian.desrosiers@etsmtl.ca

Marco Pedersoli
ETS Montreal
marco.pedersoli@etsmtl.ca

Abstract
The contrastive pre-training of a recognition model on a large dataset of unlabeled
data often boosts the model’s performance on downstream tasks like image classification. However, in domains such as medical imaging, collecting unlabeled data
can be challenging and expensive. In this work, we consider the task of medical
image segmentation and adapt contrastive learning with meta-label annotations to
scenarios where no additional unlabeled data is available. Meta-labels, such as the
location of a 2D slice in a 3D MRI scan, often come for free during the acquisition
process. We use these meta-labels to pre-train the image encoder, as well as in a
semi-supervised learning step that leverages a reduced set of annotated data. A
self-paced learning strategy exploiting the weak annotations is proposed to further
help the learning process and discriminate useful labels from noise. Results on five
medical image segmentation datasets show that our approach: i) highly boosts the
performance of a model trained on a few scans, ii) outperforms previous contrastive
and semi-supervised approaches, and iii) reaches close to the performance of a
model trained on the full data.

1

Introduction

Since the emergence of deep learning [26], there has been an active debate on the importance
of pre-training neural networks. Precursor works [17] showed that pre-training a convolutional
neural network with an unsupervised task (e.g., denoising autoencoders [49]) could lead to a better
performance in the final supervised task. As the amount of labeled training data increased, thanks
to large datasets like ImageNet [13], it was however found that pre-training could actually hinder
performance [38]. This makes sense in light of recent studies showing, for instance, that symmetries
in large networks induce many equivalent local minima [16, 35, 47] in which a pre-trained model
can get stuck. Recently, contrastive learning has renewed the interest in unsupervised pre-training
[37]. Several works [8, 10, 11, 20, 62] have found that pre-training a model with a contrastive loss
can improve its performance on a subsequent supervised training task, often outperforming a network
with supervised pre-training on ImageNet. While this has reopened the debate on the benefit of
pre-training, it offers little help for domains where data is scarce such as medical imaging. In medical
imaging, not only are labels expensive since they come from highly-trained experts like radiologists,
but images are also hard to obtain due to the need for costly equipment (e.g., MRI or CT scanner)
and privacy regulations.
Over the last years, a breadth of semi-supervised learning approaches have been proposed for
medical image segmentation, including methods based on attention [32], adversarial learning [60],
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

