Dynamic Grained Encoder for Vision Transformers

Lin Song1∗ Songyang Zhang2,4,5∗ Songtao Liu3 Zeming Li3 Xuming He2
Hongbin Sun1† Jian Sun3 Nanning Zheng1
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 ShanghaiTech University
3
Megvii Inc. (Face++) 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
stevengrove@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, sy.zhangbuaa@gmail.com,
liusongtao@megvii.com, hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn,
{hsun, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {lizeming, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
Transformers, the de-facto standard for language modeling, have been recently
applied for vision tasks. This paper introduces sparse queries for vision transformers to exploit the intrinsic spatial redundancy of natural images and save
computational costs. Specifically, we propose a Dynamic Grained Encoder for
vision transformers, which can adaptively assign a suitable number of queries to
each spatial region. Thus it achieves a fine-grained representation in discriminative
regions while keeping high efficiency. Besides, the dynamic grained encoder is
compatible with most vision transformer frameworks. Without bells and whistles,
our encoder allows the state-of-the-art vision transformers to reduce computational complexity by 40%-60% while maintaining comparable performance on
image classification. Extensive experiments on object detection and segmentation further demonstrate the generalizability of our approach. Code is available
at https://github.com/StevenGrove/vtpack.

1

Introduction

Following the evolution of network architectures in natural language processing (NLP), Vision
Transformers [1–5] have recently attracted increasing research attention and demonstrated promising
results on several vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection, and other pixel-level
tasks. Vision transformers are notable for modeling long-range dependencies and introducing less
inductive bias, considered to be a solid alternative to CNNs for vision tasks.
One of the eminent obstacles for vision transformers is the high computational cost. Vision tasks
typically require high-resolution image features to obtain detail and structure representation, which
is critical for pixel-level tasks [6–10]. However, since the encoders in vision transformers need to
establish pairwise relationships, high-resolution features could impose unacceptable computational
and memory costs. Therefore, similar to the efficient transformers [11–13] in NLP, many variants [2–
4] of vision transformers are proposed to perform sparse self-attentions with dense queries and sparse
key-value pairs based on fixed pattern or heuristic rules.
In this paper, we notice that different from natural language, natural images involve much spatial
redundancy, especially in flat or low-texture regions [14–18]. This could enable the image features to
have a low resolution in some regions while maintaining similar representational capabilities.
To verify the spatial redundancy in vision transformers, we give an empirical analysis for DeiT [19]
on ImageNet [20] classification dataset (the details refer to Sec. 3.1). It demonstrates the existence
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work was done in Megvii Research.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

