Optimality of variational inference for stochastic
block model with missing links
Solenne Gaucher
Département de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
solenne.gaucher@math.u-psud.fr
Olga Klopp
ESSEC Business School, Cergy, France
CREST, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France
kloppolga@math.cnrs.fr

Abstract
Variational methods are extremely popular in the analysis of network data. Statistical guarantees obtained for these methods typically provide asymptotic normality
for the problem of estimation of global model parameters under the stochastic
block model. In the present work, we consider the case of networks with missing
links that is important in application and show that the variational approximation
to the maximum likelihood estimator converges at the minimax rate. This provides
the first minimax optimal and tractable estimator for the problem of parameter
estimation for the stochastic block model with missing links. We complement our
results with numerical studies of simulated and real networks, which confirm the
advantages of this estimator over current methods.

1

Introduction

The analysis of network data poses both computational and theoretical challenges. Most results
obtained in the literature concentrate on the stochastic block model (SBM) which is known to be a
good proxy for more general models, such as the inhomogeneous random graph model, [35]. Recently,
variational methods ([28, 49]) have attracted considerable attention as they offer computationally
tractable algorithms often combined with theoretical guarantees. Theoretical results that one can find
for such variational methods provide asymptotic normality rates for parameter estimates of stochastic
block data. For example, consistency has been shown for profile likelihood maximization [8] and
variational approximation to the maximum likelihood estimator [13], [7]. These results have been
extended to the case of dynamic stochastic block model [34] and sampled data [48]. These work focus
on parameter estimation, as in [44] and [53], who establish the minimax optimality of variational
methods in a large class of models (which does however not include the stochastic block model).
Variational inference has also been successfully applied to the problem of community detection, see,
e.g., [3, 54, 26, 45]. In particular, the authors of [54] show that an iterative Batch Coordinate Ascent
Variational Inference algorithm designed for the two-parameters, assortative stochastic block model
achieves statistical optimality for community detection problem. Note that this algorithm cannot be
extended to the more general stochastic block model considered here.
In parallel with this line of work, the problem of statistical estimation of model parameters, in
particular, the question of minimax optimal convergence rates, has been actively studied in the
statistical community. In the case of dense graphs, a pioneering paper [17] shows that, for the
problem of estimating the matrix of connection probabilities, the least square estimator is minimax
optimal and [18] provides optimal rate for Bayes estimation. For the more challenging case of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

