Lossy Compression for Lossless Prediction

Yann Dubois
Vector Institute
yanndubois96@gmail.com

Benjamin Bloem-Reddy
The University of British Columbia
benbr@stat.ubc.ca

Karen Ullrich
Facebook AI Research
karenu@fb.com

Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Most data is automatically collected and only ever “seen” by algorithms. Yet, data
compressors preserve perceptual fidelity rather than just the information needed by
algorithms performing downstream tasks. In this paper, we characterize the bit-rate
required to ensure high performance on all predictive tasks that are invariant under a
set of transformations, such as data augmentations. Based on our theory, we design
unsupervised objectives for training neural compressors. Using these objectives,
we train a generic image compressor that achieves substantial rate savings (more
than 1000× on ImageNet) compared to JPEG on 8 datasets, without decreasing
downstream classification performance.

1

Introduction

Progress in important areas requires processing huge amounts of data. For climate prediction, models
are still data-limited [1], despite the Natl. Center for Computational Sciences storing 32 million
gigabytes (GB) of climate data [2]. For autonomous driving, capturing a realistic range of rare events
with current methods requires around 3 trillion GB of data.1 At these scales, data are only processed
by task-specific algorithms, and storing data in human-readable formats can be prohibitive. We need
compressors that retain only the information needed for algorithmic execution of downstream tasks.
Existing lossy compressors are not up to the challenge, because they aim to reconstruct the data for human perception [5–10]. However, much of perceptual
information is not needed to perform the tasks that
we care about. Consider classifying images, which
can require about 1 MB to store. Classification is typically invariant under small image transformations,
such as rescalings or rotations, and could instead be
performed using a representation that discards such
information (see Fig. 1). The amount of unnecessary
perceptual information is likely substantial, as illustrated by the fact that typical image classification can
be performed using a detailed caption, which requires
only about 1 kB to store (1000× fewer bits).

Source

Standard rec.

Our rec.

Figure 1: Our unsupervised coder improves
compression by only keeping information necessary for typical tasks. (left) source augmented MNIST digit; (center) a neural perceptual compressor achieves 130 bit-rate; (right)
our invariant compressor achieves 48 bit-rate.

1

Kalra and Paddock [3] estimated that autonomous vehicles would have to drive hundreds of billions of miles
to demonstrate reliability in rare events. At 1 TB / hour [4] and 30 miles / hour, this is 3e12 GB.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

