Effective Meta-Regularization by Kernelized
Proximal Regularization

Weisen Jiang1, 2 , James T. Kwok2 , Yu Zhang1, 3

∗

1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory

{wjiangar, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk, yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of meta-learning, which has proved to be advantageous to
accelerate learning new tasks with a few samples. The recent approaches based on
deep kernels achieve the state-of-the-art performance. However, the regularizers in
their base learners are not learnable. In this paper, we propose an algorithm called
MetaProx to learn a proximal regularizer for the base learner. We theoretically
establish the convergence of MetaProx. Experimental results confirm the advantage
of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Humans, by leveraging prior knowledge and experience, can easily learn new tasks from a handful
of examples. In contrast, deep networks are data-hungry, and a large number of training samples
are required to avoid overfitting. To reduce the labor-intensive and time-consuming process of data
labeling, meta-learning (or learning to learn) [3, 37] aims to exact meta-knowledge from seen tasks to
accelerate learning on unseen tasks. Recently, meta-learning has been receiving increasing attention
due to its diverse successful applications in few-shot learning [41, 12, 39, 35], hyperparameter
optimization [14], neural architecture search [24, 44], and reinforcement learning [29].
Many meta-learning algorithms operate on two levels. A base learner learns task-specific models in
the inner loop, and a meta-learner learns the meta-parameter in the outer loop. A popular class of
algorithms is based on meta-initialization [12, 25, 11, 38], such as the well-known MAML [12]. It
learns a model initialization such that a good model for an unseen task can be learned from limited
samples by a few gradient updates. However, computing the meta-gradient requires back-propagating
through the entire inner optimization path, which is infeasible for large models and/or there are many
gradient steps. During testing, it is common for MAML’s base learner to perform many gradient steps
to seek a more accurate solution [12]. However, for regression using a linear base learner and square
loss, we will show that though the meta-learner can converge to the optimal meta-initialization, the
base learner may overfit the training data at meta-testing.
Another class of meta-learning algorithms is based on meta-regularization [28, 43, 7, 8, 9], in which
the base learner learns the task-specific model by minimizing the loss with a proximal regularizer
(a biased regularizer from the meta-parameter). Denevi et al. [7] uses a linear model with efficient
closed-form solution for the base learner. However, extending to nonlinear base learners requires
computing the meta-gradient using matrix inversion, which can be infeasible for deep networks [28].
To introduce nonlinearity to the base learner, a recent approach is to make use of the kernel trick.
For example, R2D2 [4] and MetaOptNet [22] use deep kernels [42] in meta-learning for few-shot
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

