Minibatch and Momentum Model-based Methods for
Stochastic Weakly Convex Optimization

Qi Deng1

Wenzhi Gao2

School of Information Management and Engineering
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
1

qideng@sufe.edu.cn

2

gwz@163.shufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Stochastic model-based methods have received increasing attention lately due
to their appealing robustness to the stepsize selection and provable efficiency
guarantee. We make two important extensions for improving model-based methods
on stochastic weakly convex optimization. First, we propose new minibatch modelbased methods by involving a set of samples to approximate the model function in
each iteration. For the first time, we show that stochastic algorithms achieve linear
speedup over the batch size even for non-smooth and non-convex (particularly,
weakly convex) problems. To this end, we develop a novel sensitivity analysis of
the proximal mapping involved in each algorithm iteration. Our analysis appears
to be of independent interests in more general settings. Second, motivated by the
success of momentum stochastic gradient descent, we propose a new stochastic
extrapolated model-based method, greatly extending the classic Polyak momentum
technique to a wider class of stochastic algorithms for weakly convex optimization.
The rate of convergence to some natural stationarity condition is established over a
fairly flexible range of extrapolation terms.
While mainly focusing on weakly convex optimization, we also extend our work
to convex optimization. We apply the minibatch and extrapolated model-based
methods to stochastic convex optimization, for which we provide a new complexity
bound and promising linear speedup in batch size. Moreover, an accelerated modelbased method based on Nesterov’s momentum is presented, for which we establish
an optimal complexity bound for reaching optimality.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested in the following stochastic optimization problem:


min f (x) = Eξ∼Ξ f (x, ξ)
x∈X

(1)

where f (·, ξ) stands for the loss function, sample ξ follows certain distribution Ξ, and X is a closed
convex set. We assume that f (·, ξ) is weakly convex, namely, the sum of f (x, ξ) and a quadratic
function λ2 kxk2 is convex (λ > 0). This type of non-smooth non-convex functions can be found
in a variety of machine learning applications, such as phase retrieval, robust PCA and low rank
decomposition [8]. To solve problem (1), we consider the stochastic model-based method (SMOD,
[14, 9, 1]), which comprises a large class of stochastic algorithms (including stochastic (sub)gradient
descent, proximal point, among others). Recent work [14, 9] show that SMOD exhibits promising
convergence property: both asymptotic convergence and rates of convergence to certain stationarity
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

