Bayesian Bellman Operators
Matthew Fellows⇤ Kristian Hartikainen Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Abstract
We introduce a novel perspective on Bayesian reinforcement learning (RL);
whereas existing approaches infer a posterior over the transition distribution or
Q-function, we characterise the uncertainty in the Bellman operator. Our Bayesian
Bellman operator (BBO) framework is motivated by the insight that when bootstrapping is introduced, model-free approaches actually infer a posterior over Bellman
operators, not value functions. In this paper, we use BBO to provide a rigorous
theoretical analysis of model-free Bayesian RL to better understand its relationship
to established frequentist RL methodologies. We prove that Bayesian solutions
are consistent with frequentist RL solutions, even when approximate inference is
used, and derive conditions for which convergence properties hold. Empirically, we
demonstrate that algorithms derived from the BBO framework have sophisticated
deep exploration properties that enable them to solve continuous control tasks at
which state-of-the-art regularised actor-critic algorithms fail catastrophically.

1

Introduction

A Bayesian approach to reinforcement learning (RL) characterises uncertainty in the Markov decision
process (MDP) via a posterior [35, 78]. A great advantage of Bayesian RL is that it offers a natural
and elegant solution to the exploration/exploitation problem, allowing the agent to explore to reduce
uncertainty in the MDP, but only to the extent that exploratory actions lead to greater expected return;
unlike in heuristic strategies such as "-greedy and Boltzmann sampling, the agent does not waste
samples trying actions that it has already established are suboptimal, leading to greater sampling
efficiency. Elementary decision theory shows that the only admissible decision rules are Bayesian
[22] because a non-Bayesian decision can always be improved upon by a Bayesian agent [24]. In
addition, pre-existing domain knowledge can be formally incorporated by specifying priors.
In model-free Bayesian RL, a posterior is inferred over the Q-function by treating samples from the
MDP as stationary labels for Bayesian regression. A major theoretical issue with existing model-free
Bayesian RL approaches is their reliance on bootstrapping using a Q-function approximator, as
samples from the exact Q-function are impractical to obtain. This introduces error as the samples
are no long estimates of a Q-function and their dependence on the approximation is not accounted
for. It is unclear what posterior, if any, these methods are inferring and how it relates to the RL
problem.
In this paper, we introduce Bayesian Bellman Operators (BBO), a novel model-free Bayesian RL
framework that addresses this issue and facilitates a theoretical exposition of the relationship between
model-free Bayesian and frequentist RL approaches. Using our framework, we demonstrate that,
by bootstrapping, model-free Bayesian RL infers a posterior over Bellman operators. For our main
contribution, we prove that the BBO posterior concentrates on the true Bellman operator (or the closest
representation in our function space of Bellman operators). Hence a Bayesian method using the BBO
posterior is consistent with the equivalent frequentist solution in the true MDP. We derive convergent
gradient-based approaches for Bayesian policy evaluation and uncertainty estimation. Remarkably,
our consistency and convergence results still hold when approximate inference is used.
⇤

Correspondence to matthew.fellows@cs.ox.ac.uk

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

