Unintended Selection: Persistent Qualification Rate
Disparities and Interventions

Reilly Raab
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
reilly@ucsc.edu

Yang Liu
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Realistically—and equitably—modeling the dynamics of group-level disparities
in machine learning remains an open problem. In particular, we desire models
that do not suppose inherent differences between artificial groups of people—but
rather endogenize disparities by appeal to unequal initial conditions of insular
subpopulations. In this paper, agents each have a real-valued feature X (e.g., credit
score) informed by a “true” binary label Y representing qualification (e.g., for a
loan). Each agent alternately (1) receives a binary classification label Ŷ (e.g., loan
approval) from a Bayes-optimal machine learning classifier observing X and (2)
may update their qualification Y by imitating successful strategies (e.g., seek a
raise) within an isolated group G of agents to which they belong. We consider
the disparity of qualification rates Pr(Y = 1) between different groups and how
this disparity changes subject to a sequence of Bayes-optimal classifiers repeatedly
retrained on the global population. We model the evolving qualification rates
of each subpopulation (group) using the replicator equation, which derives from
a class of imitation processes. We show that differences in qualification rates
between subpopulations can persist indefinitely for a set of non-trivial equilibrium
states due to uniformed classifier deployments, even when groups are identical in
all aspects except initial qualification densities. We next simulate the effects of
commonly proposed fairness interventions on this dynamical system along with a
new feedback control mechanism capable of permanently eliminating group-level
qualification rate disparities. We conclude by discussing the limitations of our
model and findings and by outlining potential future work.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic prediction is increasingly used for socially consequential decisions and may determine
individual access to information, education, employment, credit, housing, medical treatment, freedom
from incarceration, or freedom from military targeting [1–5]. This situation raises technical challenges
and ethical concerns, particularly regarding the dynamics of systemic inequalities and attendant harms
to society [6–8]. Nonetheless, realistically—and equitably—modeling the dynamics of disparity in
machine learning remains an open problem.
Research historically considered the fairness of algorithmic predictions in terms of statistical
(in)consistencies [9] (e.g., across groups [10–16] or between similar individuals [10, 11]), preference guarantees [17–19], or causal considerations [19, 20] but ignored the response of a population
to new prediction policies. For instance, the proportions of potential loan applicants in each group
that will seek higher wages, falsify income, or forego application might change if banks use new
policies to approve or deny loans, possibly counteracting fair intent. We refer this class of fairness
definitions as normative present fairness.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

