Automatic Unsupervised Outlier Model Selection

Yue Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
zhaoy@cmu.edu

Ryan A. Rossi
Adobe Research
ryrossi@adobe.com

Leman Akoglu
Carnegie Mellon University
lakoglu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Given an unsupervised outlier detection task on a new dataset, how can we automatically select a good outlier detection algorithm and its hyperparameter(s)
(collectively called a model)? In this work, we tackle the unsupervised outlier
model selection (UOMS) problem, and propose M ETAOD, a principled, data-driven
approach to UOMS based on meta-learning. The UOMS problem is notoriously
challenging, as compared to model selection for classification and clustering, since
(i) model evaluation is infeasible due to the lack of hold-out data with labels,
and (ii) model comparison is infeasible due to the lack of a universal objective
function. M ETAOD capitalizes on the performances of a large body of detection
models on historical outlier detection benchmark datasets, and carries over this
prior experience to automatically select an effective model to be employed on a new
dataset without any labels, model evaluations or model comparisons. To capture
task similarity within our meta-learning framework, we introduce specialized metafeatures that quantify outlying characteristics of a dataset. Extensive experiments
show that selecting a model by M ETAOD significantly outperforms no model
selection (e.g. always using the same popular model or the ensemble of many) as
well as other meta-learning techniques that we tailored for UOMS. Moreover upon
(meta-)training, M ETAOD is extremely efficient at test time; selecting from a large
pool of 300+ models takes less than 1 second for a new task. We open-source1
M ETAOD and our meta-learning database for practical use and to foster further
research on the UOMS problem.

1

Introduction

The lack of a universal learning model that performs well on all problem instances is well recognized
[53]. Therefore, effort has been directed toward building a toolbox of various models and algorithms,
which has given rise to the problem of algorithm selection and hyperparameter tuning (i.e., model
selection). The same problem applies to outlier detection (OD); a long list of detectors has been
developed in the last decades [2], with no universal “winners” [8].
In supervised learning, model selection can be done via performance evaluation of each trained model
on labeled hold-out data. In contrast, unsupervised OD does not have access to any labels, nor is there
a universal objective function that could guide model selection (cf. clustering where a loss function
enables model comparison). Unsupervised model selection for OD is challenging exactly because
both model evaluation and comparison are not feasible—which renders any trial-and-error techniques
like grid search or iterative strategies like Bayesian hyperparameter optimization [57] inapplicable.
Consequently, there has been no principled work on unsupervised outlier model selection—rather,
the choice of a model for a new task (or dataset) remains “a black art”. A typical approach is to use
popular OD algorithms, like LOF [6] and iForest [31] (often with default hyperparameters) which are
shown to be competitive on average on many benchmark datasets. However, as noted earlier, none of
1

Code available at URL: https://github.com/yzhao062/UOMS

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

