Beyond Bandit Feedback
in Online Multiclass Classiﬁcation
Dirk van der Hoeven
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy

Federico Fusco
fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it
Dept. of Computer, Control
and Management Engineering
Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it
DSRC & Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy

Abstract
We study the problem of online multiclass classiﬁcation in a setting where the
learner’s feedback is determined by an arbitrary directed graph. While including
bandit feedback as a special case, feedback graphs allow a much richer set of applications, including ﬁltering and label efﬁcient classiﬁcation. We introduce G AP PLETRON , the ﬁrst online multiclass algorithm that works with arbitrary feedback
graphs. For this new algorithm, we prove surrogate regret bounds that hold, both
in expectation and with
√high probability, for a large class of surrogate losses. Our
bounds are of order B ρKT , where B is the diameter of the prediction space, K
is the number of classes, T is the time horizon, and ρ is the domination number
(a graph-theoretic parameter affecting the amount of exploration). In the full information case, we show that G APPLETRON achieves a constant surrogate
√
 2 regret
2
of order B K. We also prove a general lower bound of order max B K, T
showing that our upper bounds are not signiﬁcantly improvable. Experiments on
synthetic data show that for various feedback graphs our algorithm is competitive
against known baselines.

1

Introduction

In online multiclass classiﬁcation a learner interacts with an unknown environment in a sequence
of rounds. At each round t, the learner observes a feature vector xt ∈ Rd and outputs a prediction
yt′ for the label yt ∈ {1, . . . , K} associated with xt . If yt′ ̸= yt , then the learner is charged with
a mistake. Kakade et al. (2008) introduced the bandit version of online multiclass classiﬁcation,
where the only feedback received by the learner after each prediction is the loss 1[yt′ ̸= yt ]. Hence,
if a mistake is made at time t (and K > 2), the learner cannot uniquely identify the true label yt
based on the feedback information.
Although bandits are a canonical example of partial feedback, they fail to capture a number of
important practical scenarios of online classiﬁcation. Consider for example spam ﬁltering, where an
online learner is to classify emails as spam or non-spam based on their content. Whenever the learner
classiﬁes an email as legitimate, the recipient gets to see it, and can inform the learner whether the
email was correctly classiﬁed of not. However, when the email is classiﬁed as spam, the learner does
not get any feedback because the email is not checked by the recipient. Another example is label
efﬁcient multiclass classiﬁcation. Here, instead of making a prediction, the learner can ask a human
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

