HSVA: Hierarchical Semantic-Visual Adaptation for
Zero-Shot Learning

Shiming Chen† , Guo-Sen Xie‡ , Yang Liu§ , Qinmu Peng† , Baigui Sun§ ,
∗
Hao Li§ , Xinge You† , Ling Shao‡]
†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China
§
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
‡
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI (MBZUAI), UAE
]
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
{shimingchen,youxg}@hust.edu.cn

ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) tackles the unseen class recognition problem, transferring
semantic knowledge from seen classes to unseen ones. Typically, to guarantee
desirable knowledge transfer, a common (latent) space is adopted for associating
the visual and semantic domains in ZSL. However, existing common space learning
methods align the semantic and visual domains by merely mitigating distribution
disagreement through one-step adaptation. This strategy is usually ineffective
due to the heterogeneous nature of the feature representations in the two domains,
which intrinsically contain both distribution and structure variations. To address
this and advance ZSL, we propose a novel hierarchical semantic-visual adaptation
(HSVA) framework. Specifically, HSVA aligns the semantic and visual domains by
adopting a hierarchical two-step adaptation, i.e., structure adaptation and distribution adaptation. In the structure adaptation step, we take two task-specific encoders
to encode the source data (visual domain) and the target data (semantic domain)
into a structure-aligned common space. To this end, a supervised adversarial discrepancy (SAD) learning is proposed to adversarially minimize the discrepancy
between the predictions of two task-specific classifiers, thus making the visual and
semantic feature manifolds more closely aligned. In the distribution adaptation
step, we directly minimize the Wasserstein distance between the latent multivariate Gaussian distributions to align the visual and semantic distributions using a
common encoder. Finally, the structure and distribution adaptation are derived in a
unified framework under two partially-aligned variational autoencoders. Extensive
experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that HSVA achieves superior
performance on both conventional and generalized ZSL. The code is available at
https://github.com/shiming-chen/HSVA .

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, significant progress has been made in zero-shot learning (ZSL), which aims
to recognize new classes during learning by exploiting the intrinsic semantic relatedness between
seen and unseen categories [1, 2, 3]. Inspired by the way humans learn unknown concepts, sideinformation (e.g., attributes [4], word vectors [5], and sentences [6]) related to seen/unseen classes is
employed to guarantee knowledge transfer between the seen/unseen data. Common space learning is
one typical method for representing the relationship between the visual and semantic domains for
ZSL, which is key to dealing with the knowledge transfer [7]. However, existing common space
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

