Exploring Architectural Ingredients of Adversarially
Robust Deep Neural Networks

Hanxun Huang1 Yisen Wang2,3 Sarah Erfani1 Quanquan Gu4
James Bailey1 Xingjun Ma5†
1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
2
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
5
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. A
range of defense methods have been proposed to train adversarially robust DNNs,
among which adversarial training has demonstrated promising results. However,
despite preliminary understandings developed for adversarial training, it is still
not clear, from the architectural perspective, what configurations can lead to more
robust DNNs. In this paper, we address this gap via a comprehensive investigation
on the impact of network width and depth on the robustness of adversarially trained
DNNs. Specifically, we make the following key observations: 1) more parameters (higher model capacity) does not necessarily help adversarial robustness; 2)
reducing capacity at the last stage (the last group of blocks) of the network can
actually improve adversarial robustness; and 3) under the same parameter budget,
there exists an optimal architectural configuration for adversarial robustness. We
also provide a theoretical analysis explaning why such network configuration can
help robustness. These architectural insights can help design adversarially robust
DNNs. Code is available at https://github.com/HanxunH/RobustWRN.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming standard models for many real-world applications such
as image classification [1], object detection [2] and natural language processing [3]. However, a line
of research has shown that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples (attacks), which can be
easily crafted by slightly perturbing the input instance to maximize the model’s prediction error [4–6].
This vulnerability of DNNs has become a major concern for their deployment in security-critical
applications such as autonomous driving [7, 8] and medical diagnosis [9, 10].
A number of defense methods have been proposed to train adversarially robust DNNs [11–14], among
which adversarial training has demonstrated the most promising results [15–17]. Adversarial training
can be viewed as a type of data augmentation that trains DNNs on adversarial (instead of natural)
examples [15–19]. Based on adversarial training, a set of works have been proposed to understand its
learning and convergence behaviors, and the key factors for training adversarially robust DNNs. For
example, it has been found that adversarial training encourages the model to learn more robust or
compact features [20, 21], and it requires more data [22–25] or higher capacity models to gain more
robustness [15, 26]. While these understandings have motivated several improved defense methods,
it is still not clear, from an architectural perspective, what makes an adversarially robust DNN.
†

Correspondence to: Xingjun Ma (danxjma@gmail.com)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

