Test-Time Classifier Adjustment Module for
Model-Agnostic Domain Generalization

Yusuke Iwasawa
The University of Tokyo
iwasawa@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo
matsuo@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a new algorithm for domain generalization (DG), test-time
template adjuster (T3A), aiming to robustify a model to unknown distribution shift.
Unlike existing methods that focus on training phase, our method focuses test
phase, i.e., correcting its prediction by itself during test time. Specifically, T3A
adjusts a trained linear classifier (the last layer of deep neural networks) with the
following procedure: (1) compute a pseudo-prototype representation for each class
using online unlabeled data augmented by the base classifier trained in the source
domains, (2) and then classify each sample based on its distance to the pseudoprototypes. T3A is back-propagation-free and modifies only the linear layer;
therefore, the increase in computational cost during inference is negligible and
avoids the catastrophic failure might caused by stochastic optimization. Despite
its simplicity, T3A can leverage knowledge about the target domain by using
off-the-shelf test-time data and improve performance. We tested our method
on four domain generalization benchmarks, namely PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome,
and TerraIncognita, along with various backbone networks including ResNet18,
ResNet50, Big Transfer (BiT), Vision Transformers (ViT), and MLP-Mixer. The
results show T3A stably improves performance on unseen domains across choices
of backbone networks, and outperforms existing domain generalization methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks often fail to generalize to out-of-distribution samples. Accuracy suffers when
the model performs under conditions different to those of training, such as variations in light [8],
weather [51], object poses [2], textures [16], or object backgrounds [5]. Nevertheless, the model may
be deployed to different conditions in practical situations; thus, some countermeasures are needed.
Over the past decade, various studies have focused on training a generalizable model to unseen
domains given a dataset consisting of several source domains. This setting is usually denoted as
domain generalization (DG) [6, 61]. Domain generalization operates under the assumption that one
can improve robustness to domain shift by incorporating the structure common to multiple domains.
For example, domain-invariant feature learning constrains the representation to be invariant to domain
shifts [14, 45, 29]. Other methods use meta-learning [19] to learn how to regularize the model to
improve the robustness [28, 4, 31]. However, despite significant work on this front, machine learning
systems are still vulnerable to domain shifts even after using the above methods during training.
Notably, recent large-scale benchmarks [17] show that many approaches do not provide significant
improvement compared to simple supervised learning, i.e., empirical risk minimization (ERM), with
a proper and practical experimental setup. It suggests that the setup in its current state may be too
difficult, and a different approach might be needed.
This paper proposes a method of using additional off-the-shelf data in the DG setup, the unsupervised
data available at the test-time. Since no data about the target domain is available during training in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

