Support Recovery of Sparse Signals from a Mixture
of Linear Measurements
Venkata Gandikota
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13210
gandikota.venkata@gmail.com

Arya Mazumdar
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
arya@ucsd.edu

Soumyabrata Pal
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
soumyabratap@umass.edu

Abstract
Recovery of support of a sparse vector from simple measurements is a widelystudied problem, considered under the frameworks of compressed sensing, 1-bit
compressed sensing, and more general single index models. We consider generalizations of this problem: mixtures of linear regressions, and mixtures of linear
classifiers, where the goal is to recover supports of multiple sparse vectors using
only a small number of possibly noisy linear, and 1-bit measurements respectively.
The key challenge is that the measurements from different vectors are randomly
mixed. Both of these problems have also received attention recently. In mixtures of
linear classifiers, an observation corresponds to the side of the queried hyperplane
a random unknown vector lies in; whereas in mixtures of linear regressions we
observe the projection of a random unknown vector on the queried hyperplane. The
primary step in recovering the unknown vectors from the mixture is to first identify
the support of all the individual component vectors. In this work we study the
number of measurements sufficient for recovering the supports of all the component
vectors in a mixture in both these models. We provide algorithms that use a number
of measurements polynomial in k, log n and quasi-polynomial in `, to recover the
support of all the ` unknown vectors in the mixture with high probability when
each individual component is a k-sparse n-dimensional vector.

1

Introduction

In the support recovery problem, widely studied in the literature of compressed sensing [6, 2, 35], the
objective is to recover the support (positions of nonzero coordinates) of a sparse vector from minimal
number of (noisy) linear measurements. The support recovery problem is also extensively studied
under the 1-bit compressed sensing model where measurements are further quantized and just the
signs of the linear measurements are provided [22, 24, 1].
In a recent line of work that started with [46], a generalization of the sparse recovery problem is
considered [29, 31, 21, 11], where instead of one sparse vector, multiple unknown sparse vectors are
to be recovered. However any attempt to obtain a measurement (linear or 1-bit) from the vectors
results in a mixture model, where a vector from the unknown set is picked uniformly to generate the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

