XDO: A Double Oracle Algorithm for
Extensive-Form Games
Stephen McAleer
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
smcaleer@uci.edu

John Lanier
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
jblanier@uci.edu

Kevin A. Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
kevinwang@kevinwang.us

Pierre Baldi
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
pfbaldi@ics.uci.edu

Roy Fox
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
royf@uci.edu

Abstract
Policy Space Response Oracles (PSRO) is a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm for two-player zero-sum games that has been empirically shown to find
approximate Nash equilibria in large games. Although PSRO is guaranteed to
converge to an approximate Nash equilibrium and can handle continuous actions,
it may take an exponential number of iterations as the number of information
states (infostates) grows. We propose Extensive-Form Double Oracle (XDO), an
extensive-form double oracle algorithm for two-player zero-sum games that is guaranteed to converge to an approximate Nash equilibrium linearly in the number of
infostates. Unlike PSRO, which mixes best responses at the root of the game, XDO
mixes best responses at every infostate. We also introduce Neural XDO (NXDO),
where the best response is learned through deep RL. In tabular experiments on
Leduc poker, we find that XDO achieves an approximate Nash equilibrium in a
number of iterations an order of magnitude smaller than PSRO. Experiments on
a modified Leduc poker game and Oshi-Zumo show that tabular XDO achieves
a lower exploitability than CFR with the same amount of computation. We also
find that NXDO outperforms PSRO and NFSP on a sequential multidimensional
continuous-action game. NXDO is the first deep RL method that can find an
approximate Nash equilibrium in high-dimensional continuous-action sequential
games. Experiment code is available at https://github.com/indylab/nxdo.

1

Introduction

Policy Space Response Oracles (PSRO) (Lanctot et al., 2017) is a reinforcement learning (RL) method
for finding approximate Nash equilibria (NE) in large two-player zero-sum games. Methods based on
PSRO have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance on large imperfect-information two-player
zero-sum games such as Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019) and Stratego (McAleer et al., 2020). One
major benifit of PSRO versus other deep RL methods for two-player zero-sum games is that it is
naturally compatible with games that have continuous actions. The only other deep RL method
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

