Continuous Latent Process Flows
Ruizhi Deng1,2∗ Marcus A. Brubaker1,3,4 Greg Mori1,2 Andreas M. Lehrmann1
1
Borealis AI 2 Simon Fraser University 3 York University 4 Vector Institute

Abstract
Partial observations of continuous time-series dynamics at arbitrary time stamps
exist in many disciplines. Fitting this type of data using statistical models with continuous dynamics is not only promising at an intuitive level but also has practical
benefits, including the ability to generate continuous trajectories and to perform
inference on previously unseen time stamps. Despite exciting progress in this area,
the existing models still face challenges in terms of their representation power and
the quality of their variational approximations. We tackle these challenges with
continuous latent process flows (CLPF), a principled architecture decoding continuous latent processes into continuous observable processes using a time-dependent
normalizing flow driven by a stochastic differential equation. To optimize our
model using maximum likelihood, we propose a novel piecewise construction of a
variational posterior process and derive the corresponding variational lower bound
using importance weighting of trajectories. An ablation study demonstrates the
effectiveness of our contributions and comparisons to state-of-the-art baselines
show our model’s favourable performance on both synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Sparse and irregular observations of continuous dynamics are common in many areas of science,
including finance [15, 36], healthcare [16], and physics [30]. Time-series models driven by stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) provide an elegant framework for this challenging scenario and have
recently gained popularity in the machine learning community [11, 18, 24]. The SDEs are typically
implemented by neural networks with trainable parameters and the latent processes defined by the
SDEs are then decoded into an observable space with complex structure. Due to the lack of closedform transition densities for most SDEs, dedicated variational approximations have been developed
to maximize the observational log-likelihoods [2, 18, 24].
Despite the progress of existing works, challenges still remain for SDE-based models to be applied to
irregular time-series data. One major challenge is the model’s representation power. The continuoustime flow process (CTFP; [11]) uses a series of invertible mappings continuously indexed by time
to transform a simple Wiener process to a more complex stochastic process. The use of a simple
latent process and invertible transformations permits CTFP models to evaluate the exact likelihood of
observations on any time grid efficiently, but they also limit the set of stochastic processes that CTFP
can express to some specific form which can be obtained using Ito’s Lemma and excludes many
commonly seen stochastic processes. Another constraint of representation power in practice is the
Lipschitz property of transformations in the models. The latent SDE model proposed by Hasan et al.
[18] and CTFP both transform a latent stochastic process with constant variance to an observable one
using injective mappings. Due to the Lipschitz property existing in many invertible neural network
architectures, some processes that can be written as a non-Lipschitz transformation of a simple process,
like geometric Brownian motion, cannot be expressed by these models unless specific choices of
non-Lipschitz decoders are used. Apart from the model’s representation power, variational inference
is another challenge in training SDE-based models. The latent SDE model in the work of Li et al. [24]
∗

This work was done during an internship at Borealis AI. Correspondance to wsdmdeng@gmail.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

