On the Variance of the Fisher Information
for Deep Learning

Alexander Soen
The Australian National University
alexander.soen@anu.edu.au

Ke Sun
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia
The Australian National University
sunk@ieee.org

Abstract
In the realm of deep learning, the Fisher information matrix (FIM) gives novel
insights and useful tools to characterize the loss landscape, perform second-order
optimization, and build geometric learning theories. The exact FIM is either unavailable in closed form or too expensive to compute. In practice, it is almost
always estimated based on empirical samples. We investigate two such estimators
based on two equivalent representations of the FIM — both unbiased and consistent. Their estimation quality is naturally gauged by their variance given in closed
form. We analyze how the parametric structure of a deep neural network can affect the variance. The meaning of this variance measure and its upper bounds are
then discussed in the context of deep learning.

1

Introduction

The Fisher information is one of the most fundamental concepts in statistical machine learning.
Intuitively, it measures the amount of information carried by a single random observation when the
underlying model varies along certain directions in the parameter space: if such a variation does not
change the underlying model, then a corresponding observation contains zero (Fisher) information
and is non-informative regarding the varied parameter. Parameter estimation is impossible in this
case. Otherwise, if the variation signiﬁcantly changes the model and has large information, then
an observation is informative and the parameter estimation can be more efﬁcient as compared to
parameters with small Fisher information. In machine learning, this basic concept is useful for
deﬁning intrinsic structures of the parameter space, measuring model complexity, and performing
gradient-based optimization.
Given a statistical model that is speciﬁed by a parametric form p(z | θ) and a continuous domain
θ ∈ M, the Fisher information matrix (FIM) is a 2D tensor varying with θ ∈ M, given by


∂ℓ ∂ℓ
I(θ) = Ep(z | θ)
,
(1)
∂θ ∂θ ⊤
where Ep(z | θ) (·), or simply Ep (·) if the model p is clear from the context, denotes the expectation
w.r.t. p(z | θ), and ℓ := log p(z | θ) is the log-likelihood function. All vectors are column vectors
throughout this paper. Under weak conditions (see Lemma 5.3 in Lehmann and Casella [16]
 for the
univariate case), the FIM has the equivalent expression I(θ) = Ep(z | θ) −∂ 2 ℓ/∂θ∂θ ⊤ . Given
N i.i.d. observations z1 , . . . , zN , these two equivalent expressions of the FIM lead to two different
estimators


N 
N 
1 X ∂ℓi ∂ℓi
1 X
∂ 2 ℓi
Î1 (θ) =
and Î2 (θ) =
,
(2)
−
N i=1 ∂θ ∂θ ⊤
N i=1
∂θ∂θ ⊤
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

