Distilling Image Classifiers in Object Detectors
Shuxuan Guo1, 2

∗

Jose M. Alvarez2

Mathieu Salzmann1

1

CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
2
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA 95051, USA
shuxuan.guo@epfl.ch, josea@nvidia.com, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Knowledge distillation constitutes a simple yet effective way to improve the performance of a compact student network by exploiting the knowledge of a more
powerful teacher. Nevertheless, the knowledge distillation literature remains limited to the scenario where the student and the teacher tackle the same task. Here,
we investigate the problem of transferring knowledge not only across architectures
but also across tasks. To this end, we study the case of object detection and, instead
of following the standard detector-to-detector distillation approach, introduce a
classifier-to-detector knowledge transfer framework. In particular, we propose
strategies to exploit the classification teacher to improve both the detector’s recognition accuracy and localization performance. Our experiments on several detectors
with different backbones demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, allowing
us to outperform the state-of-the-art detector-to-detector distillation methods.

1

Introduction

Object detection plays a critical role in many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving
and video surveillance. While deep learning has achieved tremendous success in this task [25, 26, 31,
32, 40], the speed-accuracy trade-off of the resulting models remains a challenge. This is particularly
important for real-time prediction on embedded platforms, whose limited memory and computation
power impose strict constraints on the deep network architecture.
To address this, much progress has recently been made to obtain compact deep networks. Existing
methods include pruning [1, 2, 13, 22, 38] and quantization [7, 30, 44], both of which aim to reduce
the size of an initial deep architecture, as well as knowledge distillation, whose goal is to exploit
a deep teacher network to improve the training of a given compact student one. In this paper, we
introduce a knowledge distillation approach for object detection.
While early knowledge distillation techniques [18, 33, 36] focused on the task of image classification,
several attempts have nonetheless been made for object detection. To this end, existing techniques [5,
12, 39] typically leverage the fact that object detection frameworks consist of three main stages
depicted by Figure 1(a): A backbone to extract features; a neck to fuse the extracted features; and
heads to predict classes and bounding boxes. Knowledge distillation is then achieved using a teacher
with the same architecture as the student but a deeper and wider backbone, such as a Faster RCNN [32]
with ResNet152 [14] teacher for a Faster RCNN with ResNet50 student, thus facilitating knowledge
transfer at all three stages of the frameworks. To the best of our knowledge, [43] constitutes the only
exception to this strategy, demonstrating distillation across different detection frameworks, such as
from a RetinaNet [25] teacher to a RepPoints [40] student. This method, however, requires the teacher
and the student to rely on a similar detection strategy, i.e., both must be either one-stage detectors or
two-stage ones, and, more importantly, still follows a detector-to-detector approach to distillation.
∗

The work is done during an internship at NVIDIA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

