When Is Generalizable Reinforcement Learning
Tractable?
Yuanzhi Li
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Dhruv Malik
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Pradeep Ravikumar
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Agents trained by reinforcement learning (RL) often fail to generalize beyond the
environment they were trained in, even when presented with new scenarios that
seem similar to the training environment. We study the query complexity required
to train RL agents that generalize to multiple environments. Intuitively, tractable
generalization is only possible when the environments are similar or close in some
sense. To capture this, we introduce Weak Proximity, a natural structural condition
that requires the environments to have highly similar transition and reward functions
and share a policy providing optimal value. Despite such shared structure, we prove
that tractable generalization is impossible in the worst case. This holds even when
each individual environment can be efficiently solved to obtain an optimal linear
policy, and when the agent possesses a generative model. Our lower bound applies
to the more complex task of representation learning for efficient generalization
to multiple environments. On the positive side, we introduce Strong Proximity, a
strengthened condition which we prove is sufficient for efficient generalization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is the dominant paradigm for sequential decision making in machine
learning, and has achieved success in a variety of domains such as competitive gaming [33, 40] and
robotic control [21, 22]. Despite this success, many issues prevent RL from being regularly used in
the real world. For example, one typically trains and tests RL agents in the same environment. In
such cases, an agent can memorize behavior that achieves high reward, without acquiring the true
behavior that the system designer desires. This has raised concerns about RL agents overfitting to a
single environment, instead of learning meaningful skills [17].
Indeed, a long line of work has noted the brittleness of RL agents: slight changes in the environment,
such as those incurred by modeling or simulator design errors, or slight perturbations of the agent’s
trajectory, can lead to catastrophic declines in performance [36, 49, 23]. Furthermore, although RL
agents can solve difficult tasks, they struggle to transfer the skills they learned in one task to perform
well in a different but similar task [37, 48]. Yet, in the real world, it is reasonable to expect that RL
agents will see scenarios that are at least mildly different from the specific scenarios they trained for.
Hence, a desirable property of RL agents is that of generalization, broadly defined as the ability to
discern the correct notion of behavior and perform well in semantically similar environments. We
focus on two popular generalization settings. The Average Performance setting assumes there is an
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

