Equilibrium Refinement for the Age of Machines:
The One-Sided Quasi-Perfect Equilibrium

Gabriele Farina
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In two-player zero-sum extensive-form games, Nash equilibrium prescribes optimal
strategies against perfectly rational opponents. However, it does not guarantee
rational play in parts of the game tree that can only be reached by the players
making mistakes. This can be problematic when operationalizing equilibria in
the real world among imperfect players. Trembling-hand refinements are a sound
remedy to this issue, and are subsets of Nash equilibria that are designed to handle
the possibility that any of the players may make mistakes. In this paper, we
initiate the study of equilibrium refinements for settings where one of the players
is perfectly rational (the “machine”) and the other may make mistakes. As we
show, this endeavor has many pitfalls: many intuitively appealing approaches to
refinement fail in various ways. On the positive side, we introduce a modification
of the classical quasi-perfect equilibrium (QPE) refinement, which we call the
one-sided quasi-perfect equilibrium. Unlike QPE, one-sided QPE only accounts
for mistakes from one player and assumes that no mistakes will be made by the
machine. We present experiments on standard benchmark games and an endgame
from the famous man-machine match where the AI Libratus was the first to beat
top human specialist professionals in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker. We
show that one-sided QPE can be computed more efficiently than all known prior
refinements, paving the way to wider adoption of Nash equilibrium refinements in
settings with perfectly rational machines (or humans perfectly actuating machinegenerated strategies) that interact with players prone to mistakes. We also show
that one-sided QPE tends to play better than a Nash equilibrium strategy against
imperfect opponents.

1

Introduction

The Nash equilibrium solution concept prescribes optimal strategies against perfectly rational opponents. However, it is well known that it has serious shortcomings when used to prescribe strategies
to be deployed against imperfect opponents who may make mistakes. Even in two-player zero-sum
games, it does not guarantee rational play in parts of the game tree that can only be reached if the
players make mistakes. As a very simple perfect-information-game example, consider the game
in Figure 1 (Left). The bold lines show one of the Nash equilibria of the game. It does not matter
whether the white player acting at B chooses move l or move r because he never gets to move if the
black player acting at A plays rationally. So, in Nash equilibrium, the white player can choose move
l. However, if the black player makes a mistake and chooses move b, it would be better for the white
player to choose move r (thus getting a payoff of 5 instead of 0). So, in that part of the game where
the black player has made the mistake, the white player’s Nash equilibrium strategy is not rational.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

