On Interaction Between Augmentations and
Corruptions in Natural Corruption Robustness

Eric Mintun∗
Facebook AI Research
mintun@fb.com

Alexander Kirillov
Facebook AI Research
akirillov@fb.com

Saining Xie
Facebook AI Research
s9xie@fb.com

Abstract
Invariance to a broad array of image corruptions, such as warping, noise, or
color shifts, is an important aspect of building robust models in computer vision.
Recently, several new data augmentations have been proposed that significantly
improve performance on ImageNet-C, a benchmark of such corruptions. However,
there is still a lack of basic understanding on the relationship between data augmentations and test-time corruptions. To this end, we develop a feature space for image
transforms, and then use a new measure in this space between augmentations and
corruptions called the Minimal Sample Distance to demonstrate a strong correlation
between similarity and performance. We then investigate recent data augmentations
and observe a significant degradation in corruption robustness when the test-time
corruptions are sampled to be perceptually dissimilar from ImageNet-C in this feature space. Our results suggest that test error can be improved by training on perceptually similar augmentations, and data augmentations may not generalize well beyond the existing benchmark. We hope our results and tools will allow for more robust progress towards improving robustness to image corruptions. We provide code
at https://github.com/facebookresearch/augmentation-corruption.

1

Introduction

Robustness to distribution shift, i.e. when the train and test distributions differ, is an important feature
of practical machine learning models. Among many forms of distribution shift, one particularly
relevant category for computer vision are image corruptions. For example, test data may come from
sources that differ from the training set in terms of lighting, camera quality, or other features. Postprocessing transforms, such as photo touch-up, image filters, or compression effects are commonplace
in real-world data. Models developed using clean, undistorted inputs typically perform dramatically
worse when confronted with these sorts of image corruptions [8, 13]. The subject of corruption
robustness has a long history in computer vision [1, 6, 28] and recently has been studied actively with
the release of benchmark datasets such as ImageNet-C [13].
One particular property of image corruptions is that they are low-level distortions in nature. Corruptions are transformations of an image that affect structural information such as colors, textures, or
geometry [5] and are typically free of high-level semantics. Therefore, it is natural to expect that data
augmentation techniques, which expand the training set with random low-level transformations, can
help learn robust models. Indeed, data augmentation has become a central technique in several recent
methods [14, 20, 25] that achieve large improvements on ImageNet-C and related benchmarks.
One caveat for data augmentation based approaches is the test corruptions are expected to be unknown
at training time. If the corruptions are known, they may simply be applied to the training set as data
augmentations to trivially adapt to the test distribution. Instead, an ideal robust model needs to be
∗

This work completed as part of the Facebook AI residency program.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

