Provably Faster Algorithms for Bilevel Optimization

Junjie Yang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
yang.4972@osu.edu

Kaiyi Ji
Department of EECS
University of Michigan
kaiyiji@umich.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has been widely applied in many important machine learning
applications such as hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning. Recently,
several momentum-based algorithms have been proposed to solve bilevel optimization problems faster. However, those momentum-based algorithms do not achieve
e −2 ) of the SGD-based algoprovably better computational complexity than O(
rithm. In this paper, we propose two new algorithms for bilevel optimization, where
the first algorithm adopts momentum-based recursive iterations, and the second
algorithm adopts recursive gradient estimations in nested loops to decrease the
variance. We show that both algorithms achieve the complexity of e
O(−1.5 ), which
outperforms all existing algorithms by the order of magnitude. Our experiments
validate our theoretical results and demonstrate the superior empirical performance
of our algorithms in hyperparameter applications.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has become a timely and important topic recently due to its great effectiveness in
a wide range of applications including hyperparameter optimization [7, 5], meta-learning [33, 16, 1],
reinforcement learning [14, 24]. Bilevel optimization can be generally formulated as the following
minimization problem:
min Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x))

x∈Rp

s.t. y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y).

(1)

y∈Rq

Since the outer function Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x)) depends on the variable x also via the optimizer
y ∗ (x) of the inner-loop function g(x, y), the algorithm design for bilevel optimization is much
more complicated and challenging than minimization and minimax optimization. For example, if
the gradient-based approach is applied, then the gradient of the outer-loop function (also called
hypergradient) will necessarily involve Jacobian and Hessian matrices of the inner-loop function
g(x, y), which require more careful design to avoid high computational complexity.
This paper focuses on the nonconvex-strongly-convex setting, where the outer function f (x, y ∗ (x)) is
nonconvex with respect to (w.r.t.) x and the inner function g(x, y) is strongly convex w.r.t. y for any x.
Such a case often occurs in practical applications. For example, in hyperparameter optimization [7],
f (x, y ∗ (x)) is often nonconvex with x representing neural network hyperparameters, but the inner
function g(x, ·) can be strongly convex w.r.t. y by including a strongly-convex regularizer on y. In
few-shot meta-learning [1], the inner function g(x, ·) often takes a quadratic form together with a
strongly-convex regularizer. To efficiently solve the deterministic problem in eq. (1), various bilevel
optimization algorithms have been proposed, which include two popular classes of deterministic
gradient-based methods respectively based on approximate implicit differentiation (AID) [31, 9, 8]
and iterative differentiation (ITD) [28, 6, 7].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

