Precise characterization of the prior predictive
distribution of deep ReLU networks

Lorenzo Noci∗
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Gregor Bachmann∗
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Kevin Roth∗
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

lorenzo.noci@inf.ethz.ch

gregor.bachmann@inf.ethz.ch

kevin.roth@inf.ethz.ch

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Thomas Hofmann
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Sebastian.Nowozin@microsoft.com

thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent works on Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have highlighted the need to
better understand the implications of using Gaussian priors in combination with the
compositional structure of the network architecture. Similar in spirit to the kind of
analysis that has been developed to devise better initialization schemes for neural
networks (cf. He- or Xavier initialization), we derive a precise characterization
of the prior predictive distribution of finite-width ReLU networks with Gaussian
weights. While theoretical results have been obtained for their heavy-tailedness,
the full characterization of the prior predictive distribution (i.e. its density, CDF
and moments), remained unknown prior to this work. Our analysis, based on the
Meijer-G function, allows us to quantify the influence of architectural choices such
as the width or depth of the network on the resulting shape of the prior predictive
distribution. We also formally connect our results to previous work in the infinite
width setting, demonstrating that the moments of the distribution converge to those
of a normal log-normal mixture in the infinite depth limit. Finally, our results
provide valuable guidance on prior design: for instance, controlling the predictive
variance with depth- and width-informed priors on the weights of the network.

1

Introduction

It is well known that standard neural networks initialized with Gaussian weights tend to Gaussian
processes (Rasmussen, 2003) in the infinite width limit (Neal, 1996; Lee et al., 2018; de G. Matthews
et al., 2018), coined neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) in the literature. Although the NNGP
has been derived for a number of architectures, such as convolutional (Novak et al., 2019; GarrigaAlonso et al., 2019), recurrent (Yang, 2019) and attention mechanisms (Hron et al., 2020), little is
known about the finite width case.
The reason why the infinite width limit is relatively tractable to study is that uncorrelated but dependent
units of intermediate layers become normally distributed due to the central limit theorem (CLT) and
as a result, independent. In the finite width case, zero correlation does not imply independence,
rendering the analysis far more involved as we will outline in this paper.
One of the main motivations for our work is to better understand the implications of using Gaussian
priors in combination with the compositional structure of the network architecture. As argued by
Wilson and Izmailov (2020); Wilson (2020), the prior over parameters does not carry a meaningful
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

