Finite Sample Analysis of Average-Reward TD
Learning and Q-Learning

Sheng Zhang∗ Zhe Zhang∗ Siva Theja Maguluri
The H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
{shengzhang, jimmy_zhang, siva.theja}@gatech.edu

Abstract
The focus of this paper is on sample complexity guarantees of average-reward
reinforcement learning algorithms, which are known to be more challenging to
study than their discounted-reward counterparts. To the best of our knowledge, we
provide the first known finite sample guarantees using both constant and diminishing step sizes of (i) average-reward TD(λ) with linear function approximation
for policy evaluation and (ii) average-reward Q-learning in the tabular setting to
find the optimal policy. A major challenge is that since the value functions are
agnostic to an additive constant, the corresponding Bellman operators are no longer
contraction mappings under any norm. We obtain the results for TD(λ) by working
in an appropriately defined subspace that ensures uniqueness of the solution. For
Q-learning, we exploit the span seminorm contractive property of the Bellman
operator, and construct a novel Lyapunov function obtained by infimal convolution
of a generalized Moreau envelope and the indicator function of a set.

1

Introduction

The average-reward setting is a classical setting for formulating the goal in an infinite-horizon Markov
decision process (MDP) [1]. The need to maximize the average reward has been demonstrated in
many applications, including scheduling automatic guided vehicles [2], inventory management in
supply chains [3], communication system control and routing [4], cooperative multi-robot learning
[5] and queuing network control [6]. In these problems, the discounted-reward criterion usually leads
to poor long-time performance since the system operates over an extended period of time and the
goal is to optimize long-term behavior, whereas the discounted objective biases the optimal policy to
choose actions that lead to high near-term performance.
Even though there is a well developed theory of average-reward MDPs [7, 8, 9], the theoretical
understanding of average-reward RL methods is still quite limited. Most existing results are focused
only on asymptotic convergence [10, 11, 12, 13]. The focus of this paper is to understand the sample
efficiency. How much data is required to guarantee a given level of accuracy?
Recent literature obtains finite sample guarantees for discounted-reward TD learning and Q-learning
algorithms by developing novel analytical techniques [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Such a study of averagereward RL algorithms is not undertaken. Analysis of average-reward RL algorithms is known to
be more challenging to study than their discounted-reward counterparts. The key property that is
exploited in the study of discounted-reward problems is the contraction property of the underlying
Bellman operator. In the average-reward setting, such a contraction property does not hold under any
norm, and the Bellman equation is known to have multiple fixed points.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to Sheng Zhang <shengzhang@gatech.edu | shengzhangblog.com>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

