Self-Supervised Learning with Data Augmentations
Provably Isolates Content from Style
Julius von Kügelgen⇤1,2
Wieland Brendel 3
1
3

Yash Sharma⇤3,4

Bernhard Schölkopf†1

Michel Besserve†1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems Tübingen

Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen

Luigi Gresele⇤1

4

2

Francesco Locatello†5

University of Cambridge

IMPRS for Intelligent Systems

5

Amazon

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning has shown remarkable success in a number
of domains. A common practice is to perform data augmentation via hand-crafted
transformations intended to leave the semantics of the data invariant. We seek to
understand the empirical success of this approach from a theoretical perspective.
We formulate the augmentation process as a latent variable model by postulating a
partition of the latent representation into a content component, which is assumed
invariant to augmentation, and a style component, which is allowed to change.
Unlike prior work on disentanglement and independent component analysis, we
allow for both nontrivial statistical and causal dependencies in the latent space.
We study the identifiability of the latent representation based on pairs of views
of the observations and prove sufficient conditions that allow us to identify the
invariant content partition up to an invertible mapping in both generative and discriminative settings. We find numerical simulations with dependent latent variables
are consistent with our theory. Lastly, we introduce Causal3DIdent, a dataset of
high-dimensional, visually complex images with rich causal dependencies, which
we use to study the effect of data augmentations performed in practice.

1

Introduction

Learning good representations of high-dimensional observations from large amounts of unlabelled
data is widely recognised as an important step for more capable and data-efficient learning systems [10,
72]. Over the last decade, self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as the dominant paradigm for
such unsupervised representation learning [1, 20, 21, 34, 41, 47, 48, 90, 91, 115, 122, 125, 126]. The
main idea behind SSL is to extract a supervisory signal from unlabelled observations by leveraging
known structure of the data, which allows for the application of supervised learning techniques. A
common approach is to directly predict some part of the observation from another part (e.g., future
from past, or original from corruption), thus forcing the model to learn a meaningful representation in
the process. While this technique has shown remarkable success in natural language processing [13,
23, 30, 81, 84, 86, 95, 99] and speech recognition [5, 6, 100, 104], where a finite dictionary allows
one to output a distribution over the missing part, such predictive SSL methods are not easily applied
to continuous or high-dimensional domains such as vision. Here, a common approach is to learn a
joint embedding of similar observations or views such that their representation is close [7, 12, 22, 44].
Different views can come, for example, from different modalities (text & speech; video & audio)
or time points. As still images lack such multi-modality or temporal structure, recent advances in
representation learning have relied on generating similar views by means of data augmentation.
⇤

Joint first author. † Joint senior author. Correspondence to: jvk@tue.mpg.de
Code available at: https://www.github.com/ysharma1126/ssl_identifiability

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

