Efficient Equivariant Network

Lingshen He1 , Yuxuan Chen1 , Zhengyang Shen3 , Yiming Dong1 , Yisen Wang1,2 , Zhouchen Lin1,2,4∗
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
School of Mathematical Sciences and LMAM, Peking University
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
lingshenhe@pku.edu.cn, yuxuan chen1997@outlook.com,
shenzhy@pku.edu.cn, yimingdong ml@outlook.com,
yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have dominated the field of Computer Vision and achieved great success due to their built-in translation equivariance. Group
equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs) that incorporate more equivariance can significantly
improve the performance of conventional CNNs. However, G-CNNs are faced
with two major challenges: spatial-agnostic problem and expensive computational
cost. In this work, we propose a general framework of previous equivariant models,
which includes G-CNNs and equivariant self-attention layers as special cases. Under this framework, we explicitly decompose the feature aggregation operation into
a kernel generator and an encoder, and decouple the spatial and extra geometric
dimensions in the computation. Therefore, our filters are essentially dynamic
rather than being spatial-agnostic. We further show that our Equivariant model is
parameter Efficient and computational Efficient by complexity analysis, and also
data Efficient by experiments, so we call our model E 4 -Net. Extensive experiments
verify that our model can significantly improve previous works with smaller model
size. Especially, under the setting of training on 1/5 data of CIFAR10, our model
improves G-CNNs by 5%+ accuracy, while using only 56% parameters and 68%
FLOPs.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely used and achieved
superior results on multiple vision tasks, such as image classification [31, 55, 51, 22], semantic
segmentation [3], and object detection [44]. A compelling explanation of the good performance of
CNNs is that their built-in parameter sharing scheme brings in translation equivariance: shifting an
image and then feeding it through a CNN layer is the same as feeding the original image and then
shifting the resulted feature maps. In other words, the translation symmetry is preserved by each layer.
Motivated by this, Cohen and Welling [9] proposed Group Equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs), showing
how convolutional networks can be generalized to exploit larger groups of symmetries. Following
G-CNNs, researchers have designed new neural networks that are equivariant to other transformations
like rotations [9, 61, 24, 49] and scales [65, 53]. However, G-CNNs still have two main drawbacks:
1) In the implementation, G-CNNs would introduce extra dimensions to encode new transformations,
such as rotations and scales, thus have a very high computational cost. 2) Although G-CNNs achieve
group equivariance by sharing kernels, like vanilla CNNs, they lack the ability to adapt kernels
to diverse feature patterns with respect to different spatial positions, namely, the spatial-agnostic
problem [68, 39, 70, 71, 54, 67, 36].
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

