Implicit Task-Driven Probability Discrepancy
Measure for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Mao Li,
Kaiqi Jiang,
Xinhua Zhang
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{mli206,kjiang10,zhangx}@uic.edu

Abstract
Probability discrepancy measure is a fundamental construct for numerous machine
learning models such as weakly supervised learning and generative modeling.
However, most measures overlook the fact that the distributions are not the endproduct of learning, but are the input of a downstream predictor. Therefore, it is
important to warp the probability discrepancy measure towards the end tasks, and
towards this goal, we propose a new bi-level optimization based approach so that the
two distributions are compared not uniformly against the entire hypothesis space,
but only with respect to the optimal predictor for the downstream end task. When
applied to margin disparity discrepancy and contrastive domain discrepancy, our
method significantly improves the performance in unsupervised domain adaptation,
and enjoys a much more principled training process.

1

Introduction

Discrepancy measures on two distributions underpin a large variety of machine learning tasks, and
have been studied extensively since the dawn of modern probability [1]. For example, in generative
models, such a measure is applied to align the generated distribution with the empirical one, and
prevalent examples include 1) the f -divergence that admits a convenient variational form hence can
be effectively evaluated via sample-based adversarial optimization [2, 3]; 2) integral probability
metric [IPM, 4] that seeks the largest discrepancy in function expectation over a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) [MMD GAN, 5–7], 1-Lipschitz continuous functions [Wasserstein GAN, 8, 9],
or unit L2 norm functions [Fisher GAN, 10], etc.
In domain adaptation [DA, 11, 12], probability discrepancy is also the key construct in the feature
adaptation approach, where a feature extractor φ is sought to align the source and target distributions
transformed by φ [13, 14]. The aforementioned measures can be applied directly in this context.
It has been long noted that the discrepancy should be tailored to the function class of interest, e.g.,
those for which we would like to compute expectations. This principle has been applied to density
estimation [15] amongst others, where the RKHS is selected to match the downstream task such as
image categorization based on the compressed pixel distribution. Naturally this motivation can be
easily implemented in IPMs by customizing the generating function space.
However such tailoring remains oblivious to the loss and available labels of the end task. Intuitively,
if the latent features in DA are to be used for classification, then whether the loss is AUC or F-score
should ideally influence the probability discrepancy. The seminal H∆H-divergence is designed for
classification accuracy [16], with a few extensions to Bayesian and other losses [17–20]. Despite
being data-dependent, however, they are unsupervised without accounting for the available labels.
Likewise, if a generative model is used to augment data so as to improve segmentation accuracy
[21], then the adversarial network in GANs should not only be able to distinguish between real and
synthetic, but also “align", in an appropriate sense, with the segmentation labels at hand.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

