Efficient Training of Retrieval Models
Using Negative Cache

Erik M. Lindgren
Google Research, New York
erikml@google.com

Sashank Reddi
Google Research, New York
sashank@google.com

Ruiqi Guo
Google Research, New York
guorq@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Factorized models, such as two tower neural network models, are widely used for
scoring (query, document) pairs in information retrieval tasks. These models are
typically trained by optimizing the model parameters to score relevant “positive"
pairs higher than the irrelevant “negative" ones. While a large set of negatives
typically improves the model performance, limited computation and memory
budgets place constraints on the number of negatives used during training. In this
paper, we develop a novel negative sampling technique for accelerating training
with softmax cross-entropy loss. By using cached (possibly stale) item embeddings,
our technique enables training with a large pool of negatives with reduced memory
and computation. We also develop a streaming variant of our algorithm geared
towards very large datasets. Furthermore, we establish a theoretical basis for our
approach by showing that updating a very small fraction of the cache at each
iteration can still ensure fast convergence. Finally, we experimentally validate our
approach and show that it is efficient and compares favorably with more complex,
state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Learning to represent objects as dense vectors, often called embeddings, has proved to be crucial in
large scale information retrieval tasks from multiple domains including recommendation systems [39],
vision [18] and natural language processing [13, 22]. A popular paradigm for such learning tasks
involves training two separate neural networks (often called two-towers or dual-encoders), each
representing a query and a document. Given positive and negative (query, document) pairs, the
learning task trains the two networks by minimizing a loss function, usually softmax cross-entropy,
to encourage positive pairs to have higher similarity scores and negative pairs to have lower scores.
While it is easy to sample positive pairs of examples through user feedback such as impressions or
clicks, it is more challenging to sample good negative pairs from a pool of potentially millions or
even billions of documents. A large number of negative pairs is often required to ensure high quality
of the final model, which makes the training process expensive.
A number of strategies have been proposed in the literature to address the problem of sampling
good negative pairs from a large corpus. The most common approach is to use in-batch negatives,
which treats random, non-positive pairs in a minibatch as negatives [15, 22]. This approach is
computationally efficient and works in a streaming setting, but the pool of negative examples is
limited to the minibatch. Towards the later stages of the training, the in-batch negatives become
less informative (i.e., have low gradients) since they are sampled randomly without paying attention
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

