Neural Architecture Dilation for
Adversarial Robustness
Yanxi Li 1 , Zhaohui Yang 2,3 , Yunhe Wang 2 , Chang Xu 1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Department of Machine Intelligence,
Peking University, China
yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au, zhaohuiyang@pku.edu.cn,
yunhe.wang@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
1

Abstract
With the tremendous advances in the architecture and scale of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) over the past few decades, they can easily reach or even exceed
the performance of humans in certain tasks. However, a recently discovered shortcoming of CNNs is that they are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Although the
adversarial robustness of CNNs can be improved by adversarial training, there is a
trade-off between standard accuracy and adversarial robustness. From the neural
architecture perspective, this paper aims to improve the adversarial robustness of
the backbone CNNs that have a satisfactory accuracy. Under a minimal computational overhead, the introduction of a dilation architecture is expected to be friendly
with the standard performance of the backbone CNN while pursuing adversarial
robustness. Theoretical analyses on the standard and adversarial error bounds naturally motivate the proposed neural architecture dilation algorithm. Experimental
results on real-world datasets and benchmark neural networks demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm to balance the accuracy and adversarial
robustness.

1

Introduction

In the past few decades, novel architecture design and network scale expansion have achieved
significant success in the development of convolutional neural networks (CNN) [12, 13, 11, 23, 9, 31,
1, 35, 17, 15]. These advanced neural networks can already reach or even exceed the performance of
humans in certain tasks [10, 21]. Despite the success of CNNs, a recently discovered shortcoming of
them is that they are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. The ingeniously designed small perturbations
when applied to images could mislead the networks to predict incorrect labels of the input [7]. This
vulnerability notably reduces the reliability of CNNs in practical applications. Hence developing
solutions to increase the adversarial robustness of CNNs against adversarial attacks has attracted
particular attention from the researchers.
Adversarial training can be the most standard defense approach, which augments the training data with
adversarial examples. These adversarial examples are often generated by fast gradient sign method
(FGSM) [7] or projected gradient descent (PGD) [18]. Tramèr et al. [24] investigates the adversarial
examples produced by a number of pre-trained models and developed an ensemble adversarial
training. Focusing on the worst-case loss over a convex outer region, Wong and Kolter [27] introduces
a provable robust model. There are more improvements of PGD adversarial training techniques,
including Lipschitz regularization [6] and curriculum adversarial training [2]. In a recent study by
Tsipras et al. [25], there exists a trade-off between standard accuracy and adversarial robustness.
After the networks have been trained to defend against adversarial attacks, their performance over
natural image classification could be negatively influenced. TRADES [32] theoretically studies this
trade-off by introducing a boundary error between the natural (i.e. standard) error and the robust
error. Instead of directly adjusting the trade-off, the friendly adversarial training (FAT) [33] proposes
to exploit weak adversarial examples for a slight standard accuracy drop.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

