Dynamic Analysis of Higher-Order Coordination in
Neuronal Assemblies via De-Sparsified Orthogonal
Matching Pursuit

Shoutik Mukherjee and Behtash Babadi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Institute for Systems Research
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD 20742
{smukher2, behtash}@umd.edu

Abstract
Coordinated ensemble spiking activity is widely observable in neural recordings
and central in the study of population codes, with hypothesized roles including
robust stimulus representation, interareal communication of neural information, and
learning and memory formation. Model-free measures of synchrony characterize
the coherence of pairwise activity, but not higher-order interactions; this limitation
is transcended by statistical models of ensemble spiking activity. However, existing
model-based analyses often impose assumptions about the relevance of higher-order
interactions and require multiple repeated trials in order to characterize dynamics in
the correlational structure of ensemble activity. To address these shortcomings, we
propose an adaptive greedy filtering algorithm based on a discretized mark pointprocess model of ensemble spiking and a corresponding precise statistical inference
framework to identify significant coordinated higher-order spiking activity. In
the course of developing the statistical inference procedures, we also show that
confidence intervals can be constructed for greedily estimated parameters. We
demonstrate the utility of our proposed methods on simulated neuronal assemblies.
Applied to multi-electrode recordings of human cortical ensembles, our proposed
methods provide new insights into the dynamics underlying localized population
activity during transitions between brain states.

1

Introduction

Coordinated ensemble spiking has been observed in a variety of brain areas, prompting a range of
hypotheses about its role in cognitive function. Studies have documented synchronous spiking at all
levels of the mammalian visual pathway [1, 2, 3]. Coordinated neural activity has additionally been
hypothesized to influence interareal communication and the flow of neural information [4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
and been postulated to be mediated by oscillations in local field potentials [9, 10, 11]. The study of
synchrony is also closely tied to memory [12, 13, 14].
The prevalence of coordinated spiking and its functional implications for a range of neural processes
have motivated both model-free and model-based approaches to its characterization. An intuitive
model-free metric is the pairwise correlations of spike trains smoothed by a Gaussian (or exponential)
kernel [15, 16]; several pairwise distance metrics have been proposed [17] as alternatives. Though
the coherence of pairwise activity can be described, such measures do not capture higher-order
coordination, and are limited in the ability to model dynamics in or determine the significance of
pairwise coherence without repeated trials.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

