Overcoming the curse of dimensionality with
Laplacian regularization in semi-supervised learning

Vivien Cabannes
ENS – INRIA – PSL
Paris, France
vivien.cabannes@gmail.com

Loucas Pillaud-Vivien
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Francis Bach
ENS – INRIA – PSL
Paris, France

Alessandro Rudi
ENS – INRIA – PSL
Paris, France

Abstract
As annotations of data can be scarce in large-scale practical problems, leveraging
unlabelled examples is one of the most important aspects of machine learning. This
is the aim of semi-supervised learning. To benefit from the access to unlabelled
data, it is natural to diffuse smoothly knowledge of labelled data to unlabelled one.
This induces to the use of Laplacian regularization. Yet, current implementations
of Laplacian regularization suffer from several drawbacks, notably the well-known
curse of dimensionality. In this paper, we provide a statistical analysis to overcome
those issues, and unveil a large body of spectral filtering methods that exhibit
desirable behaviors. They are implemented through (reproducing) kernel methods,
for which we provide realistic computational guidelines in order to make our
method usable with large amounts of data.
In the last decade, machine learning has been able to tackle amazingly complex tasks, which was
mainly allowed by computational power to train large learning models on large annotated datasets.
For instance, ImageNet is made of tens of millions of images, which have all been manually annotated
by humans [16]. The greediness in data annotation of such a current learning paradigm is a major
limitation. In particular, when annotation of data demands in-depth expertise, relying on techniques
that require zillions of labelled data is not viable. This motivates several research streams to overcome
the need for annotations, such as self-supervised learning for images or natural language processing
[17]. Aiming for generality, semi-supervised learning is the most classical one, assuming access
to a vast amount of input data, but among which only a scarce percentage is labelled. To leverage
the presence of unlabelled data, most semi-supervised techniques assume a form of low-density
separation hypothesis, as detailed in the recent review of van Engelen and Hoos [52], and illustrated
by state-of the-art models [6, 54]. This hypothesis assumes that the function to learn from the data
varies smoothly in highly populated regions of the input space, but might vary more strongly in
scarcely populated areas, or that the decision frontiers between classes lie in regions with low-density.
In such a setting, it is natural to enforce constraints on the variations of the function to learn. While
semi-supervised learning is an important learning framework, it has not provided as much exciting
realizations as one could have expected. This might be related to the fact that it is classically
approached through graph-based Laplacian, a technique that does not scale well with the dimension
of the input space [5].
Paper organization. In Section 1, we motivate Laplacian regularization, and recall drawbacks of
naive implementations. These limitations are overcome in Section 2 where we expose a theoretically
principled path to derive well-behaved algorithms. More precisely, we unveil a vast class of estimates
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

