CorticalFlow: A Diffeomorphic Mesh Deformation
Module for Cortical Surface Reconstruction
Léo Lebrat†
CSIRO, QUT
leb026@csiro.au

Rodrigo Santa Cruz†
CSIRO, QUT
fon022@csiro.au

Pierrick Bourgeat
CSIRO

Jurgen Fripp
CSIRO

Frédéric de Gournay
IMT - UMR5219
degourna@insa-toulouse.fr
Clinton Fookes
QUT

Darren Fu
UQ

Olivier Salvado
CSIRO, Data61.

Abstract
In this paper we introduce CorticalFlow, a new geometric deep-learning model
that, given a 3-dimensional image, learns to deform a reference template towards a
targeted object. To conserve the template mesh’s topological properties, we train
our model over a set of diffeomorphic transformations. This new implementation of a flow Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) framework benefits from a
small GPU memory footprint, allowing the generation of surfaces with several
hundred thousand vertices. To reduce topological errors introduced by its discrete
resolution, we derive numeric conditions which improve the manifoldness of the
predicted triangle mesh. To exhibit the utility of CorticalFlow, we demonstrate
its performance for the challenging task of brain cortical surface reconstruction.
In contrast to current state-of-the-art, CorticalFlow produces superior surfaces
while reducing the computation time from nine and a half minutes to one second.
More significantly, CorticalFlow enforces the generation of anatomically plausible
surfaces; the absence of which has been a major impediment restricting the clinical
relevance of such surface reconstruction methods.

1

Introduction

The field of 3D shape reconstruction using deep learning techniques has attracted much attention.
Recently, a plethora of methods have been developed for problems such as single-view object
reconstruction [22, 50, 77], surface generation [27, 74], and meshing noisy point clouds [32, 42]. At
first, these methods solely aimed to retrieve surface meshes as geometrically close as possible to the
target shape. However, recent applications require generating regular meshes with a known genus,
such as physics simulation, 3D-printing, and clinical analysis of anatomical surfaces [24, 58, 62].
In this direction, three approaches in the literature stand out: DeepCSR [61], Voxel2Mesh [73],
and Neural Mesh Flow (NMF) [30]. DeepCSR first predicts implicit surface functions and then
employs an iso-surface extraction method along with a topology correction algorithm to obtain genuszero surfaces without handles or holes. Voxel2Mesh extends the vertex-wise template deformation
approach of Wang et al. [71] by optimizing several mesh-smoothing penalty functions. In contrast,
NMF builds an invertible mapping that enforces topology conservation upon the resolution of an
Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) through a sequence of residual blocks called Neural Ordinary
Differential Equation (NODE) [9]. However, these methods come with several limitations. The
topology correction algorithm employed by DeepCSR is computationally expensive and is blind
† Equal contribution
Check our project web-page https://lebrat.github.io/CorticalFlow/
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

