Voxel-based 3D Detection and Reconstruction of
Multiple Objects from a Single Image

Feng Liu
Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liufeng6, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Inferring 3D locations and shapes of multiple objects from a single 2D image is
a long-standing objective of computer vision. Most of the existing works either
predict one of these 3D properties or focus on solving both for a single object. One
fundamental challenge lies in how to learn an effective representation of the image
that is well-suited for 3D detection and reconstruction. In this work, we propose
to learn a regular grid of 3D voxel features from the input image which is aligned
with 3D scene space via a 3D feature lifting operator. Based on the 3D voxel
features, our novel CenterNet-3D detection head formulates the 3D detection as
keypoint detection in the 3D space. Moreover, we devise an efficient coarse-to-fine
reconstruction module, including coarse-level voxelization and a novel local PCASDF shape representation, which enables fine detail reconstruction and one order
of magnitude faster inference than prior methods. With complementary supervision
from both 3D detection and reconstruction, one enables the 3D voxel features to
be geometry and context preserving, benefiting both tasks. The effectiveness of
our approach is demonstrated through 3D detection and reconstruction in single
object and multiple object scenarios. Code is available at http://cvlab.cse.
msu.edu/project-mdr.html.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental computer vision task, instance-level 3D scene understanding from a single image
has drawn substantial attention from researchers due to its importance in applications such as
robotics [1, 2], AR/VR [3] and autonomous driving [4–6]. The important 3D properties include 3D
bounding box (pose, size, location) and 3D shape of object instances. In this work, we aim to design
a framework to infer all these 3D properties of multiple objects from a single 2D image.
In recent years, various monocular methods are proposed to predict either 3D boxes [7–12] or 3D
shapes [13–17]. However, only a few studies [18–23] consider both 3D detection and reconstruction
for a total 3D scene understanding. The complexity of real-world scenarios and diverse category
variations make it challenging to fully reconstruct the scene context (both semantics and geometry) at
the instance level from a single image. Moreover, those methods primarily assign 3D semantic labels
to pixels. Yet, such a 2D representation with depth ambiguity is insufficient for 3D geometry and
context reasoning. It is thus crucial to develop an effective representation of the image that is relevant
to 3D geometry and spatial information for performing accurate 3D detection and reconstruction.
In light of this, attempts like grid-based representation have been made for tasks such as rendering [24],
detection [25, 26], or reconstruction [27]. OFT [25] proposes to sample and transform image features
into a BEV grid representation, which enables holistic reasoning of the 3D scene configuration.
CaDDN [26] extends the BEV grid representation with a categorical depth prior, leading to higher 3D
detection accuracies. DeepVoxels [24] and UCLID-Net [27] build voxel features by back-projecting
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

