Learning One Representation to Optimize All
Rewards
Ahmed Touati⇤
Mila, University of Montreal
ahmed.touati@umontreal.ca

Yann Ollivier
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
Paris
yol@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce the forward-backward (FB) representation of the dynamics of a
reward-free Markov decision process. It provides explicit near-optimal policies for
any reward specified a posteriori. During an unsupervised phase, we use rewardfree interactions with the environment to learn two representations via off-the-shelf
deep learning methods and temporal difference (TD) learning. In the test phase, a
reward representation is estimated either from reward observations or an explicit
reward description (e.g., a target state). The optimal policy for that reward is
directly obtained from these representations, with no planning. We assume access
to an exploration scheme or replay buffer for the first phase.
The corresponding unsupervised loss is well-principled: if training is perfect, the
policies obtained are provably optimal for any reward function. With imperfect
training, the sub-optimality is proportional to the unsupervised approximation
error. The FB representation learns long-range relationships between states and
actions, via a predictive occupancy map, without having to synthesize states as in
model-based approaches.
This is a step towards learning controllable agents in arbitrary black-box stochastic
environments. This approach compares well to goal-oriented RL algorithms on
discrete and continuous mazes, pixel-based MsPacman, and the FetchReach virtual
robot arm. We also illustrate how the agent can immediately adapt to new tasks
beyond goal-oriented RL. 2

1

Introduction

We consider one kind of unsupervised reinforcement learning problem: Given a Markov decision
process (MDP) but no reward information, is it possible to learn and store a compact object that,
for any reward function specified later, provides the optimal policy for that reward, with a minimal
amount of additional computation? In a sense, such an object would encode in a compact form the
solutions of all possible planning problems in the environment. This is a step towards building agents
that are fully controllable after first exploring their environment in an unsupervised way.
Goal-oriented RL methods [ACR+ 17, PAR+ 18] compute policies for a series of rewards specified in
advance (such as reaching a set of target states), but cannot adapt in real time to new rewards, such as
weighted combinations of target states or dense rewards.
Learning a model of the world is another possibility, but it still requires explicit planning for each
new reward; moreover, synthesizing accurate trajectories of states over long time ranges has proven
difficult [Tal17, KST+ 18].
⇤

2

Work done during an internship at Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research Paris.
Code: https://github.com/ahmed-touati/controllable_agent

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

