Modified Frank Wolfe in Probability Space

Carson Kent
Stanford University
crkent@stanford.edu

Jiajin Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
gerrili1996@gmail.com

José Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Peter Glynn
Stanford University
glynn@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel Frank-Wolfe (FW) procedure for the optimization of infinitedimensional functionals of probability measures - a task which arises naturally
in a wide range of areas including statistical learning (e.g. variational inference)
and artificial intelligence (e.g. generative adversarial networks). Our FW procedure takes advantage of Wasserstein gradient flows and strong duality results
recently developed in Distributionally Robust Optimization so that gradient steps
(in the Wasserstein space) can be efficiently computed using finite-dimensional,
convex optimization methods. We show how to choose the step sizes in order to
guarantee exponentially fast iteration convergence, under mild assumptions on the
functional to optimize. We apply our algorithm to a range of functionals arising
from applications in nonparametric estimation.

1

Introduction

Problems in artificial intelligence, statistics, and optimization often find a common root as an infinite
dimensional optimization problem in the form


inf J (µ) : µ ∈ P Rd ,
(1)

for the space P Rd of Borel probability measures over Rd . In recent years, quantitative statistical
and algorithmic treatments of these formulations have produced insights into modern computational methods– resulting in novel approaches to difficult, open problems. Recent works in robust
optimization [6, 44, 54, 55], probabilistic fairness [57, 53], reinforcement learning [63, 64], and
generative adversarial networks [42, 18, 19] highlight these gains and are linked by the following
theme: problems in the form of (1) provide access to rich infinite dimensional structure that sidesteps
brittle artifacts of finite dimensional formulations.
This paper provides the construction and analysis of a modified Frank-Wolfe algorithm for (1) that
operates from this infinite dimensional perspective and yields concrete convergence and complexity
guarantees for a sub-family of problems (1) which are well-behaved with respect to the Wasserstein
distance of order 2 (see Algorithm 1 and Theorem 1). Under canonical conditions of smoothness
and convexity we recover linear rates of convergence while, even for functionals which exhibit low
degrees of smoothness and for conditions that go beyond convexity, we recover sublinear rates that
are to be expected from finite dimensional analogues [36] (see Section 2.2).
The vanilla Frank-Wolfe method cannot work in probability space, in general, since the planar
derivative (i.e. the first variation also known as the influence function) can be unbounded when
distributions do not have compact support. To overcome this issue, we conduct a natural modification
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

