Pareto-Optimal Learning-Augmented Algorithms for
Online Conversion Problems
Bo Sun
ECE, HKUST
bsunaa@connect.ust.hk
Mohammad Hajiesmaili
CICS, UMass Amherst
hajiesmaili@cs.umass.edu

Russell Lee
CICS, UMass Amherst
rclee@cs.umass.edu
Adam Wierman
CMS, Caltech
adamw@caltech.edu

Danny H.K. Tsang
ECE, HKUST
eetsang@ust.hk

Abstract
This paper leverages machine-learned predictions to design competitive algorithms
for online conversion problems with the goal of improving the competitive ratio
when predictions are accurate (i.e., consistency), while also guaranteeing a worstcase competitive ratio regardless of the prediction quality (i.e., robustness). We
unify the algorithmic design of both integral and fractional conversion problems,
which are also known as the 1-max-search and one-way trading problems, into a
class of online threshold-based algorithms (OTA). By incorporating predictions
into design of OTA, we achieve the Pareto-optimal trade-off of consistency and
robustness, i.e., no online algorithm can achieve a better consistency guarantee
given for a robustness guarantee. We demonstrate the performance of OTA using
numerical experiments on Bitcoin conversion.

1

Introductions

An online conversion problem aims to convert one asset to another through a sequence of exchanges at
varying rates in order to maximize the terminal wealth in financial markets. With limited information
on possible future rates, the core challenge in an online conversion problem is how to balance the
return from waiting for possible high rates with the risk that high rates never show up. A high profile
example of this risk is cryptocurrency markets, e.g., Bitcoin, where high fluctuations up and down
make it challenging to optimize exchanges. Two well-known classical online conversion problems
are 1-max-search [7] and one-way trading [8], which can be considered as integral and fractional
versions of the online conversion problem that trade the asset as a whole or fraction-by-fraction (e.g.,
trading stock in lot or shares). Beyond these two problems, a number of extensions and variants of
online conversion problems have been studied with applications to lookback options [14], online
portfolio selection [13], online bidding [5], and beyond.
Most typically, conversion problems are studied through the lens of competitive ratios and the goal is
to design online algorithms that minimize the worst-case return ratio of the offline optimal to online
algorithm decisions. For example, EI-Yaniv et al. [8] have shown that optimal online algorithms can
be designed to achieve the minimal competitive ratios for both 1-max-search and one-way trading.
However, in real-world problems, predictions about future conversion rates are increasingly available
and the algorithms developed in the literature are not designed to take advantage of such information.
The challenge for using such predictions is that, in one extreme, the additional information is
an accurate prediction (advice) of future inputs. In this case, the algorithm can confidently use
the information to improve performance, e.g., [9]. However, most commonly, predictions have
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

