Combiner: Full Attention Transformer
with Sparse Computation Cost

∗

Hongyu Ren† , ∗Hanjun Dai⋄ , ∗ Zihang Dai⋄
Mengjiao Yang⋄ , Jure Leskovec† , Dale Schuurmans⋄,‡ , Bo Dai⋄
†
Stanford University, {hyren,jure}@cs.stanford.edu
⋄
Google Research, Brain Team, {hadai,zihangd,sherryy,schuurmans,bodai}@google.com
‡
University of Alberta

Abstract
Transformers provide a class of expressive architectures that are extremely effective for sequence modeling. However, the key limitation of transformers is their
quadratic memory and time complexity O(L2 ) with respect to the sequence length
in attention layers, which restricts application in extremely long sequences. Most
existing approaches leverage sparsity or low-rank assumptions in the attention
matrix to reduce cost, but sacrifice expressiveness. Instead, we propose Combiner,
which provides full attention capability in each attention head while maintaining
low computation and memory complexity. The key idea is to treat the self-attention
mechanism as a conditional expectation over embeddings at each location, and
approximate the conditional distribution with a structured factorization. Each location can attend to all other locations, either via direct attention, or through indirect
attention to abstractions, which are again conditional expectations of embeddings
from corresponding local regions. We show that most sparse attention patterns
used in existing sparse transformers are able to inspire the design of such factorization
√ for full attention, resulting in the same sub-quadratic cost (O(L log(L)) or
O(L L)). Combiner is a drop-in replacement for attention layers in existing transformers and can be easily implemented in common frameworks. An experimental
evaluation on both autoregressive and bidirectional sequence tasks demonstrates
the effectiveness of this approach, yielding state-of-the-art results on several image
and text modeling tasks.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [1] is a powerful neural network architecture that has demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in machine translation [2] and many other natural language processing (NLP) tasks
via pretraining, using either unidirectional language modeling [3] or bidirectional language modeling [4–8]. It has also achieved excellent results in other domains like image recognition [9], code
understanding [10], speech recognition [11], protein [12], music [13] and image [14] generative modeling. The core component of Transformer is the attention mechanism, which computes dependencies
between all pairs of positions in a sequence. However, for a sequence of length L, the expressiveness
of pairwise attention comes at a quadratic cost O(L2 ) in both time and memory consumption. This
makes the vanilla Transformer [1] prohibitive for applications that involve long sequences, including
high-resolution images, protein sequences, or raw speech signals [15], where the sequence length L
is often larger than 10, 000 [14].
Recently, there have been several attempts to scale up attention to long sequences. A popular
class of methods sparsifies the attention matrix with different sparsity patterns, including local
∗

indicates equal contribution. The work was completed during HR’s internship at Google Brain.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

