A Provably Efficient Model-Free Posterior Sampling
Method for Episodic Reinforcement Learning

Christoph Dann
Google Research

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research and NYU

Tong Zhang
Google Research and HKUST

Julian Zimmert
Google Research

Abstract
Thompson Sampling is one of the most effective methods for contextual bandits
and has been generalized to posterior sampling for certain MDP settings. However,
existing posterior sampling methods for reinforcement learning are limited by being
model-based or lack worst-case theoretical guarantees beyond linear MDPs. This
paper proposes a new model-free formulation of posterior sampling that applies to
more general episodic reinforcement learning problems with theoretical guarantees.
We introduce novel proof techniques to show that under suitable conditions, the
worst-case regret of our posterior sampling method matches the best known results
of optimization based methods. In the linear MDP setting with dimension, the regret
of our algorithm scales linearly with the dimension as compared to a quadratic
dependence of the existing posterior sampling-based exploration algorithms.

1

Introduction

A key challenge in reinforcement learning problems is to balance exploitation and exploration. The
goal is to make decisions that are currently expected to yield high reward and that help identify less
known but potentially better alternate decisions. In the special case of contextual bandit problems, this
trade-off is well understood and one of the most effective and widely used algorithms is Thompson
sampling [Thompson, 1933]. Thompson sampling is a Bayesian approach that maintains a posterior
distribution of each arm being optimal for the given context. At each round, the algorithm samples an
action from this distribution and updates the posterior with the new observation. The popularity of
Thompson sampling stems from strong empirical performance [Li et al., 2010], as well as competitive
theoretical guarantees in the form of Bayesian [Russo and Van Roy, 2014] and frequentist regret
bounds [Kaufmann et al., 2012].
The results in the contextual bandit setting have motivated several adaptations of Thompson sampling
to the more challenging Markov decision process (MDP) setting. Most common are model-based
adaptations such as PSRL [Strens, 2000, Osband et al., 2013, Agrawal and Jia, 2017] or BOSS
[Asmuth et al., 2012], which maintain a posterior distributions over MDP models. These algorithms
determine their current policy by sampling a model from this posterior and computing the optimal
policy for it. The benefit of maintaining a posterior over models instead of the optimal policy or
optimal value function directly is that posterior updates can be more easily derived and algorithms
are easier to analyze. However, model-based approaches are limited to small-scale problems where
a realizable model class of moderate size is available and where computing the optimal policy of a
model is computationally tractable. This rules out many practical problems where the observations
are rich, e.g. images or text.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

