Federated Hyperparameter Tuning: Challenges,
Baselines, and Connections to Weight-Sharing

Mikhail Khodak, Renbo Tu, Tian Li
Carnegie Mellon University
{khodak,renbo,tianli}@cmu.edu

Liam Li
Hewlett Packard Enterprise
me@liamcli.com

Maria-Florina Balcan, Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu,smithv@cmu.edu
Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University & Hewlett Packard Enterprise
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
Tuning hyperparameters is a crucial but arduous part of the machine learning
pipeline. Hyperparameter optimization is even more challenging in federated learning, where models are learned over a distributed network of heterogeneous devices;
here, the need to keep data on device and perform local training makes it difficult to
efficiently train and evaluate configurations. In this work, we investigate the problem of federated hyperparameter tuning. We first identify key challenges and show
how standard approaches may be adapted to form baselines for the federated setting.
Then, by making a novel connection to the neural architecture search technique
of weight-sharing, we introduce a new method, FedEx, to accelerate federated
hyperparameter tuning that is applicable to widely-used federated optimization
methods such as FedAvg and recent variants. Theoretically, we show that a FedEx
variant correctly tunes the on-device learning rate in the setting of online convex
optimization across devices. Empirically, we show that FedEx can outperform
natural baselines for federated hyperparameter tuning by several percentage points
on the Shakespeare, FEMNIST, and CIFAR-10 benchmarks—obtaining higher
accuracy using the same training budget.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a popular distributed computational setting where training is performed
locally or privately [30, 36] and where hyperparameter tuning has been identified as a critical
problem [18]. Although general hyperparameter optimization has been the subject of intense study [3,
16, 26], several unique aspects of the federated setting make tuning hyperparameters especially
challenging. However, to the best of our knowledge there has been no dedicated study on the specific
challenges and solutions in federated hyperparameter tuning. In this work, we first formalize the
problem of hyperparameter optimization in FL, introducing the following three key challenges:
1. Federated validation data: In federated networks, as the validation data is split across devices,
the entire dataset is not available at any one time; instead a central server is given access to
some number of devices at each communication round, for one or at most a few runs of local
training and validation. Thus, because the standard measure of complexity in FL is the number of
communication rounds, computing validation metrics exactly dramatically increases the cost.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

