Autobahn: Automorphism-based Graph Neural Nets

1

Erik H. Thiede,1* Wenda Zhou,12† Risi Kondor134‡
Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute, New York NY 10010
2
Center for Data Science, New York University, New York NY 10011
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637
4
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637
*
ehthiede@flatironinstitute.org, † wz2247@nyu.edu, ‡ risi@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We introduce Automorphism-based graph neural networks (Autobahn), a new
family of graph neural networks. In an Autobahn, we decompose the graph into a
collection of subgraphs and apply local convolutions that are equivariant to each
subgraph’s automorphism group. Specific choices of local neighborhoods and
subgraphs recover existing architectures such as message passing neural networks.
Our formalism also encompasses novel architectures: as an example, we introduce
a graph neural network that decomposes the graph into paths and cycles. The
resulting convolutions reflect the natural way that parts of the graph can transform,
preserving the intuitive meaning of convolution without sacrificing global permutation equivariance. We validate our approach by applying Autobahn to molecular
graphs, where it achieves results competitive with state-of-the-art message passing
algorithms.

1

Introduction

The successes of artificial neural networks in domains such as computer vision and natural language
processing have inspired substantial interest in developing neural architectures on graphs. Since
graphs naturally capture relational information, graph-structured data appears in a myriad of fields.
However, working with graph data raises new problems. Chief among them is the problem of graph
isomorphism: for the output of our neural network to be reliable, it is critical that the network gives
the same result independent of trivial changes in graph representation such as permutation of nodes.
Considerable effort has gone into constructing neural network architectures that obey this constraint[1–
5]. Arguably, the most popular approach is to construct Message-Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs)[6, 7]. In each layer of an MPNN, every node aggregates the activations of its neighbors in a permutation invariant manner and applies a linear mixing and nonlinearity to the resulting
vector. While subsequent architectures have built on this paradigm, e.g., by improving activations on
nodes and graph edges [8, 9], the core paradigm of repeatedly pooling information from neighboring
nodes has remained. These architectures are memory efficient, intuitively appealing, and respect the
graph’s symmetry under permutation of its nodes. However, practical results have shown that they
can oversmooth signals [10] and theoretical work has shown that they have trouble distinguishing
certain graphs and counting substructures [8, 11–13]. Moreover, MPNNs do not use the graph’s
topology to its fullest extent. For instance, applying an MPNN to highly structured graphs such as
grid graphs does not recover powerful known architectures such as convolutional neural networks. It
is also not clear how to best adapt MPNNs to families of graphs with radically different topologies:
MPNNs for citation graphs and molecular graphs are constructed in largely the same way. This
suggests that it should be possible to construct more expressive graph neural networks by directly
leveraging the graph’s structure.
In this work, we introduce a new framework for constructing graph neural networks, Automorphismbased Neural Networks (Autobahn). Our research is motivated by our goal of designing neural
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

