DSelect-k: Differentiable Selection in the Mixture of
Experts with Applications to Multi-Task Learning

Hussein Hazimeh1 , Zhe Zhao1 , Aakanksha Chowdhery1 , Maheswaran Sathiamoorthy1
Yihua Chen1 , Rahul Mazumder2 , Lichan Hong1 , Ed H. Chi1
1

Google, {hazimeh,zhezhao,chowdhery,nlogn,yhchen,lichan,edchi}@google.com
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, rahulmaz@mit.edu

Abstract
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture is showing promising results in improving parameter sharing in multi-task learning (MTL) and in scaling high-capacity
neural networks. State-of-the-art MoE models use a trainable “sparse gate” to
select a subset of the experts for each input example. While conceptually appealing,
existing sparse gates, such as Top-k, are not smooth. The lack of smoothness can
lead to convergence and statistical performance issues when training with gradientbased methods. In this paper, we develop DSelect-k: a continuously differentiable
and sparse gate for MoE, based on a novel binary encoding formulation. The gate
can be trained using first-order methods, such as stochastic gradient descent, and
offers explicit control over the number of experts to select. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of DSelect-k on both synthetic and real MTL datasets with up to
128 tasks. Our experiments indicate that DSelect-k can achieve statistically significant improvements in prediction and expert selection over popular MoE gates.
Notably, on a real-world, large-scale recommender system, DSelect-k achieves
over 22% improvement in predictive performance compared to Top-k. We provide
an open-source implementation of DSelect-k1 .

1

Introduction

The Mixture of Experts (MoE) [14] is the basis of many state-of-the-art deep learning models. For
example, MoE-based layers are being used to perform efficient computation in high-capacity neural
networks and to improve parameter sharing in multi-task learning (MTL) [32, 22, 21]. In its simplest
form, a MoE consists of a set of experts (neural networks) and a trainable gate. The gate assigns
weights to the experts on a per-example basis, and the MoE outputs a weighted combination of the
experts. This per-example weighting mechanism allows experts to specialize in different partitions of
the input space, which has the potential to improve predictive performance and interpretability. In
Figure 1 (left), we show an example of a simple MoE architecture that can be used as a standalone
learner or as a layer in a neural network.
The literature on the MoE has traditionally focused on softmax-based gates, in which all experts
are assigned nonzero weights [17]. To enhance the computational efficiency and interpretability of
MoE models, recent works use sparse gates that assign nonzero weights to only a small subset of
the experts [1, 32, 28, 21]. Existing sparse gates are not differentiable, and reinforcement learning
algorithms are commonly used for training [1, 28]. In an exciting work, [32] introduced a new sparse
gate (Top-k gate) and proposed training it using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The ability to
train the gate using SGD is appealing because it enables end-to-end training. However, the Top-k gate
is not continuous, which can lead to convergence issues in SGD that affect statistical performance (as
we demonstrate in our experiments).
1
https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/dselect_k_moe
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

