Active 3D Shape Reconstruction
from Vision and Touch
Edward J. Smith1,2∗

David Meger2

Luis Pineda1

Jitendra Malik1,3

Adriana Romero-Soriano1,2,†

1

2

Facebook AI Research

McGill University

3

Roberto Calandra1
Michal Drozdzal1,†

University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Humans build 3D understandings of the world through active object exploration, using
jointly their senses of vision and touch. However, in 3D shape reconstruction, most
recent progress has relied on static datasets of limited sensory data such as RGB
images, depth maps or haptic readings, leaving the active exploration of the shape
largely unexplored. In active touch sensing for 3D reconstruction, the goal is to actively
select the tactile readings that maximize the improvement in shape reconstruction
accuracy. However, the development of deep learning-based active touch models is
largely limited by the lack of frameworks for shape exploration. In this paper, we focus
on this problem and introduce a system composed of: 1) a haptic simulator leveraging
high spatial resolution vision-based tactile sensors for active touching of 3D objects; 2)
a mesh-based 3D shape reconstruction model that relies on tactile or visuotactile signals;
and 3) a set of data-driven solutions with either tactile or visuotactile priors to guide
the shape exploration. Our framework enables the development of the first fully datadriven solutions to active touch on top of learned models for object understanding. Our
experiments show the benefits of such solutions in the task of 3D shape understanding
where our models consistently outperform natural baselines. We provide our framework
as a tool to foster future research in this direction.

1

Introduction

3D shape understanding is an active area of research, whose goal is to build 3D models of objects and
environments from limited sensory data. It is commonly tackled by leveraging partial observations
such as a single view RGB image [60, 67, 23, 44], multiple view RGB images [16, 25, 30, 31], depth
maps [61, 74] or tactile readings [7, 49, 59, 45, 38]. Most of this research focuses on building shape
reconstruction models from a fixed set of partial observations. However, this constraint is relaxed in
the active sensing scenario, where additional observation can be acquired to improve the quality of the
3D reconstructions. In active vision [4], for instance, the objective can be to iteratively select camera
perspectives from an object that result in the highest improvement in quality of the reconstruction [76] and
only very recently the research community has started to leverage large scale datasets to learn exploration
strategies that generalize to unseen objects [77, 5, 41, 51, 29, 78, 50, 6].
Human haptic exploration of objects both with and without the presence of vision has classically been
analysed from a psychological perspective, where it was discovered that the developed tactile exploration
strategies for object understanding were demonstrated to not only be ubiquitous, but also highly tailored
to specific tasks [37, 33]. In spite of this, deep learning-based data-driven approaches to active touch
for shape understanding are practically non-existent. Previous haptic exploration works consider objects
∗
†

Correspondence to: ejsmith@fb.com and edward.smith@mail.mcgill.ca
Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

