Learning Distilled Collaboration Graph
for Multi-Agent Perception

Yiming Li
New York University
yimingli@nyu.edu

Shunli Ren
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
renshunli@sjtu.edu.cn

Siheng Chen∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn

Chen Feng∗
New York University
cfeng@nyu.edu

Pengxiang Wu
Rutgers University
pxiangwu@gmail.com

Wenjun Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zhangwenjun@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
To promote better performance-bandwidth trade-off for multi-agent perception,
we propose a novel distilled collaboration graph (DiscoGraph) to model trainable,
pose-aware, and adaptive collaboration among agents. Our key novelties lie in
two aspects. First, we propose a teacher-student framework to train DiscoGraph
via knowledge distillation. The teacher model employs an early collaboration
with holistic-view inputs; the student model is based on intermediate collaboration
with single-view inputs. Our framework trains DiscoGraph by constraining postcollaboration feature maps in the student model to match the correspondences in
the teacher model. Second, we propose a matrix-valued edge weight in DiscoGraph.
In such a matrix, each element reflects the inter-agent attention at a specific spatial
region, allowing an agent to adaptively highlight the informative regions. During inference, we only need to use the student model named as the distilled collaboration
network (DiscoNet). Attributed to the teacher-student framework, multiple agents
with the shared DiscoNet could collaboratively approach the performance of a
hypothetical teacher model with a holistic view. Our approach is validated on V2XSim 1.0, a large-scale multi-agent perception dataset that we synthesized using
CARLA and SUMO co-simulation. Our quantitative and qualitative experiments
in multi-agent 3D object detection show that DiscoNet could not only achieve
a better performance-bandwidth trade-off than the state-of-the-art collaborative
perception methods, but also bring more straightforward design rationale. Our
code is available on https://github.com/ai4ce/DiscoNet.

1

Introduction

Perception, which involves organizing, identifying and interpreting sensory information, is a crucial
ability for intelligent agents to understand the environment. Single-agent perception [4] has been
studied extensively in recent years, e.g., 2D/3D object detection [18, 27], tracking [23, 22] and
segmentation [25, 16], etc. Despite its great progress, single-agent perception suffers from a number
of shortcomings stemmed from its individual perspective. For example, in autonomous driving [8],
the LiDAR-based perception system can hardly perceive the target in the occluded or long-range areas.
Intuitively, with an appropriate collaboration strategy, multi-agent perception could fundamentally
upgrade the perception ability over single-agent perception.
To design a collaboration strategy, current approaches mainly include raw-measurement-based
early collaboration, output-based late collaboration and feature-based intermediate collaboration.
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

