Near-Optimal Offline Reinforcement Learning via
Double Variance Reduction
Ming Yin 1,3 , Yu Bai2 , and Yu-Xiang Wang1
1

Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara
2
Salesforce Research
3
Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, UC Santa Barbara
ming_yin@ucsb.edu yu.bai@salesforce.com yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of offline reinforcement learning (RL) — a well-motivated
setting of RL that aims at policy optimization using only historical data. Despite
its wide applicability, theoretical understandings of offline RL, such as its optimal
sample complexity, remain largely open even in basic settings such as tabular
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). In this paper, we propose Off-Policy Double
Variance Reduction (OPDVR), a new variance reduction based algorithm for offline
RL. Our main result shows that OPDVR provably identifies an -optimal policy with
e 2 /dm 2 ) episodes of offline data in the finite-horizon stationary transition
O(H
setting, where H is the horizon length and dm is the minimal marginal stateaction distribution induced by the behavior policy. This improves over the best
known upper bound by a factor of H. Moreover, we establish an informationtheoretic lower bound of Ω(H 2 /dm 2 ) which certifies that OPDVR is optimal up
to logarithmic factors. Lastly, we show that OPDVR also achieves rate-optimal
sample complexity under alternative settings such as the finite-horizon MDPs with
non-stationary transitions and the infinite horizon MDPs with discounted rewards.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (offline RL) aims at learning the near-optimal policy by using a static
offline dataset that is collected by a certain behavior policy µ [Lange et al., 2012]. As offline RL
agent has no access to interact with the environment, it is more widely applicable to problems where
online interaction is infeasible, e.g. when trials-and-errors are expensive (robotics, education), risky
(autonomous driving) or even unethical (healthcare) [see,e.g., a recent survey Levine et al., 2020].
Despite its practical significance, a precise theoretical understanding of offline RL has been lacking.
Previous sample complexity bounds for RL has primarily focused on the online setting [Azar et al.,
2017, Jin et al., 2018, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019, Simchowitz and Jamieson, 2019, Efroni et al.,
2019, Cai et al., 2019] or the generative model (simulator) setting [Azar et al., 2013, Sidford et al.,
2018a,b, Yang and Wang, 2019, Agarwal et al., 2020, Wainwright, 2019, Lattimore and Szepesvari,
2019], both of which assuming interactive access to the environment and not applicable to offline RL.
On the other hand, the sample complexity of offline RL remains unsettled even for environments with
finitely many state and actions, a.k.a, the tabular MDPs (Markov Decision Processes). One major
line of work is concerned with the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem [Li et al., 2015, Jiang and Li,
2016, Liu et al., 2018, Kallus and Uehara, 2019a,b, Uehara and Jiang, 2019, Xie et al., 2019, Yin and
Wang, 2020, Duan and Wang, 2020]. These works provide sample complexity bounds for evaluating
the performance of a fixed policy, and do not imply guarantees for policy optimization. Another line
of work studies the sample complexity of offline policy optimization in conjunction with function
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

