On Learning Domain-Invariant Representations for
Transfer Learning with Multiple Sources

Trung Phung1 Trung Le2 Long Vuong1 Toan Tran1 Anh Tran1 Hung Bui1 Dinh Phung1,2
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam 2 Monash University, Australia
v.trungpq3@vinai.io, trunglm@monash.edu,
{v.longvt8, v.toantm3, v.anhtt152, v.hungbh1, v.dinhpq2}@vinai.io

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) benefits from the rigorous theoretical works that study
its insightful characteristics and various aspects, e.g., learning domain-invariant
representations and its trade-off. However, it seems not the case for the multiple
source DA and domain generalization (DG) settings which are remarkably more
complicated and sophisticated due to the involvement of multiple source domains
and potential unavailability of target domain during training. In this paper, we
develop novel upper-bounds for the target general loss which appeal to us to define
two kinds of domain-invariant representations. We further study the pros and cons
as well as the trade-offs of enforcing learning each domain-invariant representation.
Finally, we conduct experiments to inspect the trade-off of these representations
for offering practical hints regarding how to use them in practice and explore other
interesting properties of our developed theory.

1

Introduction

Although annotated data has been shown to be really precious and valuable to deep learning (DL),
in many real-world applications, annotating a sufficient amount of data for training qualified DL
models is prohibitively labour-expensive, time-consuming, and error-prone. Transfer learning is a
vital solution for the lack of labeled data. Additionally, in many situations, we are only able to collect
limited number of annotated data from multiple source domains. Therefore, it is desirable to train a
qualified DL model primarily based on multiple source domains and possibly together with a target
domain. Depending on the availability of the target domain during training, we encounter either
multiple source domain adaptation (MSDA) or domain generalization (DG) problem.
Domain adaptation (DA) is a specific case of MSDA when we need to transfer from a single
source domain to an another target domain available during training. For the DA setting, the
pioneering work [3] and other following work [43, 52, 53, 21, 18, 54, 22] are abundant to study its
insightful characterizations and aspects, notably what domain-invariant (DI) representations are,
how to learn this kind of representations, and the trade-off of enforcing learning DI representations.
Those well-grounded studies lay the foundation for developing impressive practical DA methods
[14, 47, 44, 52, 7, 51, 36].
Due to the appearance of multiple source domains and possibly unavailability of target domain,
establishing theoretical foundation and characterizing DI representations for the MSDA and especially
DG settings are significantly more challenging. A number of state-of-the-art works in MSDA and
DG [56, 39, 19, 11, 41, 27, 28, 34, 15, 55, 49, 35, 37] have implicitly exploited and used DI
representations in some sense to achieve impressive performances, e.g., [28, 28, 11] minimize
representation divergence during training, [41] decomposes representation to obtain invariant feature,
[55] maximizes domain prediction entropy to learn invariance. Despite the successes, the notion
DI representations in MSDA and DG is not fully-understood, and rigorous studies to theoretically
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

