Deep Conditional Gaussian Mixture Model for
Constrained Clustering
Laura Manduchi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
laura.manduchi@inf.ethz.ch

Kieran Chin-Cheong
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
kieran.chincheong@inf.ethz.ch

Holger Michel
Department of Neonatology
University Children’s Hospital Regensburg (KUNO)
University of Regensburg, Germany
holger.michel@barmherzige-regensburg.de
Sven Wellmann
Department of Neonatology
University Children’s Hospital Regensburg (KUNO)
University of Regensburg, Germany
sven.wellmann@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

Julia E. Vogt
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
julia.vogt@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Constrained clustering has gained significant attention in the field of machine
learning as it can leverage prior information on a growing amount of only partially
labeled data. Following recent advances in deep generative models, we propose a
novel framework for constrained clustering that is intuitive, interpretable, and can
be trained efficiently in the framework of stochastic gradient variational inference.
By explicitly integrating domain knowledge in the form of probabilistic relations,
our proposed model (DC-GMM) uncovers the underlying distribution of data
conditioned on prior clustering preferences, expressed as pairwise constraints.
These constraints guide the clustering process towards a desirable partition of
the data by indicating which samples should or should not belong to the same
cluster. We provide extensive experiments to demonstrate that DC-GMM shows
superior clustering performances and robustness compared to state-of-the-art deep
constrained clustering methods on a wide range of data sets. We further demonstrate
the usefulness of our approach on two challenging real-world applications.

1

Introduction

The ever-growing amount of data and the time cost associated with its labeling has made clustering a
relevant task in the field of machine learning. Yet, in many cases, a fully unsupervised clustering
algorithm might naturally find a solution that is not consistent with the domain knowledge (Basu et al.,
2008). In medicine, for example, clustering could be driven by unwanted bias, such as the type of
machine used to record the data, rather than more informative features. Moreover, practitioners often
have access to prior information about the types of clusters that are sought, and a principled method
to guide the algorithm towards a desirable configuration is then needed. Therefore, constrained
clustering has a long history in machine learning as it enforces desirable clustering properties by
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

