Approximate Decomposable Submodular Function
Minimization for Cardinality-Based Components

Nate Veldt∗
nveldt@tamu.edu
Texas A&M University

Austin R. Benson
arb@cs.cornell.edu
Cornell University

Jon Kleinberg
kleinberg@cornell.edu
Cornell University

Abstract
Minimizing a sum of simple submodular functions of limited support is a special case of general submodular function minimization that has seen numerous
applications in machine learning. We develop fast techniques for instances where
components in the sum are cardinality-based, meaning they depend only on the
size of the input set. This variant is one of the most widely applied in practice,
encompassing, e.g., common energy functions arising in image segmentation and
recent generalized hypergraph cut functions. We develop the first approximation
algorithms for this problem, where the approximations can be quickly computed
via reduction to a sparse graph cut problem, with graph sparsity controlled by the
desired approximation factor. Our method relies on a new connection between
sparse graph reduction techniques and piecewise linear approximations to concave
functions. Our sparse reduction technique leads to significant improvements in
theoretical runtimes, as well as substantial practical gains in problems ranging from
benchmark image segmentation tasks to hypergraph clustering problems.

1

Introduction

Given a ground set V , a function f : 2V → R is submodular if for every A, B ⊆ V it satisfies f (A) +
f (B) ≥ f (A ∩ B) + f (A ∪ B). Submodular functions are ubiquitous in combinatorial optimization
and machine learning, arising, e.g., in image segmentation [22], hypergraph clustering [30], data
subset selection [44], document summarization [31], and dense subgraph discovery [43]. Algorithms
for minimizing submodular functions are well studied. Strongly-polynomial time algorithms for
general submodular minimization exist [36, 17, 18], but their runtimes are impractical in most cases.
The past decade has witnessed several advances in faster algorithms for decomposable submodular
function minimization (DSFM), i.e., minimizing a sum of simpler submodular functions [9, 24, 39,
29, 35, 10, 21, 19]. This problem is defined by identifying a set E ⊆ 2V of subsets of the ground set.
The goal is then to solve
P
minimizeS⊆V f (S) = e∈E fe (S ∩ e),
(1)
where for each e ∈ E, fe is a submodular function supported on a subset e ⊆ V . Functions of this
form often arise as energy functions in computer vision [22, 23, 13], and generalized cut functions
for hypergraph clustering and learning [12, 28, 30, 32, 41, 42], among other applications.
This paper focuses on cardinality-based DSFM (Card-DSFM), where every component fe in the
sum is a concave cardinality function, i.e., fe (A) = ge (|A|) for some concave function ge . A single
concave cardinality function is effectively a function of one variable and is trivial to minimize.
However, set functions obtained via sums of these functions are much more complex and have broad
modeling power, making this one of the most widely studied and applied variants since the earliest
∗

This research was performed while the author was a postdoctoral associate at Cornell University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

