CATs: Cost Aggregation Transformers for Visual
Correspondence

Seokju Cho∗
Yonsei University

Sunghwan Hong∗
Korea University

Sangryul Jeon
Yonsei University

Yunsung Lee
Korea University

Seungryong Kim†
Korea University

Kwanghoon Sohn
Yonsei University

Abstract
We propose a novel cost aggregation network, called Cost Aggregation Transformers (CATs), to find dense correspondences between semantically similar images
with additional challenges posed by large intra-class appearance and geometric
variations. Cost aggregation is a highly important process in matching tasks, which
the matching accuracy depends on the quality of its output. Compared to handcrafted or CNN-based methods addressing the cost aggregation, in that either lacks
robustness to severe deformations or inherit the limitation of CNNs that fail to
discriminate incorrect matches due to limited receptive fields, CATs explore global
consensus among initial correlation map with the help of some architectural designs that allow us to fully leverage self-attention mechanism. Specifically, we
include appearance affinity modeling to aid the cost aggregation process in order to
disambiguate the noisy initial correlation maps and propose multi-level aggregation
to efficiently capture different semantics from hierarchical feature representations.
We then combine with swapping self-attention technique and residual connections
not only to enforce consistent matching, but also to ease the learning process, which
we find that these result in an apparent performance boost. We conduct experiments
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model over the latest methods
and provide extensive ablation studies. Code and trained models are available
at https://sunghwanhong.github.io/CATs/.

1

Introduction

Establishing dense correspondences across semantically similar images can facilitate many Computer
Vision applications, including semantic segmentation [46, 54, 36], object detection [29], and image
editing [53, 30, 28, 25]. Unlike classical dense correspondence problems that consider visually similar
images taken under the geometrically constrained settings [16, 19, 50, 18], semantic correspondence
poses additional challenges from large intra-class appearance and geometric variations caused by the
unconstrained settings of given image pair.
Recent approaches [42, 43, 45, 34, 37, 39, 31, 58, 47, 57, 51, 35] addressed these challenges by
carefully designing deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)-based models analogously to the
classical matching pipeline [48, 41], feature extraction, cost aggregation, and flow estimation. Several
works [24, 9, 37, 39, 47, 51] focused on the feature extraction stage, as it has been proven that the more
powerful feature representation the model learns, the more robust matching is obtained [24, 9, 51].
However, solely relying on the matching similarity between features without any prior often suffers
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

