The Causal-Neural Connection:
Expressiveness, Learnability, and Inference

Kevin Xia
CausalAI Lab
Columbia University

Kai-Zhan Lee
Bloomberg L.P.
Columbia University

kmx2000@columbia.edu

kl2792@columbia.edu

Yoshua Bengio
MILA
Université de Montréal
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Elias Bareinboim
CausalAI Lab
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
One of the central elements of any causal inference is an object called structural
causal model (SCM), which represents a collection of mechanisms and exogenous
sources of random variation of the system under investigation (Pearl, 2000). An
important property of many kinds of neural networks is universal approximability:
the ability to approximate any function to arbitrary precision. Given this property,
one may be tempted to surmise that a collection of neural nets is capable of learning
any SCM by training on data generated by that SCM. In this paper, we show
this is not the case by disentangling the notions of expressivity and learnability.
Specifically, we show that the causal hierarchy theorem (Thm. 1, Bareinboim et al.,
2020), which describes the limits of what can be learned from data, still holds for
neural models. For instance, an arbitrarily complex and expressive neural net is
unable to predict the effects of interventions given observational data alone. Given
this result, we introduce a special type of SCM called a neural causal model (NCM),
and formalize a new type of inductive bias to encode structural constraints necessary
for performing causal inferences. Building on this new class of models, we focus
on solving two canonical tasks found in the literature known as causal identification
and estimation. Leveraging the neural toolbox, we develop an algorithm that is both
sufficient and necessary to determine whether a causal effect can be learned from
data (i.e., causal identifiability); it then estimates the effect whenever identifiability
holds (causal estimation). Simulations corroborate the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

One of the most celebrated and relied upon results in the science of intelligence is the universality of
neural models. More formally, universality says that neural models can approximate any function
(e.g., boolean, classification boundaries, continuous valued) with arbitrary precision given enough
capacity in terms of the depth and breadth of the network [14, 26, 47, 53]. This result, combined
with the observation that most tasks can be abstracted away and modeled as input/output – i.e., as
functions – leads to the strongly held belief that under the right conditions, neural networks can solve
the most challenging and interesting tasks in AI. This belief is not without merits, and is corroborated
by ample evidence of practical successes, including in compelling tasks in computer vision [43],
speech recognition [22], and game playing [54]. Given that the universality of neural nets is such a
compelling proposition, we investigate this belief in the context of causal reasoning.
To start understanding the causal-neural connection – i.e., the non-trivial and somewhat intricate
relationship between these modes of reasoning – two standard objects in causal analysis will be
instrumental. First, we evoke a class of generative models known as the Structural Causal Model
(SCM, for short) [58, Ch. 7]. In words, an SCM M∗ is a representation of a system that includes a
collection of mechanisms and a probability distribution over the exogenous conditions (to be formally
defined later on). Second, any fully specified SCM M∗ induces a collection of distributions known as
the Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH) [5, Def. 9]. The importance of the PCH is that it formally delimits
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

