Safe Reinforcement Learning by Imagining the Near
Future
Garrett Thomas
Stanford University
gwthomas@stanford.edu

Yuping Luo
Princeton University
yupingl@cs.princeton.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning is a promising path toward applying reinforcement
learning algorithms to real-world problems, where suboptimal behaviors may lead
to actual negative consequences. In this work, we focus on the setting where
unsafe states can be avoided by planning ahead a short time into the future. In
this setting, a model-based agent with a sufficiently accurate model can avoid
unsafe states. We devise a model-based algorithm that heavily penalizes unsafe
trajectories, and derive guarantees that our algorithm can avoid unsafe states under
certain assumptions. Experiments demonstrate that our algorithm can achieve
competitive rewards with fewer safety violations in several continuous control
tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) enables the discovery of effective policies for sequential decisionmaking tasks via trial and error [Mnih et al., 2015, Gu et al., 2016, Bellemare et al., 2020]. However,
in domains such as robotics, healthcare, and autonomous driving, certain kinds of mistakes pose
danger to people and/or objects in the environment. Hence there is an emphasis on the safety of the
policy, both at execution time and while interacting with the environment during learning. This issue,
referred to as safe exploration, is considered an important problem in AI safety [Amodei et al., 2016].
In this work, we advocate a model-based approach to safety, meaning that we estimate the dynamics of
the system to be controlled and use the model for planning (or more accurately, policy improvement).
The primary motivation for this is that a model-based method has the potential to anticipate safety
violations before they occur. Often in real-world applications, the engineer has an idea of what
states should be considered violations of safety: for example, a robot colliding rapidly with itself or
surrounding objects, a car driving on the wrong side of the road, or a patient’s blood glucose levels
spiking.Yet model-free algorithms typically lack the ability to incorporate such prior knowledge and
must encounter some safety violations before learning to avoid them.
We begin with the premise that in practice, forward prediction for relatively few timesteps is sufficient
to avoid safety violations. Consider the illustrative example in Figure 1, in which an agent controls
the acceleration (and thereby, speed) of a car by pressing the gas or brake (or nothing). Note that
there is an upper bound on how far into the future the agent would have to plan to foresee and (if
possible) avoid any collision, namely, the amount of time it takes to bring the car to a complete stop.
Assuming that the horizon required for detecting unsafe situations is not too large, we show how
to construct a reward function with the property that an optimal policy will never incur a safety
violation. A short prediction horizon is also beneficial for model-based RL, as the well-known issue
of compounding error plagues long-horizon prediction [Asadi et al., 2019]: imperfect predictions
are fed back into the model as inputs (possibly outside the distribution of inputs in the training data),
leading to progressively worse accuracy as the prediction horizon increases.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

