Interactive Label Cleaning with
Example-based Explanations

Stefano Teso
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
stefano.teso@unitn.it

Andrea Bontempelli
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
andrea.bontempelli@unitn.it

Fausto Giunchiglia
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
fausto.giunchiglia@unitn.it

Andrea Passerini
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it

Abstract
We tackle sequential learning under label noise in applications where a human
supervisor can be queried to relabel suspicious examples. Existing approaches
are flawed, in that they only relabel incoming examples that look “suspicious” to
the model. As a consequence, those mislabeled examples that elude (or don’t
undergo) this cleaning step end up tainting the training data and the model with no
further chance of being cleaned. We propose CINCER, a novel approach that cleans
both new and past data by identifying pairs of mutually incompatible examples.
Whenever it detects a suspicious example, CINCER identifies a counter-example
in the training set that—according to the model—is maximally incompatible with
the suspicious example, and asks the annotator to relabel either or both examples,
resolving this possible inconsistency. The counter-examples are chosen to be
maximally incompatible, so to serve as explanations of the model’s suspicion,
and highly influential, so to convey as much information as possible if relabeled.
CINCER achieves this by leveraging an efficient and robust approximation of
influence functions based on the Fisher information matrix (FIM). Our extensive
empirical evaluation shows that clarifying the reasons behind the model’s suspicions
by cleaning the counter-examples helps in acquiring substantially better data and
models, especially when paired with our FIM approximation.

1

Introduction

Label noise is a major issue in machine learning as it can lead to compromised predictive performance
and unreliable models [1, 2]. We focus on sequential learning settings in which a human supervisor,
usually a domain expert, can be asked to double-check and relabel any potentially mislabeled
example. Applications include crowd-sourced machine learning and citizen science, where trained
researchers can be asked to clean the labels provided by crowd-workers [3, 4], and interactive personal
assistants [5], where the user self-reports the initial annotations (e.g., about activities being performed)
and unreliability is due to memory bias [6], unwillingness to report [7], or conditioning [8].
This problem is often tackled by monitoring for incoming examples that are likely to be mislabeled,
aka suspicious examples, and ask the supervisor to provide clean (or at least better) annotations for
them. Existing approaches, however, focus solely on cleaning the incoming examples [9, 4, 10, 5].
This means that noisy examples that did not undergo the cleaning step (e.g., those in the initial
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

