Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
With Timed Subgoals

Nico Gürtler

Dieter Büchler

Georg Martius

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
{nguertler, dbuechler, gmartius}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) holds great potential for sampleefficient learning on challenging long-horizon tasks. In particular, letting a higher
level assign subgoals to a lower level has been shown to enable fast learning on
difficult problems. However, such subgoal-based methods have been designed with
static reinforcement learning environments in mind and consequently struggle with
dynamic elements beyond the immediate control of the agent even though they
are ubiquitous in real-world problems. In this paper, we introduce Hierarchical
reinforcement learning with Timed Subgoals (HiTS), an HRL algorithm that enables the agent to adapt its timing to a dynamic environment by not only specifying
what goal state is to be reached but also when. We discuss how communicating
with a lower level in terms of such timed subgoals results in a more stable learning
problem for the higher level. Our experiments on a range of standard benchmarks
and three new challenging dynamic reinforcement learning environments show that
our method is capable of sample-efficient learning where an existing state-of-the-art
subgoal-based HRL method fails to learn stable solutions.1

1

Introduction

Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) has recently begun to live up to its promise of sampleefficient learning on difficult long-horizon tasks. The idea behind HRL is to break down a complex
problem into a hierarchy of more tractable subtasks. A particularly successful approach to defining
such a hierarchy is to let a high-level policy choose a subgoal which a low-level policy is then tasked
with achieving [8]. Due to the resulting temporal abstraction such subgoal-based HRL methods have
been shown to be able to learn demanding tasks with unprecedented efficiency [31, 23, 19].
In order to realize the full potential of HRL it is necessary to design algorithms that enable concurrent
learning on all levels of the hierarchy. However, the changing behavior of the lower level during
training introduces a major difficulty. From the perspective of the higher level, the reinforcement
learning environment and the policy on the lower level constitute an effective environment which
determines what consequences its actions will have. During training, the learning progress on the
lower level renders this effective environment non-stationary. If this issue is not addressed, the higher
level will usually not start to learn efficiently before the lower level is fully converged. This situation is
similar to a manager and a worker trying to solve a task together while the meaning of the vocabulary
they use for communication is continuously changing. Clearly, a stable solution can then only be
found once the worker reacts reliably to instructions. Hence, to enable true concurrent learning, all
1
Videos and code, including our algorithm and the proposed dynamic environments, can be found at
https://github.com/martius-lab/HiTS.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

