Accelerating Quadratic Optimization with
Reinforcement Learning
Jeffrey Ichnowski*1 , Paras Jain*1 , Bartolomeo Stellato2 , Goran Banjac3 , Michael Luo1 ,
Francesco Borrelli1 , Joseph E. Gonzalez1 , Ion Stoica1 , and Ken Goldberg1
1
University of California, Berkeley, 2 Princeton University, 3 ETH Zürich
Correspondence to: {jeffi, paras_jain}@berkeley.edu
* equal contribution

Abstract
First-order methods for quadratic optimization such as OSQP are widely used for
large-scale machine learning and embedded optimal control, where many related
problems must be rapidly solved. These methods face two persistent challenges:
manual hyperparameter tuning and convergence time to high-accuracy solutions.
To address these, we explore how Reinforcement Learning (RL) can learn a policy
to tune parameters to accelerate convergence. In experiments with well-known QP
benchmarks we find that our RL policy, RLQP, significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art QP solvers by up to 3x. RLQP generalizes surprisingly well to previously
unseen problems with varying dimension and structure from different applications,
including the QPLIB, Netlib LP and Maros-Mészáros problems. Code, models, and
videos are available at https://berkeleyautomation.github.io/rlqp/.

1

Introduction

Solving quadratic programs (QPs) efficiently is critical to applications in finance, robotic control
and operations research. While state-of-the-art interior-point methods scale poorly with problem
dimensions, first-order methods for solving QPs typically require thousands of iterations. Moreover,
real-time control applications have tight latency constraints for solvers [33]. Therefore, it is important
to develop efficient heuristics to solve QPs in fewer iterations.
The Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) [6, 15, 18] is an efficient first-order
optimization algorithm, and is the basis for the widely used and state-of-the art Operator-Splitting QP
(OSQP) solver [44]. ADMM performs a linear solve on a matrix based on the optimality conditions
of the QP to generate a step direction, and then projects the step onto the constraint bounds.
While state-of-the-art, the ADMM algorithm has numerous hyperparameters that must be tuned
with heuristics to regularize and control optimization. Most importantly, the step size parameter ρ
has considerable impact on the convergence rate. However, is still unclear how to select ρ before
attempting the QP solution. While some theoretical works compute the optimal ρ [17], they rely
on solving semidefinite optimization problems which are much harder than solving the QP itself.
Alternatively, some heuristics introduce “feedback” by adapting ρ throughout optimization in order
to balance primal and dual residuals [44, 6, 22].
We propose RLQP (see Fig. 1), an accelerated QP solver based on OSQP that uses reinforcement
learning (RL) to adapt the internal parameters of the ADMM algorithm between iterations to minimize
solve times. An RL algorithm learns a policy πθ : S → A, parameterized by θ (e.g., the weights of a
neural network), that maps states in a set S to actions in set A such that the selected action maximizes
the accumulated reward r. To train the policy for RLQP, we define S to be the internal state of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

