Near-Optimal Lower Bounds For Convex
Optimization For All Orders of Smoothness

Ankit Garg
Microsoft Research India
Bengaluru, KA, India
garga@microsoft.com
Praneeth Netrapalli
Google Research India
Bengaluru, KA, India
praneethn@gmail.com

Robin Kothari
Microsoft Quantum and Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
robin.kothari@microsoft.com
Suhail Sherif
Vector Institute
Toronto, ON, Canada
suhail.sherif@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the complexity of optimizing highly smooth convex functions. For a
positive integer p, we want to find an -approximate minimum of a convex function
f , given oracle access to the function and its first p derivatives, assuming that the
pth derivative of f is Lipschitz.
Recently, three independent research groups (Jiang et al., PLMR 2019; Gasnikov
et al., PLMR 2019; Bubeck et al., PLMR 2019) developed a new algorithm that
2
e
3p+1 ) oracle calls for constant p. This is known to
solves this problem with O(1/
be optimal (up to log factors) for deterministic algorithms, but known lower bounds
for randomized algorithms do not match this bound. We prove a new lower bound
that matches this bound (up to log factors), and holds not only for randomized
algorithms, but also quantum algorithms.

1

Introduction

In recent years, several optimization algorithms have been proposed, especially for machine learning
problems, that achieve improved performance by exploiting the smoothness of the function to be
optimized. Specifically, these algorithms have better performance when the function’s first, second, or
higher order derivatives are Lipschitz [Nes08, Bae09, MS13, Nes19, GDG+ 19, JWZ19, BJL+ 19b].
In this paper we study the problem of minimizing a highly smooth convex function given black-box
access to the function and its higher order derivatives. The simplest example of the family of problems
we consider here is the problem of approximately minimizing a convex function f : Rn → R, given
access to an oracle that on input x ∈ Rn outputs (f (x), ∇f (x)), under the assumption that the
function’s first derivative, its gradient ∇f , has bounded Lipschitz constant. This problem can be
solved by Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent, and it is known that this algorithm is optimal (in
high dimension) among deterministic and randomized algorithms [Nes83, NY83].
More generally, for any positive integer p, consider the pth-order optimization problem: For known
R > 0,  > 0, and Lp > 0, we have a p times differentiable convex function f : Rn → R whose pth
derivative has Lipschitz constant at most Lp , which means
k∇p f (x) − ∇p f (y)k ≤ Lp kx − yk,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(1)

