Co-Adaptation of Algorithmic and
Implementational Innovations in
Inference-based Deep Reinforcement Learning

Hiroki Furuta
The University of Tokyo
furuta@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Tatsuya Matsushima
The University of Tokyo

Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo

Tadashi Kozuno
University of Alberta

Shixiang Shane Gu
Google Research

Abstract
Recently many algorithms were devised for reinforcement learning (RL) with
function approximation. While they have clear algorithmic distinctions, they also
have many implementation differences that are algorithm-independent and sometimes under-emphasized. Such mixing of algorithmic novelty and implementation
craftsmanship makes rigorous analyses of the sources of performance improvements across algorithms difficult. In this work, we focus on a series of off-policy
inference-based actor-critic algorithms – MPO, AWR, and SAC – to decouple
their algorithmic innovations and implementation decisions. We present unified
derivations through a single control-as-inference objective, where we can categorize each algorithm as based on either Expectation-Maximization (EM) or direct
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence minimization and treat the rest of specifications
as implementation details. We performed extensive ablation studies, and identified
substantial performance drops whenever implementation details are mismatched
for algorithmic choices. These results show which implementation or code details
are co-adapted and co-evolved with algorithms, and which are transferable across
algorithms: as examples, we identified that tanh Gaussian policy and network sizes
are highly adapted to algorithmic types, while layer normalization and ELU are
critical for MPO’s performances but also transfer to noticeable gains in SAC. We
hope our work can inspire future work to further demystify sources of performance
improvements across multiple algorithms and allow researchers to build on one
another’s both algorithmic and implementational innovations.1

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved huge empirical successes in both continuous [36, 18]
and discrete [39, 26] problem settings with on-policy [52, 54] and off-policy [13, 22, 23] algorithms.
Especially in the continuous control domain, interpreting RL as probabilistic inference [60, 61] has
yielded many kinds of algorithms with strong empirical performances [34, 50, 51, 12, 29, 21, 16, 24].
Recently, there has been a series of off-policy algorithms derived from this perspective for learning
policies with function approximations [2, 22, 48]. Notably, Soft Actor Critic (SAC) [22, 23], based
on a maximum entropy objective and soft Q-function, significantly outperforms on-policy [52,
54] and off-policy [36, 18, 13] methods. Maximum a posteriori Policy Optimisation (MPO) [2],
1

The implementation is available at https://github.com/frt03/inference-based-rl.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

