Hard-Attention for Scalable Image Classification

Athanasios Papadopoulos1 Paweł Korus1,2 Nasir Memon1
1
Tandon School of Engineering, New York University
2
AGH University of Science and Technology
{tpapadop, pkorus, memon}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Can we leverage high-resolution information without the unsustainable quadratic
complexity to input scale? We propose Traversal Network (TNet), a novel multiscale hard-attention architecture, which traverses image scale-space in a top-down
fashion, visiting only the most informative image regions along the way. TNet
offers an adjustable trade-off between accuracy and complexity, by changing the
number of attended image locations. We compare our model against hard-attention
baselines on ImageNet, achieving higher accuracy with less resources (FLOPs, processing time and memory). We further test our model on fMoW dataset, where we
process satellite images of size up to 896×896 px, getting up to 2.5x faster processing compared to baselines operating on the same resolution, while achieving higher
accuracy as well. TNet is modular, meaning that most classification models could
be adopted as its backbone for feature extraction, making the reported performance
gains orthogonal to benefits offered by existing optimized deep models. Finally,
hard-attention guarantees a degree of interpretability to our model’s predictions,
without any extra cost beyond inference.

1

Introduction

In image classification, deep neural networks (DNNs) are typically designed and optimized for a
specific input resolution, e.g. 224 × 224 px. Using modern DNNs on images of higher resolution (as
happens e.g., in satellite or medical imaging) is a non-trivial problem due to the subtlety of scaling
model architectures [57], and rapid increase in computational and memory requirements.
A linear increase in the spatial dimensions of the input, results in a quadratic increase in computational
complexity and memory, and can easily lead to resource bottlenecks. This can be mitigated with
careful engineering, e.g., streaming [46] or gradient checkpointing [42]. However, such solutions are
content-agnostic, and don’t take advantage of the fact that discriminative information may be sparse
and distributed across various image scales, deeming processing of the whole input unnecessary.
Our goal is to leverage high-resolution information, while dispensing with the unsustainable quadratic
complexity to input scale. To this end, we propose Traversal Network (TNet), a multi-scale hardattention architecture, which traverses image scale-space in a top-down fashion, visiting only the
most informative image regions along the way. TNet is recursive, and can be applied to inputs of
virtually any resolution; an outline of its processing flow is presented in Fig. 1 (a). Our method draws
its intuition from the way humans use saccades to explore the visual world.
TNet offers an adjustable trade-off between accuracy and complexity, by changing the number
of attended image regions. This way, complexity increases linearly with the number of attended
locations, irrespective of the input resolution. Also, hard-attention explicitly reveals the image regions
that our model values the most, providing a certain degree of interpretability (Fig. 1 (c)). Importantly,
interpretability comes without any extra cost beyond inference, in contrast to popular attribution
methods, which require at least an additional backward pass [53], or numerous forward passes [1].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

