Towards Sharper Generalization Bounds for
Structured Prediction
Shaojie Li1,2 Yong Liu1,2,∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
2020000277@ruc.edu.cn, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the generalization performance of structured prediction
learning and obtain state-of-the-art generalization bounds. Our analysis is based
on factor graph decomposition of structured prediction algorithms, and we present
novel margin guarantees from three different perspectives: Lipschitz continuity,
smoothness, and space capacity condition. In the Lipschitz continuity scenario, we
improve the square-root dependency on the label set cardinality of existing bounds
to a logarithmic dependence. In the smoothness scenario, we provide generalization
bounds that are not only a logarithmic dependency on the label set cardinality but a
faster convergence rate of order O( n1 ) on the sample size n. In the space capacity
scenario, we obtain bounds that do not depend on the label set cardinality and have
faster convergence rates than O( √1n ). In each scenario, applications are provided
to suggest that these conditions are easy to be satisfied.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction [18, 12, 17] covers a wide range of machine learning fields, such as computer
vision, natural language processing, and computational biology. Several examples of structured
prediction problems include part-of-speech tagging, dependency parsing, named entity recognition
and machine translation in natural language understanding, image segmentation and objection
recognition in computer vision, and protein folding in computational biology. An essential property
of structured prediction is that the output space admits some structure, such as strings, graphs, trees,
or sequences [18, 12, 13]. Meanwhile, another property common to the above tasks is that the natural
loss function in each case admits a decomposition along with the output substructures. The complex
output structure and corresponding loss function make structured prediction different from the widely
studied binary or multi-class classification problems.
The design of structured prediction algorithms have been thrived for many years, including conditional
random fields [30], structured support vector machines [61], kernel-regression algorithm [19], searchbased structured prediction [20], maximum-margin markov network [60], image segmentation
[43], part-of-speech-tagging [27], and machine translation [68]. Compared to the prosperity and
development of structured prediction algorithm designing, the theoretical analysis of structured
prediction appears to be not sufficiently well-documented [13], especially the studying on sharper
generalization bounds. However, it is known that the theoretical study of structured prediction
algorithms is essential [18, 12, 13, 1].
Several theoretical studies of structured prediction consider a specific algorithm and a simple loss
such as Hamming loss [60, 16, 14]. Recently, increasing work has considered the analysis of general
losses. These works can be roughly cast into four categories: PAC-Bayesian approach, factor graph
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

