A Max-Min Entropy Framework for Reinforcement
Learning

Seungyul Han
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
UNIST
Ulsan, South Korea 44919
syhan@unist.ac.kr

Youngchul Sung†
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea 34141
ycsung@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a max-min entropy framework for reinforcement learning
(RL) to overcome the limitation of the soft actor-critic (SAC) algorithm implementing the maximum entropy RL in model-free sample-based learning. Whereas the
maximum entropy RL guides learning for policies to reach states with high entropy
in the future, the proposed max-min entropy framework aims to learn to visit states
with low entropy and maximize the entropy of these low-entropy states to promote
better exploration. For general Markov decision processes (MDPs), an efficient
algorithm is constructed under the proposed max-min entropy framework based
on disentanglement of exploration and exploitation. Numerical results show that
the proposed algorithm yields drastic performance improvement over the current
state-of-the-art RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

The maximum entropy framework has been considered in various RL domains [22, 23, 30, 45,
51, 53, 58]. Maximum entropy RL adds the expected policy entropy to the return objective of
standard RL in order to maximize both the return and the entropy of policy distribution. Maximum
entropy RL encourages the policy to choose multiple actions probabilistically and yields a significant
improvement in exploration and robustness and good final performance in various control tasks
[15, 20, 21, 25, 26, 29, 50]. In particular, soft actor-critic (SAC) implements maximum entropy RL in
an efficient iterative manner based on soft policy iteration and guarantees convergence to the optimal
policy for finite MDPs, yielding significant performance improvement over various on-policy and
off-policy recent RL algorithms in many continuous control tasks. However, we observe that such an
iterative implementation of the maximum entropy strategy of optimizing for policies that aim to reach
states with high entropy in the future does not necessarily result in the desired exploration behavior
but may yield positive feedback hindering exploration in model-free sample-based learning with
function approximation. In order to overcome such limitations associated with implementation of the
maximum entropy RL, we propose a max-min entropy framework for RL, which aims to learn policies
reaching states with low entropy and maximizing the entropy of these low-entropy states, whereas the
conventional maximum entropy RL optimizes for policies that aim to visit states with high entropy
and maximize the entropy of those high-entropy states for high entropy of the entire trajectory. We
implemented the proposed max-min entropy framework into a practical iterative actor-critic algorithm
based on policy iteration with disentangled exploration and exploitation. It is demonstrated that the
proposed algorithm significantly enhances exploration capability due to the fairness across states
induced by the max-min framework and yields drastic performance improvement over existing RL
algorithms including maximum-entropy SAC on difficult control tasks.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

