H-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields for Rendering and
Temporal Reconstruction of Humans in Motion

Hongyi Xu
Google Research

Thiemo Alldieck
Google Research

Cristian Sminchisescu
Google Research

hongyixu@google.com

alldieck@google.com

sminchisescu@google.com

Abstract
We present neural radiance fields for rendering and temporal (4D) reconstruction of
humans in motion (H-NeRF), as captured by a sparse set of cameras or even from a
monocular video. Our approach combines ideas from neural scene representation,
novel-view synthesis, and implicit statistical geometric human representations,
coupled using novel loss functions. Instead of learning a radiance field with a
uniform occupancy prior, we constrain it by a structured implicit human body
model, represented using signed distance functions. This allows us to robustly
fuse information from sparse views and generalize well beyond the poses or
views observed in training. Moreover, we apply geometric constraints to co-learn
the structure of the observed subject – including both body and clothing – and
to regularize the radiance field to geometrically plausible solutions. Extensive
experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the robustness and the accuracy of
our approach, its generalization capabilities significantly outside a small training
set of poses and views, and statistical extrapolation beyond the observed shape.

1

Introduction

Enabling free-viewpoint video of a human in motion, based on a sparse set of views, is extremely
challenging, but has many applications. Our work is motivated by a breadth of transformative 3D use
cases, including immersive visualization of photographs, virtual clothing and try-on, fitness, as well
as AR and VR for improved communication or collaboration. However, so far static scenes and rigid
objects have been the primary subject of research. In pursuing realistic novel-view synthesis two
schools of thought have been established: 1) 3D reconstruction methods aim to recover the geometry
of the observed scene as accurately as possible, with novel views generated using classical rendering
pipelines [30, 42]. 2) Image-based rendering techniques [7, 10, 40] and very recently neural radiance
fields [29] primarily aim at image production quality without explicitly constructing an accurate 3D
geometric model. While these techniques explicitly or implicitly reconstruct the scene geometry
sometimes, this is however not guaranteed to accurately resemble the true scene geometry. We
argue that novel-view rendering and reconstruction are two sides of the same coin, and that reliable
viewpoint generalization, especially given relatively few input views, would require good quality
for both. To this end, we propose a unified model in order to support both robust reconstruction
and photo-realistic rendering. Dynamic scenes, especially those capturing a human in motion, add
considerable complexity to the problem: while static scenes can be observed from many views by
a camera moving through the scene, any configuration of a dynamic scene is typically observed
only from sparse views. Moreover, the scene geometry and its appearance may change considerably
over time. To cope with few views, some methods integrate scene knowledge over time by warping
observations into a common reference frame [35, 37]. At test time, the information is warped back to
the desired state and rendered from a novel view. Extrapolating to unseen motion, however, remains
challenging. For scenes capturing people, this means that only poses seen during training can be
rendered at test time. For some applications, however, rendering the subject over a broad range of
motions, or in novel poses, is desirable. To make generalisation over poses and views possible, we
rely on additional problem domain knowledge in the form of a human body model, imGHUM [4].
imGHUM is an implicit signed distance function (SDF) conditioned on generative shape and pose
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

