A Mathematical Framework for Quantifying
Transferability in Multi-source Transfer Learning

Xinyi Tong
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute
Tsinghua University
txy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiangxiang Xu∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
xuxx@mit.edu

Shao-Lun Huang†
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute
Tsinghua University
shaolun.huang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Lizhong Zheng
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
lizhong@mit.edu

Abstract
Current transfer learning algorithm designs mainly focus on the similarities between
source and target tasks, while the impacts of the sample sizes of these tasks are
often not sufficiently addressed. This paper proposes a mathematical framework
for quantifying the transferability in multi-source transfer learning problems, with
both the task similarities and the sample complexity of learning models taken
into account. In particular, we consider the setup where the models learned from
different tasks are linearly combined for learning the target task, and use the optimal
combining coefficients to measure the transferability. Then, we demonstrate the
analytical expression of this transferability measure, characterized by the sample
sizes, model complexity, and the similarities between source and target tasks, which
provides fundamental insights of the knowledge transferring mechanism and the
guidance for algorithm designs. Furthermore, we apply our analyses for practical
learning tasks, and establish a quantifiable transferability measure by exploiting a
parameterized model. In addition, we develop an alternating iterative algorithm to
implement our theoretical results for training deep neural networks in multi-source
transfer learning tasks. Finally, experiments on image classification tasks show that
our approach outperforms existing transfer learning algorithms in multi-source and
few-shot scenarios.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning is nowadays an active research area in machine learning focusing on solving target
learning tasks by the knowledge of learnable source tasks. The transferability between source and
target tasks is the central topic in transfer learning for understanding the knowledge transferring
mechanisms and the algorithm designs [1]. In general, the transferability can be affected by several
factors, including: (i) the similarities between source tasks and the target task [2]; (ii) the sample
sizes of the tasks; and (iii) the complexity or dimensionality of the machine learning model. Most of
the existing transfer strategies are designed based on how similar the source and target tasks are [2, 3],
without considering the impacts of the training sample sizes or the complexity of the models.
∗
†

Work performed at Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

