Breaking the Dilemma of Medical Image-to-image
Translation
Lingke Kong∗
Manteia Tech
konglingke@manteiatech.com
Detian Huang
Huaqiao University
huangdetian@hqu.edu.cn

Chenyu Lian∗
Xiamen University
cylian@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Zhenjiang Li
Shandong University
zhenjli1987@163.com

Yanle Hu†
Mayo Clinic Arizona
Hu.Yanle@mayo.edu

Qichao Zhou†
Manteia Tech
zhouqc@manteiatech.com

Abstract
Supervised Pix2Pix and unsupervised Cycle-consistency are two modes that dominate the ﬁeld of medical image-to-image translation. However, neither modes
are ideal. The Pix2Pix mode has excellent performance. But it requires paired
and well pixel-wise aligned images, which may not always be achievable due
to respiratory motion or anatomy change between times that paired images are
acquired. The Cycle-consistency mode is less stringent with training data and
works well on unpaired or misaligned images. But its performance may not be
optimal. In order to break the dilemma of the existing modes, we propose a new
unsupervised mode called RegGAN for medical image-to-image translation. It
is based on the theory of "loss-correction". In RegGAN, the misaligned target
images are considered as noisy labelsăand the generator is trained with an additional registration network to ﬁt the misaligned noise distribution adaptively. The
goal is to search for the common optimal solution to both image-to-image translation and registration tasks. We incorporated RegGAN into a few state-of-the-art
image-to-image translation methods and demonstrated that RegGAN could be easily combined with these methods to improve their performances. Such as a simple
CycleGAN in our mode surpasses latest NICEGAN even though using less network parameters. Based on our results, RegGAN outperformed both Pix2Pix on
aligned data and Cycle-consistency on misaligned or unpaired data. RegGAN is
insensitive to noises which makes it a better choice for a wide range of scenarios,
especially for medical image-to-image translation tasks in which well pixel-wise
aligned data are not available. Code and data used in this study can be found at
https://github.com/Kid-Liet/Reg-GAN.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs)[1] is a framework that simultaneously trains a generator G
and a discriminator D through an adversarial process. The generator is used to translate the distribu∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

