Ranking Policy Decisions

Hadrien Pouget∗
University of Cambridge
UK
pougeth@gmail.com

Youcheng Sun
Queen’s University Belfast
UK
youcheng.sun@qub.ac.uk

Hana Chockler
causaLens
and
King’s College London
UK
hana@causalens.com
hana.chockler@kcl.ac.uk
Daniel Kroening†
Amazon
UK
daniel.kroening@magd.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Policies trained via Reinforcement Learning (RL) are often needlessly complex,
making them difficult to analyse and interpret. In a run with n time steps, a policy
will make n decisions on actions to take; we conjecture that only a small subset
of these decisions delivers value over selecting a simple default action. Given
a trained policy, we propose a novel black-box method based on statistical fault
localisation that ranks the states of the environment according to the importance
of decisions made in those states. We argue that among other things, the ranked
list of states can help explain and understand the policy. As the ranking method
is statistical, a direct evaluation of its quality is hard. As a proxy for quality, we
use the ranking to create new, simpler policies from the original ones by pruning
decisions identified as unimportant (that is, replacing them by default actions) and
measuring the impact on performance. Our experiments on a diverse set of standard
benchmarks demonstrate that pruned policies can perform on a level comparable to
the original policies. Conversely, we show that naive approaches for ranking policy
decisions, e.g., ranking based on the frequency of visiting a state, do not result in
high-performing pruned policies.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is a powerful method for training policies that complete tasks in complex
environments. The policies produced are optimised to maximise the expected reward provided by the
environment. While performance is clearly an important goal, the reward typically does not capture
the entire range of our preferences. By focusing solely on performance, we risk overlooking the
demand for models that are easier to analyse, predict and interpret [16]. Our hypothesis is that many
trained policies are needlessly complex, i.e., that there exist alternative policies that perform just
as well or nearly as well but that are significantly simpler. This tension between performance and
simplicity is central to the field of explainable AI (XAI), and machine learning as a whole [11]; our
method aims to help by highlighting the most important parts of a policy.
∗
†

The work in this paper was done while at the University of Oxford.
The work in this paper was done prior to joining Amazon.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

