Conservative Offline Distributional
Reinforcement Learning
Yecheng Jason Ma, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
{jasonyma, dineshj, obastani}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning (RL) problems in practice are offline, learning purely
from observational data. A key challenge is how to ensure the learned policy
is safe, which requires quantifying the risk associated with different actions. In
the online setting, distributional RL algorithms do so by learning the distribution
over returns (i.e., cumulative rewards) instead of the expected return; beyond
quantifying risk, they have also been shown to learn better representations for
planning. We propose Conservative Offline Distributional Actor Critic (CODAC),
an offline RL algorithm suitable for both risk-neutral and risk-averse domains.
CODAC adapts distributional RL to the offline setting by penalizing the predicted
quantiles of the return for out-of-distribution actions. We prove that CODAC
learns a conservative return distribution—in particular, for finite MDPs, CODAC
converges to an uniform lower bound on the quantiles of the return distribution;
our proof relies on a novel analysis of the distributional Bellman operator. In
our experiments, on two challenging robot navigation tasks, CODAC successfully
learns risk-averse policies using offline data collected purely from risk-neutral
agents. Furthermore, CODAC is state-of-the-art on the D4RL MuJoCo benchmark
in terms of both expected and risk-sensitive performance. Code is available at:
https://github.com/JasonMa2016/CODAC

1

Introduction

In many applications of reinforcement learning, actively gathering data through interactions with
the environment can be risky and unsafe. Offline (or batch) reinforcement learning (RL) avoids this
problem by learning a policy solely from historical data (called observational data) [9, 22, 23].
A shortcoming of most existing approaches to offline RL [11, 46, 20, 21, 48, 18] is that they are
designed to maximize the expected value of the cumulative reward (which we call the return) of
the policy. As a consequence, they are unable to quantify risk and ensure that the learned policy
acts in a safe way. In the online setting, there has been recent work on distributional RL algorithms
[7, 6, 27, 38, 17], which instead learn the full distribution over future returns. They can use this
distribution to plan in a way that avoids taking risky, unsafe actions. Furthermore, when coupled with
deep neural network function approximation, they can learn better state representations due to the
richer distributional learning signal [4, 26], enabling them to outperform traditional RL algorithms
even on the risk-neutral, expected return objective [4, 7, 6, 47, 14].
We propose Conservative Offline Distributional Actor-Critic (CODAC), which adapts distributional
RL to the offline setting. A key challenge in offline RL is accounting for high uncertainty on
out-of-distribution (OOD) state-action pairs for which observational data is limited [23, 20]; the
value estimates for these state-action pairs are intrinsically high variance, and may be exploited by
the policy without correction due to the lack of online data gathering and feedback. We build on
conservative Q-learning [21], which penalizes Q values for OOD state-action pairs to ensure that
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

