Deep Jump Learning for Off-Policy Evaluation in
Continuous Treatment Settings

Hengrui Cai ∗
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, USA
hcai5@ncsu.edu

Chengchun Shi ∗
London School of Economics and Political Science
London, UK
C.Shi7@lse.ac.uk

Rui Song
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, USA
rsong@ncsu.edu

Wenbin Lu
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, USA
wlu4@ncsu.edu

Abstract
We consider off-policy evaluation (OPE) in continuous treatment settings, such as
personalized dose-finding. In OPE, one aims to estimate the mean outcome under a
new treatment decision rule using historical data generated by a different decision
rule. Most existing works on OPE focus on discrete treatment settings. To handle
continuous treatments, we develop a novel estimation method for OPE using deep
jump learning. The key ingredient of our method lies in adaptively discretizing the
treatment space using deep discretization, by leveraging deep learning and multiscale change point detection. This allows us to apply existing OPE methods in
discrete treatments to handle continuous treatments. Our method is further justified
by theoretical results, simulations, and a real application to Warfarin Dosing.

1

Introduction

Individualization proposes to leverage omni-channel data to meet individual needs. Individualized
decision making plays a vital role in a wide variety of applications. Examples include individualized
treatment regime in precision medicine [37; 3; 51; 5], customized pricing strategy in economics
[38; 49], personalized recommendation system in marketing [32], etc. Prior to adopting any decision
rule in practice, it is crucial to know the impact of implementing such a policy. In medical and
public-policy domains, it is risky to apply a treatment decision rule or policy online to estimate its
mean outcome [see, e.g., 34; 20; 29]. Off-policy evaluation (OPE) thus attracts a lot of attention by
estimating the mean outcome under a new decision rule (or policy), i.e., the value function, using the
offline data generated by a different decision rule.
Despite the popularity of developing OPE methods with finitely many treatment (or action) options
[see e.g., 12; 11; 50; 54; 55; 30; 22; 48; 52; 13; 2; 53; 46; 23; 42; 43], less attention has been paid
to the continuous treatment setting, such as personalized dose finding [4; 56; 57; 58], dynamic
pricing [10], and contextual bandits [7]. Recently, a few OPE methods have been proposed to
handle continuous treatments [25; 27; 45; 8; 44; 47; 24]. All these methods rely on the use of a
kernel function to extend the inverse probability weighting (IPW) or doubly robust (DR) approaches
developed in discrete treatment domains [see e.g., 12]. They suffer from two limitations. First,
the validity of these methods requires the mean outcome to be a smooth function over the
treatment space. This assumption could be violated in applications such as dynamic pricing, where
the expected demand for a product has jump discontinuities as a function of the charged price [10].
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

