Bridging Explicit and Implicit Deep Generative
Models via Neural Stein Estimators
Qitian Wu1⇤ Rui Gao2⇤ Hongyuan Zha1,3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of Texas at Austin
3
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
echo740@sjtu.edu.cn, rui.gao@mccombs.utexas.edu, zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
There are two types of deep generative models: explicit and implicit. The former
defines an explicit density form that allows likelihood inference; while the latter
targets a flexible transformation from random noise to generated samples. While
the two classes of generative models have shown great power in many applications,
both of them, when used alone, suffer from respective limitations and drawbacks.
To take full advantages of both models and enable mutual compensation, we
propose a novel joint training framework that bridges an explicit (unnormalized)
density estimator and an implicit sample generator via Stein discrepancy. We
show that our method 1) induces novel mutual regularization via kernel Sobolev
norm penalization and Moreau-Yosida regularization, and 2) stabilizes the training
dynamics. Empirically, we demonstrate that proposed method can facilitate the
density estimator to more accurately identify data modes and guide the generator
to output higher-quality samples, comparing with training a single counterpart.
The new approach also shows promising results when the training samples are
contaminated or limited.

1

Introduction

Deep generative model, as a powerful unsupervised framework for learning the distribution of highdimensional multi-modal data, has been extensively studied in recent literature. Typically, there are
two types of generative models: explicit and implicit. Explicit models define a density function
of the distribution [35, 51, 42], while implicit models learn a mapping that generates samples by
transforming an easy-to-sample random variable [15, 39, 2, 4].
Both models have their own power and limitations. The density form in explicit models endows
them with convenience to characterize data distribution and infer the sample likelihood. However, the
unknown normalizing constant often causes computational intractability. On the other hand, implicit
models including generative adversarial networks (GANs) can directly generate vivid samples in
various application domains including images, natural languages, graphs, etc. Nevertheless, one
important challenge is to design a training algorithm that do not suffer from instability and mode
collapse. In view of this, it is natural to build a unified framework that takes full advantages of the
two models and encourages them to compensate for each other.
Intuitively, an explicit density estimator and a flexible implicit sampler could help each other’s
training given effective information sharing. On the one hand, the density estimation given by explicit
⇤

Part of the work was done when the two authors were visiting The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

