Good Classification Measures and How to Find Them
Martijn Gösgens
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
research@martijngosgens.nl
Alexey Tikhonov
Yandex
Berlin, Germany
altsoph@gmail.com

Anton Zhiyanov
Yandex Research, HSE University
Moscow, Russia
zhiyanovap@gmail.com
Liudmila Prokhorenkova
Yandex Research, HSE University, MIPT
Moscow, Russia
ostroumova-la@yandex.ru

Abstract
Several performance measures can be used for evaluating classification results:
accuracy, F-measure, and many others. Can we say that some of them are better than
others, or, ideally, choose one measure that is best in all situations? To answer this
question, we conduct a systematic analysis of classification performance measures:
we formally define a list of desirable properties and theoretically analyze which
measures satisfy which properties. We also prove an impossibility theorem: some
desirable properties cannot be simultaneously satisfied. Finally, we propose a
new family of measures satisfying all desirable properties except one. This family
includes the Matthews Correlation Coefficient and a so-called Symmetric Balanced
Accuracy that was not previously used in classification literature. We believe that
our systematic approach gives an important tool to practitioners for adequately
evaluating classification results.

1

Introduction

Classification is a classic machine learning task that is used in countless applications. To evaluate
classification results, one has to compare the predicted labeling of a given set of elements with the
actual (true) labeling. For this, performance measures are used, and there are many well-known ones
like accuracy, F-measure, and so on [13, 15]. The fact that different measures behave differently
is known throughout the literature [10, 13, 20, 21]. For instance, accuracy is known to be biased
towards the majority class. Thus, different measures may lead to different evaluation results, and it
is important to choose an appropriate measure. While there are attempts to compare performance
measures and describe their properties [3, 6, 13, 14, 26, 28], the problem still lacks a systematic
approach, and our paper aims at filling this gap.1 Our research is particularly motivated by a recent
paper [12] providing a systematic analysis of evaluation measures for the clustering task. We transfer
many proposed properties to the classification problem and extend the research by adding more
properties, new measures, and novel theoretical results.
To provide a systematic comparison of performance measures, we formally define a list of properties
that are desirable across various classification tasks. The proposed properties can be applied both to
binary and multiclass problems. Some properties are intuitive and straightforward, like symmetry,
while others are more tricky. A particularly important property is called constant baseline. It requires
a measure not to be biased towards particular predicted class sizes. For each measure and each
1

We describe related research in detail in Appendix A.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

