Subgame solving without common knowledge

Brian Hu Zhang
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In imperfect-information games, subgame solving is significantly more challenging
than in perfect-information games, but in the last few years, such techniques have
been developed. They were the key ingredient to the milestone of superhuman play
in no-limit Texas hold’em poker. Current subgame-solving techniques analyze
the entire common-knowledge closure of the player’s current information set,
that is, the smallest set of nodes within which it is common knowledge that the
current node lies. While this is acceptable in games like poker where the commonknowledge closure is relatively small, many practical games have more complex
information structure, which renders the common-knowledge closure impractically
large to enumerate or even reasonably approximate. We introduce an approach
that overcomes this obstacle, by instead working with only low-order knowledge.
Our approach allows an agent, upon arriving at an infoset, to basically prune any
node that is no longer reachable, thereby massively reducing the game tree size
relative to the common-knowledge subgame. We prove that, as is, our approach can
increase exploitability compared to the blueprint strategy. However, we develop
three avenues by which safety can be guaranteed. First, safety is guaranteed if
the results of subgame solves are incorporated back into the blueprint. Second,
we provide a method where safety is achieved by limiting the infosets at which
subgame solving is performed. Third, we prove that our approach, when applied at
every infoset reached during play, achieves a weaker notion of equilibrium, which
we coin affine equilibrium, and which may be of independent interest. We show
that affine equilibria cannot be exploited by any Nash strategy of the opponent,
so an opponent who wishes to exploit must open herself to counter-exploitation.
Even without the safety-guaranteeing additions, experiments on medium-sized
games show that our approach always reduced exploitability in practical games
even when applied at every infoset, and a depth-limited version of it led to—to our
knowledge—the first strong AI for the challenge problem dark chess.

1

Introduction

Subgame solving is the standard technique for playing perfect-information games that has been used
by strong agents in a wide variety of games, including chess [7, 25] and go [22]. Methods for subgame
solving in perfect-information games exploit the fact that a solution to a subgame can be computed
independently of the rest of the game. However, this condition fails in the imperfect-information
setting, where the optimal strategy in a subgame can depend on strategies outside that subgame.
Recently, subgame solving techniques have been extended to imperfect-information games [9,
13]. Some of those techniques are provably safe in the sense that, under reasonable conditions,
incorporating them into an agent cannot make the agent more exploitable [6, 21, 2, 20, 5, 26, 1, 16].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

