Reinforcement Learning with Latent Flow
Wenling Shang∗
DeepMind
wendyshang@deepmind.com
Aravind Srinivas
OpenAI
aravind_srinivas@berkeley.edu
Yang Gao
Tsinghua University
gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiaofei Wang∗
UC Berkeley
w.xf@berkeley.edu
Aravind Rajeswaran
Facebook AI Research, University of Washington
aravraj@fb.com

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley, Covariant
pabbeel@berkeley.edu

Michael Laskin
UC Berkeley
mlaskin@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Temporal information is essential to learning effective policies with Reinforcement
Learning (RL). However, current state-of-the-art RL algorithms either assume
that such information is given as part of the state space or, when learning from
pixels, use the simple heuristic of frame-stacking to implicitly capture temporal
information present in the image observations. This heuristic is in contrast to
the current paradigm in video classification architectures, which utilize explicit
encodings of temporal information through methods such as optical flow and
two-stream architectures to achieve state-of-the-art performance. Inspired by
leading video classification architectures, we introduce the Flow of Latents for
Reinforcement Learning (Flare), a network architecture for RL that explicitly
encodes temporal information through latent vector differences. We show that
Flare recovers optimal performance in state-based RL without explicit access to
the state velocity, solely with positional state information. Flare is the most sample
efficient model-free pixel-based RL algorithm on the DeepMind Control suite when
evaluated on the 500k and 1M step benchmarks across 5 challenging control tasks,
and, when used with Rainbow DQN, outperforms the competitive baseline on Atari
games at 100M time step benchmark across 8 challenging games.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [41] holds the promise of enabling artificial agents to solve a diverse
set of tasks in uncertain and unstructured environments. Recent developments in RL with deep
neural networks have led to tremendous advances in autonomous decision making. Notable examples
include classical board games [36, 37], video games [29, 6, 45], and continuous control [34, 28].
There has been a large body of research on extracting high quality features during the RL process,
such as with auxiliary losses [20, 27, 35] or data augmentation [25, 26]. However, another important
component in RL representation learning has been largely overlooked: a more effective architecture
to incorporate temporal features. This becomes especially crucial in an unstructured real-world setup
like the home when compact state representations such as calibrated sensory inputs are unavailable.
Motivated by this understanding, we explore architectural improvements to better utilize temporal
features for the problem of efficient and effective deep RL from pixels.
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

