Neural Flows: Efficient Alternative to Neural ODEs
Marin Biloš1∗, Johanna Sommer1 , Syama Sundar Rangapuram2 ,
Tim Januschowski2 , Stephan Günnemann1
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 AWS AI Labs, Germany

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations describe how values change in time. This
is the reason why they gained importance in modeling sequential data, especially
when the observations are made at irregular intervals. In this paper we propose an
alternative by directly modeling the solution curves — the flow of an ODE — with
a neural network. This immediately eliminates the need for expensive numerical
solvers while still maintaining the modeling capability of neural ODEs. We propose
several flow architectures suitable for different applications by establishing precise
conditions on when a function defines a valid flow. Apart from computational efficiency, we also provide empirical evidence of favorable generalization performance
via applications in time series modeling, forecasting, and density estimation.

1

Introduction

Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are among the most important tools for modeling complex
systems, both in natural and social sciences. They describe the instantaneous change in the system,
which is often an easier way to model physical phenomena than specifying the whole system itself.
For example, the change of the pendulum angle or the change in population can be naturally expressed
in the differential form. Similarly, Chen et al. [11] introduce neural ODEs that describe how some
quantity of interest represented as a vector x, changes with time: ẋ = f (t, x(t)), where f is now a
neural network. Starting at some initial value x(t0 ) we can find the result of this dynamic at any t1 :
Z t1
x(t1 ) = x(t0 ) +
f (t, x(t)) dt = ODESolve(x(t0 ), f, t0 , t1 ).
(1)
t0

It is sufficient for f to be continuous in t and Lipschitz continuous
in x to have a unique solution, by the Picard–Lindelöf theorem
[14]. This mild condition is already satisfied by a large family
of neural networks. In most practically relevant scenarios, the
integral in Equation 1 has to be solved numerically, requiring
a trade-off between computation cost and numerical precision.
Much of the follow up work to [11] focused on retaining expressive dynamics while requiring fewer solver evaluations [22, 37].
In the machine learning context we are given a set of initial
conditions (often at t0 = 0) and a loss function for the solution
evaluated at time t1 . One example is modeling time series where
the latent state is evolved in continuous time and is used to predict
the observed measurements [16]. Here, unlike in physics for
example, the function f is completely unknown and needs to be
learned from data. Thus, [11] used neural networks to model it,
for their ability to capture complex dynamics. However, note that
this comes at the cost of the ODE being non-interpretable.
∗

Neural ODE

Neural flow

ODESolve(·)

F (t, x0 )

f (t, x(t))

x0

x0

Figure 1: (Left) ODE requires numerical solver which evaluates f
at many points along the solution
curve. (Right) Our approach returns the solutions directly.

Work partially done during an internship at Amazon Research. Correspondence to: bilos@in.tum.de.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

