Learning Graph Cellular Automata

Daniele Grattarola
Università della Svizzera italiana
grattd@usi.ch

Lorenzo Livi
University of Manitoba

Cesare Alippi
Università della Svizzera italiana
Politecnico di Milano

Abstract
Cellular automata (CA) are a class of computational models that exhibit rich
dynamics emerging from the local interaction of cells arranged in a regular lattice.
In this work we focus on a generalised version of typical CA, called graph cellular
automata (GCA), in which the lattice structure is replaced by an arbitrary graph.
In particular, we extend previous work that used convolutional neural networks
to learn the transition rule of conventional CA and we use graph neural networks
to learn a variety of transition rules for GCA. First, we present a general-purpose
architecture for learning GCA, and we show that it can represent any arbitrary
GCA with finite and discrete state space. Then, we test our approach on three
different tasks: 1) learning the transition rule of a GCA on a Voronoi tessellation;
2) imitating the behaviour of a group of flocking agents; 3) learning a rule that
converges to a desired target state.

1

Introduction

Cellular automata (CA) [1] are discrete computational models that consist of a regular lattice of cells,
each associated with a state, and a transition rule. The transition rule is usually defined to update
the state of each cell as a function of its current state and the state of its neighbours. Even when
using simple transition rules and low-dimensional lattices, CA can exhibit very intricate patterns
that emerge from the repeated synchronous application of the transition rule. Despite being almost a
century-old idea, many different forms of CA are still studied today in dynamical systems theory [2].
In this paper, we focus on a generalised version of CA called graph cellular automata (GCA) [3],
which relaxes the assumption of the lattice structure and allows cells to have an arbitrary and variable
number of neighbours.
Starting from the observation that GCA are a generalised version of lattice-based CA, in which the
underlying lattice is replaced by an arbitrary graph, we focus on the analogous parallel that exists
between convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and graph neural networks (GNNs) [4, 5, 6]. Namely,
the goal of this paper is to study the application of GNNs to learn a desired GCA transition rule, a
setting that we refer to as Graph Neural Cellular Automata (GNCA).
The inspiration for this work comes from a recent series of papers that studied how to train a
convolutional neural network to approximate a desired CA transition rule, which we extend in two
significant ways. First, we present a general-purpose architecture for GNCA and show that it is
sufficient to represent any arbitrary GCA with finite and discrete state space. Based on well-known
results on the expressive power of neural networks and GNNs, we also propose that the same
architecture is expressive enough to represent any transition function on continuous state spaces.
Then, we present several classes of problems that can be formulated as computation with GCA. We
use our architecture to learn a varied family of GCA with non-trivial features including discrete and
continuous state spaces, complex or unknown transition rules, dynamic graphs, and the ability to
globally coordinate through local message exchanges. First, we train a GNCA to approximate a GCA
defined on the Voronoi tessellation of random points, where the underlying graph is fixed throughout
the evolution of the system and the state space is binary. Then, we focus on a dynamic GCA with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

