Distribution-free inference for regression:
discrete, continuous, and in between

Rina Foygel Barber
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
rina@uchicago.edu

Yonghoon Lee
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
yhoony31@uchicago.edu

Abstract
In data analysis problems where we are not able to rely on distributional assumptions, what types of inference guarantees can still be obtained? Many popular
methods, such as holdout methods, cross-validation methods, and conformal prediction, are able to provide distribution-free guarantees for predictive inference,
but the problem of providing inference for the underlying regression function (for
example, inference on the conditional mean E [Y |X]) is more challenging. In the
setting where the features X are continuously distributed, recent work has established that any confidence interval for E [Y |X] must have non-vanishing width,
even as sample size tends to infinity. At the other extreme, if X takes only a small
number of possible values, then inference on E [Y |X] is trivial to achieve. In this
work, we study the problem in settings in between these two extremes. We find that
there are several distinct regimes in between the finite setting and the continuous
setting, where vanishing-width confidence intervals are achievable if and only if
the effective support size of the distribution of X is smaller than the square of the
sample size.

1

Introduction

Consider a regression problem, where our aim is to model the distribution of a response variable Y ∈
R based on the information carried by features X ∈ X . Given training data (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ),
we aim to build a fitted model to estimate the conditional distribution of Y | X, or some summary of
this distribution such as the conditional mean or conditional median. In this type of setting, our goals
are to simultaneously perform two tasks, estimation and inference—that is, we want to accurately
estimate the conditional distribution, and we also want a reliable way of quantifying our uncertainty
about this estimate.
To make this concrete, suppose the training data {(Xi , Yi )} are drawn i.i.d. from some unknown
distribution P on Rd ×R, and we want to estimate the true conditional mean, µP (x) := E [Y |X = x],
of this distribution. Given the training data, we construct a fitted regression function µ
b : Rd → R
using any algorithm, for instance, a parametric method such as least squares or a nonparametric
procedure such as a Gaussian kernel method. For many regression algorithms, assuming certain
conditions on the underlying distribution P will ensure an accurate estimate of µP ; however, unless
we are able to verify these assumptions, we cannot be confident that the corresponding error rates
will indeed lead to a valid confidence interval for µP . The goal of distribution-free inference is to
provide inference guarantees—in this case, confidence intervals for µP (Xn+1 ) at a newly observed
feature vector Xn+1 —that are valid universally over any underlying distribution P .
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

