Early-stopped neural networks are consistent

Ziwei Ji
Justin D. Li
Matus Telgarsky
<{ziweiji2,jdli3,mjt}@illinois.edu>
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
This work studies the behavior of shallow ReLU networks trained with the logistic
loss via gradient descent on binary classification data where the underlying data
distribution is general, and the (optimal) Bayes risk is not necessarily zero. In this
setting, it is shown that gradient descent with early stopping achieves population
risk arbitrarily close to optimal in terms of not just logistic and misclassification
losses, but also in terms of calibration, meaning the sigmoid mapping of its outputs
approximates the true underlying conditional distribution arbitrarily finely. Moreover, the necessary iteration, sample, and architectural complexities of this analysis
all scale naturally with a certain complexity measure of the true conditional model.
Lastly, while it is not shown that early stopping is necessary, it is shown that any
univariate classifier satisfying a local interpolation property is inconsistent.

1

Overview and main result

Deep networks trained with gradient descent seem to have no trouble adapting to arbitrary prediction
problems, and are steadily displacing stalwart methods across many domains. In this work, we
provide a mathematical basis for this good performance on arbitrary binary classification problems,
considering the simplest possible networks: shallow ReLU networks where only the inner (inputfacing) weights are trained via vanilla gradient descent with a constant step size. The central
contributions are as follows.
1. Fully general classification tasks. The joint distribution generating the (x, y) pairs only requires
x to be bounded, and is otherwise arbitrary. In particular, the underlying distribution may be
noisy, meaning the true conditional model of the labels, Pr[Y = 1|X = x], is arbitrary.
In this setting, we show that as data, width, and training time increase, the logistic loss measured
over the population converges to optimality over all measurable functions, which moreover
implies that the induced conditional model (defined by a sigmoid mapping) converges to the true
model, and the population misclassification rate also converges to optimality. This is in contrast
with prior analyses of gradient descent, which either only consider the training risk [Allen-Zhu
et al., 2018b, Du et al., 2019, Zou et al., 2018, Oymak and Soltanolkotabi, 2019, Song and Yang,
2019], or can only handle restricted conditional models [Allen-Zhu et al., 2018a, Arora et al.,
2019, Cao and Gu, 2019, Nitanda and Suzuki, 2019, Ji and Telgarsky, 2020b, Chen et al., 2021].
2. Adaptivity to data simplicity. The required number of data samples, network nodes, and
gradient descent iterations all shrink if the distribution satisfies a natural notion of simplicity:
the true conditional model Pr[Y = 1|X = x] is approximated well by a low-complexity
infinite-width random feature model.
Rounding out the story and contributions, firstly we present a brief toy univariate model hinting
towards the necessity of early stopping: concretely, any univariate predictor satisfying a local
interpolation property can not achieve optimal test error for noisy distributions. Secondly, our
analysis is backed by a number of lemmas that could be useful elsewhere; amongst these are a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

