Reducing the Covariate Shift by Mirror Samples in
Cross Domain Alignment

Yin Zhao∗†
Alibaba Group
yinzhao.zy@alibaba-inc.com

Minquan Wang∗
Alibaba Group
minquan.wmq@alibaba-inc.com

Longjun Cai
Alibaba Group
longjun.clj@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Eliminating the covariate shift cross domains is one of the common methods to deal
with the issue of domain shift in visual unsupervised domain adaptation. However,
current alignment methods, especially the prototype based or sample-level based
methods neglect the structural properties of the underlying distribution and even
break the condition of covariate shift. To relieve the limitations and conflicts, we
introduce a novel concept named (virtual) mirror, which represents the equivalent
sample in another domain. The equivalent sample pairs, named mirror pairs reflect
the natural correspondence of the empirical distributions. Then a mirror loss, which
aligns the mirror pairs cross domains, is constructed to enhance the alignment of
the domains. The proposed method does not distort the internal structure of the
underlying distribution. We also provide theoretical proof that the mirror samples
and mirror loss have better asymptotic properties in reducing the domain shift.
By applying the virtual mirror and mirror loss to the generic unsupervised domain adaptation model, we achieved consistently superior performance on several
mainstream benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Current deep learning models have achieved significant progress on many tasks but heavily rely
on the large amount of labeled data. The generality of the model may be severely degraded when
facing the same task of a different domain. So, domain adaptation (DA) attracts a lot of attentions in
recent years. DA has several different settings, such as unsupervised [34] or semi-supervised DA
[23], open-set [6] or closed-set DA [38], as well as single or multi-source DA [40]. In this paper, we
consider the closed-set, single-source unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) on the classification
task. In this setting, one has the source domain data with labels and is expected to predict for the
unlabeled target domain data. Both the source and target domains share the same class labels.
The main challenge for DA is the domain shift. It can be further categorized into covariate shift
[45, 44], target/label shift [48]),etc. Specifically, define ps (x, y) and pt (x, y) as the joint distributions
of the source and target domains. The covariate shift refers to the difference of the marginal
distribution of x, i.e. ps (x) 6= pt (x), assuming the conditional probabilities cross domains are
same, i.e. ps (y|x) = pt (y|x). Most of the current methods, in terms of learning domain-invariant
representation or domain alignment, are working to reduce the covariate shift explicitly or implicitly.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

