On the Cryptographic Hardness
of Learning Single Periodic Neurons
Min Jae Song⇤
Courant Institute
New York University
minjae.song@nyu.edu

Ilias Zadik⇤
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
izadik@mit.edu

Joan Bruna
Courant Institute
Center for Data Science
New York University
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We show a simple reduction which demonstrates the cryptographic hardness of
learning a single periodic neuron over isotropic Gaussian distributions in the presence of noise. More precisely, our reduction shows that any polynomial-time
algorithm (not necessarily gradient-based) for learning such functions under small
noise implies a polynomial-time quantum algorithm for solving worst-case lattice
problems, whose hardness form the foundation of lattice-based cryptography. Our
core hard family of functions, which are well-approximated by one-layer neural
networks, take the general form of a univariate periodic function applied to an affine
projection of the data. These functions have appeared in previous seminal works
which demonstrate their hardness against gradient-based (Shamir’18), and Statistical Query (SQ) algorithms (Song et al.’17). We show that if (polynomially) small
noise is added to the labels, the intractability of learning these functions applies to
all polynomial-time algorithms, beyond gradient-based and SQ algorithms, under
the aforementioned cryptographic assumptions. Moreover, we demonstrate the
necessity of noise in the hardness result by designing a polynomial-time algorithm
for learning certain families of such functions under exponentially small adversarial
noise. Our proposed algorithm is not a gradient-based or an SQ algorithm, but is
rather based on the celebrated Lenstra-Lenstra-Lovász (LLL) lattice basis reduction
algorithm. Furthermore, in the absence of noise, this algorithm can be directly
applied to solve CLWE detection (Bruna et al.’21) and phase retrieval with an
optimal sample complexity of d + 1 samples. In the former case, this improves
upon the quadratic-in-d sample complexity required in (Bruna et al.’21).

1

Introduction

The empirical success of Deep Learning has given an impetus to provide theoretical foundations
explaining when and why it is possible to efficiently learn from high-dimensional data with neural
networks. Currently, there are large gaps between positive and negative results for learning, even
for the simplest neural network architectures [61, 29, 14, 27]. These gaps offer a large ground for
debate, discussing the extent up to which improved learning algorithms can be designed, or whether
a fundamental computational barrier has been reached.
One particular challenge in closing these gaps is establishing negative results for improper learning
in the distribution-specific setting, in which the learner can exploit the peculiarities of a known input
distribution, and is not limited to outputting hypotheses from the target function class. Over the last
few years, authors have successfully developed distribution-specific hardness results in the context
of learning neural networks, offering different flavors. On one hand, there have been several results
⇤

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

