Neural Active Learning with Performance
Guarantees
Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Zhilei Wang
New York University
New York, NY 10012
zhileiwang92@gmail.com
Christoph Dann
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
chrisdann@google.com

Ayush Sekhari
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ayush.sekhari@gmail.com

Claudio Gentile
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
cgentile@google.com

Abstract
We investigate the problem of active learning in the streaming setting in nonparametric regimes, where the labels are stochastically generated from a class of
functions on which we make no assumptions whatsoever. We rely on recently
proposed Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) approximation tools to construct a suitable
neural embedding that determines the feature space the algorithm operates on
and the learned model computed atop. Since the shape of the label requesting
threshold is tightly related to the complexity of the function to be learned, which is
a-priori unknown, we also derive a version of the algorithm which is agnostic to
any prior knowledge. This algorithm relies on a regret balancing scheme to solve
the resulting online model selection problem, and is computationally efficient. We
prove joint guarantees on the cumulative regret and number of requested labels
which depend on the complexity of the labeling function at hand. In the linear case,
these guarantees recover known minimax results of the generalization error as a
function of the label complexity in a standard statistical learning setting.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning is a fundamental paradigm in machine learning and is at the core of modern
breakthroughs in deep learning [29]. A machine learning system trained via supervised learning
requires access to labeled data collected via recruiting human experts, crowdsourcing, or running
expensive experiments. Furthermore, as the complexity of current deep learning architectures grows,
their requirement for labeled data increases significantly. The area of active learning aims to reduce
this data requirement by studying the design of algorithms that can learn and generalize from a small
carefully chosen subset of the training data [13, 40].
The two common formulations of active learning are pool based active learning, and sequential (or
streaming) active learning. In the pool based setting [30], the learning algorithm has access to a
large unlabeled set of data points, and the algorithm can ask for a subset of the data to be labeled. In
contrast, in the sequential setting, data points arrive in a streaming manner, either adversarially or
drawn i.i.d. from a distribution, and the algorithm must decide whether to query the label of a given
point or not [14].
From a theoretical perspective, active learning has typically been studied under models inspired by
the probably approximately correct (PAC) model of learning [41]. Here one assumes that there is
a pre-specified class H of functions such that the target function mapping examples to their labels
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

