Roto-translated Local Coordinate Frames
For Interacting Dynamical Systems

Miltiadis Kofinas
University of Amsterdam
m.kofinas@uva.nl

Naveen Shankar Nagaraja
BMW Group
Naveen-Shankar.Nagaraja@bmw.de

Eftratios Gavves
University of Amsterdam
egavves@uva.nl

Abstract
Modelling interactions is critical in learning complex dynamical systems, namely
systems of interacting objects with highly non-linear and time-dependent behaviour.
A large class of such systems can be formalized as geometric graphs, i.e., graphs
with nodes positioned in the Euclidean space given an arbitrarily chosen global
coordinate system, for instance vehicles in a traffic scene. Notwithstanding the
arbitrary global coordinate system, the governing dynamics of the respective dynamical systems are invariant to rotations and translations, also known as Galilean
invariance. As ignoring these invariances leads to worse generalization, in this
work we propose local coordinate frames per node-object to induce roto-translation
invariance to the geometric graph of the interacting dynamical system. Further,
the local coordinate frames allow for a natural definition of anisotropic filtering in
graph neural networks. Experiments in traffic scenes, 3D motion capture, and colliding particles demonstrate that the proposed approach comfortably outperforms
the recent state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Modelling interacting dynamical systems –systems of interacting objects with highly non-linear
and time-dependent behaviour– with neural networks is attracting a significant amount of interest
[27, 3, 19] for its potential to learn long-term behaviours directly from observations. A large class
of these systems consists of objects in the physical space, for instance pedestrians in a traffic scene
[31, 37] or colliding subatomic particles [5]. These systems can be formalized as geometric graphs, in
which the nodes describe the physical coordinates of the objects among other features. Kipf et al. [27]
introduced Neural Relational Inference (NRI) to learn geometric graph dynamical systems using the
variational autoencoding framework [25, 38]. Following [27], dynamic NRI [19] advocated sequential
latent variable models to encode time-transient behaviours. Both approaches and the majority of
learning algorithms for dynamical systems assume an arbitrary global coordinate system to encode
time-transient interactions and model complex behaviours. In this work, we posit that taking into
account the relative nature of dynamics is key to accurate modelling of interacting dynamical systems.
Represented by geometric graphs, learning algorithms of dynamical systems subscribe themselves to
the Newtonian space. The absolute notion of Newtonian space and mechanics, however, determines
that there exist infinite inertial frames that connect with each other by a rotation and translation.
Each of these inertial frames is equivalent in that they can all serve as global coordinate frames and,
thus, an arbitrary choice is made. Notwithstanding this arbitrariness, the dynamics of the system are
invariant to the choice of a global coordinate frame up to a rotation and translation, in what is also
known as Galilean invariance. Put otherwise, geometric graphs of interacting dynamical systems
often exhibit symmetries that if left to their own devices lead models to subpar learning.
Inspired by the notion of Galilean invariance, we focus on inducing roto-translation invariance
in interacting dynamical systems and their geometric graphs to sustain the effects of underlying
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

