Offline Reinforcement Learning as One Big
Sequence Modeling Problem

Michael Janner
Qiyang Li
Sergey Levine
University of California at Berkeley
{janner, qcli}@berkeley.edu
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is typically concerned with estimating stationary
policies or single-step models, leveraging the Markov property to factorize problems in time. However, we can also view RL as a generic sequence modeling
problem, with the goal being to produce a sequence of actions that leads to a
sequence of high rewards. Viewed in this way, it is tempting to consider whether
high-capacity sequence prediction models that work well in other domains, such
as natural-language processing, can also provide effective solutions to the RL
problem. To this end, we explore how RL can be tackled with the tools of sequence
modeling, using a Transformer architecture to model distributions over trajectories
and repurposing beam search as a planning algorithm. Framing RL as sequence
modeling problem simplifies a range of design decisions, allowing us to dispense
with many of the components common in offline RL algorithms. We demonstrate
the flexibility of this approach across long-horizon dynamics prediction, imitation
learning, goal-conditioned RL, and offline RL. Further, we show that this approach
can be combined with existing model-free algorithms to yield a state-of-the-art
planner in sparse-reward, long-horizon tasks.

1

Introduction

The standard treatment of reinforcement learning relies on decomposing a long-horizon problem into
smaller, more local subproblems. In model-free algorithms, this takes the form of the principle of
optimality (Bellman, 1957), a recursion that leads naturally to the class of dynamic programming
methods like Q-learning. In model-based algorithms, this decomposition takes the form of single-step
predictive models, which reduce the problem of predicting high-dimensional, policy-dependent state
trajectories to that of estimating a comparatively simpler, policy-agnostic transition distribution.
However, we can also view reinforcement learning as analogous to a sequence generation problem,
with the goal being to produce a sequence of actions that, when enacted in an environment, will
yield a sequence of high rewards. In this paper, we consider the logical extreme of this analogy:
does the toolbox of contemporary sequence modeling itself provide a viable reinforcement learning
algorithm? We investigate this question by treating trajectories as unstructured sequences of states,
actions, and rewards. We model the distribution of these trajectories using a Transformer architecture
(Vaswani et al., 2017), the current tool of choice for capturing long-horizon dependencies. In place
of the trajectory optimizers common in model-based control, we use beam search (Reddy, 1977), a
heuristic decoding scheme ubiquitous in natural language processing, as a planning algorithm.
Posing reinforcement learning, and more broadly data-driven control, as a sequence modeling problem
handles many of the considerations that typically require distinct solutions: actor-critic algorithms
require separate actors and critics, model-based algorithms require predictive dynamics models, and
offline RL methods often require estimation of the behavior policy (Fujimoto et al., 2019). These
Code is available at trajectory-transformer.github.io
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

