Distributed Machine Learning with Sparse
Heterogeneous Data

Dominic Richards
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
24-29 St Giles’, Oxford, OX1 3LB
Dominic.Richards94@gmail.com

Sahand N Negahban
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
24 Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT 06510
Sahand.Negahban@Yale.edu

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
24-29 St Giles’, Oxford, OX1 3LB
Patrick.Rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Motivated by distributed machine learning settings such as Federated Learning, we
consider the problem of fitting a statistical model across a distributed collection of
heterogeneous data sets whose similarity structure is encoded by a graph topology.
Precisely, we analyse the case where each node is associated with fitting a sparse
linear model, and edges join two nodes if the difference of their solutions is also
sparse. We propose a method based on Basis Pursuit Denoising with a total
variation penalty, and provide finite sample guarantees for sub-Gaussian design
matrices. Taking the root of the tree as a reference node, we show that if the sparsity
of the differences across nodes is smaller than the sparsity at the root, then recovery
is successful with fewer samples than by solving the problems independently, or
by using methods that rely on a large overlap in the signal supports, such as the
group Lasso. We consider both the noiseless and noisy setting, and numerically
investigate the performance of distributed methods based on Distributed Alternating
Direction Methods of Multipliers (ADMM) and hyperspectral unmixing.

1

Introduction

The wide adoption of mobile phones, wearable and smart devices, has created a influx of data which
requires processing and storage. Due to the size of these datasets and communication limitations, it is
then often not feasible to send all the data to a single computer cluster for storage and processing.
This has motivated the adoption of decentralised methods, such as Federated Learning [33, 43], which
involves both storing and processing data locally on edge devices.
This increase in data sources has led to applications that are increasingly high-dimensional. To
be both statistically and computationally efficient in this setting, it is then important to develop
approaches that can exploit the structure within the data. A natural assumption in this case is that
the data is sparse in some sense. For instance, a subset of features is assumed to be responsible for
determining the outcome of interest or, in the case of compressed sensing [13], the data is assumed to
be generated from a sparse signal.
Fitting statistical models on data collected and stored across a variety of devices presents a number of
computational and statistical challenges. Specifically, the distributed data sets can be heterogeneous
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

