Analysis of one-hidden-layer Neural Networks via the
Resolvent Method
Vanessa Piccolo
ETH Zurich (current affiliation: ENS Lyon)
vanessa.piccolo@ens-lyon.fr

Dominik Schröder
Institute for Theoretical Studies
ETH Zurich
dschroeder@ethz.ch

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the asymptotic spectral density of the random feature
matrix M = Y Y ∗ with Y = f (W X) generated by a single-hidden-layer neural
network, where W and X are random rectangular matrices with i.i.d. centred
entries and f is a non-linear smooth function which is applied entry-wise. We
prove that the Stieltjes transform of the limiting spectral distribution approximately
satisfies a quartic self-consistent equation, which is exactly the equation obtained
by Pennington and Worah [22] and Benigni and Péché [6] with the moment method.
We extend the previous results to the case of additive bias Y = f (W X + B) with
B being an independent rank-one Gaussian random matrix, closer modelling the
neural network infrastructures encountered in practice. Our key finding is that in
the case of additive bias it is impossible to choose an activation function preserving
the layer-to-layer singular value distribution, in sharp contrast to the bias-free
case where a simple integral constraint is sufficient to achieve isospectrality. To
obtain the asymptotics for the empirical spectral density we follow the resolvent
method from random matrix theory via the cumulant expansion. We find that this
approach is more robust and less combinatorial than the moment method and expect
that it will apply also for models where the combinatorics of the former become
intractable. The resolvent method has been widely employed, but compared to
previous works, it is applied here to non-linear random matrices.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has seen many successful achievements in recent years. Applications in face
identification, object and speech recognition, translation, email spam filtering, navigation, medical
diagnosis, etc. have proved the enormous potential of machine learning for day-to-day live [16, 11].
Deep neural networks have turned out to be a particularly powerful machine learning method, and
understanding the theoretical underpinning of their success has received tremendous attention in
mathematics, physics and computer science.
A fully-connected, feed-forward neural network with L hidden layers of dimensions n1 , . . . , nL can
be modelled as follows:
fθ (x) = β ∗ f (W (L) f (W (L−1) f (. . . f (W (1) x) . . . ))) ∈ Rd ,
where x ∈ Rn0 denotes the input data vector and f : R → R is a non-linear activation function
which is applied entry-wise. We denote the parameters of the network by θ := (W (1) , . . . , W (L) , β),
where W (l) ∈ Rnl ×nl−1 for 1 ≤ l ≤ L and β ∈ RnL ×d are the matrices of the weights. In
the classical setting of supervised learning, we are given a training set of (say) m samples of
input feature vectors xi ∈ Rn0 with associated target vectors zi ∈ Rd . For example, xi may
encode the pixels of a photograph of an animal and the target zi may label the species of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

