Delayed Propagation Transformer:
A Universal Computation Engine towards Practical
Control in Cyber-Physical Systems

Wenqing Zheng
The University of Texas at Austin
w.zheng@utexas.edu

Qiangqiang Guo
University of Washington
guoqq17@uw.edu

Peihao Wang
The University of Texas at Austin
peihaowang@utexas.edu

Hao Yang
University of Washington
haoya@uw.edu

Zhangyang Wang
The University of Texas at Austin
atlaswang@utexas.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent control is a central theme in the Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). However, current control methods either receive non-Markovian states due to insufficient sensing and decentralized design, or suffer from poor convergence. This
paper presents the Delayed Propagation Transformer (DePT), a new transformerbased model that specializes in the global modeling of CPS while taking into
account the immutable constraints from the physical world. DePT induces a
cone-shaped spatial-temporal attention prior, which injects the information propagation and aggregation principles and enables a global view. With physical
constraint inductive bias baked into its design, our DePT is ready to plug and
play for a broad class of multi-agent systems. The experimental results on
one of the most challenging CPS – network-scale traffic signal control system
in the open world – show that our model outperformed the state-of-the-art expert methods on synthetic and real-world datasets. Our codes are released at:
https://github.com/VITA-Group/DePT.

1

Introduction

The Cyber-Physical System (CPS) is ubiquitous in our modern society; examples include intelligent
transportation systems, power grids, autonomous automobile systems, industrial control systems,
and robotic swarms. A CPS consists of multiple physical agents that interact and cooperate from
time to time; as well as a cyberspace that is responsible for monitoring the status of the physical
system, predicting future states, and/or assigning control actions to the physical agents [1, 2]. How to
effectively execute multi-agent control over CPS is an open problem of vital importance.
In general, there are two types of methods to solve the CPS multi-agent control problem: decentralized
and centralized ones. The decentralized methods usually design an individual controller for each
agent based on local states. Due to the agents’ continuous interaction, the features and the influence
of actions propagate between agents, hence the state transition for each agent relies on not only the
locally observed states and local actions but also states and actions of other agents. Therefore, the
locally observed states alone cannot make up a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [3, 4], which requires
the controller to balance the global as well as the local features [5, 6, 7]. Existing methods tackle
this issue by either complementing local information with information from the node’s immediate
neighbors or self history, or using Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) instead to recursively
model information propagation and aggregation. However, no aforementioned method is free of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

