Weisfeiler and Lehman Go Cellular: CW Networks
Cristian Bodnar⇤
University of Cambridge
cb2015@cam.ac.uk

Fabrizio Frasca⇤
Imperial College London & Twitter
ffrasca@twitter.com

Nina Otter
UCLA
otter@math.ucla.edu

Yu Guang Wang
MPI-MIS, SJTU & UNSW
yuguang.wang@unsw.edu.au

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge
pl219@cam.ac.uk

Guido Montúfar
MPI-MIS & UCLA
montufar@math.ucla.edu

Michael Bronstein
Imperial College London & Twitter
mbronstein@twitter.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are limited in their expressive power, struggle with
long-range interactions and lack a principled way to model higher-order structures.
These problems can be attributed to the strong coupling between the computational
graph and the input graph structure. The recently proposed Message Passing
Simplicial Networks naturally decouple these elements by performing message
passing on the clique complex of the graph. Nevertheless, these models can be
severely constrained by the rigid combinatorial structure of Simplicial Complexes
(SCs). In this work, we extend recent theoretical results on SCs to regular Cell
Complexes, topological objects that flexibly subsume SCs and graphs. We show
that this generalisation provides a powerful set of graph “lifting” transformations,
each leading to a unique hierarchical message passing procedure. The resulting
methods, which we collectively call CW Networks (CWNs), are strictly more
powerful than the WL test and not less powerful than the 3-WL test. In particular,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of one such scheme, based on rings, when applied
to molecular graph problems. The proposed architecture benefits from provably
larger expressivity than commonly used GNNs, principled modelling of higherorder signals and from compressing the distances between nodes. We demonstrate
that our model achieves state-of-the-art results on a variety of molecular datasets.

1

Introduction

The operations performed by message passing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) emulate the structure
of the input graph. While this property has clear computational advantages, it brings with it a series of
fundamental limitations. As observed by Xu et al. [74] and Morris et al. [55] the local neighbourhood
aggregations used by GNNs are at most as powerful as the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test [71] in
distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs. Therefore, GNNs fail to detect certain higer-order meso-scale
structures such as cliques or (induced) cycles [2, 15], which are particularly important in applications
dealing with social and biological networks or molecular graphs. At the same time, many such layers
have to be stacked to make long-range interactions in the graph possible. Besides the computational
burden this incurs, deep GNNs typically come with additional problems such as over-smoothing [51]
and over-squashing [1] of the node representations.
⇤

Authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

