Improving Transferability of Representations
via Augmentation-Aware Self-Supervision

Hankook Lee1 Kibok Lee23∗ Kimin Lee4 Honglak Lee25 Jinwoo Shin1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
University of Michigan
3
Amazon Web Services
4
University of California, Berkeley
5
LG AI Research

Abstract
Recent unsupervised representation learning methods have shown to be effective in
a range of vision tasks by learning representations invariant to data augmentations
such as random cropping and color jittering. However, such invariance could be
harmful to downstream tasks if they rely on the characteristics of the data augmentations, e.g., location- or color-sensitive. This is not an issue just for unsupervised
learning; we found that this occurs even in supervised learning because it also
learns to predict the same label for all augmented samples of an instance. To
avoid such failures and obtain more generalizable representations, we suggest to
optimize an auxiliary self-supervised loss, coined AugSelf, that learns the difference
of augmentation parameters (e.g., cropping positions, color adjustment intensities)
between two randomly augmented samples. Our intuition is that AugSelf encourages to preserve augmentation-aware information in learned representations, which
could be beneficial for their transferability. Furthermore, AugSelf can easily be
incorporated into recent state-of-the-art representation learning methods with a
negligible additional training cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
simple idea consistently improves the transferability of representations learned by
supervised and unsupervised methods in various transfer learning scenarios. The
code is available at https://github.com/hankook/AugSelf.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning has recently shown a remarkable success in various domains,
e.g., computer vision [1, 2, 3], natural language [4, 5], code [6], reinforcement learning [7, 8, 9], and
graphs [10]. The representations pretrained with a large number of unlabeled data have achieved
outstanding performance in various downstream tasks, by either training task-specific layers on top
of the model while freezing it or fine-tuning the entire model.
In the vision domain, the recent state-of-the-art methods [1, 2, 11, 12, 13] learn representations
to be invariant to a pre-defined set of augmentations. The choice of the augmentations plays a
crucial role in representation learning [2, 14, 15, 16]. A common choice is a combination of random
cropping, horizontal flipping, color jittering, grayscaling, and Gaussian blurring. With this choice,
learned representations are invariant to color and positional information in images; in other words,
the representations lose such information.
On the contrary, there have also been attempts to learn representations by designing pretext tasks that
keep such information in augmentations, e.g., predicting positional relations between two patches of
∗

Work done while at University of Michigan.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

