Differentially Private Learning with Adaptive
Clipping

Galen Andrew
galenandrew@google.com

Om Thakkar
omthkkr@google.com

H. Brendan McMahan
mcmahan@google.com

Swaroop Ramaswamy
swaroopram@google.com

Abstract
Existing approaches for training neural networks with user-level differential privacy
(e.g., DP Federated Averaging) in federated learning (FL) settings involve bounding
the contribution of each user’s model update by clipping it to some constant value.
However there is no good a priori setting of the clipping norm across tasks and
learning settings: the update norm distribution depends on the model architecture
and loss, the amount of data on each device, the client learning rate, and possibly
various other parameters. We propose a method wherein instead of a fixed clipping
norm, one clips to a value at a specified quantile of the update norm distribution,
where the value at the quantile is itself estimated online, with differential privacy.
The method tracks the quantile closely, uses a negligible amount of privacy budget,
is compatible with other federated learning technologies such as compression and
secure aggregation, and has a straightforward joint DP analysis with DP-FedAvg.
Experiments demonstrate that adaptive clipping to the median update norm works
well across a range of realistic federated learning tasks, sometimes outperforming
even the best fixed clip chosen in hindsight, and without the need to tune any
clipping hyperparameter.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become ubiquitous, with applications as diverse as image processing, natural
language translation, and music generation [27, 13, 28, 7]. Deep models are able to perform well in
part due to their ability to utilize vast amounts of data for training. However, recent work has shown
that it is possible to extract information about individual training examples using only the parameters
of a trained model [12, 30, 26, 8, 19]. When the training data potentially contains privacy-sensitive
user information, it becomes imperative to use learning techniques that limit such memorization.
Differential privacy (DP) [10, 11] is widely considered a gold standard for bounding and quantifying
the privacy leakage of sensitive data when performing learning tasks. Intuitively, DP prevents an
adversary from confidently making any conclusions about whether some user’s data was used in
training a model, even given access to arbitrary side information. The formal definition of DP depends
on the notion of neighboring datasets: we will refer to a pair of datasets D, D0 ∈ D as neighbors if
D0 can be obtained from D by adding or removing one element.
Definition 1.1 (Differential Privacy). A (randomized) algorithm M : D → R with input domain D
and output range R is (ε, δ)-differentially private if for all pairs of neighboring datasets D, D0 ∈ D,
and every measurable S ⊆ R, we have Pr (M (D) ∈ S) ≤ eε · Pr (M (D0 ) ∈ S) + δ, where
probabilities are with respect to the coin flips of M .
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

