M AUVE: Measuring the Gap
Between Neural Text and Human Text
using Divergence Frontiers
Krishna Pillutla1 Swabha Swayamdipta2 Rowan Zellers1 John Thickstun3
Sean Welleck1,2 Yejin Choi1,2 Zaid Harchaoui4
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
4
Department of Statistics, University of Washington

Abstract
As major progress is made in open-ended text generation, measuring how close
machine-generated text is to human language remains a critical open problem.
We introduce M AUVE, a comparison measure for open-ended text generation,
which directly compares the learnt distribution from a text generation model to
the distribution of human-written text using divergence frontiers. M AUVE scales
up to modern text generation models by computing information divergences in
a quantized embedding space. Through an extensive empirical study on three
open-ended generation tasks, we find that M AUVE identifies known properties
of generated text, scales naturally with model size, and correlates with human
judgments, with fewer restrictions than existing distributional evaluation metrics.

1

Introduction

Recent large-scale text generation models show an ability to produce human-like text of remarkable
quality and coherence in open-ended generation [45, 61, 6]. In this setting, a text generation model
forms a distribution over natural language sequences, induced by an autoregressive neural sequence
model (e.g., GPT-3 [6]) paired with a decoding algorithm (e.g., nucleus sampling [26]). Generating
text amounts to sampling from this distribution, with the goal of obtaining samples that resemble
those from the “true” distribution of human-written text.
To evaluate how close a generation model’s distribution is to that of human-written text, we must
consider two types of errors: (I) where the model assigns high probability to sequences which do
not resemble human-written text, and, (II) where the model distribution does not cover the human
distribution, i.e., it fails to yield diverse samples. However, quantifying these aspects in a principled
yet computationally tractable manner is challenging, as the text distributions are high-dimensional
and discrete, accessed only through samples or expensive model evaluations [26, 58, 62].
We develop M AUVE, a comparison measure for open-ended text generation. The proposed measure
is efficient, interpretable, and practical for evaluating modern text generation models. It captures
both types of errors (Figure 1) by building upon information divergence frontiers [49, 31, 16], so
far underexplored in natural language processing. The key idea for making the proposed measure
computationally tractable, yet effective, is to reduce its measurement to computing Kullback-Leibler
divergences in a quantized, low-dimensional space after embedding samples from each distribution
with an external language model. From an end-user’s perspective, M AUVE has a simple interface:
given neural text and human text, it yields a scalar measure of the gap between them.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

