Deep Proxy Causal Learning and its Application to
Confounded Bandit Policy Evaluation

Liyuan Xu
Gatsby Unit
liyuan.jo.19@ucl.ac.uk

Heishiro Kanagawa
Gatsby Unit
heishiro.kanagawa@gmail.com

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
Proxy causal learning (PCL) is a method for estimating the causal effect of treatments on outcomes in the presence of unobserved confounding, using proxies
(structured side information) for the confounder. This is achieved via two-stage
regression: in the first stage, we model relations among the treatment and proxies;
in the second stage, we use this model to learn the effect of treatment on the
outcome, given the context provided by the proxies. PCL guarantees recovery of
the true causal effect, subject to identifiability conditions. We propose a novel
method for PCL, the deep feature proxy variable method (DFPV), to address the
case where the proxies, treatments, and outcomes are high-dimensional and have
nonlinear complex relationships, as represented by deep neural network features.
We show that DFPV outperforms recent state-of-the-art PCL methods on challenging synthetic benchmarks, including settings involving high dimensional image
data. Furthermore, we show that PCL can be applied to off-policy evaluation
for the confounded bandit problem, in which DFPV also exhibits competitive
performance.

1

Introduction

In causal learning, we aim to estimate the effect of our actions on the world. For example, we may
be interested in measuring the impact of flight ticket prices on sales [2, 34], or the effect of grade
retention on cognitive development [4]. We refer to our action as a treatment, which results in a
particular outcome. It is often impossible to determine the effect of treatment on outcome from
observational data alone, since the observed joint distribution of treatment and outcome can depend
on a common confounder which influences both, and which might not be observed. In our example on
sales of plane tickets given a price, the two might even be positively correlated in some circumstances,
such as the simultaneous increase in sales and prices during the holiday season. This does not mean
that raising the price causes sales to increase. In this context, people’s desire to fly is a confounder,
since it affects both the number of ticket sales and the prices people are willing to accept. Thus, we
need to correct the bias caused by the confounder.
One common assumption to cope with confounding bias is to assume no unobserved confounders
exist [8], or more generally, the ignorable treatment assignment assumption [28], which states that
the treatment assignment is independent of the potential outcomes caused by the treatment, given the
background data available. Although a number of methods are proposed based on this assumption
[7, 9, 36], it can be too restrictive, since it is often difficult to determine how the confounder affects
treatment assignments and outcomes.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

