Task-Agnostic Undesirable Feature Deactivation Using
Out-of-Distribution Data
Dongmin Park1 , Hwanjun Song2 , MinSeok Kim1 , Jae-Gil Lee1∗
1
KAIST, 2 NAVER AI Lab
Republic of Korea
{dongminpark, minseokkim, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr, hwanjun.song@navercorp.com

Abstract
A deep neural network (DNN) has achieved great success in many machine learning
tasks by virtue of its high expressive power. However, its prediction can be easily
biased to undesirable features, which are not essential for solving the target task
and are even imperceptible to a human, thereby resulting in poor generalization.
Leveraging plenty of undesirable features in out-of-distribution (OOD) examples
has emerged as a potential solution for de-biasing such features, and a recent study
shows that softmax-level calibration of OOD examples can successfully remove the
contribution of undesirable features to the last fully-connected layer of a classiﬁer.
However, its applicability is conﬁned to the classiﬁcation task, and its impact on
a DNN feature extractor is not properly investigated. In this paper, we propose
TAUFE, a novel regularizer that deactivates many undesirable features using OOD
examples in the feature extraction layer and thus removes the dependency on
the task-speciﬁc softmax layer. To show the task-agnostic nature of TAUFE, we
rigorously validate its performance on three tasks, classiﬁcation, regression, and a
mix of them, on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet, CUB200, and CAR datasets.
The results demonstrate that TAUFE consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art
method as well as the baselines without regularization.

1

Introduction

Undesirable features, which are informally deﬁned as those not relevant to a target task, frequently
appear in training data; for example, the background is an undesirable feature for classifying animals
in images. The undesirable features are mainly caused by the statistical bias in in-distribution training
data. In fact, many undesirable features are statistically correlated with labels, even though they are
unnecessary and sometimes even harmful for the target task [1]; for example, the “desert” background
feature is correlated with “camels” because the camels frequently appear in a desert. However, such
undesirable features (e.g., desert background) rather yield unreliable predictions because they are
easily shifted in other unseen data (e.g., images of the camels on the road).
Meanwhile, deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to overly capture any high-frequency data
components which are even imperceptible to a human [2, 3]. This property is attributed to the
vulnerability of DNNs that can totally overﬁt to random labels or adversarial examples owing to their
extremely high capacity [3, 4, 5, 6]. Accordingly, DNNs are easily biased toward the undesirable
features as well, thereby often showing unsatisfactory generalization to unseen examples [7]. Thus, it
is very important to prevent overﬁtting to the undesirable features.
In this regard, a few research efforts have been devoted to remove the negative inﬂuence of undesirable
features by leveraging out-of-distribution (OOD) data [8, 9]. Under the assumption that in-distribution
and OOD data share undesirable features, OOD data is treated as a useful resource to alleviate the
aforementioned undesirable bias. Notably, a recent study [8] proposed a softmax-level calibration,
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

