Sampling with Trustworthy Constraints:
A Variational Gradient Framework
Xin T. Tong∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
mattxin@nus.edu.sg

Xingchao Liu∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
xcliu@utexas.edu

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.texas.edu

Abstract
Sampling-based inference and learning techniques, especially Bayesian inference,
provide an essential approach to handling uncertainty in machine learning (ML). As
these techniques are increasingly used in daily life, it becomes essential to safeguard
the ML systems with various trustworthy-related constraints, such as fairness,
safety, interpretability. Mathematically, enforcing these constraints in probabilistic
inference can be cast into sampling from intractable distributions subject to general
nonlinear constraints, for which practical efficient algorithms are still largely
missing. In this work, we propose a family of constrained sampling algorithms
which generalize Langevin Dynamics (LD) and Stein Variational Gradient Descent
(SVGD) to incorporate a moment constraint specified by a general nonlinear
function. By exploiting the gradient flow structure of LD and SVGD, we derive
two types of algorithms for handling constraints, including a primal-dual gradient
approach and the constraint controlled gradient descent approach. We investigate
the continuous-time mean-field limit of these algorithms and show that they have
O(1/t) convergence under mild conditions. Moreover, the LD variant converges
linearly assuming that a log Sobolev like inequality holds. Various numerical
experiments are conducted to demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithms in
trustworthy settings.

1

Introduction

Efficient approximation and sampling methods of intractable distributions plays a key role in probabilistic machine learning, especially Bayesian inference. Traditionally, this problem has been framed
as Monte Carlo sampling. Recently, variational optimization ideas, which frame the sampling problem into functional minimization problem of KL divergence in the space of distributions, have been
popularized, as exemplified by Langevin dynamics (through the lens of Wasserstein gradient flow
(Jordan et al., 1998)), and Stein variational gradient descent (Liu & Wang, 2016; Liu, 2017; Liu &
Wang, 2018). Let p∗0 be a probability density function supported on Rd from which it is intractable to
draw samples exactly; p∗0 can be the posterior distribution in Bayesian inference, or a probabilistic
graphical model constructed based on data and expert knowledge. The variational methods consider
∗

: Equal contribution. Code is available at https://github.com/gnobitab/ConstrainedSampling.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

