SmoothMix: Training Conﬁdence-calibrated
Smoothed Classiﬁers for Certiﬁed Robustness

1

Jongheon Jeong1

Sejun Park2∗

Minkyu Kim3

Heung-Chang Lee4

Doguk Kim5†

Jinwoo Shin3,1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST 2 Vector Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST 4 Kakao Enterprise
5
Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Inha University
{jongheonj, minkyu.kim, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
sejun.park@vectorinstitute.ai
andrew.com@kakaoenterprise.com dgkim@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is currently a state-of-the-art method to construct a certiﬁably robust classiﬁer from neural networks against ℓ2 -adversarial perturbations.
Under the paradigm, the robustness of a classiﬁer is aligned with the prediction
conﬁdence, i.e., the higher conﬁdence from a smoothed classiﬁer implies the better
robustness. This motivates us to rethink the fundamental trade-off between accuracy and robustness in terms of calibrating conﬁdences of a smoothed classiﬁer. In
this paper, we propose a simple training scheme, coined SmoothMix, to control the
robustness of smoothed classiﬁers via self-mixup: it trains on convex combinations
of samples along the direction of adversarial perturbation for each input. The
proposed procedure effectively identiﬁes over-conﬁdent, near off-class samples as
a cause of limited robustness in case of smoothed classiﬁers, and offers an intuitive
way to adaptively set a new decision boundary between these samples for better
robustness. Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can
signiﬁcantly improve the certiﬁed ℓ2 -robustness of smoothed classiﬁers compared
to existing state-of-the-art robust training methods.3

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples [53, 17] in deep neural networks clearly highlight that neural networks often
generalize differently from humans, at least without an additional prior of local smoothness of predictions with respect to the input space: an adversarially-crafted, yet imperceptible input perturbation can
drastically change the prediction of a neural network based classiﬁer. Due to the intrinsic complexity
of neural networks, however, the community has noticed that it is extremely hard to directly encode
this smoothness prior into neural networks [6, 3, 55], especially without relying on adversarial
training [40, 66], i.e., augmenting training data with its adversarial examples. Even with adversarial
training, (a) the non-convex, minimax nature of the training introduces many optimization difﬁculties,
often resulting in a harsh over-ﬁtting [51, 47], and (b) it is generally hard to provably guarantee that
the learned classiﬁer is indeed smooth.
∗

Work done at KAIST.
Work done at Kakao Enterprise.
3
Code is available at https://github.com/jh-jeong/smoothmix.

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

