Fair Sortition Made Transparent
Bailey Flanigan
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
bflaniga@andrew.cmu.edu

Gregory Kehne
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
gkehne@g.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Sortition is an age-old democratic paradigm, widely manifested today through the
random selection of citizens’ assemblies. Recently-deployed algorithms select assemblies maximally fairly, meaning that subject to demographic quotas, they give
all potential participants as equal a chance as possible of being chosen. While
these fairness gains can bolster the legitimacy of citizens’ assemblies and facilitate their uptake, existing algorithms remain limited by their lack of transparency.
To overcome this hurdle, in this work we focus on panel selection by uniform
lottery, which is easy to realize in an observable way. By this approach, the final
assembly is selected by uniformly sampling some pre-selected set of m possible
assemblies. We provide theoretical guarantees on the fairness attainable via this
type of uniform lottery, as compared to the existing maximally fair but opaque algorithms, for two different fairness objectives. We complement these results with
experiments on real-world instances that demonstrate the viability of the uniform
lottery approach as a method of selecting assemblies both fairly and transparently.

1

Introduction

In a citizens’ assembly, a panel of randomly chosen citizens is convened to deliberate and ultimately make recommendations on a policy issue. The defining aspect of citizens’ assemblies is
the randomness of the process, sortition, by which participants are chosen. In practice, the sortition process works as follows: first, volunteers are solicited via thousands of letters or phone calls,
which target individuals chosen uniformly at random. Those who respond affirmatively form the
pool of volunteers, from which a final panel will be chosen. Finally, a selection algorithm is used
to randomly select some pre-specified number k of pool members for the panel. To ensure adequate
representation of demographic groups, the chosen panel is often constrained to satisfy some upper
and lower quotas on feature categories such as age, gender, and ethnicity. We call a quota-satisfying
panel of size k a feasible panel. As this process illustrates, citizens’ assemblies offer a way to involve the public in informed decision-making. This potential for civic participation has recently
spurred a global resurgence in the popularity of citizens assemblies; they have been commissioned
by governments and led to policy changes at the national level [19, 23, 12].
Prompted by the growing impact of citizens’ assemblies, there has been a recent flurry of computer
scientific research on sortition, and in particular, on the fairness of the procedure by which participants are chosen [2, 13, 12]. The most practicable result to date is a family of selection algorithms
proposed by Flanigan et al. [12], which are distinguished from their predecessors by their use of
randomness toward the goal of fairness: while previously-used algorithms selected pool members in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

