Integrating Tree Path in Transformer
for Code Representation
Han Peng1 , Ge Li1∗, Wenhan Wang1 , Yunfei Zhao1 , Zhi Jin1∗
1
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University),
Ministry of Education; Institute of Software, EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
{phan, lige, wwhjacob, zhaoyunfei, zhijin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning distributed representation of source code requires modelling its syntax
and semantics. Recent state-of-the-art models leverage highly structured source
code representations, such as the syntax trees and paths therein. In this paper, we
investigate two representative path encoding methods shown in previous research
work and integrate them into the attention module of Transformer. We draw
inspiration from the ideas of positional encoding and modify them to incorporate
these path encoding. Specifically, we encode both the pairwise path between
tokens of source code and the path from the leaf node to the tree root for each
token in the syntax tree. We explore the interaction between these two kinds of
paths by integrating them into the unified Transformer framework. The detailed
empirical study for path encoding methods also leads to our novel state-of-theart representation model TPTrans, which finally outperforms strong baselines.
Extensive experiments and ablation studies on code summarization across four
different languages demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches. We release
our code at https://github.com/AwdHanPeng/TPTrans.

1

Introduction

Machine learning for source code aims at building models that learn semantic embedding of programs.
The initial representation of source code relied on sequential models adopted from natural language
processing, such as n-gram language model [Hindle et al., 2016, Hellendoorn and Devanbu, 2017],
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [Wei et al., 2019] and so on. However, source code is more
logical than natural languages, rich in structured information such as Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).
Therefore, these previous works struggle to capture the structural complexity of source code.
Some works leverage the program AST to model source code structure and linearize the graph by
traversing it. Code2seq [Alon et al., 2018] represents source code as a set of pairwise paths over
AST where each path is compressed to a vector using LSTMs [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997].
Code2seq obtains state-of-the-art for code representation using only AST information, demonstrating
the effectiveness of path encoding. [Kim et al., 2020] leveraged another kind of path from the leaf
node to the root of AST by traversing up its ancestors and then coupled the representation of paths
with the source code.
On the other hand, several works also leverage structured graph neural networks for modelling source
code directly. [Allamanis et al., 2017] used Gated Graph Neural Network (GGNN) to embed the
semantically meaningful relationships in the code. [Zhou et al., 2019] proposed a novel graph neural
network with composite programming representation for vulnerability identification. However, GNNs
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

