Differentiable Optimization of Generalized
Nondecomposable Functions using Linear Programs

Zihang Meng1 , Lopamudra Mukherjee2 , Yichao Wu3 , Vikas Singh1 , Sathya N. Ravi3
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
3
University of Illinois at Chicago
zihangm@cs.wisc.edu, mukherjl@uww.edu, yichaowu@uic.edu
vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu, sathya@uic.edu

Abstract
We propose a framework which makes it feasible to directly train deep neural
networks with respect to popular families of task-specific non-decomposable performance measures such as AUC, multi-class AUC, F -measure and others. A
feature of the optimization model that emerges from these tasks is that it involves
solving a Linear Programs (LP) during training where representations learned by
upstream layers characterize the constraints or the feasible set. The constraint matrix is not only large but the constraints are also modified at each iteration. We
show how adopting a set of ingenious ideas proposed by Mangasarian for 1-norm
SVMs – which advocates for solving LPs with a generalized Newton method –
provides a simple and effective solution that can be run on the GPU. In particular, this strategy needs little unrolling, which makes it more efficient during the
backward pass. Further, even when the constraint matrix is too large to fit on the
GPU memory (say large minibatch settings), we show that running the Newton
method in a lower dimensional space yields accurate gradients for training, by
utilizing a statistical concept called sufficient dimension reduction. While a number of specialized algorithms have been proposed for the models that we describe
here, our module turns out to be applicable without any specific adjustments or
relaxations. We describe each use case, study its properties and demonstrate the
efficacy of the approach over alternatives which use surrogate lower bounds and
often, specialized optimization schemes. Frequently, we achieve superior computational behavior and performance improvements on common datasets used in the
literature.

1

Introduction

Commonly used losses such as cross-entropy used in deep neural network (DNN) models can be
expressed as a sum over the per-sample losses incurred by the current estimate of the model. This
allows the direct use of mature optimization routines, and is sufficient for many use cases. But in
applications ranging from ranking/retrieval to class imbalanced learning, the most suitable losses for
the task do not admit a “decompose over samples” form. Examples include Area under the ROC
curve (AUC), multi-class variants of AUC, F -score, Precision at a fixed recall (P@R) and others.
Optimizing such measures in a scalable manner can pose challenges even in the shallow setting.
For AUC maximization, we now know that convex surrogate losses can be used in a linear model
Liu et al. [2018], Natole et al. [2018] in the so-called ERM framework. These ideas have been incorporated within deep neural network models and solved using SGD type schemes in Liu et al. [2019].
Such results on stochastic and online data models have also been explored in Ataman et al. [2006],
Cortes and Mohri [2004], Gao et al. [2013]. There are also available strategies for measures other
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

