ScaleCert: Scalable Certified Defense against
Adversarial Patches with Sparse Superficial Layers

Husheng Han1,2,3 ∗ Kaidi Xu4 ∗ Xing Hu1 † Xiaobing Chen1,2,3 Ling Liang5
Zidong Du1,3 Qi Guo1 Yanzhi Wang6 Yunji Chen1,2
1
SKL of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Cambricon Technologies
4
Drexel University 5 UC Santa Barbara 6 Northeastern University
{hanhusheng20z,huxing,chenxiaobing,duzidong,guoqi,cyj}@ict.ac.cn
kx46@drexel.edu, yanz.wang@northeastern.edu liangling@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Adversarial patch attacks that craft the pixels in a confined region of the input
images show their powerful attack effectiveness in physical environments even
with noises or deformations. Existing certified defenses towards adversarial patch
attacks work well on small images like MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, but achieve
very poor certified accuracy on higher-resolution images like ImageNet. It is urgent
to design both robust and effective defenses against such a practical and harmful
attack in industry-level larger images. In this work, we propose the certified defense
methodology that achieves high provable robustness for high-resolution images
and largely improves the practicality for real adoption of the certified defense. The
basic insight of our work is that the adversarial patch intends to leverage localized
superficial important neurons (SIN) to manipulate the prediction results. Hence,
we leverage the SIN-based DNN compression techniques to significantly improve
the certified accuracy, by reducing the adversarial region searching overhead and
filtering the prediction noises. Our experimental results show that the certified
accuracy is increased from 36.3% (the state-of-the-art certified detection) to 60.4%
on the ImageNet dataset, largely pushing the certified defenses for practical use.

1

Introduction

Despite the promising opportunities and great success of deep neural network (DNN) techniques
in computer vision tasks [9, 13], DNN techniques are vulnerable to adversarial attacks that craft
the input data with adversarial perturbations to manipulate the output [2, 20, 26]. Recent studies
reach a consensus that compared to the adversarial example attack, adversarial patch attack is more
practical and well-demonstrated in physical environment with good effectiveness and transferability
in both classification and detection systems [5, 14, 15, 23, 25, 28]. The key difference between
the adversarial example attack and patch attack is the constraint of perturbation. For adversarial
example attack, the adversary perturbs all pixels in the image with the `p -norm of the perturbation in
prescribed bounds, while the adversarial patch attack only changes the pixels in a confined region
without bounded constraints but free to choose the values. Consider the real-world condition, it’s
hard to define the `p -norm constraint of the perturbation due to the environment, viewpoint and
object variation. Hence, the adversarial patch attack is much more appropriate to be mounted in the
physical world. The success of practical adversarial patch attacks raises the importance and urgency
of defense methodologies. Existing defending methodologies can be classified into two categories,
heuristic defenses and certified defenses. For heuristic defense approaches, they have good efficiency
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

