You Are the Best Reviewer of Your Own Papers: An
Owner-Assisted Scoring Mechanism

Weijie J. Su
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of Pennsylvania
suw@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
I consider the setting where reviewers offer very noisy scores for a number of
items for the selection of high-quality ones (e.g., peer review of large conference
proceedings) whereas the owner of these items knows the true underlying scores but
prefers not to provide this information. To address this withholding of information,
in this paper, I introduce the Isotonic Mechanism, a simple and efficient approach
to improving on the imprecise raw scores by leveraging certain information that
the owner is incentivized to provide. This mechanism takes as input the ranking of
the items from best to worst provided by the owner, in addition to the raw scores
provided by the reviewers. It reports adjusted scores for the items by solving a
convex optimization problem. Under certain conditions, I show that the owner’s
optimal strategy is to honestly report the true ranking of the items to her best
knowledge in order to maximize the expected utility. Moreover, I prove that the
adjusted scores provided by this owner-assisted mechanism are indeed significantly
more accurate than the raw scores provided by the reviewers. This paper concludes
with several extensions of the Isotonic Mechanism and some refinements of the
mechanism for practical considerations.

1

Introduction

Designing mechanisms for evaluating a set of items by aggregating scores from agents has applications
in a wide range of domains [7, 2, 25]. As an example of these applications, reviewers are asked to
score submissions for conference proceedings on the basis of certain criteria, and the scores serve as
a crucial factor in accepting or rejecting the submissions. Ideally, one wishes to design a mechanism
that is expected to produce scores that adequately reflect the quality of the submissions.
In the last few years, however, the explosion in the number of submissions to many artificial
intelligence and machine learning conferences has made it very challenging to maintain high-quality
scores from peer review. For instance, the number of submissions to NeurIPS—a leading machine
learning conference—has grown from 1,673 in 2014 to a record-high of 9,454 in 2020 [18, 13]. On
the other hand, the number of qualified reviewers—those, for example, who have published at least
one paper in a premier machine learning conference—simply cannot keep up with the growth of the
submission size [24]. This significant disparity imposes significant burdens on the qualified reviewers,
thereby reducing the average amount of time spent on reviewing a paper and, worse, pushing program
chairs to solicit novice reviewers for top-tier machine learning conferences, including NeurIPS,
ICML, AAAI, and many others [26].
Given the fundamental role of peer review in scientific research, the consequence of this reality
has started to impede the advance of machine learning research [17, 8, 28]. In the famous NIPS
experiment in 2014 [18], review scores are observed to have a surprisingly high level of arbitrariness.
The situation has presumably become even worse, as the number of submissions in 2020 was
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

