Landmark-RxR: Solving Vision-and-Language
Navigation with Fine-Grained Alignment Supervision
Keji He1,2

Yan Huang1,2

Qi Wu3 Jianhua Yang5
Liang Wang∗1,2,6,7

Dong An1,4

Shuanglin Sima1,2

1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide
4
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
6
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
7
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (CAS-AIR)
{keji.he, dong.an, shuanglin.sima}@cripac.ia.ac.cn
{yhuang,
wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
youngjianhua@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
In Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) task, an agent is asked to navigate
inside 3D indoor environments following given instructions. Cross-modal alignment is one of the most critical challenges in VLN because the predicted trajectory needs to match the given instruction accurately. In this paper, we address
the cross-modal alignment challenge from the perspective of ﬁne-grain. Firstly, to
alleviate weak cross-modal alignment supervision from coarse-grained data, we
introduce a human-annotated ﬁne-grained VLN dataset, namely Landmark-RxR.
Secondly, to further enhance local cross-modal alignment under ﬁne-grained supervision, we investigate the focal-oriented rewards with soft and hard forms, by
focusing on the critical points sampled from ﬁne-grained Landmark-RxR. Moreover, to fully evaluate the navigation process, we also propose a re-initialization
mechanism that makes metrics insensitive to difﬁcult points, which can cause the
agent to deviate from the correct trajectories. Experimental results show that our
agent has superior navigation performance on Landmark-RxR, en-RxR and R2R.
Our dataset and code are available at https://github.com/hekj/Landmark-RxR.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) is an important task about cross-modal intelligence and can
be applied to service and rescue robots. Different from other cross-modal tasks like image/video
captioning [1, 2] and visual question answering [3], where the agent only needs to understand ﬁxed
images or videos, VLN agent has to learn and reason by dynamically interacting with the real environment guided by human instructions. Since Anderson et al. [4] ﬁrst introduced the VLN task with
the coarse-grained dataset Room-to-Room (R2R), great progresses in this direction have been made,
ranging from the sequence-to-sequence models [4] combined with cross-modal grounding modules
[5–8] to Transformer-based models [7, 9–12].
Cross-modal alignment is one of the most critical challenges in VLN as the predicted trajectory
needs to match the given instruction accurately. However, it is difﬁcult for the agent to learn very
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

