Discovering and Achieving Goals via World Models

Russell Mendonca*
Carnegie Mellon University
Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania

Oleh Rybkin*
University of Pennsylvania

Danijar Hafner
University of Toronto

Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
How can artificial agents learn to solve many diverse tasks in complex visual
environments without any supervision? We decompose this question into two
challenges: discovering new goals and learning to reliably achieve them. Our
proposed agent, Latent Explorer Achiever (LEXA), addresses both challenges by
learning a world model from image inputs and using it to train an explorer and
an achiever policy via imagined rollouts. Unlike prior methods that explore by
reaching previously visited states, the explorer plans to discover unseen surprising
states through foresight, which are then used as diverse targets for the achiever
to practice. After the unsupervised phase, LEXA solves tasks specified as goal
images zero-shot without any additional learning. LEXA substantially outperforms
previous approaches to unsupervised goal reaching, both on prior benchmarks and
on a new challenging benchmark with 40 test tasks spanning across four robotic
manipulation and locomotion domains. LEXA further achieves goals that require
interacting with multiple objects in sequence.

1

Introduction

How can we build an agent that learns to solve
hundreds of tasks in complex visual environments, such as rearranging objects with a robot
arm or completing chores in a kitchen? While
traditional reinforcement learning (RL) has been
successful for individual tasks, it requires a substantial amount of human effort for every new
task. Specifying task rewards requires domain
knowledge, access to object positions, is timeconsuming, and prone to human errors. Moreover, traditional RL would require environment
interaction to explore and practice in the environment for every new task. Instead, we approach
learning hundreds of tasks through the paradigm
of unsupervised goal-conditioned RL, where the
agent learns many diverse skills in the environment in the complete absence of supervision, to
later solve tasks via user-specified goal images
immediately without further training [2, 26, 40].
Challenges Exploring the environment and
learning to solve many different tasks is substantially more challenging than traditional RL
with a dense reward function or learning from
∗

Unsupervised Interaction

Random Goal Image

Achiever

Replay Buﬀer

World Model
Explorer

Environment
without rewards

Zero-Shot Evaluation

User Goal Image

Achiever (frozen)

Environment

Figure 1: LEXA learns a world model without any
supervision, and leverages it to train two policies
in imagination. The explorer finds new images and
the achiever learns to reliably reach them. Once
trained, the achiever reaches user-specified goals
zero-shot without further training at test time.

Equal contribution. Ordering determined at random. Project page: https://orybkin.github.io/lexa/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

