No-Press Diplomacy from Scratch

Anton Bakhtin David Wu Adam Lerer Noam Brown
Facebook AI Research
{yolo,dwu,alerer,noambrown}@fb.com

Abstract
Prior AI successes in complex games have largely focused on settings with at
most hundreds of actions at each decision point. In contrast, Diplomacy is a game
with more than 1020 possible actions per turn. Previous attempts to address games
with large branching factors, such as Diplomacy, StarCraft, and Dota, used human
data to bootstrap the policy or used handcrafted reward shaping. In this paper,
we describe an algorithm for action exploration and equilibrium approximation
in games with combinatorial action spaces. This algorithm simultaneously performs value iteration while learning a policy proposal network. A double oracle
step is used to explore additional actions to add to the policy proposals. At each
state, the target state value and policy for the model training are computed via an
equilibrium search procedure. Using this algorithm, we train an agent, DORA,
completely from scratch for a popular two-player variant of Diplomacy and show
that it achieves superhuman performance. Additionally, we extend our methods
to full-scale no-press Diplomacy and for the first time train an agent from scratch
with no human data. We present evidence that this agent plays a strategy that is
incompatible with human-data bootstrapped agents. This presents the first strong
evidence of multiple equilibria in Diplomacy and suggests that self play alone may
be insufficient for achieving superhuman performance in Diplomacy.

1

Introduction

Classic multi-agent AI research domains such as chess, Go,
and poker feature action spaces with at most thousands of
actions per state, and are therefore possible to explore exhaustively a few steps deep. In contrast, modern multi-agent
AI benchmarks such as StarCraft, Dota, and Diplomacy feature combinatorial action spaces that are incredibly large. In
StarCraft and Diplomacy, this challenge has so far been addressed by bootstrapping from human data [32, 24, 3, 11]. In
Dota, this challenge was addressed through careful expertdesigned reward shaping [4].
In contrast, in this paper we describe an algorithm that trains
agents through self play without any human data and can
accommodate the large action space of Diplomacy, a longstanding AI benchmark game in which the number of legal
actions for a player on a turn is often more than 1020 [24].

Figure 1: France (blue) would be in
a strong position were it not for exactly two actions that Austria (red)
can play to dislodge the unit in Tyr.
The probability of sampling one of
them randomly is roughly 10−6 .

We propose a form of deep RL (reinforcement learning)
where at each visited state the agent approximates a Nash
equilibrium for the stage game with 1-step lookahead search,
plays the equilibrium policy, and uses the equilibrium value as the training target. Since the full action space is too large to consider, this equilibrium is computed over a smaller set of candidate
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

