Causal Bandits with Unknown Graph Structure

Yangyi Lu
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yylu@umich.edu

Amirhossein Meisami
Adobe Inc.
meisami@adobe.com

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
In causal bandit problems, the action set consists of interventions on variables of
a causal graph. Several researchers have recently studied such bandit problems
and pointed out their practical applications. However, all existing works rely on a
restrictive and impractical assumption that the learner is given full knowledge of
the causal graph structure upfront. In this paper, we develop novel causal bandit
algorithms without knowing the causal graph. Our algorithms work well for causal
trees, causal forests and a general class of causal graphs. The regret guarantees
of our algorithms greatly improve upon those of standard multi-armed bandit
(MAB) algorithms under mild conditions. Lastly, we prove our mild conditions are
necessary: without them one cannot do better than standard MAB algorithms.

1

Introduction

A multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the classic models of sequential decision making (Auer et al., 2002; Agrawal and Goyal, 2012, 2013a). Statistical measures such as regret and
sample complexity measure how fast learning algorithms achieve near optimal performance in bandit
problems. However, both regret and sample complexity for MAB problems necessarily scale with
the number of actions without further assumptions. To address problems with a large action set,
researchers have studied various types of structured bandit problems where additional assumptions are
made on the structure of the reward distributions of the various actions. Algorithms for structured bandit problems exploit the dependency among arms to reduce the regret or sample complexity. Examples
of structured bandit problems include linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal and Goyal,
2013b), sparse linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012), and combinatorial bandits (Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi, 2012; Combes et al., 2015).
In this paper, we study a different kind of structured bandit problems: causal bandits. In this setting,
actions are composed of interventions on variables of a causal graph. Many real world problems can
be modeled via causal bandits. In healthcare applications, the physician adaptively adjusts the dosage
of multiple drugs to achieve some desirable clinical outcome (Liu et al., 2020). In email campaign
problems, marketers adjust for features of commercial emails to attract more customers and convert
them into loyal buyers (Lu et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2021). Genetic engineering also involves direct
manipulation of one or more genes using biotechnology, such as changing the genetic makeup of
cells to produce improved organisms (Wikipedia contributors, 2021). Recently there has been a flurry
of works (Lattimore et al., 2016; Sen et al., 2017; Lee and Bareinboim, 2018; Lu et al., 2019; Lee
and Bareinboim, 2019; Nair et al., 2021) on causal bandits that show how to achieve simple regret or
cumulative regret not scaling with the action set size.
However, a major drawback of existing work is that they require significant prior knowledge. All
existing works require that the underlying causal graph is given upfront. Some regret analysis works
even assume knowing certain probabilities for the causal model. In practice, they are all strong
assumptions.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

