The Hardness Analysis of Thompson Sampling for
Combinatorial Semi-bandits with Greedy Oracle
Fang Kong1
Yueran Yang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Wei Chen2
Shuai Li1⇤
2
Microsoft Research

{fangkong,yangyr99,shuaili8}@sjtu.edu.cn

weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
Thompson sampling (TS) has attracted a lot of interest in the bandit area. It was
introduced in the 1930s but has not been theoretically proven until recent years. All
of its analysis in the combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) setting requires
an exact oracle to provide optimal solutions with any input. However, such an
oracle is usually not feasible since many combinatorial optimization problems
are NP-hard and only approximation oracles are available. An example [30] has
shown the failure of TS to learn with an approximation oracle. However, this oracle
is uncommon and is designed only for a specific problem instance. It is still an
open question whether the convergence analysis of TS can be extended beyond
the exact oracle in CMAB. In this paper, we study this question under the greedy
oracle, which is a common (approximation) oracle with theoretical guarantees to
solve many (offline) combinatorial optimization problems. We provide a problemdependent regret lower bound of order ⌦(log T / 2 ) to quantify the hardness of
TS to solve CMAB problems with greedy oracle, where T is the time horizon
and
is some reward gap. We also provide an almost matching regret upper
bound. These are the first theoretical results for TS to solve CMAB with a common
approximation oracle and break the misconception that TS cannot work with
approximation oracles.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem [20, 5, 3] is a classical online learning framework.
It has been extensively studied in the literature and has a wide range of applications [13, 12, 20].
The problem is modeled by a T -round game between the learning agent and the environment. The
environment contains an arm set and each arm is associated with a reward distribution. At each
round t, the agent first selects an arm, while the environment generates a random reward for each arm
from its reward distribution. The agent then obtains the reward of the selected arm. The objective
of the agent is to accumulate as many expected rewards over T rounds, or equivalent to minimizing
the cumulative expected regret, which is defined as the cumulative difference between the expected
reward of the optimal arm and the selected arms over T rounds. To achieve this long-horizon goal,
the learning agent has to face the dilemma of exploration and exploitation in each round. The former
aims to try arms that have not been observed enough times to get a potentially higher reward, the
latter focuses on the arm with the best observed performance so far to maintain a high profit. How to
balance the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation is the main focus of the MAB algorithms.
One of the most popular bandit algorithms is the upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm [5]. The
algorithm aims to construct confidence sets for unknown expected rewards and selects arms according
to their highest upper confidence bounds. The UCB-type algorithms have been widely studied
and provided theoretical guarantees with regret upper bound of order O(log T / ), where is the
⇤

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

