Alpha-IoU: A Family of Power Intersection over
Union Losses for Bounding Box Regression

Jiabo He1,3,∗, Sarah Erfani1 , Xingjun Ma2,†, James Bailey1 , Ying Chi3,† , Xian-Sheng Hua3
1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{jiaboh@student., sarah.erfani@, baileyj@}unimelb.edu.au
danxjma@gmail.com, {xinyi.cy, xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Bounding box (bbox) regression is a fundamental task in computer vision. So far,
the most commonly used loss functions for bbox regression are the Intersection
over Union (IoU) loss and its variants. In this paper, we generalize existing IoUbased losses to a new family of power IoU losses that have a power IoU term
and an additional power regularization term with a single power parameter α.
We call this new family of losses the α-IoU losses and analyze properties such
as order preservingness and loss/gradient reweighting. Experiments on multiple
object detection benchmarks and models demonstrate that α-IoU losses, 1) can
surpass existing IoU-based losses by a noticeable performance margin; 2) offer
detectors more flexibility in achieving different levels of bbox regression accuracy
by modulating α; and 3) are more robust to small datasets and noisy bboxes.

1

Introduction

Bounding box (bbox) regression localizes an object in an image/video by predicting a bbox for the
object, which is fundamental to object detection, localization, and tracking. For example, the most
advanced object detectors often consist of a bbox regression branch and a classification branch with
the bbox regression branch generating bboxes to localize objects for classification. In this work, we
explore more effective loss functions for bbox regression in the context of object detection.
Whilst early works in object detection use `n -norm losses [11] for bbox regression, recent works
directly adopt the localization performance metric, i.e., Intersection over Union (IoU), as the localization loss [28, 39]. Compared with `n -norm losses, the IoU loss is invariant to bbox scales, thus
helping train better detectors. However, the IoU loss suffers from the gradient vanishing problem
when the predicted bboxes are not overlapping with the ground truth, which tends to slow down
convergence and result in inaccurate detectors. This has motivated the design of several improved
IoU-based losses including Generalized IoU (GIoU), Distance-IoU (DIoU) and Complete IoU (CIoU).
GIoU introduces a penalty term into the IoU loss to alleviate the gradient vanishing problem [32],
while DIoU and CIoU consider the central point distance and aspect ratio between predicted bboxes
and their ground truth in penalty terms [43].
In this paper, we present a new family of IoU losses obtained by applying power transformations
to existing IoU-based losses. We first apply the Box-Cox transformation [2] to the IoU loss LIoU =
1 − IoU and generalize it to a power IoU loss: Lα-IoU = (1 − IoU α )/α, α > 0, denoted as α-IoU.
We further simplify α-IoU to Lα-IoU = 1 − IoU α for α 9 0 and extend it to a more general form
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
∗
†

This research was done when Jiabo He interned with the DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
Corresponding authors.

