Factored Policy Gradients: Leveraging Structure
for Efficient Learning in MOMDPs

Thomas Spooner
J. P. Morgan AI Research
thomas.spooner@jpmorgan.com

Nelson Vadori
J. P. Morgan AI Research
nelson.vadori@jpmorgan.com

Sumitra Ganesh
J. P. Morgan AI Research
sumitra.ganesh@jpmorgan.com

Abstract
Policy gradient methods can solve complex tasks but often fail when the dimensionality of the action-space or objective multiplicity grow very large. This occurs, in
part, because the variance on score-based gradient estimators scales quadratically.
In this paper, we address this problem through a factor baseline which exploits independence structure encoded in a novel action-target influence network. Factored
policy gradients (FPGs), which follow, provide a common framework for analysing
key state-of-the-art algorithms, are shown to generalise traditional policy gradients,
and yield a principled way of incorporating prior knowledge of a problem domain’s
generative processes. We provide an analysis of the proposed estimator and identify the conditions under which variance is reduced. The algorithmic aspects of
FPGs are discussed, including optimal policy factorisation, as characterised by
minimum biclique coverings, and the implications for the bias-variance trade-off
of incorrectly specifying the network. Finally, we demonstrate the performance
advantages of our algorithm on large-scale bandit and traffic intersection problems,
providing a novel contribution to the latter in the form of a spatial approximation.

1

Introduction

Many sequential decision-making problems in the real-world have objectives that can be naturally
decomposed into a set of conditionally independent targets. Control of water reservoirs, energy
consumption optimisation, market making, cloud computing allocation, sewage flow systems, and
robotics are but a few examples [36]. While many optimisation methods have been proposed [25, 34]
— perhaps most prominently using Lagrangian scalarisation [46] — multi-agent learning has emerged
as a promising new paradigm for sample-efficient learning [6]. In this class of algorithms, the
multi-objective learning problem is cast into a centralised, co-operative stochastic game in which
co-ordination is achieved through global coupling terms in each agent’s objective/reward functions.
For example, a grocer who must manage their stock could be decomposed into a collection of subagents that each manage a single type of produce, but are subject to a global constraint on inventory.
This approach has been shown to be very effective in a number of domains [20, 50, 30, 24, 52], but
presents both conceptual and technical issues.
The transformation of a multi-objective Markov decision process (MOMDP) [36] into a stochastic
game is a non-trivial design challenge. In many cases there is no clear delineation between agents
in the new system, nor an established way of performing the decomposition. What’s more, it’s
unclear in many domains that a multi-agent perspective is appropriate, even as a technical trick. For
example, the concurrent problems studied by Silver et al. [39] exhibit great levels of homogeneity,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

