Chasing Sparsity in Vision Transformers:
An End-to-End Exploration

1

Tianlong Chen1 , Yu Cheng2 , Zhe Gan2 , Lu Yuan2 , Lei Zhang3 , Zhangyang Wang1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Microsoft Corporation, 3 International Digital Economy Academy
{tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu,{yu.cheng,zhe.gan,luyuan}@microsoft.com
leizhangcn@ieee.org

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have recently received explosive popularity, but their
enormous model sizes and training costs remain daunting. Conventional posttraining pruning often incurs higher training budgets. In contrast, this paper aims
to trim down both the training memory overhead and the inference complexity,
without sacrificing the achievable accuracy. We carry out the first-of-its-kind
comprehensive exploration, on taking a unified approach of integrating sparsity in
ViTs “from end to end”. Specifically, instead of training full ViTs, we dynamically
extract and train sparse subnetworks, while sticking to a fixed small parameter
budget. Our approach jointly optimizes model parameters and explores connectivity
throughout training, ending up with one sparse network as the final output. The
approach is seamlessly extended from unstructured to structured sparsity, the
latter by considering to guide the prune-and-grow of self-attention heads inside
ViTs. We further co-explore data and architecture sparsity for additional efficiency
gains by plugging in a novel learnable token selector to adaptively determine the
currently most vital patches. Extensive results on ImageNet with diverse ViT
backbones validate the effectiveness of our proposals which obtain significantly
reduced computational cost and almost unimpaired generalization. Perhaps most
surprisingly, we find that the proposed sparse (co-)training can sometimes improve
the ViT accuracy rather than compromising it, making sparsity a tantalizing “free
lunch”. For example, our sparsified DeiT-Small at (5%, 50%) sparsity for (data,
architecture), improves 0.28% top-1 accuracy, and meanwhile enjoys 49.32%
FLOPs and 4.40% running time savings. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/SViTE.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen substantial efforts devoted to scaling deep networks to enormous sizes.
Parameter counts are frequently measured in billions rather than millions, with the time and financial
outlay necessary to train these models growing in concert. The trend undoubtedly continues with
the recent forefront of transformers [1–3] for computer vision tasks. By leveraging self-attention,
reducing weight sharing such as convolutions, and feeding massive training data, vision transformers
have established many new state-of-the-art (SOTA) records in image classification [1, 2], object detection [4–7], image enhancement [8, 9], and image generation [10–12]. Existing vision transformers
and variants, despite the impressive empirical performance, have in general suffered from gigantic
parameter-counts, heavy run-time memory usages, and tedious training. That naturally calls for the
next step research of slimming their inference and training, without compromising the performance.
Model compression and efficient learning are no strangers to deep learning researchers, although their
exploration in the emerging vision transformer field remains scarce [13]. Among the large variety
of compression means [14], sparsity has been one of the central themes since the beginning [15].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

