Learning interaction rules from multi-animal
trajectories via augmented behavioral models

Keisuke Fujii∗
Nagoya University
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
JST PRESTO

Naoya Takeishi
University of Applied Sciences
and Arts Western Switzerland
RIKEN Center for Advanced
Intelligence Project

Kazushi Tsutsui
Nagoya University

Emyo Fujioka
Doshisha University

Nozomi Nishiumi
National Institute
for Basic Biology

Ryoya Tanaka
Nagoya University

Mika Fukushiro
Doshisha University

Kaoru Ide
Doshisha University

Hiroyoshi Kohno
Tokai University

Ken Yoda
Nagoya University

Susumu Takahashi
Doshisha University

Shizuko Hiryu
Doshisha University

Yoshinobu Kawahara
Kyushu University
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project

Abstract
Extracting the interaction rules of biological agents from movement sequences
pose challenges in various domains. Granger causality is a practical framework
for analyzing the interactions from observed time-series data; however, this framework ignores the structures and assumptions of the generative process in animal
behaviors, which may lead to interpretational problems and sometimes erroneous
assessments of causality. In this paper, we propose a new framework for learning
Granger causality from multi-animal trajectories via augmented theory-based behavioral models with interpretable data-driven models. We adopt an approach for
augmenting incomplete multi-agent behavioral models described by time-varying
dynamical systems with neural networks. For efficient and interpretable learning,
our model leverages theory-based architectures separating navigation and motion
processes, and the theory-guided regularization for reliable behavioral modeling.
This can provide interpretable signs of Granger-causal effects over time, i.e., when
specific others cause the approach or separation. In experiments using synthetic
datasets, our method achieved better performance than various baselines. We then
analyzed multi-animal datasets of mice, flies, birds, and bats, which verified our
method and obtained novel biological insights.

1

Introduction

Extracting the interaction rules of real-world agents from data is a fundamental problem in a variety
of scientific and engineering fields. For example, animals, vehicles, and pedestrians observe other’s
states and execute their actions in complex situations. Discovering the directed interaction rules of
such agents from observed data will contribute to the understanding of the principles of biological
∗

fujii@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

