Scalable Neural Data Server: A Data Recommender
for Transfer Learning

Tianshi Cao 1,2,3 ∗

Sasha Doubov 1,2 ∗
University of Toronto1

David Acuna 1,2,3
Vector Institute2

Sanja Fidler 1,2,3

NVIDIA3

{jcao,doubovs,davidj,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Absence of large-scale labeled data in the practitioner’s target domain can be a
bottleneck to applying machine learning algorithms in practice. Transfer learning
is a popular strategy for leveraging additional data to improve the downstream
performance, but finding the most relevant data to transfer from can be challenging.
Neural Data Server (NDS) [45], a search engine that recommends relevant data for a
given downstream task, has been previously proposed to address this problem. NDS
uses a mixture of experts trained on data sources to estimate similarity between
each source and the downstream task. Thus, the computational cost to each user
grows with the number of sources. To address these issues, we propose Scalable
Neural Data Server (SNDS), a large-scale search engine that can theoretically index
thousands of datasets to serve relevant ML data to end users. SNDS trains the
mixture of experts on intermediary datasets during initialization, and represents
both data sources and downstream tasks by their proximity to the intermediary
datasets. As such, computational cost incurred by SNDS users remains fixed as new
datasets are added to the server. We validate SNDS on a plethora of real world tasks
and find that data recommended by SNDS improves downstream task performance
over baselines. We also demonstrate the scalability of SNDS by showing its ability
to select relevant data for transfer outside of the natural image setting.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning (ML) applications have taken a foothold in many fields. Methodological and computational advances have shown a trend in performance improvements achieved by
using larger and larger training datasets, confirming that data is the fuel of modern machine learning.
This fuel, however, is not free of cost. While the raw data itself (such as images, text, etc.) can
be relatively easy to collect, annotating the data is a labour intensive endeavour. A popular and
effective approach to reduce the need of labeling in a target application domain is to leverage existing
datasets via transfer learning. Transfer learning is the re-purposing of ML models trained on a source
dataset towards a different target task [22]. The performance of transfer learning is predicated on
the relevance of the source to the target [46, 36]. Although there are numerous datasets available
through various data sharing platforms [41, 5, 38, 20], finding the right dataset that will most benefit
transfer-learning performance on the target domain is not a simple problem.
Consider a startup looking to train a debris detector for use on a road cleaning robot, and suppose
that they have collected a small, labeled dataset. They are looking for data with which to augment
their training set. Ideally, they would find a dataset of roadside debris that is captured from a sensor
similar to their own. However, keyword searches for “roadside debris”, would likely find data geared
towards autonomous driving, which might be from one of the many sensor types (rgb, lidar, radar).
Searching for their specific sensor type might lead to data from similar setups, but of different objects.
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

