Directed Probabilistic Watershed
Enrique Fita Sanmartín,
Sebastian Damrich,
Fred A. Hamprecht
HCI/IWR at Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
{enrique.fita.sanmartin, sebastian.damrich, fred.hamprecht}
@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
The Probabilistic Watershed is a semi-supervised learning algorithm applied on
undirected graphs. Given a set of labeled nodes (seeds), it defines a Gibbs probability distribution over all possible spanning forests disconnecting the seeds. It
calculates, for every node, the probability of sampling a forest connecting a certain
seed with the considered node. We propose the "Directed Probabilistic Watershed",
an extension of the Probabilistic Watershed algorithm to directed graphs. Building
on the Probabilistic Watershed, we apply the Matrix Tree Theorem for directed
graphs and define a Gibbs probability distribution over all incoming directed forests
rooted at the seeds. Similar to the undirected case, this turns out to be equivalent to
the Directed Random Walker. Furthermore, we show that in the limit case in which
the Gibbs distribution has infinitely low temperature, the labeling of the Directed
Probabilistic Watershed is equal to the one induced by the incoming directed forest
of minimum cost. Finally, for illustration, we compare the empirical performance
of the proposed method with other semi-supervised segmentation methods for
directed graphs.

1

Introduction

In the last years, machine learning has experienced a great boost thanks to the large quantity of
available data and increasing accessibility of less expensive and more powerful processing capacities.
However, the acquisition of labeled data is still laborious in some applications like computer-aided
diagnosis or drug discovery. Semi-supervised learning is the subfield of machine learning that utilizes
both labeled and unlabeled data. It permits exploiting the large amount of unlabeled data available
in many use cases jointly with frequently smaller sets of labeled data. When data is encoded as a
network, graph-based semi-supervised learning aims to assign a label or class to each of the nodes of a
network based on its topology and a given set of labeled nodes / seeds. Graph-based semi-supervised
learning has been applied in multiple domains like computer vision [6, 15, 17], NLP [2, 28, 31],
social networks [1, 45] and biomedical science[24]. Most graph-based semi-supervised learning
algorithms focus on undirected weighted graphs [5, 36], though directed graphs appear naturally in
many cases like in k-Nearest Neighbors graphs or citation and recommendation networks among
others. Instances of methods proposed for directed graphs are [9, 11, 42, 48, 49].
Recently, [12] proposed the transductive graph-based semi-supervised learning algorithm Probabilistic
Watershed (ProbWS). It envisages a Gibbs distribution over the labeled nodes separating forests
(forests whose trees contain a unique labeled node) that span a weighted undirected graph. The
probability of each forest is proportional to its weight. By means of the Matrix Tree Theorem [19, 40],
the ProbWS computes the probability of sampling a seed separating forest such that a query node is
connected to a single labeled node / seed. This approach turns out to be equivalent computationally
and by result to the Random Walker / Harmonic energy minimization [3, 15, 47, 50].
The Matrix Tree Theorem [19, 40] has been generalized to directed graphs [25]. We propose an
extension of the ProbWS, the “Directed Probabilistic Watershed" (DProbWS), that can be applied
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

