Bias and variance of the Bayesian-mean decoder

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, USA
mw2230@columbia.edu

Arthur Prat-Carrabin
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, USA
arthur.p@columbia.edu

Abstract
Perception, in theoretical neuroscience, has been modeled as the encoding of
external stimuli into internal signals, which are then decoded. The Bayesian
mean is an important decoder, as it is optimal for purposes of both estimation and
discrimination. We present widely-applicable approximations to the bias and to
the variance of the Bayesian mean, obtained under the minimal and biologicallyrelevant assumption that the encoding results from a series of independent, though
not necessarily identically-distributed, signals. Simulations substantiate the accuracy of our approximations in the small-noise regime. The bias of the Bayesian
mean comprises two components: one driven by the prior, and one driven by the
precision of the encoding. If the encoding is ‘efficient’, the two components have
opposite effects; their relative strengths are determined by the objective that the encoding optimizes. The experimental literature on perception reports both ‘Bayesian’
biases directed towards prior expectations, and opposite, ‘anti-Bayesian’ biases.
We show that different tasks are indeed predicted to yield such contradictory biases,
under a consistently-optimal encoding-decoding model. Moreover, we recover Wei
and Stocker’s “law of human perception” [1], a relation between the bias of the
Bayesian mean and the derivative of its variance, and show how the coefficient
of proportionality in this law depends on the task at hand. Our results provide a
parsimonious theory of optimal perception under constraints, in which encoding
and decoding are adapted both to the prior and to the task faced by the observer.

1

Introduction

Perception has been described in neuroscience as resulting from a two-stage, ‘encoding-decoding’
process. In the encoding stage, an external stimulus elicits in the brain an internal representation (in
the form of a neural activity) whose statistics depend on the physical properties of the stimulus. In the
decoding stage, the brain makes use of the internal representation to achieve a goal: for instance, to
estimate the magnitude of the stimulus, or to choose the best of two stimuli. It is generally understood
that the encoding capacity of the brain is limited, i.e., that there is some amount of imprecision in
the internal representation. The theory of ‘efficient coding’, however, proposes that the encoding is
optimized, under a constraint on the encoding capacity of the brain; and the theory of the ‘Bayesian
brain’ puts forward the notion that the brain optimally decodes the imprecise representation, through
Bayesian inference. Although these two theories emerged separately, recent models of perception
combine the two into a single, normative account of perception [2–9].
There does not seem to be a general consensus, however, as to what objectives the encoding and
decoding stages optimize [10]; in some models (though not all [8]), the two stages optimize different
objectives [6, 9]. Furthermore, in behavioral experiments involving one-dimensional, physical
magnitudes (such as some orientation or length), human perceptual decisions are often biased, and
they exhibit variability (‘noise’). Recent encoding-decoding models of perception account for these
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

