Topological Detection of Trojaned Neural Networks

Songzhu Zheng1 , Yikai Zhang2 , Hubert Wagner3 , Mayank Goswami4 , Chao Chen1
1
Stony Brook University, {zheng.songzhu,chao.chen.1}@stonybrook.edu
2
Morgan Stanley, Yikai.Zhang@morganstanley.com
3
University of Florida, hwagner@ufl.edu
4
City University of New York, mayank.goswami@qc.cuny.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to have security issues. One particular threat is
the Trojan attack. It occurs when the attackers stealthily manipulate the model’s
behavior through Trojaned training samples, which can later be exploited. Guided
by basic neuroscientific principles, we discover subtle – yet critical – structural
deviation characterizing Trojaned models. In our analysis we use topological
tools. They allow us to model high-order dependencies in the networks, robustly
compare different networks, and localize structural abnormalities. One interesting
observation is that Trojaned models develop short-cuts from shallow to deep layers.
Inspired by these observations, we devise a strategy for robust detection of Trojaned
models. Compared to standard baselines it displays better performance on multiple
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed rapid development of deep neural networks (DNNs) [33, 25, 58, 16].
However, due to their high complexity and lack of transparency, DNNs are vulnerable to various
malicious attacks [2, 56]. This paper focuses on one type of data poisoning attack called the Trojan
attack [23]. In this scenario the attacker injects Trojaned samples into the training dataset – for
example by using incorrectly labeled images overlaid with a special trigger. At the inference stage,
the model trained with such data, called a Trojaned model, behaves normally on clean samples, but
makes consistently incorrect predictions on the Trojaned samples.
The challenges in identifying such attacks stem from the confined setting: the user has access
only to the DNN model and few clean samples. In such data-limited setting, methods requiring
dense sampling [9] are not very practical. Instead, state-of-the-art methods often follow a reverse
engineering strategy [59, 43, 24, 62]. Starting with a clean sample, they try to reconstruct a Trojaned
sample that can change the prediction. Network’s response to such a reverse engineered sample can
help determine if the network was indeed Trojaned. However, in practice the search space for triggers
is huge, and efficient, reliable detection has proven challenging so far.
Previous approaches treat a neural network as a black-box, only inspecting the dependency between
its input and output. In this paper, we open the box and look into the internal mechanisms of the
model. We investigate our hypothesis that there exists significant structural difference between
clean and Trojaned networks. To this end, we follow a classic adage of neuroscience, “Neurons
that fire together, wire together” [26]. We consider neurons with highly correlated activation as wired
together – even if they are not directly connected in the network. Unfortunately, direct inspection of
such connectivity is not sufficient, presumably due to the high heterogeneity of models and data.
To overcome this issue, we propose to use more advanced tools which allow us to model more subtle,
higher-order structural information of neural networks. Our method uses tools from topological data
analysis, particularly persistent homology [18, 4]. With principled algebraic-topological foundations
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

