Coresets for Decision Trees of Signals

Ibrahim Jubran
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa, Israel
ibrahim.jub@gmail.com

Ernesto Evgeniy Sanches Shayda
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa, Israel
ernestosanches@gmail.com

Ilan Newman
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa, Israel
ilan@cs.haifa.ac.il

Dan Feldman
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa, Israel
dannyf.post@gmail.com

Abstract
A k-decision tree t (or k-tree) is a recursive partition of a matrix (2D-signal) into
k ≥ 1 block matrices (axis-parallel rectangles, leaves) where each rectangle is
assigned a real label. Its regression or classification loss to a given matrix D of
N entries (labels) is the sum of squared differences over every label in D and its
assigned label by t. Given an error parameter ε ∈ (0, 1), a (k, ε)-coreset C of D
is a small summarization that provably approximates this loss to every such tree,
up to a multiplicative factor of 1 ± ε. In particular, the optimal k-tree of C is a
(1 + ε)-approximation to the optimal k-tree of D.
We provide the first algorithm that outputs such a (k, ε)-coreset for every such
matrix D. The size |C| of the coreset is polynomial in k log(N )/ε, and its construction takes O(N k) time. This is by forging a link between decision trees from
machine learning – to partition trees in computational geometry.
Experimental results on sklearn and lightGBM show that applying our coresets
on real-world data-sets boosts the computation time of random forests and their
parameter tuning by up to x10, while keeping similar accuracy. Full open source
code is provided.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are one of the most common algorithms used in machine learning today, both in
the academy and industry, for classification and regression problems [52]. Informally, a decision
tree is a recursive binary partition of the input feature space into hyper-rectangles, where each such
hyper-rectangle is assigned a label. If the labels are given from a discrete set, the trees are usually
called classification trees, and otherwise they are usually called regression trees. Variants include
non-binary partitions and forests [29].
Why decision trees? Advantages of decision trees, especially compared to deep learning, include:
(i) Interpretability. They are among the most popular algorithms for interpretable (transparent)
machine learning [31]. (ii) Usually require small memory space, which also implies fast classification
time. (iii) Accuracy. Decision trees are considered as one of the few competitors of deep networks. In
competitions, such as the ones in Kaggle [36], they are one of the favorite classifiers [10], especially
on small or traditional tabular data. (iv) May learn from small training data.
The goal is usually to compute the optimal k-tree t∗ for a given dataset D and a given number k of
leaves, according to some given loss function. In practice, researchers usually use ensemble of trees
called forests, e.g., a Random Forest [12], which are usually learned from different subsets of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

