Learning to Adapt via Latent Domains for Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation

Yunan Liu, Shanshan Zhang∗, Yang Li, Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{liuyunan, shanshan.zhang, yangli1995, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive semantic segmentation aims to transfer knowledge learned from
labeled source domain to unlabeled target domain. To narrow down the domain
gap and ease adaptation difficulty, some recent methods translate source images to
target-like images (latent domains), which are used as supplement or substitute to
the original source data. Nevertheless, these methods neglect to explicitly model
the relationship of knowledge transferring across different domains. Alternatively,
in this work we break through the standard “source-target” one pair adaptation
framework and construct multiple adaptation pairs (e.g. “source-latent” and “latenttarget”). The purpose is to use the meta-knowledge (how to adapt) learned from
one pair as guidance to assist the adaptation of another pair under a meta-learning
framework. Furthermore, we extend our method to a more practical setting of open
compound domain adaptation (a.k.a multiple-target domain adaptation), where the
target is a compound of multiple domains without domain labels. In this setting, we
embed an additional pair of “latent-latent” to reduce the domain gap between the
source and different latent domains, allowing the model to adapt well on multiple
target domains simultaneously. When evaluated on standard benchmarks, our
method is superior to the state-of-the-art methods in both the single target and
multiple-target domain adaptation settings.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a popular task in computer vision, which assigns pixel-wise semantic
labels for given images. It has been widely utilized to facilitate downstream applications such
as video surveillance and autonomous driving. Recent progress on image semantic segmentation
has been driven by deep neural networks trained on a large amount of labeled data, which are yet
expensive to obtain. An alternative way is to generate synthetic images with pixel-level ground
truth readily available in an effortless way [1, 2]. However, the model purely trained on synthetic
datasets usually performs rather poor on real data. To address this issue, domain adaptation methods
are used to reduce the domain shift and learn domain-invariant representations by minimizing
distribution discrepancy between source and target domains [3, 4]. Following the advances of
generative adversarial nets (GANs) [5], adversarial learning has been used to align representations
of different domains in an adversarial manner [6, 7, 8, 9]. Recent studies introduce an additional
intermediate domain, i.e. latent domain, to narrow down the huge domain gap between source and
target domains [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. This is achieved by image-to-image
∗

The corresponding author is Shanshan Zhang.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

