Dynamic Sasvi: Strong Safe Screening for
Norm-Regularized Least Squares

Hiroaki Yamada
Kyoto University
hyamada@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Makoto Yamada
Kyoto University and RIKEN AIP
myamada@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
A recently introduced technique, called “safe screening,” for a sparse optimization
problem allows us to identify irrelevant variables in the early stages of optimization.
In this paper, we first propose a flexible framework for safe screening based on
the Fenchel–Rockafellar duality and then derive a strong safe screening rule for
norm-regularized least squares using the proposed framework. We refer to the
proposed screening rule for norm-regularized least squares as “dynamic Sasvi”
because it can be interpreted as a generalization of Sasvi. Unlike the original Sasvi,
it does not require the exact solution of a more strongly regularized problem; hence,
it works safely in practice. We show that our screening rule always eliminates more
features compared with the existing state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Sparse models such as Lasso [23] and group Lasso [26] have been widely studied in the areas of
statistics and machine learning and used for various applications such as compressed sensing [6] and
biomarker discovery [4]. Although sparse models can be formulated as a simple convex optimization
problem, the computational cost can be large if the numbers of samples and dimensions are extremely
large.
To address this problem, a technique called safe screening has been introduced [10] for Lasso
problems. Specifically, it eliminates variables that are guaranteed to be zero in the Lasso solution
before solving the original Lasso optimization problem. Many safe screening methods have been
proposed for various problems [10, 19, 24, 14, 25]. These are called sequential screening rules
because they require the solution to a more strongly regularized problem. A recent technique, called
dynamic screening, has been proposed to eliminate variables through an estimated solution in an
iterative solver [3]. In particular, Gap Safe [7, 16], a dynamic screening framework, is widely used
owing to its generality and efficiency [17, 21, 1, 20, 18].
In this paper, we propose a dynamic safe screening algorithm that is stronger than Gap Safe for the
Lasso-Like problem, which includes norm-regularized least squares. To this end, we first propose
a general screening framework based on the Fenchel–Rockafellar duality and then derive Dynamic
Sasvi, a strong safe screening rule for Lasso-like problems. Our framework can be regarded as a
generalization of the Gap Safe framework, and thus, we can derive Gap Safe simply using our results.
Moreover, owing to this generalization, we can use the strong problem adaptive inequality. The
derived screening rule for Lasso-like problems can be seen as a dynamic variant of safe screening
with variational inequalities (Sasvi) [14], which is a sequential screening rule for Lasso. Therefore,
we refer to this as Dynamic Sasvi. Unlike the original Sasvi, dynamic Sasvi does not require an
exact solution to the problem with another hyper-parameter and, hence, operates safely in practice.
Moreover, we propose the use of dynamic enhanced dual polytope projection (EDPP) [24], which is
a relaxation of dynamic Sasvi due to the introduction of a minimum radius sphere. We show, both
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

