Generalized Linear Bandits with Local Differential
Privacy

Yuxuan Han1∗
yhanat@connect.ust.hk

Zhipeng Liang2∗
zliangao@connect.ust.hk

Yang Wang1,2
yangwang@ust.hk

Jiheng Zhang1,2
jiheng@ust.hk

Department of Mathematics1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Contextual bandit algorithms are useful in personalized online decision-making.
However, many applications such as personalized medicine and online advertising
require the utilization of individual-specific information for effective learning,
while user’s data should remain private from the server due to privacy concerns.
This motivates the introduction of local differential privacy (LDP), a stringent
notion in privacy, to contextual bandits. In this paper, we design LDP algorithms
for stochastic generalized linear bandits to achieve the same regret bound as in
non-privacy settings. Our main idea is to develop a stochastic gradient-based
estimator and update mechanism to ensure LDP. We then exploit the flexibility of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), whose theoretical guarantee for bandit problems
is rarely explored, in dealing with generalized linear bandits. We also develop an
estimator and update mechanism based on Ordinary Least Square (OLS) for linear
bandits. Finally, we conduct experiments with both simulation and real-world
datasets to demonstrate the consistently superb performance of our algorithms
under LDP constraints with reasonably small parameters (ε, δ) to ensure strong
privacy protection.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandit algorithms have received extensive attention for their efficacy for online decision
making in many applications such as recommendation system, clinic trials, and online advertisement
[7, 35, 24]. Despite their success in many applications, intensive utilization of user-specific information, especially in privacy-sensitive domains such as clinical trials and e-commerce promotions, raises
concerns about data privacy protection. Differential privacy, as a provable protection against identification from attackers [18, 19], has been put forth as a competitive candidate for a formal definition of
privacy and has received considerable attention from both academic research [33, 17, 43, 36, 8] and
industry adoption [20, 12, 37]. While increasing attention has been paid to bandit algorithms with
joint differential privacy [34, 9], we introduce in this paper a more stringent notion, local differential
privacy (LDP), in which users even distrust the server collecting the data, to contextual bandits.
* Equal contributions.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

