Moser Flow: Divergence-based Generative Modeling
on Manifolds
Noam Rozen1
1

Aditya Grover2,3

Maximilian Nickel2

Weizmann Institute of Science

2

Facebook AI Research

Yaron Lipman1,2
3

UCLA

Abstract
We are interested in learning generative models for complex geometries described
via manifolds, such as spheres, tori, and other implicit surfaces. Current extensions
of existing (Euclidean) generative models are restricted to specific geometries and
typically suffer from high computational costs. We introduce Moser Flow (MF),
a new class of generative models within the family of continuous normalizing
flows (CNF). MF also produces a CNF via a solution to the change-of-variable
formula, however differently from other CNF methods, its model (learned) density
is parameterized as the source (prior) density minus the divergence of a neural
network (NN). The divergence is a local, linear differential operator, easy to
approximate and calculate on manifolds. Therefore, unlike other CNFs, MF does
not require invoking or backpropagating through an ODE solver during training.
Furthermore, representing the model density explicitly as the divergence of a NN
rather than as a solution of an ODE facilitates learning high fidelity densities.
Theoretically, we prove that MF constitutes a universal density approximator under
suitable assumptions. Empirically, we demonstrate for the first time the use of
flow models for sampling from general curved surfaces and achieve significant
improvements in density estimation, sample quality, and training complexity over
existing CNFs on challenging synthetic geometries and real-world benchmarks
from the earth and climate sciences.

1

Introduction

The major successes of deep generative models in recent years are primarily in domains involving
Euclidean data, such as images (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021), text (Brown et al., 2020), and video (Kumar et al., 2019). However, many kinds of scientific data in the real world lie in non-Euclidean spaces
specified as manifolds. Examples include planetary-scale data for earth and climate sciences (Mathieu
and Nickel, 2020), protein interactions and brain imaging data for life sciences (Gerber et al., 2010;
Chen et al., 2012), as well as 3D shapes in computer graphics (Hoppe et al., 1992; Kazhdan et al.,
2006). Existing (Euclidean) generative models cannot be effectively applied in these scenarios as they
would tend to assign some probability mass to areas outside the natural geometry of these domains.
An effective way to impose geometric domain constraints for deep generative modeling is to design
normalizing flows that operate in the desired manifold space. A normalizing flow maps a prior (source)
distribution to a target distribution via the change of variables formula (Rezende and Mohamed,
2015; Dinh et al., 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2019). Early work in this direction proposed invertible
architectures for learning probability distributions directly over the specific manifolds defined over
spheres and tori (Rezende et al., 2020). Recently, Mathieu and Nickel (2020) proposed to extend
continuous normalizing flows (CNF) (Chen et al., 2018) for generative modeling over Riemannian
manifolds wherein the flows are defined via vector fields on manifolds and computed as the solution
to an associated ordinary differential equation (ODE). CNFs have the advantage that the neural
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

