Locally Most Powerful Bayesian Test for
Out-of-Distribution Detection Using Deep Generative
Models
Keunseo Kim Juncheol Shin Heeyoung Kim
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST
{kkseo91, jczy0402, heeyoungkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Several out-of-distribution (OOD) detection scores have been recently proposed
for deep generative models because the direct use of the likelihood threshold
for OOD detection has been shown to be problematic. In this paper, we propose
a new OOD score based on a Bayesian hypothesis test called the locally most
powerful Bayesian test (LMPBT). The LMPBT is locally most powerful in that
the alternative hypothesis (the representative parameter for the OOD sample) is
specified to maximize the probability that the Bayes factor exceeds the evidence
threshold in favor of the alternative hypothesis provided that the parameter specified
under the alternative hypothesis is in the neighborhood of the parameter specified
under the null hypothesis. That is, under this neighborhood parameter condition,
the test with the proposed alternative hypothesis maximizes the probability of
correct detection of OOD samples. We also propose numerical strategies for more
efficient and reliable computation of the LMPBT for practical application to deep
generative models. Evaluations conducted of the OOD detection performance of
the LMPBT on various benchmark datasets demonstrate its superior performance
over existing OOD detection methods.

1

Introduction

In several real-world applications of deep learning models, detecting anomalous samples that significantly deviate from the distribution of the training data, that is, out-of-distribution (OOD) samples,
is crucial for reliable decision making, and various OOD detection methods have been studied in
this regard. Deep generative models [9, 8, 17] have also been investigated for OOD detection as an
intuitive strategy owing to their ability to evaluate the likelihood of a test sample. However, recent
studies have shown that deep generative models can assign higher likelihoods to OOD samples
than in-distribution samples [12], causing the direct use of raw likelihoods for OOD detection to be
problematic.
To address this challenge, several OOD scores have been recently proposed for deep generative models
and have exhibited effective OOD detection performance [15, 16, 18]. Ren et al. [15] proposed the
use of the ratio of the likelihood obtained from a model trained using pure input data to that obtained
from a background model trained using noise-perturbed input data as an OOD score. Xiao et al. [18]
proposed a likelihood regret score that can be calculated as the difference between the likelihood
obtained with the optimized parameters for a test sample and that approximated by the VAE. Serrà
et al. [16] proposed a penalized log-likelihood with an input complexity as an OOD score, where the
input complexity can be computed as the normalized size of the compressed input image.
In this paper, we propose a new OOD detection method that is optimal in some sense in the framework
of a Bayesian hypothesis test—inspired by a uniformly most powerful Bayesian test [7] and a locally
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

