Local Differential Privacy for Regret Minimization in
Reinforcement Learning

Evrard Garcelon
Facebook AI Research & CREST, ENSAE
Paris, France
evrard@fb.com
Ciara Pike-Burke
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
c.pikeburke@gmail.com

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE Paris & Criteo AI Lab
Palaiseau, France,
vianney@ensae.fr
Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research
Paris, France
matteo.pirotta@gmail.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms are widely used in domains where it is desirable
to provide a personalized service. In these domains it is common that user data
contains sensitive information that needs to be protected from third parties. Motivated by this, we study privacy in the context of finite-horizon Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) by requiring information to be obfuscated on the user side.
We formulate this notion of privacy for RL by leveraging the local differential
privacy (LDP) framework. We establish a lower bound for regret minimization in
finite-horizon MDPs with LDP guarantees which shows that guaranteeing privacy
has a multiplicative effect on the regret. This result shows that while LDP is
an appealing notion of privacy, it makes the learning problem significantly more
complex. Finally, we present an optimistic
algorithm that simultaneously satisfies
√
ε-LDP requirements, and achieves K/ε regret in any finite-horizon MDP after
K episodes, matching the lower bound dependency on the number of episodes K.

1

Introduction

The practical successes of Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have led to them becoming
ubiquitous in many settings such as digital marketing, healthcare and finance, where it is desirable to
provide a personalized service [e.g., 1, 2]. However, users are becoming increasingly wary of the
amount of personal information that these services require. This is particularly pertinent in many
of the aforementioned domains where the data obtained by the RL algorithm are highly sensitive.
For example, in healthcare, the state encodes personal information such as gender, age, vital signs,
etc. In advertising, it is normal for states to include browser history, geolocalized information,
etc. Unfortunately, [3] has shown that, unless sufficient precautions are taken, the RL agent leaks
information about the environment (i.e., states containing sensitive information). That is to say,
observing the policy computed by the RL algorithm is sufficient to infer information about the data
(e.g., states and rewards) used to compute the policy (scenario ¬). This puts users’ privacy at jeopardy.
Users therefore want to keep their sensitive information private, not only to an observer but also to
the service provider itself (i.e., the RL agent). In response, many services are adapting to provide
stronger protection of user privacy and personal data, for example by guaranteeing privacy directly
on the user side (scenario ­). This often means that user data (i.e., trajectories of states, actions,
rewards) are privatized before being observed by the RL agent. In this paper, we study the effect that
this has on the learning problem in RL.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

