Locality defeats the curse of dimensionality in
convolutional teacher-student scenarios
Alessandro Favero ∗
Institute of Physics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
alessandro.favero@epfl.ch

Francesco Cagnetta ∗
Institute of Physics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
francesco.cagnetta@epfl.ch

Matthieu Wyart
Institute of Physics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
matthieu.wyart@epfl.ch

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks perform a local and translationally-invariant treatment of the data: quantifying which of these two aspects is central to their success
remains a challenge. We study this problem within a teacher-student framework
for kernel regression, using ‘convolutional’ kernels inspired by the neural tangent
kernel of simple convolutional architectures of given filter size. Using heuristic
methods from physics, we find in the ridgeless case that locality is key in determining the learning curve exponent β (that relates the test error t ∼ P −β to the size
of the training set P ), whereas translational invariance is not. In particular, if the
filter size of the teacher t is smaller than that of the student s, β is a function of s
only and does not depend on the input dimension. We confirm our predictions on
β empirically. We conclude by proving, under a natural universality assumption,
that performing kernel regression with a ridge that decreases with the size of the
training set leads to similar learning curve exponents to those we obtain in the
ridgeless case.

1

Introduction

Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are widely recognised as the engine of the latest
successes of deep learning methods, yet such a success is surprising. Indeed, any supervised learning
model suffers in principle from the curse of dimensionality: under minimal assumptions on the
function to be learnt, achieving a fixed target generalisation error  requires a number of training
samples P which grows exponentially with the dimensionality d of input data [1], i.e. (P ) ∼ P −1/d .
Nonetheless, empirical evidence shows that the curse of dimensionality is beaten in practice [2, 3, 4],
with
(P ) ∼ P −β , β  1/d.
(1)
CNNs, in particular, achieve excellent performances on high-dimensional tasks such as image
classification on ImageNet with state-of-the-art architectures, for which β ≈ [0.3, 0.5] [2]. Natural
data must then possess additional structures that make them learnable. A classical idea [5] ascribes
the success of recognition systems to the compositionality of data, i.e. the fact that objects are made
of features, themselves made of sub-features [6, 7, 8]. In this view, the locality of CNNs plays a
key role for their performance, as supported by empirical observations [9]. Yet, there is no clear
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

