Near Optimal Policy Optimization via REPS
Aldo Pacchiano
Microsoft Research
apacchiano@microsoft.com

Jonathan Lee
Stanford University
jnl@stanford.edu

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley
peter@berkeley.edu

Ofir Nachum
Google
ofirnachum@google.com

Abstract
Since its introduction a decade ago, relative entropy policy search (REPS) has
demonstrated successful policy learning on a number of simulated and real-world
robotic domains, not to mention providing algorithmic components used by many
recently proposed reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. While REPS is wellknown in the community, there exist no guarantees on its performance when using
stochastic, gradient-based solvers. In this paper we aim to fill this gap by providing
guarantees and convergence rates for the sub-optimality of a policy learned using
first-order optimization methods applied to the REPS objective. We first consider
the setting in which we are given access to exact gradients and demonstrate how
near-optimality of the objective translates to near-optimality of the policy. We then
consider the setting of stochastic gradients and introduce a technique that uses
generative access to the underlying Markov decision process to compute parameter
updates that maintain favorable convergence to the optimal regularized policy.

1

Introduction

Introduced by Peters et al. [23], relative entropy policy search (REPS) is an algorithm for learning
agent policies in a reinforcement learning (RL) context. REPS has demonstrated successful policy
learning in a variety of challenging simulated and real-world robotic tasks, encompassing table
tennis [23], tether ball [12], beer pong [1], and ball-in-a-cup [8], among others. Beyond these direct
applications of REPS, the mathematical tools and algorithmic components underlying REPS have
inspired and been utilized as a foundation for a number of later algorithms, with their own collection
of practical successes [13, 25, 20, 22, 15, 2, 18, 21].
At its core, the REPS algorithm is derived via an application of convex duality [22, 19], in which
a Kullback Leibler (KL)-regularized version of the max-return objective in terms of state-action
distributions is transformed into an logsumexp objective in terms of state-action advantages (i.e., the
difference of the value of the state-action pair compared to the value of the state alone, with respect
to some learned state value function). If this dual objective is optimized, then the optimal policy of
the original primal problem may be derived as a softmax of the state-action advantages. This basic
derivation may be generalized, using any number of entropic regularizers on the original primal to
yield a dual problem in the form of a convex function of advantages, whose optimal values may be
transformed back to optimal regularized policies [7].
While the motivation for the REPS objective through the lens of convex duality is attractive, it leaves
two main questions unanswered regarding the theoretical soundness of using such an approach. First,
in practice, the dual objective in terms of advantages is likely not optimized fully. Rather, standard
gradient-based solvers only provide guarantees on the near-optimality of a returned candidate solution.
While convex duality asserts a relationship between primal and dual variables at the exact optimum,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

