Robust Optimization for Multilingual Translation
with Imbalanced Data
Xian Li and Hongyu Gong
Facebook AI
{xianl, hygong}@fb.com

Abstract
Multilingual models are parameter-efficient and especially effective in improving
low-resource languages by leveraging crosslingual transfer. Despite recent advance
in massive multilingual translation with ever-growing model and data, how to
effectively train multilingual models has not been well understood. In this paper,
we show that a common situation in multilingual training, data imbalance among
languages, poses optimization tension between high resource and low resource
languages where the found multilingual solution is often sub-optimal for low
resources. We show that common training method which upsamples low resources
can not robustly optimize population loss with risks of either underfitting high
resource languages or overfitting low resource ones. Drawing on recent findings
on the geometry of loss landscape and its effect on generalization, we propose a
principled optimization algorithm, Curvature Aware Task Scaling (CATS), which
adaptively rescales gradients from different tasks with a meta objective of guiding
multilingual training to low-curvature neighborhoods with uniformly low loss for
all languages. We ran experiments on common benchmarks (TED, WMT and
OPUS-100) with varying degrees of data imbalance. CATS effectively improved
multilingual optimization and as a result demonstrated consistent gains on low
resources (+0.8 to +2.2 BLEU) without hurting high resources. In addition,
CATS is robust to overparameterization and large batch size training, making it a
promising training method for massive multilingual models that truly improve low
resource languages.

1

Introduction

Multilingual models have received growing interest in natural language processing (NLP) [34, 41,
10, 26, 2, 19, 58]. The task of multilingual machine translation aims to have one model which can
translate between multiple languages pairs, which reduces training and deployment cost by improving
parameter efficiency. It presents several research questions around crosslingual transfer learning and
multi-task learning (MTL) [23, 1, 2, 27, 45, 28].
Recent progress in multilingual sequence modeling, with multilingual translation as a representative
application, been extending the scale of massive multilingual learning, with increasing number of
languages [2, 10, 58] , the amount of data [2, 12], as well as model size [27, 13]. Despite the
power-law scaling of (English-only) language modeling loss with model, data and compute [25],
it has been found that multilingual models do not always benefit from scaling up model and data
size, especially multilingual machine translation to multiple languages even after exploiting language
proximity with external linguistic knowledge [12, 27, 51].
There has been limited understanding of the optimization aspects of multilingual models. Multilingual
training is often implemented as monolithic with data from different languages simply combined.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

