Achieving Forgetting Prevention and Knowledge
Transfer in Continual Learning

1

Zixuan Ke1 , Bing Liu1 , Nianzu Ma1 , Hu Xu2 and Lei Shu3∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
2
Facebook AI Research
3
Amazon AWS AI
1
{zke4,liub,nma4}@uic.edu
2
huxu@fb.com
3
shulindt@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) learns a sequence of tasks incrementally with the goal
of achieving two main objectives: overcoming catastrophic forgetting (CF) and
encouraging knowledge transfer (KT) across tasks. However, most existing techniques focus only on overcoming CF and have no mechanism to encourage KT,
and thus do not do well in KT. Although several papers have tried to deal with
both CF and KT, our experiments show that they suffer from serious CF when
the tasks do not have much shared knowledge. Another observation is that most
current CL methods do not use pre-trained models, but it has been shown that such
models can significantly improve the end task performance. For example, in natural
language processing, fine-tuning a BERT-like pre-trained language model is one of
the most effective approaches. However, for CL, this approach suffers from serious
CF. An interesting question is how to make the best use of pre-trained models for
CL. This paper proposes a novel model called CTR to solve these problems. Our
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of CTR.2

1

Introduction

This paper studies continual learning (CL) of a sequence of natural language processing (NLP) tasks
in the task continual learning (Task-CL) setting. It aims to (i) prevent catastrophic forgetting (CF),
and (ii) transfer knowledge across tasks. (ii) is particularly important because many tasks in NLP
share similar knowledge that can be leveraged to achieve better accuracy. CF means that in learning a
new task, the existing network parameters learned for the previous tasks may be modified, which
degrades the performance of previous tasks [40]. In the Task-CL setting, the task id is provided for
each test case in testing so that the specific model for the task in the network can be applied to classify
the test case. Another popular CL setting is class continual learning, which does not provide the task
id during testing but it is for solving a different type of problems.
Most existing CL papers focus on dealing with CF [21, 5]. There are also some papers that perform
knowledge transfer. To achieve both objectives is highly challenging. To overcome CF in the Task-CL
setting, we don’t want the training of the new task to update the model parameters learned for previous
tasks to achieve model separation. But to transfer knowledge across tasks, we want the new task to
leverage the knowledge learned from previous tasks for learning a better model (forward transfer)
and also want the new task to enhance the performance of similar previous tasks (backward transfer).
∗
2

Work was done prior to joining Amazon.
The code of CTR can be found at https://github.com/ZixuanKe/PyContinual

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

