MST: Masked Self-Supervised Transformer for
Visual Representation

Zhaowen Li†?∗ Zhiyang Chen†?∗ Fan Yang◦ Wei Li◦ Yousong Zhu†
Chaoyang Zhao† Rui Deng◦∇ Liwei Wu◦ Rui Zhao◦ Ming Tang†
Jinqiao Wang†?
†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
?
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
◦
SenseTime Research
∇
University of California, Los Angeles
{zhaowen.li,zhiyang.chen,yousong.zhu,chaoyang.zhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{tangm,jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{yangfan1,liwei1,dengrui,wuliwei,zhaorui}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Transformer has been widely used for self-supervised pre-training in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and achieved great success. However, it has not been
fully explored in visual self-supervised learning. Meanwhile, previous methods
only consider the high-level feature and learning representation from a global
perspective, which may fail to transfer to the downstream dense prediction tasks
focusing on local features. In this paper, we present a novel Masked Self-supervised
Transformer approach named MST, which can explicitly capture the local context
of an image while preserving the global semantic information. Specifically, inspired
by the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) in NLP, we propose a masked token
strategy based on the multi-head self-attention map, which dynamically masks some
tokens of local patches without damaging the crucial structure for self-supervised
learning. More importantly, the masked tokens together with the remaining tokens
are further recovered by a global image decoder, which preserves the spatial
information of the image and is more friendly to the downstream dense prediction
tasks. The experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and
generality of the proposed method. For instance, MST achieves Top-1 accuracy of
76.9% with DeiT-S only using 300-epoch pre-training by linear evaluation, which
outperforms supervised methods with the same epoch by 0.4% and its comparable
variant DINO by 1.0%. For dense prediction tasks, MST also achieves 42.7% mAP
on MS COCO object detection and 74.04% mIoU on Cityscapes segmentation only
with 100-epoch pre-training.

1

Introduction

As Yann LeCun said, “if intelligence is a cake, the bulk of the cake is unsupervised learning”. This
sentence reflects that Un-/Self-supervised Learning played a central role in the resurgence of deep
learning. Common approaches focus on designing different pretext tasks [10, 29, 14, 3, 4, 6, 5, 13, 1,
36] and aim to learn useful representations of the input data without relying on human annotations. It
then uses those representations in downstream tasks, such as image classification, objection detection,
and semantic segmentation.
∗

Work done as an intern at SenseTime Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

