When False Positive is Intolerant:
End-to-End Optimization with Low FPR for
Multipartite Ranking
Peisong Wen1,2
Yuan He3

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
4
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
1

2

Qianqian Xu1∗
Zhiyong Yang2
Qingming Huang1,2,4,5∗

{wenpeisong20z,xuqianqian}@ict.ac.cn
{yangzhiyong21,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn
heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Multipartite ranking is a basic task in machine learning, where the Area Under
the receiver operating characteristics Curve (AUC) is generally applied as the
evaluation metric. Despite that AUC reﬂects the overall performance of the model,
it is inconsistent with the expected performance in some application scenarios,
where only a low False Positive Rate (FPR) is meaningful. To leverage high performance under low FPRs, we consider an alternative metric for multipartite ranking
evaluating the True Positive Rate (TPR) at a given FPR, denoted as TPR@FPR.
Unfortunately, the key challenge of direct TPR@FPR optimization is two-fold: a)
the original objective function is not differentiable, making gradient backpropagation impossible; b) the loss function could not be written as a sum of independent
instance-wise terms, making mini-batch based optimization infeasible. To address
these issues, we propose a novel framework on top of the deep learning framework named Cross-Batch Approximation for Multipartite Ranking (CBA-MR). In
face of a), we propose a differentiable surrogate optimization problem where the
instances having a short-time effect on FPR are rendered with different weights
based on the random walk hypothesis. To tackle b), we propose a fast ranking
estimation method, where the full-batch loss evaluation is replaced by a delayed
update scheme with the help of an embedding cache. Finally, experimental results
on four real-world benchmarks are provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

1

Introduction

The multipartite ranking is a multi-class extension of bipartite ranking, aiming to sort a dataset
with multiple discrete labels in proper order. Different from general multi-class classiﬁcation, the
categories in multipartite ranking are arranged according to a certain attribute. In the past decade,
multipartite ranking is studied in a variety of application scenarios in the ﬁeld of computer vision,
including age estimation[33], monocular depth estimation [12] and aesthetic visual analysis [32], etc.
Previous literature [13, 29, 35, 37, 38] uses Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) as the evaluation
metric for multipartite ranking. Intuitively, Hanley & McNeil [18] prove that AUC measures the
probability expectation that positive instances are sorted higher than negative instances. This metric
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

