Algorithmic Instabilities
of Accelerated Gradient Descent
Amit Attia
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
amitattia@mail.tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University, and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study the algorithmic stability of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method. For
convex quadratic objectives, Chen et al. [10] proved that the uniform stability of the
method grows quadratically with the number of optimization steps, and conjectured
that the same is true for the general convex and smooth case. We disprove this
conjecture and show, for two notions of algorithmic stability (including uniform
stability), that the stability of Nesterov’s accelerated method in fact deteriorates
exponentially fast with the number of gradient steps. This stands in sharp contrast
to the bounds in the quadratic case, but also to known results for non-accelerated
gradient methods where stability typically grows linearly with the number of steps.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic stability has emerged over the last two decades as a central tool for generalization analysis
of learning algorithms. While the classical approach in generalization theory originating in the PAC
learning framework appeal to uniform convergence arguments, more recent progress on stochastic
convex optimization models, starting with the pioneering work of Bousquet and Elisseeff [6] and
Shalev-Shwartz et al. [24], has relied on stability analysis for deriving tight generalization results for
convex risk minimizing algorithms.
Perhaps the most common form of algorithmic stability is the so called uniform stability [6]. Roughly,
the uniform stability of a learning algorithm is the worst-case change in its output model, in terms
of its loss on an arbitrary example, when replacing a single sample in the data set used for training.
Bousquet and Elisseeff [6] initially used uniform stability to argue about the generalization of empirical
risk minimization with strongly convex losses. Shalev-Shwartz et al. [24] revisited this concept and
studied the stability effect of regularization on the generalization of convex models. Their bounds
were recently improved in a variety of ways [13, 14, 7] and their approach has been influential in a
variety of settings (e.g., 18, 16, 9). In fact, to this day, algorithmic stability is essentially the only
general approach for obtaining tight (dimension free) generalization bounds for convex optimization
algorithms applied to the empirical risk (see 24, 12).
Significant focus has been put recently on studying the stability properties of iterative optimization
algorithms. Hardt et al. [17] considered stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and gave the first bounds
on its uniform stability for a convex and smooth loss function, that grow linearly with the number of
optimization steps. As observed by Feldman and Vondrak [13] and Chen et al. [10], their arguments
also apply with minor modifications to full-batch gradient descent (GD). Bassily et al. [5] exhibited a
significant gap in stability between the smooth and non-smooth cases, showing that non-smooth GD
and SGD are inherently less stable than their smooth counterparts. Even further, algorithmic stability
has also been used as an analysis technique in stochastic mini-batched iterative optimization (e.g.,
25, 1), and has been proved crucial to the design and analysis of differentially private optimization
algorithms [26, 4, 15], both of which focusing primarily on smooth optimization.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

