On the Validity of Modeling SGD with Stochastic
Differential Equations (SDEs)
Zhiyuan Li

Sadhika Malladi Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University
{zhiyuanli,smalladi,arora}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
It is generally recognized that finite learning rate (LR), in contrast to infinitesimal
LR, is important for good generalization in real-life deep nets. Most attempted
explanations propose approximating finite-LR SGD with Itô Stochastic Differential
Equations (SDEs), but formal justification for this approximation (e.g., (Li et al.,
2019a)) only applies to SGD with tiny LR. Experimental verification of the approximation appears computationally infeasible. The current paper clarifies the picture
with the following contributions: (a) An efficient simulation algorithm SVAG that
provably converges to the conventionally used Itô SDE approximation. (b) A theoretically motivated testable necessary condition for the SDE approximation and its
most famous implication, the linear scaling rule (Goyal et al., 2017), to hold. (c)
Experiments using this simulation to demonstrate that the previously proposed SDE
approximation can meaningfully capture the training and generalization properties
of common deep nets.

1

Introduction

Training with Stochastic Gradient Gescent (SGD) (1) and finite learning rate (LR) is largely considered
essential for getting best performance out of deep nets: using infinitesimal LR (which turns the
process into Gradient Flow (GF)) or finite LR with full gradients results in noticeably worse test
error despite sometimes giving better training error (Wu et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2020; Bjorck et al.,
2018).
Mathematical explorations of the implicit bias of finite-LR SGD toward good generalization have
focused on the noise arising from gradients being estimated from small batches. This has motivated
modeling SGD as a stochastic process and, in particular, studying Stochastic Differential Equations
(SDEs) to understand the evolution of net parameters.
Early attempts to analyze the effect of noise try to model it as as a fixed Gaussian (Jastrzebski
et al., 2017; Mandt et al., 2017). Current approaches approximate SGD using a parameter-dependent
noise distribution that match the first and second order moments of of the SGD (Equation (2)). It is
important to realize that this approximation is heuristic for finite LR, meaning it is not known whether
the two trajectories actually track each other closely. Experimental verification seems difficult because
simulating the (continuous) SDE requires full gradient/noise computation over suitably fine time
intervals. Recently, Li et al. (2017, 2019a); Feng et al. (2017); Hu et al. (2019) provided rigorous
proofs that the trajectories are arbitrarily close in a natural sense, but the proof needs the LR of
SGD to be an unrealistically small (unspecified) constant so the approximation remains heuristic.
In the worst case, the LR needs to be exponentially small, i.e., e ⌦(T ) , where T is the continuous
training time. Furthermore, noise plays no role in these approximation analyses and the same analysis
indeed shows GD, SGD and SDE all converge weakly to GF at the same rate. Thus whenever their
requirements for LR are met, there should be no performance difference between SGD and full-batch
GD. However, for a common practical LR choice we observe some difference in Figure 1, indicating
that the LR is usually outside of the regime their result requires.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

