Making the most of your day: online learning for
optimal allocation of time

Etienne Boursier
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay, France
etienne.boursier1@gmail.com
Tristan Garrec
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay, France
EDF Lab, Palaiseau, France
tristan.garrec@ut-capitole.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE Paris, France
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
vianney@ensae.fr

Marco Scarsini
Department of Economics and Finance, LUISS, Rome
marco.scarsini@luiss.it

Abstract
We study online learning for optimal allocation when the resource to be allocated is
time. An agent receives task proposals sequentially according to a Poisson process
and can either accept or reject a proposed task. If she accepts the proposal, she
is busy for the duration of the task and obtains a reward that depends on the task
duration. If she rejects it, she remains on hold until a new task proposal arrives. We
study the regret incurred by the agent, first when she knows her reward function
but does not know the distribution of the task duration, and then when she does
not know her reward function, either. This natural setting bears similarities with
contextual (one-armed) bandits, but with the crucial difference that the normalized
reward associated to a context depends on the whole distribution of contexts.

1

Introduction

Motivation. A driver filling her shift with rides, a landlord renting an estate short-term, an independent deliveryman, a single server that can make computations online, a communication system
receiving a large number of calls, etc. all face the same trade-off. There is a unique resource that can
be allocated to some tasks/clients for some duration. The main constraint is that, once it is allocated,
the resource becomes unavailable for the whole duration. As a consequence, if a “better” request
arrived during this time, it could not be accepted and would be lost. Allocating the resource for
some duration has some cost but generates some rewards – possibly both unknown and random. For
instance, an estate must be cleaned up after each rental, thus generating some fixed costs; on the other
hand, guests might break something, which explains why these costs are both random and unknown
beforehand. Similarly, the relevance of a call is unknown beforehand. Concerning duration, the
shorter the request the better (if the net reward is the same). Indeed, the resource could be allocated
twice in the same amount of time.
The ideal request would therefore be of short duration and large reward; this maximizes the revenue
per time. A possible policy could be to wait for this kind of request, declining the other ones (too
long and/or less profitable). On the other hand, such a request could be very rare. So it might be more
rewarding in the long run to accept any request, at the risk of “missing” the ideal one.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

