Optimal Rates for Nonparametric Density Estimation
under Communication Constraints
Jayadev Acharya
Cornell University
Ithaca, USA
acharya@cornell.edu

Clément L. Canonne
University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Aditya Vikram Singh
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
adityavs@iisc.ac.in

Himanshu Tyagi
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
htyagi@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We consider density estimation for Besov spaces when the estimator is restricted to
use only a limited number of bits about each sample. We provide a noninteractive
adaptive estimator which exploits the sparsity of wavelet bases, along with a
simulate-and-infer technique from parametric estimation under communication
constraints. We show that our estimator is nearly rate-optimal by deriving minmax
lower bounds that hold even when interactive protocols are allowed. Interestingly,
while our wavelet-based estimator is almost rate-optimal for Sobolev spaces as
well, it is unclear whether the standard Fourier basis, which arise naturally for
those spaces, can be used to achieve the same performance.

1

Introduction

Estimating distributions from samples is a fundamental statistical task. Modern applications, such as
those arising in federated learning or the Internet of Things (IoT), often limit access to the true data
samples. One common limitation in large scale distributed systems is communication constraints,
which require that each data sample must be compressed to a small number of bits.
Most prior work on communication-constrained estimation has focused on parametric problems
such as Gaussian mean estimation and discrete distribution estimation. In this work, we study
nonparametric density estimation under communication constraints where independent samples
from an unknown distribution (whose density f lies in a function class) are distributed across
players (one sample per player), and each player can only send ` bits about its sample to a central
referee; the referee outputs an estimate of f based on these `-bit messages. This problem has
s
been considered before by [5] for densities in Hölder class HL
([0, 1]) (functions supported on [0, 1]
s
satisfying |f (x) − f (y)| ≤ L|x − y| for every x, y ∈ [0, 1]), which is a relatively simple class for
which the normalized histogram with uniform bins is known to be optimal in the centralized setting.
This suggests a natural method for distributed setting – quantize each data sample into uniform bins
and use the optimal estimator for distributed discrete distribution estimation. Indeed, [5] shows that
this is optimal for distributed estimation of densities from the Hölder class under communication
constraints. However, this simple estimator does not seem to extend to the richer Sobolev class and
the most general Besov classes. In particular, the following question is largely open:
How to quantize samples to estimate densities from Besov classes under communication constraints?
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

