Diverse Message Passing for Attribute with
Heterophily
Liang Yang 1,2,⇤, Mengzhe Li 1,⇤ , Liyang Liu 1,⇤
Bingxin Niu 1 , Chuan Wang 2 , Xiaochun Cao 3 , Yuanfang Guo 4,†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, CAS, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
yangliang@vip.qq.com, limengzhefree@foxmail.com, liyang_liu1@163.com
niubingxin666@163.com, {wangchuan,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, andyguo@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Most of the existing GNNs can be modeled via the Uniform Message Passing
framework. This framework considers all the attributes of each node in its entirety,
shares the uniform propagation weights along each edge, and focuses on the
uniform weight learning. The design of this framework possesses two prerequisites,
the simplification of homophily and heterophily to the node-level property and
the ignorance of attribute differences. Unfortunately, different attributes possess
diverse characteristics. In this paper, the network homophily rate defined with
respect to the node labels is extended to attribute homophily rate by taking the
attributes as weak labels. Based on this attribute homophily rate, we propose
a Diverse Message Passing (DMP) framework, which specifies every attribute
propagation weight on each edge. Besides, we propose two specific strategies to
significantly reduce the computational complexity of DMP to prevent the overfitting
issue. By investigating the spectral characteristics, existing spectral GNNs are
actually equivalent to a degenerated version of DMP. From the perspective of
numerical optimization, we provide a theoretical analysis to demonstrate DMP’s
powerful representation ability and the ability of alleviating the over-smoothing
issue. Evaluations on various real networks demonstrate the superiority of our
DMP on handling the networks with heterophily and alleviating the over-smoothing
issue, compared to the existing state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Originated from the spectral graph theory, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)[1, 2] have demonstrated
superior performances on modeling ubiquitous irregular data in many tasks, such as computer vision,
natural language processing, information retrieval, etc. By reducing the computational complexity of
graph Fourier transformation via approximation, most of the GNNs, especially Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCN) [3] and its variants (such as SGC [4]), actually perform Laplacian smoothing [5]
and low-passing filtering [4]. Although this intuitive strategy achieves state-of-the-art performances
on networks with homophily, such as Cora, CiteSeer and Pubmed, it possesses two fatal drawbacks.
Firstly, it only performs well on shallow networks, while induces serious over-smoothing issue when
more layers are stacked [5, 6, 7]. Secondly, it shows obvious ineffectiveness in handling the networks
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

