Auto-Encoding Knowledge Graph for Unsupervised
Medical Report Generation

1

Fenglin Liu1,2 , Chenyu You4 , Xian Wu5 , Shen Ge5 , Sheng Wang3∗, Xu Sun1∗
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
2
School of ECE, Peking University
3
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
4
Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University 5 Tencent
{fenglinliu98, xusun}@pku.edu.cn, chenyu.you@yale.edu
{kevinxwu, shenge}@tencent.com, swang@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Medical report generation, which aims to automatically generate a long and coherent report of a given medical image, has been receiving growing research interests.
Existing approaches mainly adopt a supervised manner and heavily rely on coupled image-report pairs. However, in the medical domain, building a large-scale
image-report paired dataset is both time-consuming and expensive. To relax the
dependency on paired data, we propose an unsupervised model Knowledge Graph
Auto-Encoder (KGAE) which accepts independent sets of images and reports
in training. KGAE consists of a pre-constructed knowledge graph, a knowledgedriven encoder and a knowledge-driven decoder. The knowledge graph works as the
shared latent space to bridge the visual and textual domains; The knowledge-driven
encoder projects medical images and reports to the corresponding coordinates in
this latent space and the knowledge-driven decoder generates a medical report
given a coordinate in this space. Since the knowledge-driven encoder and decoder
can be trained with independent sets of images and reports, KGAE is unsupervised.
The experiments show that the unsupervised KGAE generates desirable medical
reports without using any image-report training pairs. Moreover, KGAE can also
work in both semi-supervised and supervised settings, and accept paired images
and reports in training. By further fine-tuning with image-report pairs, KGAE
consistently outperforms the current state-of-the-art models on two datasets.

1

Introduction

Medical images, such as radiology and pathology images, and their corresponding reports are widely
used for clinical diagnosis and treatment [8, 11]. A medical report is usually a paragraph of multiple
sentences which describes both the normal and abnormal findings in the medical image. In clinical
practice, writing a report can be time-consuming and tedious for experienced radiologists, and
error-prone for inexperienced radiologists [4]. Therefore, given the large volume of medical images,
automatically generating reports can improve current clinical practice in diagnostic radiology and
assist radiologists in clinical decision-making [15, 25]. Specifically, it can relieve radiologists from
such heavy workload and alert radiologists of the abnormalities to avoid misdiagnosis and missed
diagnosis. Therefore, automatic medical report generation attracts remarkable attention in both
artificial intelligence and clinical medicine.
Recently, inspired by the great success of neural machine translation [2, 38, 49, 50, 48], image
captioning [44, 39, 46, 28, 30, 29] and medical imaging analysis [47, 51, 52], the data-driven deep
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

