Exact marginal prior distributions
of finite Bayesian neural networks

Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth
Department of Physics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
jzavatoneveth@g.harvard.edu
Cengiz Pehlevan
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks are theoretically well-understood only in the infinitewidth limit, where Gaussian priors over network weights yield Gaussian priors over
network outputs. Recent work has suggested that finite Bayesian networks may
outperform their infinite counterparts, but their non-Gaussian function space priors
have been characterized only though perturbative approaches. Here, we derive
exact solutions for the function space priors for individual input examples of a class
of finite fully-connected feedforward Bayesian neural networks. For deep linear
networks, the prior has a simple expression in terms of the Meijer G-function. The
prior of a finite ReLU network is a mixture of the priors of linear networks of
smaller widths, corresponding to different numbers of active units in each layer.
Our results unify previous descriptions of finite network priors in terms of their tail
decay and large-width behavior.

1

Introduction

Modern Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) ubiquitously employ isotropic Gaussian priors over their
weights [1–22]. Despite their simplicity, these weight priors induce richly complex priors over the
network’s outputs [1, 4–22]. These function space priors are well-understood only in the limit of
infinite hidden layer width, in which they become Gaussian [4–8]. However, these infinite networks
cannot flexibly adapt to represent the structure of data during inference, an ability that is key to
the empirical successes of deep learning, Bayesian or otherwise [2, 3, 9–14, 16–20, 23, 24]. As a
result, elucidating how finite-width networks differ from their infinite-width cousins is an important
objective for theoretical study.
Progress towards this goal has been made through systematic study of the leading asymptotic corrections to the infinite-width prior [12, 14–17], including approaches emphasizing the physical
framework of effective field theory [13, 14]. However, the applicability of these perturbative approaches to narrow networks, particularly those with extremely narrow bottleneck layers [9], remains
unclear. In this paper, we present an alternative treatment of a simple class of BNNs, drawing
inspiration from the study of exactly solvable models in physics [25–27]. Our primary contributions
are as follows:
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

