Offline Meta Reinforcement Learning – Identifiability
Challenges and Effective Data Collection Strategies

Ron Dorfman
Technion
rdorfman@campus.technion.ac.il

Idan Shenfeld
Technion
idanshen@campus.technion.ac.il

Aviv Tamar
Technion
avivt@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Consider the following instance of the Offline Meta Reinforcement Learning
(OMRL) problem: given the complete training logs of N conventional RL agents,
trained on N different tasks, design a meta-agent that can quickly maximize reward
in a new, unseen task from the same task distribution. In particular, while each
conventional RL agent explored and exploited its own different task, the meta-agent
must identify regularities in the data that lead to effective exploration/exploitation
in the unseen task. Here, we take a Bayesian RL (BRL) view, and seek to learn
a Bayes-optimal policy from the offline data. Building on the recent VariBAD
BRL approach, we develop an off-policy BRL method that learns to plan an
exploration strategy based on an adaptive neural belief estimate. However, learning
to infer such a belief from offline data brings a new identifiability issue we term
MDP ambiguity. We characterize the problem, and suggest resolutions via data
collection and modification procedures. Finally, we evaluate our framework on a
diverse set of domains, including difficult sparse reward tasks, and demonstrate
learning of effective exploration behavior that is qualitatively different from the
exploration used by any RL agent in the data. Our code is available online at
https://github.com/Rondorf/BOReL.

1

Introduction

A central question in reinforcement learning (RL) is how to learn quickly (i.e., with few samples)
in a new environment. Meta-RL addresses this issue by training an agent on a large set of training
environments [5, 9]. Intuitively, the meta-RL agent can learn regularities in the environments,
which allow quick learning in any environment that shares a similar structure. Indeed, recent work
demonstrated this by training memory-based controllers that ‘identify’ the domain [5, 28, 18], or by
learning a parameter initialization that leads to good performance within a few gradient steps [9].
Another formulation of quick RL is Bayesian RL [BRL, 11]. In BRL, the environment parameters
are treated as unobserved variables, with a known prior distribution. Consequentially, the standard
problem of maximizing expected returns (taken with respect to the posterior distribution) explicitly
accounts for the environment uncertainty, and its solution is a Bayes-optimal policy, wherein actions
optimally balance exploration and exploitation. Recently, Zintgraf et al. [36] showed that meta-RL
is in fact an instance of BRL, where the meta-RL environment distribution is simply the BRL prior.
Furthermore, a Bayes-optimal policy can be trained using standard RL methods, by adding to the
state the belief over the environment parameters. The VariBAD algorithm [36] implements this idea
using a variational autoencoder (VAE) for belief estimation and deep neural network policies.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

