Kernel Functional Optimisation

Arun Kumar A V, Alistair Shilton, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University
Waurn Ponds, Geelong, Australia
{aanjanapuravenk, alistair.shilton, santu.rana, sunil.gupta,
svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Traditional methods for kernel selection rely on parametric kernel functions or
a combination thereof and although the kernel hyperparameters are tuned, these
methods often provide sub-optimal results due to the limitations induced by the
parametric forms. In this paper, we propose a novel formulation for kernel selection
using efficient Bayesian optimisation to find the best fitting non-parametric kernel.
The kernel is expressed using a linear combination of functions sampled from
a prior Gaussian Process (GP) defined by a hyperkernel. We also provide a
mechanism to ensure the positive definiteness of the Gram matrix constructed using
the resultant kernels. Our experimental results on GP regression and Support Vector
Machine (SVM) classification tasks involving both synthetic functions and several
real-world datasets show the superiority of our approach over the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Kernel machines (Hofmann et al., 2008) generally work well with low-dimensional and small to
medium-scaled data. In most kernel machines, the kernel function is chosen from the standard bag
of popular kernels (Genton, 2001, Stein, 2015) such as Squared Exponential kernel (SE), Matérn
kernel and Periodic kernel, or a weighted combination thereof (Aiolli and Donini, 2015, Gönen and
Alpaydın, 2011, Rakotomamonjy et al., 2007). Recent developments (Jang et al., 2017, Wilson and
Adams, 2013) in kernel learning parameterise the kernel function to boost the expressiveness of the
kernel. However, the expressiveness of such kernels remains limited by the chosen parametric form
and thus they often fall short in providing the best kernel function for complex data distributions.
There have been some early attempts to design an optimal non-parametric kernel to remove the
limitations associated with the parametric forms. Ong et al. (2003, 2005) proposed a hyperkernel
framework by defining a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) on the space of kernels i.e., a
kernel on kernels to support kernel learning. They formulate a semidefinite programming (Vandenberghe and Boyd, 1996) based optimisation problem using the representer theorem (Steinwart and
Christmann, 2008, Vapnik, 1999) to find the best kernel. However, their method suffers from two key
limitations: (i) their way of enforcing the positive definiteness property produces a restrictive search
space, resulting in a sub-optimal solution, and (ii) the computational complexity of their method
scales with the dataset size, making it infeasible for larger datasets. Benton et al. (2019) proposed
Functional Kernel Learning (FKL), which extends the function space view of the Gaussian Process
(GP) for kernel learning. FKL uses a transformed GP over a spectral density to define a distribution
over kernels. However, the formulation of kernel functionals using the spectral densities induces
strong assumptions on the properties such as periodicity, stationarity, etc. and thus are not generally
applicable. Malkomes et al. (2016) proposed an automated kernel selection (BOMS) using Bayesian
optimisation. The kernel space in BOMS is defined by the base kernels and the associated grammar
to combine them. Although the search space is constructed by summing or multiplying the base
kernels, the resultant kernel space is restricted in the compositional space of parametric forms.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

