An Online Riemannian PCA for Stochastic Canonical
Correlation Analysis

Zihang Meng1∗ Rudrasis Chakraborty2∗ Vikas Singh1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Butlr
zihangm@cs.wisc.edu, rudrasischa@gmail.com, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
We present an efficient stochastic algorithm (RSG+) for canonical correlation analysis (CCA) using a reparametrization of the projection matrices. We show how this
reparametrization (into structured matrices), simple in hindsight, directly presents
an opportunity to repurpose/adjust mature techniques for numerical optimization
on Riemannian manifolds. Our developments nicely complement existing methods
for this problem which either require O(d3 ) time complexity per iteration with
O( √1t ) convergence rate (where d is the dimensionality) or only extract the top
1 component with O( 1t ) convergence rate. In contrast, our algorithm offers an
improvement: it achieves O(d2 k) runtime complexity per iteration for extracting
the top k canonical components with O( 1t ) convergence rate. While our paper
focuses more on the formulation and the algorithm, our experiments show that
the empirical behavior on common datasets is quite promising. We also explore a
potential application in training fair models with missing sensitive attributes.

1

Introduction

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) is a classical method for evaluating correlations between two
sets of variables. It is commonly used in unsupervised multi-view learning, where the multiple
views of the data may correspond to image, text, audio and so on, Rupnik and Shawe-Taylor [2010],
Chaudhuri et al. [2009], Luo et al. [2015], and has been applied to manifold-valued data also Kim
et al. [2014]. Classical formulations have also been extended to leverage advances in representation
learning, for example, Andrew et al. [2013] showed how the CCA can be interfaced with deep neural
networks enabling modern use cases. Many results over the last few years have used CCA or its
variants for problems including measuring representational similarity in deep neural networks Morcos
et al. [2018] and speech recognition Couture et al. [2019].
The goal in CCA is to find linear combinations within two random variables X and Y which have
maximum correlation with each other. Formally, the CCA problem is defined as follows. Let
X ∈ RN ×dx and Y ∈ RN ×dy be N samples respectively drawn from pair of random variables X
(dx -variate random variable) and Y (dy -variate random variable), with unknown joint probability
distribution. The goal is to find the projection matrices U ∈ Rdx ×k and V ∈ Rdy ×k , with
k ≤ min{dx , dy }, such that the correlation is maximized:

max F = trace U T CXY V
s.t.
U T CX U = Ik , V T CY V = Ik
(1)
U,V

Here, CX = N1 X T X and CY = N1 Y T Y are the sample covariance matrices, and CXY = N1 X T Y
denotes the sample cross-covariance.
The objective in (1) is the expected cross-correlation in the projected space and the constraints specify
that different canonical components should be decorrelated. Let us define the whitened covariance
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

