Fast Tucker Rank Reduction for Non-Negative
Tensors Using Mean-Field Approximation
Kazu Ghalamkari1,2 Mahito Sugiyama1,2
1
National Institute of Informatics
2
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI
{gkazu,mahito}@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
We present an efficient low-rank approximation algorithm for non-negative tensors. The algorithm is derived from our two findings: First, we show that rank-1
approximation for tensors can be viewed as a mean-field approximation by treating each tensor as a probability distribution. Second, we theoretically provide a
sufficient condition for distribution parameters to reduce Tucker ranks of tensors;
interestingly, this sufficient condition can be achieved by iterative application of
the mean-field approximation. Since the mean-field approximation is always given
as a closed formula, our findings lead to a fast low-rank approximation algorithm
without using a gradient method. We empirically demonstrate that our algorithm is
faster than the existing non-negative Tucker rank reduction methods and achieves
competitive or better approximation of given tensors.

1

Introduction

A multidimensional array, or tensor, is a fundamental data structure in machine learning and statistical
data analysis, and extraction of the essential information contained in tensors has been studied
extensively [14, 20]. For second-order tensors – that is, matrices – low-rank approximation by
singular value decomposition (SVD) is well established [13]. SVD always provides the best low-rank
approximation in the sense of arbitrary unitarily invariant norms [30]. In contrast, the problem
of low-rank approximation becomes much more challenging for tensors higher than the second
order, where the question of how to define the rank of tensors is even nontrivial. To date, various
types of ranks – the CP-rank [17, 24], the Tucker rank [9, 39], and the tubal rank [29] – have been
proposed, and low-rank approximation of tensors in terms of one of the above two ranks has been
widely studied. Furthermore, non-negative low-rank approximation has also been developed, not
only for matrices such as NMF [26], but also for tensors [27]. In particular, non-negative Tucker
decomposition (NTD) [21] and its efficient variant lraSNTD [43] approximate a given non-negative
tensor by a tensor with the lower Tucker rank.
While these approximations have been widely used in various domains such as image classification [23], recommendation [37], and denoising [12], efficient low-rank approximation remains
fundamentally challenging. Even the simplest case, the rank-1 approximation in terms of minimizing the Least Squares (LS) error between a given tensor and a low-rank tensor, is known to be
NP-hard [16]. Various methods have been developed to efficiently find approximate solutions in
polynomial runtime [7, 8, 10, 25, 42]. If we use the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence instead of the
LS error as a cost function, we can alleviate the problem as the best rank-1 approximation can be
obtained in the closed formula [19]. However, the general case of low-rank approximation in terms
of the KL divergence is also still under development.
In this paper, we present a fast low-Tucker-rank approximation method for non-negative tensors.
To date, the majority of low-rank approximation methods are based on gradient decent using the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

