An Infinite-Feature Extension for Bayesian ReLU Nets
That Fixes Their Asymptotic Overconfidence

Agustinus Kristiadi
University of Tübingen
agustinus.kristiadi@uni-tuebingen.de

Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen
matthias.hein@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen and MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
A Bayesian treatment can mitigate overconfidence in ReLU nets around the training
data. But far away from them, ReLU Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) can still
underestimate uncertainty and thus be asymptotically overconfident. This issue
arises since the output variance of a BNN with finitely many features is quadratic
in the distance from the data region. Meanwhile, Bayesian linear models with
ReLU features converge, in the infinite-width limit, to a particular Gaussian process
(GP) with a variance that grows cubically so that no asymptotic overconfidence
can occur. While this may seem of mostly theoretical interest, in this work, we
show that it can be used in practice to the benefit of BNNs. We extend finite
ReLU BNNs with infinite ReLU features via the GP and show that the resulting
model is asymptotically maximally uncertain far away from the data while the
BNNs’ predictive power is unaffected near the data. Although the resulting model
approximates a full GP posterior, thanks to its structure, it can be applied post-hoc
to any pre-trained ReLU BNN at a low cost.

1

Introduction

Approximate Bayesian methods, which turn neural networks (NNs) into Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs), can be used to address the overconfidence issue of NNs [1]. Specifically, Kristiadi et al. [2]
recently showed for binary ReLU classification networks that far away from the training data, i.e. when
scaling any input with a scalar α > 0 and taking the limit α → ∞, the confidence of (Gaussian-based)
BNNs is strictly less than one—“being Bayesian” can thus mitigate overconfidence. This result is
encouraging vis-à-vis standard point-estimated networks, for which Hein et al. [3] showed earlier that
the same asymptotic limit always yields arbitrarily high confidence. Nevertheless, BNNs can still be
asymptotically overconfident, albeit less so than standard NNs, since the aforementioned uncertainty
bound can be loose.
We identify that this issue arises because the variance over function outputs of a BNN is asymptotically
quadratic, while the corresponding mean is asymptotically linear w.r.t. α. Intuitively, fixing this issue
requires adding an unbounded number of ReLU features with increasing distance from the training
data, so that the output mean stays unchanged but the associated variance grows super-quadratically.
And indeed there is a particular Gaussian process (GP), arising from the cubic spline kernel [4],
which has cubic variance growth and can be seen as a Bayesian linear model with countably infinite
ReLU features. In the context of the analysis, the fact that standard ReLU BNNs only use finitely
many features makes them “miss out” on some uncertainty that should be there. In this work, we
“add back” this missing uncertainty into finite ReLU BNNs by first extending the cubic spline kernel
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

