Safe Reinforcement Learning
with Natural Language Constraints

Tsung-Yen Yang∗
Princeton University
ty3@princeton.edu

Michael Hu∗
Princeton University
michael.hu@yobi.ventures

Yinlam Chow
Google Research
yinlamchow@google.com
Peter J. Ramadge
Princeton University
ramadge@princeton.edu

Karthik Narasimhan
Princeton University
karthikn@princeton.edu

Abstract
While safe reinforcement learning (RL) holds great promise for many practical applications like robotics or autonomous cars, current approaches require specifying
constraints in mathematical form. Such specifications demand domain expertise,
limiting the adoption of safe RL. In this paper, we propose learning to interpret
natural language constraints for safe RL. To this end, we first introduce H AZARD W ORLD, a new multi-task benchmark that requires an agent to optimize reward
while not violating constraints specified in free-form text. We then develop an agent
with a modular architecture that can interpret and adhere to such textual constraints
while learning new tasks. Our model consists of (1) a constraint interpreter that
encodes textual constraints into spatial and temporal representations of forbidden
states, and (2) a policy network that uses these representations to produce a policy
achieving minimal constraint violations during training. Across different domains
in H AZARDW ORLD, we show that our method achieves higher rewards (up to
11x) and fewer constraint violations (by 1.8x) compared to existing approaches.
However, in terms of absolute performance, H AZARDW ORLD still poses significant
challenges for agents to learn efficiently, motivating the need for future work.1

1

Introduction

Although reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promise in several simulated domains such as
games [1, 2, 3] and autonomous navigation [4, 5], deploying RL in real-world scenarios remains
challenging [6]. In particular, real-world RL requires ensuring the safety of the agent and its surroundings, which means accounting for constraints during training that are orthogonal to maximizing
rewards. For example, a cleaning robot must be careful to not knock the television over, even if the
television lies on the optimal path to cleaning the house.
Safe RL tackles these challenges with algorithms that maximize rewards while simultaneously
minimizing constraint violations during exploration [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However,
these algorithms have two key limitations that prevent their widespread use. First, they require us
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/SRL-NLC

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

