Gradient Starvation:
A Learning Proclivity in Neural Networks

Mohammad Pezeshki1,2
Aaron Courville1,2

Sékou-Oumar Kaba1,3 Yoshua Bengio1,2
Doina Precup1,3,4
Guillaume Lajoie1,2

1

Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 McGill University 4 Google DeepMind
corresponding authors:{pezeshki, guillaume.lajoie}@mila.quebec

Abstract
We identify and formalize a fundamental gradient descent phenomenon leading to
a learning proclivity in over-parameterized neural networks. Gradient Starvation
arises when cross-entropy loss is minimized by capturing only a subset of features
relevant for the task, despite the presence of other predictive features that fail to
be discovered. This work provides a theoretical explanation for the emergence of
such feature imbalances in neural networks. Using tools from Dynamical Systems
theory, we identify simple properties of learning dynamics during gradient descent
that lead to this imbalance, and prove that such a situation can be expected given
certain statistical structure in training data. Based on our proposed formalism,
we develop guarantees for a novel but simple regularization method aimed at
decoupling feature learning dynamics, improving accuracy and robustness in cases
hindered by gradient starvation. We illustrate our findings with simple and realworld out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization experiments.

1

Introduction

In 1904, a horse named Hans attracted worldwide attention due to the belief that it was capable of
doing arithmetic calculations [81]. Its trainer would ask Hans a question, and Hans would reply
by tapping on the ground with its hoof. However, it was later revealed that the horse was only
noticing subtle but distinctive signals in its trainer’s unconscious behavior, unbeknown to him, and
not actually performing arithmetic. An analogous phenomenon has been noticed when training neural
networks [e.g. 85, 109, 54, 39, 17, 14, 37, 51, 107, 76, 48, 19, 61, 77]. In many cases, state-of-the-art
neural networks appear to focus on low-level superficial correlations, rather than more abstract and
robustly informative features of interest [16, 88, 40, 68, 30].
The rationale behind this phenomenon is well known by practitioners: given strongly-correlated and
fast-to-learn features in training data, gradient descent is biased towards learning them first. However,
the precise conditions leading to such learning dynamics, and how one might intervene to control
this feature imbalance are not entirely understood. Recent work aims at identifying the reasons
behind this phenomenon [97, 70, 22, 73, 51, 76, 100, 92, 83, 105, 42, 79, 4], while complementary
work quantifies resulting shortcomings, including poor generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD)
test data, reliance upon spurious correlations, and lack of robustness [30, 68, 77, 41, 63, 64, 9].
However most established work focuses on squared-error loss and its particularities, where results
do not readily generalize to other objective forms. This is especially problematic since for several
classification applications, cross-entropy is the loss function of choice, yielding very distinct learning
dynamics. In this paper, we argue that Gradient Starvation, first coined in [26], is a leading cause for
this feature imbalance in neural networks trained with cross-entropy, and propose a simple approach
to mitigate it.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

