History Aware Multimodal Transformer for
Vision-and-Language Navigation

Shizhe Chen, Pierre-Louis Guhur, Cordelia Schmid, Ivan Laptev
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
{shizhe.chen, pierre-louis.guhur, cordelia.schmid, ivan.laptev}@inria.fr
https://cshizhe.github.io/projects/vln_hamt.html

Abstract
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) aims to build autonomous visual agents
that follow instructions and navigate in real scenes. To remember previously visited
locations and actions taken, most approaches to VLN implement memory using
recurrent states. Instead, we introduce a History Aware Multimodal Transformer
(HAMT) to incorporate a long-horizon history into multimodal decision making.
HAMT efficiently encodes all the past panoramic observations via a hierarchical
vision transformer (ViT), which first encodes individual images with ViT, then
models spatial relation between images in a panoramic observation and finally
takes into account temporal relation between panoramas in the history. It, then,
jointly combines text, history and current observation to predict the next action. We
first train HAMT end-to-end using several proxy tasks including single step action
prediction and spatial relation prediction, and then use reinforcement learning to
further improve the navigation policy. HAMT achieves new state of the art on a
broad range of VLN tasks, including VLN with fine-grained instructions (R2R,
RxR), high-level instructions (R2R-Last, REVERIE), dialogs (CVDN) as well as
long-horizon VLN (R4R, R2R-Back). We demonstrate HAMT to be particularly
effective for navigation tasks with longer trajectories.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) has recently received growing attention [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. VLN
requires an agent to understand natural language instructions, perceive the visual world, and perform
navigation actions to arrive at a target location. A number of datasets have been proposed to support
various VLN tasks such as indoor and outdoor navigation with fine-grained instructions [2, 6, 7],
language-driven remote object finding [8] and navigation in dialogs [9].
VLN agents are faced with several challenges. First, as opposed to static vision-text grounding [10],
the agent continuously receives new visual observations and should align them with instructions.
Most of existing works adopt recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] to encode
historical observations and actions within a fixed-size state vector to predict the next action. Such
condensed states might be sub-optimal for capturing essential information in extended trajectories [17].
For instance, “bring the spoon to me” requires the agent to remember its start location after navigating
to the “spoon”, while early memories are prone to fade in the recurrent state. Few endeavors [18, 19]
construct external map-like memories for received observations. Nevertheless, these approaches still
rely on RNNs to track the navigation state. As the history plays an important role in environment
understanding and instruction grounding, we propose to explicitly encode the history as a sequence
of previous actions and observations instead of using recurrent states.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

