Online Knapsack with Frequency Predictions
Sungjin Im
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Merced
sim3@ucmerced.edu

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Mahshid Montazer Qaem
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Merced
mmontazerqaem@ucmerced.edu

Manish Purohit
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
mpurohit@google.com

Abstract
There has been recent interest in using machine-learned predictions to improve the
worst-case guarantees of online algorithms. In this paper we continue this line of
work by studying the online knapsack problem, but with very weak predictions:
in the form of knowing an upper and lower bound for the number of items of
each value. We systematically derive online algorithms that attain the best possible
competitive ratio for any fixed prediction; we also extend the results to more general
settings such as generalized one-way trading and two-stage online knapsack. Our
work shows that even seemingly weak predictions can be utilized effectively to
provably improve the performance of online algorithms.

1

Introduction

An algorithm designer’s ultimate goal is to develop algorithms that are reliable and work well in
practice. High reliability has been the major focus of discrete algorithmic research that primarily
seeks to give strong worst-case guarantees for all inputs. Unfortunately, such algorithms treat all
input instances on an equal footing—even pathological ones that rarely occur in practice—and do not
necessarily exploit the latent structure that can be present in realistic instances. In contrast, machine
learning has demonstrated amazing successes in many real-world applications, yet occasionally
exhibits unacceptable failures on specific (worst-case) instances.
Learning-augmented algorithm design has recently emerged as a model to achieve both reliability and
worst-case guarantees, particularly in the online setting. In this model, an online algorithm is given
certain predictions on the input it will face in the future, and the algorithm then makes irrevocable
decisions as the actual input is revealed one by one. Ideally, the algorithm should perform close to
the optimum when the predictions are good, and yet possess worst-case guarantees even when the
predictions are malicious. Recent work has shown that this is achievable for online problems such as
caching [17, 26, 29], ski-rental [2, 14, 22], scheduling [6, 15, 22, 28], load balancing [23], secretary
problem [5], metrical task systems [4], set cover [7], flow/matching [24], bin packing [3], etc.
Most prior work on learning-augmented online algorithms assumes that we are given as prediction a
specific value of key parameters of the online instance, e.g., the number of days to ski in the ski-rental
problem or the next request time of a page in the caching problem. In this paper, we take a relaxed
approach and assume that the prediction only gives a range of values for key parameters. This is a
natural way to model weak predictions where the predictor has high uncertainty and can only provide
a reliable range in which the value must lie. Given such weak predictions, we seek to obtain beyond
worst-case guarantees for all inputs respecting the prediction, by possibly exploiting the structure
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

