Compositional Transformers for Scene Generation

Drew A. Hudson
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
dorarad@cs.stanford.edu

C. Lawrence Zitnick
Facebook AI Research
Facebook, Inc.
zitnick@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce the GANformer2 model, an iterative object-oriented transformer,
explored for the task of generative modeling. The network incorporates strong
and explicit structural priors, to reflect the compositional nature of visual scenes,
and synthesizes images through a sequential process. It operates in two stages:
a fast and lightweight planning phase, where we draft a high-level scene layout,
followed by an attention-based execution phase, where the layout is being refined,
evolving into a rich and detailed picture. Our model moves away from conventional
black-box GAN architectures that feature a flat and monolithic latent space towards
a transparent design that encourages efficiency, controllability and interpretability.
We demonstrate GANformer2’s strengths and qualities through a careful evaluation
over a range of datasets, from multi-object CLEVR scenes to the challenging
COCO images, showing it successfully achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of visual quality, diversity and consistency. Further experiments demonstrate
the model’s disentanglement and provide a deeper insight into its generative process,
as it proceeds step-by-step from a rough initial sketch, to a detailed layout that
accounts for objects’ depths and dependencies, and up to the final high-resolution
depiction of vibrant and intricate real-world scenes. See https://github.com/
dorarad/gansformer for model implementation.

1

Introduction

Drawing, the practice behind human visual and artistic expression, can essentially be defined as
an iterative process. It starts from an initial outline, with just a few strokes that specify the spatial
arrangement and overall layout, and is then gradually refined and embellished with color, depth and
richness, until a vivid picture eventually emerges. These initial schematic sketches can serve as an
abstract scene representation that is very concise, yet highly expressive: several lines are enough to
delineate three dimensional structures, account for perspective and proportion, convey shapes and
geometry, and even imply semantic information [52, 63, 67]. A large body of research in psychology
highlights the importance of sketching in stimulating creative discovery [40, 58], fostering cognitive
development [27], and facilitating problem solving [26, 44]. In fact, a large variety of generative and
RL tasks either in the visual [5], textual [22, 78] or symbolic modalities [2], can benefit from the
same strategy – prepare a high-level plan first, and then carry out the details.
At the heart of this hierarchical strategy stands the principle of compositionality – where the meaning
of the whole can be derived from those of its constituents. Indeed, the world around us is highly
structured. Our environment consists of a varied collection of objects, tightly interconnected through
dependencies of all sorts: from close-by to long-range, and from physical and dynamic to abstract and
semantic [10, 66]. As pointed out by prior literature [24, 51, 55, 57], compositional representations
are pivotal to human intelligence, supporting our capabilities of reasoning [32], planning [53],
learning [54] and imagination [6]. Realizing this principle, and explicitly capturing the objects and
elements composing the scene, is thereby a desirable goal, that can make the generative process more
explainable, controllable, versatile and efficient.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

