On the Sample Complexity of Learning
under Invariance and Geometric Stability

Alberto Bietti
NYU∗
alberto.bietti@nyu.edu

Luca Venturi
NYU†
lv800@nyu.edu

Joan Bruna
NYU‡
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Many supervised learning problems involve high-dimensional data such as images,
text, or graphs. In order to make efficient use of data, it is often useful to leverage
certain geometric priors in the problem at hand, such as invariance to translations,
permutation subgroups, or stability to small deformations. We study the sample
complexity of learning problems where the target function presents such invariance
and stability properties, by considering spherical harmonic decompositions of such
functions on the sphere. We provide non-parametric rates of convergence for kernel
methods, and show improvements in sample complexity by a factor equal to the
size of the group when using an invariant kernel over the group, compared to
the corresponding non-invariant kernel. These improvements are valid when the
sample size is large enough, with an asymptotic behavior that depends on spectral
properties of the group. Finally, these gains are extended beyond invariance groups
to also cover geometric stability to small deformations, modeled here as subsets
(not necessarily subgroups) of permutations.

1

Introduction

Learning from high-dimensional data is known to be statistically intractable without strong assumptions on the problem. A canonical example is learning Lipschitz functions, which generally requires a
number of samples exponential in the dimension due to the curse of dimensionality (e.g., [31]). Many
high-dimensional machine learning problems involve highly structured data such as images, text, or
graphs, and may exhibit invariance to certain transformations of the input data, such as permutations,
translations or rotations, and near invariance to small deformations. More precisely, if X is the
high-dimensional data domain, and G is a set of transformations σ : X → X , the learning task can be
alleviated if one knows in advance that the target function f varies smoothly under transformations in
G: |f (σ · x) − f (x)| is uniformly small over x ∈ X for σ ∈ G.
To further motivate this property, it is useful to view the data domain X as a space of signals
X = L2 (Ω; R) defined over a geometric domain Ω, such as a 2d grid. The set of transformations G
can then be articulated in terms of Ω rather than X , a much simpler geometric object, and then lifted
into X by composition: if σ : Ω → Ω, and x ∈ X then (σ · x)(u) := x(σ −1 (u)) for every u ∈ Ω.
The smoothness to transformations can thus be interpreted as a form of geometric stability.
In this paper, we quantify the sample complexity gains brought by geometric stability. Concretely,
we consider target functions f defined on the sphere X = Sd−1 in d dimensions with finite L2 (Sd−1 )
norm. In this case, we view the geometric domain as the discrete 1d grid Ω = [1, . . . , d], and
consider geometric transformations G as subsets of the symmetric group of permutations of d
∗

Center for Data Science, New York University.
Courant Institute for Mathematical Sciences, New York University.
‡
Center for Data Science and Courant Institute for Mathematical Sciences, New York University.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

