See More for Scene: Pairwise Consistency Learning
for Scene Classification
Gongwei Chen1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Bohan Wang1,2 , and Shuqiang Jiang1,2,3
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS
{gongwei.chen, xinhang.song, bohan.wang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn
3

Abstract
Scene classification is a valuable classification subtask and has its own characteristics which still needs more in-depth studies. Basically, scene characteristics are
distributed over the whole image, which cause the need of “seeing” comprehensive
and informative regions. Previous works mainly focus on region discovery and
aggregation, while rarely involves the inherent properties of CNN along with its
potential ability to satisfy the requirements of scene classification. In this paper,
we propose to understand scene images and the scene classification CNN models
in terms of the focus area. From this new perspective, we find that large focus
area is preferred in scene classification CNN models as a consequence of learning
scene characteristics. Meanwhile, the analysis about existing training schemes
helps us to understand the effects of focus area, and also raises the question about
optimal training method for scene classification. Pursuing the better usage of
scene characteristics, we propose a new learning scheme with a tailored loss in the
goal of activating larger focus area on scene images. Since the supervision of the
target regions to be enlarged is usually lacked, our alternative learning scheme is
to erase already activated area, and allow the CNN models to activate more area
during training. The proposed scheme is implemented by keeping the pairwise
consistency between the output of the erased image and its original one. In particular, a tailored loss is proposed to keep such pairwise consistency by leveraging
category-relevance information. Experiments on Places365 show the significant
improvements of our method with various CNNs. Our method shows an inferior
result on the object-centric dataset, ImageNet, which experimentally indicates that
it captures the unique characteristics of scenes.

1

Introduction

Image classification is one of the fundamental tasks of computer vision, and attracts a lot of attention
as a popular task for facilitating the improvement of convolution neural network (CNN) [16, 23, 26,
11, 14]. As a valuable classification subtask, scene classification has its own characteristics which still
needs further study. In comparison with objects, scenes are more complex and have many differences.
One of main differences is that the characteristics of scenes are basically distributed over the whole
image, while those of objects are confined within a clear boundary. This phenomenon inspires a core
idea of scene classification, “seeing” comprehensive and informative regions in the image.
Most scene classification methods aim to extract unspecific [9, 25, 6] or specific regions [29, 33, 3],
then aggregate them via statistical models [9, 6, 29] or relation modeling approaches [25, 3]. The
main challenge is that the extraction and aggregation are partially independent from the main CNN
backbone. It induces some issues as follows. 1) some sort of incompatibility caused by the separated
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

