Excess Capacity and Backdoor Poisoning

Naren Sarayu Manoj
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
nsm@ttic.edu

Avrim Blum
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
avrim@ttic.edu

Abstract
A backdoor data poisoning attack is an adversarial attack wherein the attacker
injects several watermarked, mislabeled training examples into a training set. The
watermark does not impact the test-time performance of the model on typical data;
however, the model reliably errs on watermarked examples.
To gain a better foundational understanding of backdoor data poisoning attacks,
we present a formal theoretical framework within which one can discuss backdoor
data poisoning attacks for classification problems. We then use this to analyze
important statistical and computational issues surrounding these attacks.
On the statistical front, we identify a parameter we call the memorization capacity
that captures the intrinsic vulnerability of a learning problem to a backdoor attack.
This allows us to argue about the robustness of several natural learning problems
to backdoor attacks. Our results favoring the attacker involve presenting explicit
constructions of backdoor attacks, and our robustness results show that some
natural problem settings cannot yield successful backdoor attacks.
From a computational standpoint, we show that under certain assumptions, adversarial training can detect the presence of backdoors in a training set. We then show
that under similar assumptions, two closely related problems we call backdoor
filtering and robust generalization are nearly equivalent. This implies that it is
both asymptotically necessary and sufficient to design algorithms that can identify
watermarked examples in the training set in order to obtain a learning algorithm
that both generalizes well to unseen data and is robust to backdoors.

1

Introduction

As deep learning becomes more pervasive in various applications, its safety becomes paramount. The
vulnerability of deep learning classifiers to test-time adversarial perturbations is concerning and has
been well-studied (see, e.g., [11], [21]).
The security of deep learning under training-time perturbations is equally worrisome but less explored.
Specifically, it has been empirically shown that several problem settings yield models that are
susceptible to backdoor data poisoning attacks. Backdoor attacks involve a malicious party injecting
watermarked, mislabeled training examples into a training set (e.g. [13], [29], [9], [30], [27], [17]).
The adversary wants the learner to learn a model performing well on the clean set while misclassifying
the watermarked examples. Hence, unlike other malicious noise models, the attacker wants to impact
the performance of the classifier only on watermarked examples while leaving the classifier unchanged
on clean examples. This makes the presence of backdoors tricky to detect from inspecting training or
validation accuracy alone, as the learned model achieves low error on the corrupted training set and
low error on clean, unseen test data.
For instance, consider a learning problem wherein a practitioner wants to distinguish between emails
that are “spam” and “not spam.” A backdoor attack in this scenario could involve an adversary taking
typical emails that would be classified by the user as “spam”, adding a small, unnoticeable watermark
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

