Proxy-Normalizing Activations to Match Batch
Normalization while Removing Batch Dependence

Antoine Labatie

Dominic Masters Zach Eaton-Rosen Carlo Luschi
Graphcore Research, UK
antoine.labatie@centraliens.net
{dominicm, zacher, carlo}@graphcore.ai

Abstract
We investigate the reasons for the performance degradation incurred with batchindependent normalization. We find that the prototypical techniques of layer
normalization and instance normalization both induce the appearance of failure
modes in the neural network’s pre-activations: (i) layer normalization induces
a collapse towards channel-wise constant functions; (ii) instance normalization
induces a lack of variability in instance statistics, symptomatic of an alteration of
the expressivity. To alleviate failure mode (i) without aggravating failure mode (ii),
we introduce the technique “Proxy Normalization” that normalizes post-activations
using a proxy distribution. When combined with layer normalization or group normalization, this batch-independent normalization emulates batch normalization’s
behavior and consistently matches or exceeds its performance.

1

Introduction

Normalization plays a critical role in deep learning as it allows successful scaling to large and deep
models. In vision tasks, the most well-established normalization technique is Batch Normalization
(BN) [1]. At every layer in the network, BN normalizes the intermediate activations to have zero
mean and unit variance in each channel. While indisputably successful when training with large batch
size, BN incurs a performance degradation in the regime of small batch size [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. This
performance degradation is commonly attributed to an excessive or simply unwanted regularization
stemming from the noise in the approximation of full-batch statistics by mini-batch statistics.
Many techniques have been proposed to avoid this issue, while at the same time retaining BN’s
benefits. Some techniques mimic BN’s principle while decoupling the computational batch from the
normalization batch [2, 8, 7]. Other techniques are “batch-independent” in that they operate independently of the batch in various modalities: through an explicit normalization either in activation space
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 3, 5, 14, 15, 6] or in weight space [16, 17, 18, 19, 20]; through the use of an analytic
proxy to track activation statistics [21, 22, 23]; through a change of activation function [24, 5, 15].
In this paper, we push the endeavor to replace BN with a batch-independent normalization a step
further. Our main contributions are as follows: (i) we introduce a novel framework to finely
characterize the various neural network properties affected by the choice of normalization; (ii) using
this framework, we show that while BN’s beneficial properties are not retained when solely using
the prototypical batch-independent norms, they are retained when combining some of these norms
with “Proxy Normalization”, a novel technique that we hereby introduce; (iii) we demonstrate on an
extensive set of experiments that, by reproducing BN’s beneficial properties, our batch-independent
normalization approach consistently matches or exceeds BN’s performance.
As a starting point of our analysis, we need to gain a better understanding of those beneficial properties
of BN that we aim at reproducing.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

