POODLE: Improving Few-shot Learning via
Penalizing Out-of-Distribution Samples
Duong H. Le ⇤
VinAI Research
v.duonglh5@vinai.io

Khoi D. Nguyen ⇤
VinAI Research
khoinguyenucd@gmail.com

Quoc-Huy Tran
Retrocausal, Inc.
huy@retrocausal.ai

Khoi Nguyen
VinAI Research
ducminhkhoi@gmail.com

Rang Nguyen
VinAI Research
rangnhm@gmail.com

Binh-Son Hua
VinAI Research &
VinUniversity

Abstract
In this work, we propose to leverage out-of-distribution samples, i.e., unlabeled samples coming from outside target classes, for improving few-shot learning. Specifically, we exploit the easily available out-of-distribution samples
(e.g., from base classes) to drive the classifier to avoid irrelevant features by
maximizing the distance from prototypes to out-of-distribution samples while
minimizing that to in-distribution samples (i.e., support, query data). Our approach is simple to implement, agnostic to feature extractors, lightweight without any additional cost for pre-training, and applicable to both inductive and
transductive settings. Extensive experiments on various standard benchmarks
demonstrate that the proposed method consistently improves the performance
of pretrained networks with different architectures. Our code is available at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/poodle.

1

Introduction

Learning with limited supervision is a key challenge to translate the research efforts of deep neural
networks to real-world applications where large-scale annotated datasets are prohibitively costly to
acquire. This issue has motivated the recent topic of few-shot learning (FSL), which aims to build a
system that can quickly learn new tasks from a small number of labeled data.
A popular group of methods in FSL focus on strengthening the backbone network by various
techniques, from increasing model capacity [6, 11], self-supervised learning (SSL) [18, 51, 65], to
knowledge distillation (KD) [53]. With these techniques, few-shot methods are expected to learn
better representations that are more robust and generalized. However, even if the network can discover
visual features and semantic cues, few-shot learners have to deal with a key challenge - the ambiguity:
as we have only a small amount of support evidence, there are multiple plausible hypotheses at
the inference stage. Existing works, therefore, rely on the developed inductive bias of the network
(during the pretraining stage), such as shape bias [47, 14], to reduce the hypothesis space.
In this work, we view the classification problem as conditional reasoning, i.e., “if X has P then X is
Q”. Human beings are good at learning such inferences, thus quickly grasping new concepts with
minimal supervision. More importantly, humans learn new concepts in context - where we have
already had prior knowledge about other entities. According to mental models in cognitive science,
when assessing the validity of an inference, one would retrieve counter-examples, i.e., which do not
⇤

First two authors contribute equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

