Label-Imbalanced and Group-Sensitive
Classification under Overparameterization

Ganesh Ramachandra Kini
University of California, Santa Barbara
kini@ucsb.edu

Orestis Paraskevas
University of California, Santa Barbara
orestis@ucsb.edu

Samet Oymak
University of California, Riverside
oymak@ece.ucr.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis
University of British Columbia
cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
The goal in label-imbalanced and group-sensitive classification is to optimize
relevant metrics such as balanced error and equal opportunity. Classical
methods, such as weighted cross-entropy, fail when training deep nets
to the terminal phase of training (TPT), that is training beyond zero
training error. This observation has motivated recent flurry of activity
in developing heuristic alternatives following the intuitive mechanism of
promoting larger margin for minorities. In contrast to previous heuristics, we
follow a principled analysis explaining how different loss adjustments affect
margins. First, we prove that for all linear classifiers trained in TPT, it is
necessary to introduce multiplicative, rather than additive, logit adjustments
so that the interclass margins change appropriately. To show this, we discover
a connection of the multiplicative CE modification to the cost-sensitive
support-vector machines. Perhaps counterintuitively, we also find that, at
the start of training, the same multiplicative weights can actually harm the
minority classes. Thus, while additive adjustments are ineffective in the
TPT, we show that they can speed up convergence by countering the initial
negative effect of the multiplicative weights. Motivated by these findings,
we formulate the vector-scaling (VS) loss, that captures existing techniques
as special cases. Moreover, we introduce a natural extension of the VS-loss
to group-sensitive classification, thus treating the two common types of
imbalances (label/group) in a unifying way. Importantly, our experiments on
state-of-the-art datasets are fully consistent with our theoretical insights and
confirm the superior performance of our algorithms. Finally, for imbalanced
Gaussian-mixtures data, we perform a generalization analysis, revealing
tradeoffs between balanced / standard error and equal opportunity.

1

Introduction

1.1 Motivation and contributions
Equitable learning in the presence of data imbalances is a classical machine learning (ML)
problem, but one with increasing importance as ML decisions are adapted in increasingly
more complex applications directly involving people [3]. Two common types of imbalances
are those appearing in label-imbalanced and group-sensitive classification. In the first type,
examples from a target class are heavily outnumbered by examples from the rest of the classes.
The standard metric of average misclassification error is insensitive to such imbalances and
among several classical alternatives the balanced error is a widely used metric. In the second
type, the broad goal is to ensure fairness with respect to a protected underrepresented group
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

