Graph Differentiable Architecture Search with
Structure Learning

Yijian Qin, Xin Wang∗, Zeyang Zhang, Wenwu Zhu∗
Tsinghua University
qinyj19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xin_wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
zy-zhang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Discovering ideal Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) architectures for different tasks
is labor intensive and time consuming. To save human efforts, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) recently has been used to automatically discover adequate GNN
architectures for certain tasks in order to achieve competitive or even better performance compared with manually designed architectures. However, existing works
utilizing NAS to search GNN structures fail to answer the question How NAS is
able to select the desired GNN architectures. In this paper, we investigate this
question to solve the problem, for the first time. We conduct theoretical analysis
and measurement study with experiments to discover that gradient based NAS
methods tend to select proper architectures based on the usefulness of different
types of information with respect to the target task. Our explorations further show
that gradient based NAS also suffers from noises hidden in the graph, resulting
in searching suboptimal GNN architectures. Based on our findings, we propose
a Graph differentiable Architecture Search model with Structure Optimization
(GASSO), which allows differentiable search of the architecture with gradient
descent and is able to discover graph neural architectures with better performance
through employing graph structure learning as a denoising process in the search
procedure. Extensive experiments on real-world graph datasets demonstrate that
our proposed GASSO model is able to achieve the state-of-the-art performance
compared with existing baselines.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications including social networks, e-commerce, traffics, and biochemistry, a variety
of relational data can be represented as graphs. This motivates the advent of graph neural networks
(GNNs) based models such as GCN [1], GAT [2] and GIN [3], which are designed to learn and extract
knowledge from the relational graph-structured data. To utilize information in graph structure and
node features, GNNs follow a recursive message passing scheme where nodes aggregate information
from their neighbors in each layer, making great success in various graph related tasks. Given that
discovering ideal GNN architectures for different tasks is labor intensive and time consuming, graph
architecture search [4, 5] employs the ideas of neural architecture search (NAS) [6–8] to facilitate the
automatic design of optimal GNN architectures so that a large number of human efforts can be saved.
These automatically generated GNNs can achieve competitive or even better performance compared
with manually designed GNNs on graph related tasks. 2
Nevertheless, existing works on graph architecture search mainly focus on designing search space
and search strategy, ignoring the fundamental mechanism in adopting NAS for automatic GNN
∗
2

Corresponding Authors.
Our code will be released at https://github.com/THUMNLab/AutoGL

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

