Compressing Neural Networks: Towards
Determining the Optimal Layer-wise Decomposition
Lucas Liebenwein⇤
MIT CSAIL
lucas@csail.mit.edu
Oren Gal
University of Haifa
orengal@alumni.technion.ac.il

Alaa Maalouf⇤
University of Haifa
alaamalouf12@gmail.com
Dan Feldman
University of Haifa
dannyf.post@gmail.com

Daniela Rus
MIT CSAIL
rus@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We present a novel global compression framework for deep neural networks that
automatically analyzes each layer to identify the optimal per-layer compression
ratio, while simultaneously achieving the desired overall compression. Our algorithm hinges on the idea of compressing each convolutional (or fully-connected)
layer by slicing its channels into multiple groups and decomposing each group via
low-rank decomposition. At the core of our algorithm is the derivation of layer-wise
error bounds from the Eckart–Young–Mirsky theorem. We then leverage these
bounds to frame the compression problem as an optimization problem where we
wish to minimize the maximum compression error across layers and propose an
efficient algorithm towards a solution. Our experiments indicate that our method
outperforms existing low-rank compression approaches across a wide range of
networks and data sets. We believe that our results open up new avenues for future
research into the global performance-size trade-offs of modern neural networks.

1

Introduction

Neural network compression entails taking an existing
model and reducing its computational and memory
footprint in order to enable the deployment of largescale networks in resource-constrained environments.
Beyond inference time efficiency, compression can
yield novel insights into the design (Liu et al., 2019b),
training (Liebenwein et al., 2021a,b), and theoretical
properties (Arora et al., 2018) of neural networks.
Among existing compression techniques – which include quantization (Wu et al., 2016), distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), and pruning (Han et al., 2015) –
low-rank compression aims at decomposing a layer’s
weight tensor into a tuple of smaller low-rank tensors. Such compression techniques may build upon
the rich literature on low-rank decomposition and its
numerous applications outside deep learning such as
dimensionality reduction (Laparra et al., 2015) or spec⇤

Figure 1: ALDS, Automatic Layer-wise Decomposition Selector, can compress up to
60% of parameters on a ResNet18 (ImageNet), 3x more compared to baselines. Detailed results are described in Section 3.

denotes authors with equal contributions. Code: https://github.com/lucaslie/torchprune

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

