Global Convergence to Local Minmax Equilibrium in
Classes of Nonconvex Zero-Sum Games
Tanner Fiez
University of Washington
fiezt@uw.edu

Lillian J. Ratliff
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Evan Faulkner
University of Washington
evanjf5@uw.edu

Eric Mazumdar
California Institute of Technology
mazumdar@caltech.edu

Adhyyan Narang
University of Washington
adhyyan@uw.edu

Abstract
We study gradient descent-ascent learning dynamics with timescale separation
(τ -GDA) in unconstrained continuous action zero-sum games where the minimizing
player faces a nonconvex optimization problem and the maximizing player optimizes a Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ) or strongly-concave (SC) objective. In contrast
to past work on gradient-based learning in nonconvex-PŁ/SC zero-sum games,
we assess convergence in relation to natural game-theoretic equilibria instead of
only notions of stationarity. In pursuit of this goal, we prove that the only locally
stable points of the τ -GDA continuous-time limiting system correspond to strict
local minmax equilibria in each class of games. For these classes of games, we
exploit timescale separation to construct a potential function that when combined
with the stability characterization and an asymptotic saddle avoidance result gives a
global asymptotic almost-sure convergence guarantee for the discrete-time gradient
descent-ascent update to a set of the strict local minmax equilibrium. Moreover, we
provide convergence rates for the gradient descent-ascent dynamics with timescale
separation to approximate stationary points.

1

Introduction

We study continuous action zero-sum games of the form
min max f (x, y)

x∈X y∈Y

where f ∈ C 2 (X × Y, R) and X = Rd1 and Y = Rd2 denote the individual action spaces and
d = d1 + d2 . In particular, we focus on unconstrained, continuous strategy space zero-sum games
in which f (·, y) is potentially nonconvex in x ∈ X and f (x, ·) satisfies the Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(PŁ) condition [47] or is strongly-concave (SC) in y ∈ Y. We refer to these classes of games as
nonconvex-PŁ and nonconvex-SC zero-sum games, respectively.
This general formulation has a broad spectrum of applications such as fair classification [45], distributionally robust optimization [44, 48, 53], and adversarial training [38]. Consequently, there has been a
surge of interest in recent years toward developing methods for solving these problems efficiently. So
far, existing work on gradient-based learning in nonconvex-PŁ/SC zero-sum games has exclusively
focused on providing global convergence rates to approximate stationary points with no attention
given to the characterization in terms of game-theoretic equilibrium concepts [33, 34, 36, 45, 48, 62].
In contrast, a common theme in the study of general nonconvex-nonconcave zero-sum games is to
assess the types of stationary points an algorithm locally converges toward in terms of their higher
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

