Storchastic: A Framework for
General Stochastic Automatic Differentiation
Emile van Krieken
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
e.van.krieken@vu.nl

Jakub M. Tomczak
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
j.m.tomczak@vu.nl

Annette ten Teije
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
annette.ten.teije@vu.nl

Abstract
Modelers use automatic differentiation (AD) of computation graphs to implement complex deep learning models without defining gradient computations.
Stochastic AD extends AD to stochastic computation graphs with sampling steps,
which arise when modelers handle the intractable expectations common in reinforcement learning and variational inference. However, current methods for
stochastic AD are limited: They are either only applicable to continuous random variables and differentiable functions, or can only use simple but high variance score-function estimators. To overcome these limitations, we introduce
Storchastic, a new framework for AD of stochastic computation graphs. Storchastic allows the modeler to choose from a wide variety of gradient estimation
methods at each sampling step, to optimally reduce the variance of the gradient estimates. Furthermore, Storchastic is provably unbiased for estimation of
any-order gradients, and generalizes variance reduction techniques to any-order
derivative estimates. Finally, we implement Storchastic as a PyTorch library at
github.com/HEmile/storchastic.

1

Introduction

One of the driving forces behind deep learning is automatic differentiation (AD) libraries of complex
computation graphs. Deep learning modelers are relieved by accessible AD of the need to implement
complex derivation expressions of the computation graph. However, modelers are currently limited
in settings where the modeler uses intractable expectations over random variables [37, 8]. Two
common examples are reinforcement learning methods using policy gradient optimization [49, 29,
36] and latent variable models, especially when inferred using amortized variational inference [34,
20, 41, 43]. Typically, modelers estimate these expectations using Monte Carlo methods, that is,
sampling, and resort to gradient estimation techniques [37] to differentiate through the expectation.
A popular approach for stochastic AD is reparameterization [20], which is both unbiased and has
low variance, but is limited to continuous random variables and differentiable functions. The other
popular approach [49, 45, 13] analyzes the computation graph and then uses the score function
estimator to create a surrogate loss that provides gradient estimates when differentiated. While this
approach is more general as it can also be applied to discrete random variables and non-differentiable
functions, naive applications of the score function will have high variance, which leads to unstable
and slow convergence. Furthermore, this approach is often implemented incorrectly [13], which can
introduce bias in gradients.
We therefore develop a new framework called Storchastic to support deep learning modelers. They
can use Storchastic to focus on defining stochastic deep learning models without having to worry
about complex gradient estimation implementations. Storchastic extends DiCE [13] to other gradient estimation techniques than basic applications of the score function. It defines a surrogate loss by
decomposing gradient estimation methods into four components: The proposal distribution, weight35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

