DropGNN: Random Dropouts Increase the
Expressiveness of Graph Neural Networks

Pál András Papp
ETH Zurich
apapp@ethz.ch

Karolis Martinkus
ETH Zurich
martinkus@ethz.ch

Lukas Faber
ETH Zurich
lfaber@ethz.ch

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zurich
wattenhofer@ethz.ch

Abstract
This paper studies Dropout Graph Neural Networks (DropGNNs), a new approach
that aims to overcome the limitations of standard GNN frameworks. In DropGNNs,
we execute multiple runs of a GNN on the input graph, with some of the nodes
randomly and independently dropped in each of these runs. Then, we combine
the results of these runs to obtain the final result. We prove that DropGNNs can
distinguish various graph neighborhoods that cannot be separated by message
passing GNNs. We derive theoretical bounds for the number of runs required to
ensure a reliable distribution of dropouts, and we prove several properties regarding
the expressive capabilities and limits of DropGNNs. We experimentally validate
our theoretical findings on expressiveness. Furthermore, we show that DropGNNs
perform competitively on established GNN benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have been successful in handling various forms of data. Since some of the world’s
most interesting data is represented by graphs, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved
state-of-the-art performance in various fields such as quantum chemistry, physics, or social networks
[12; 27; 18]. On the other hand, GNNs are also known to have severe limitations and are sometimes
unable to recognize even simple graph structures.
In this paper, we present a new approach to increase the expressiveness of GNNs, called Dropout
Graph Neural Networks (DropGNNs). Our main idea is to execute not one but multiple different runs
of the GNN. We then aggregate the results from these different runs into a final result.
In each of these runs, we remove (“drop out”) each node in the graph with a small probability
p. As such, the different runs of an episode will allow us to not only observe the actual extended
neighborhood of a node for some number of layers d, but rather to observe various slightly perturbed
versions of this d-hop neighborhood. We emphasize that this notion of dropouts is very different
from the popular dropout regularization method; in particular, DropGNNs remove nodes during both
training and testing, since their goal is to observe a similar distribution of dropout patterns during
training and testing.
This dropout technique increases the expressive power of our GNNs dramatically: even when two
distinct d-hop neighborhoods cannot be distinguished by a standard GNN, their dropout variants (with
a few nodes removed) are already separable by GNNs in most cases. Thus by learning to identify the
dropout patterns where the two d-hop neighborhoods differ, DropGNNs can also distinguish a wide
variety of cases that are beyond the theoretical limits of standard GNNs.
Our contributions. We begin by showing several example graphs that are not distinguishable in
the regular GNN setting but can be easily separated by DropGNNs. We then analyze the theoretical
properties of DropGNNs in detail. We first show that executing e
O(γ) different runs is often already
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

