Learning Robust Hierarchical Patterns of Human
Brain across Many fMRI Studies

Dushyant Sahoo
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
sadu@seas.upenn.edu

Christos Davatzikos
Department of Radiology
University of Pennsylvania
christos.davatzikos@uphs.upenn.edu

Abstract
Multi-site fMRI studies face the challenge that the pooling introduces systematic
non-biological site-specific variance due to hardware, software, and environment.
In this paper, we propose to reduce site-specific variance in the estimation of
hierarchical Sparsity Connectivity Patterns (hSCPs) in fMRI data via a simple yet
effective matrix factorization while preserving biologically relevant variations. Our
method leverages unsupervised adversarial learning to improve the reproducibility
of the components. Experiments on simulated datasets display that the proposed
method can estimate components with higher accuracy and reproducibility, while
preserving age-related variation on a multi-center clinical data set.

1

Introduction

Multi-site fMRI studies have gained a lot of interest over the last decade [1, 2]. One reason for this
is the necessity to evaluate a hypothesis in multiple settings/sites and make the hypothesis result
generalizable to a diverse population. Also, the pooling of data is essential when studying rare
disorders or neurological conditions where the aim is to generalize the results to diverse populations
[3, 4]. However, the data pooling often results in the introduction of non-biological systematic
variance due to differences in scanner hardware and imaging acquisition parameters [5]. This
additional variability can lead to spurious results and a decrease in statistical power. The variability
can also result in hindrance in the estimation of true biological changes or in inferring non-biological
differences as biological because of the correlation between site effects and biological predictors.
Many studies working with multi-site data fMRI have reported considerable variability due site or
scanner effects [6, 7, 1].
The non-biological variability introduced due to inter-scanner and inter-protocol variations can affect
the estimation of the common features derived from fMRI [8], such as functional connectivity [5] or
sparse hierarchical factors (this paper). These features were used for the study of the brain’s function
during aging [9], of various neurological disorders [10, 11], and tasks [12]. The non-biological
variability can considerably reduce these features’ reproducibility across different datasets and hence
their utility as biomarkers for diseases that disrupt functional connectivity. Thus the removal of
non-biological variance introduced by pooling of the data is essential for many neuroimaging studies.
Independent Component Analysis [13], Non Negative Matrix Factorization [14], Sparse Dictionary
Learning [15] and Sparse factor Modeling [16, 17] are some of the commonly used methods for
estimating interpretable components that capture the complexity of the human brain function at
rest. However, these methods do not account for the hierarchical organization of the human brain
[18, 19]. Recently, deep learning based methods [20, 21] have been developed to estimate hierarchical
networks. However, they fail to capture overlapping components and the existence of positively
and negatively correlated nodes in a component that are shown to capture the underlying structure
better [22, 23]. Hierarchical Sparse Connectivity Patterns (hSCPs) overcome these limitations by
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

