Grounding Spatio-Temporal Language with
Transformers
Tristan Karch⇤, Laetitia Teodorescu⇤
Inria - Flowers Team
Université de Bordeaux
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Katja Hofmann
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Clément Moulin-Frier
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
ENSTA ParisTech

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
ENSTA ParisTech

Abstract
Language is an interface to the outside world. In order for embodied agents to use
it, language must be grounded in other, sensorimotor modalities. While there is
an extended literature studying how machines can learn grounded language, the
topic of how to learn spatio-temporal linguistic concepts is still largely uncharted.
To make progress in this direction, we here introduce a novel spatio-temporal
language grounding task where the goal is to learn the meaning of spatio-temporal
descriptions of behavioral traces of an embodied agent. This is achieved by
training a truth function that predicts if a description matches a given history of
observations. The descriptions involve time-extended predicates in past and present
tense as well as spatio-temporal references to objects in the scene. To study the role
of architectural biases in this task, we train several models including multimodal
Transformer architectures; the latter implement different attention computations
between words and objects across space and time. We test models on two classes of
generalization: 1) generalization to randomly held-out sentences; 2) generalization
to grammar primitives. We observe that maintaining object identity in the attention
computation of our Transformers is instrumental to achieving good performance
on generalization overall, and that summarizing object traces in a single token has
little influence on performance. We then discuss how this opens new perspectives
for language-guided autonomous embodied agents. We also release our code under
open-source license as well as pretrained models and datasets to encourage the
wider community to build upon and extend our work in the future.

1

Introduction

Building autonomous agents that learn to represent and use language is a long standing-goal in
Artificial Intelligence [20, 39]. In developmental robotics [7], language is considered a cornerstone
of development that enables embodied cognitive agents to learn more efficiently through social
interactions with humans or through cooperation with other autonomous agents. It is also considered
essential to develop complex sensorimotor skills, facilitating the representation of behaviors and
actions.
Embodied Language Grounding [50] is the field that studies how agents can align language with
their behaviors in order to extract the meaning of linguistic constructions. Early approaches in
⇤

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

