Data-Efficient Instance Generation
from Instance Discrimination
Ceyuan Yang† Yujun Shen‡ Yinghao Xu† Bolei Zhou†
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong ‡ ByteDance Inc.

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have significantly advanced image
synthesis, however, the synthesis quality drops significantly given a limited amount
of training data. To improve the data efficiency of GAN training, prior work
typically employs data augmentation to mitigate the overfitting of the discriminator
yet still learn the discriminator with a bi-classification (i.e., real vs. fake) task. In
this work, we propose a data-efficient Instance Generation (InsGen) method based
on instance discrimination. Concretely, besides differentiating the real domain
from the fake domain, the discriminator is required to distinguish every individual
image, no matter it comes from the training set or from the generator. In this way,
the discriminator can benefit from the infinite synthesized samples for training,
alleviating the overfitting problem caused by insufficient training data. A noise
perturbation strategy is further introduced to improve its discriminative power.
Meanwhile, the learned instance discrimination capability from the discriminator
is in turn exploited to encourage the generator for diverse generation. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a variety of datasets
and training settings. Noticeably, on the setting of 2K training images from
the FFHQ dataset, we outperform the state-of-the-art approach with 23.5% FID
improvement.1

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [16] has become a popular paradigm to learn the distribution
of the observed data. It is formulated as a two-player game, where a generator synthesizes realistic
data, while a discriminator distinguishes synthesized samples from real ones. To reach equilibrium
in this minimax game, it requires both the generator and the discriminator to be sufficiently trained.
In other words, the synthesis capability of the generator will subsequently deteriorate given an
inadequate discriminator [24, 39, 49, 51].
Recent success of GANs [22, 23, 25, 4] relies on big data to assure the sufficient training of the
discriminator. Prior work [49, 24] has found that reducing the amount of training data leads to the
overfitting of the discriminator, which tends to memorize the entire training set. In turn, the backpropagation from the discriminator to the generator damages the synthesis quality of the generator
and potentially causes the mode collapse problem [1, 44]. Data augmentation is one of the most
widely used methods to alleviate the overfitting issue in deep learning algorithms [45, 11, 10]. Some
recent attempts [24, 39, 49, 51, 44] have been made to apply data augmentation to GAN training. It
is found that the discriminator can be improved by augmenting not only the real images from the
dataset but also the synthesized images by the generator [49, 24]. However, the learning objective of
the discriminator remains as categorizing real and fake domains and a substantial performance drop
can be observed given limited training data.
1

Code is available at https://genforce.github.io/insgen/.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

