Towards Optimal Strategies for Training Self-Driving
Perception Models in Simulation

David Acuna∗, Jonah Philion∗, Sanja Fidler
NVIDIA, University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{dacunamarrer, jphilion, sfidler}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Autonomous driving relies on a huge volume of real-world data to be labeled
to high precision. Alternative solutions seek to exploit driving simulators that
can generate large amounts of labeled data with a plethora of content variations.
However, the domain gap between the synthetic and real data remains, raising
the following important question: What are the best way to utilize a self-driving
simulator for perception tasks? In this work, we build on top of recent advances in
domain-adaptation theory, and from this perspective, propose ways to minimize
the reality gap. We primarily focus on the use of labels in the synthetic domain
alone. Our approach introduces both a principled way to learn neural-invariant
representations and a theoretically inspired view on how to sample the data from
the simulator. Our method is easy to implement in practice as it is agnostic
of the network architecture and the choice of the simulator. We showcase our
approach on the bird’s-eye-view vehicle segmentation task with multi-sensor data
(cameras, lidar) using an open-source simulator (CARLA), and evaluate the entire
framework on a real-world dataset (nuScenes). Last but not least, we show what
types of variations (e.g. weather conditions, number of assets, map design and
color diversity) matter to perception networks when trained with driving simulators,
and which ones can be compensated for with our domain adaptation technique.

1

Introduction

The dominant strategy in self-driving for training perception models is to deploy cars that collect
massive amounts of real-world data, hire a large pool of annotators to label it and then train the models
on that data using supervised learning. Although this approach is likely to succeed asymptotically,
the financial cost scales with the amount of data being collected and labeled. Furthermore, changing
sensors may require redoing the effort to a large extent. Some tasks such as labeling ambiguous far
away or occluded objects may be hard or even impossible for humans.
In comparison, sampling data from self-driving simulators such as [46, 2, 6, 13] has several benefits.
First, one has control over the content inside a simulator which makes all self-driving scenarios
equally efficient to generate, indepedent of how rare the event might be in the real world. Second,
full world state information is known in a simulator, allowing one to synthesize perfect labels for
information that humans might annotate noisily, as well as labels for fully occluded objects that
would be impossible to label outside of simulation. Finally, one has control over sensor extrinsics and
intrinsics in a simulator, allowing one to collect data for a fixed scenario under any chosen sensor rig.
Given these features of simulation, it would be tremendously valuable to be able to train deployable
perception models on data obtained from a self-driving simulation. There are, however, two critical
challenges in using a driving simulator out of the box. First, sensor models in simulation do not mimic
real world sensors perfectly; even with exact calibration of extrinsics and intrinsics, it is extremely
∗

denotes equal contribution, https://nv-tlabs.github.io/simulation-strategies

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

