Scaling Vision with Sparse Mixture of Experts

Carlos Riquelme ∗
Google Brain

Joan Puigcerver *
Google Brain

Rodolphe Jenatton
Google Brain

André Susano Pinto
Google Brain

Basil Mustafa *
Google Brain
Daniel Keysers
Google Brain

Maxim Neumann
Google Brain
Neil Houlsby
Google Brain

Abstract
Sparsely-gated Mixture of Experts networks (MoEs) have demonstrated excellent
scalability in Natural Language Processing. In Computer Vision, however, almost
all performant networks are “dense”, that is, every input is processed by every
parameter. We present a Vision MoE (V-MoE), a sparse version of the Vision
Transformer, that is scalable and competitive with the largest dense networks.
When applied to image recognition, V-MoE matches the performance of state-ofthe-art networks, while requiring as little as half of the compute at inference time.
Further, we propose an extension to the routing algorithm that can prioritize subsets
of each input across the entire batch, leading to adaptive per-image compute. This
allows V-MoE to trade-off performance and compute smoothly at test-time. Finally,
we demonstrate the potential of V-MoE to scale vision models, and train a 15B
parameter model that attains 90.35% on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Deep learning historically shows that increasing network capacity and dataset size generally improves
performance. In computer vision, large models pre-trained on large datasets often achieve the state of
the art [57, 50, 36, 20, 3]. This approach has had even more success in Natural Language Processing
(NLP), where large pre-trained models are ubiquitous, and perform very well on many tasks [48, 18].
Text Transformers [61] are the largest models to date, some with over 100B parameters [9]. However,
training and serving such models is expensive [56, 46]. This is partially because these deep networks
are typically “dense”– every example is processed using every parameter –thus, scale comes at high
computational cost. In contrast, conditional computation [5] aims to increase model capacity while
keeping the training and inference cost roughly constant by applying only a subset of parameters
to each example. In NLP, sparse Mixture of Experts (MoEs) are gaining popularity [54, 39, 22],
enabling training and inference with fewer resources while unlocking trillion parameter models.
In this work, we explore conditional computation for vision at scale. We introduce the Vision
MoE (V-MoE), a sparse variant of the recent Vision Transformer (ViT) architecture [20] for image
classification. The V-MoE replaces a subset of the dense feedforward layers in ViT with sparse MoE
layers, where each image patch is “routed” to a subset of “experts” (MLPs). Due to unique failure
modes and non-differentiability, routing in deep sparse models is challenging. We explore various
design choices, and present an effective recipe for the pre-training and transfer of V-MoE, notably
outperforming their dense counterparts. We further show that V-MoE models are remarkably flexible.
The performance vs. inference-cost trade-off of already trained models can be smoothly adjusted
during inference by modulating the sparsity level with respect to the input and/or the model weights.
Also, we open-source our implementation and a number of V-MoE models trained on ImageNet-21k.2
∗
2

These authors contributed equally. Correspondence to { rikel, jpuigcerver, basilm }@google.com
Mixture of experts code and models available at http://github.com/google-research/vmoe.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

