Unsupervised Foreground Extraction via
Deep Region Competition

Peiyu Yu1
yupeiyu98@cs.ucla.edu

Sirui Xie1
srxie@ucla.edu

Xiaojian Ma1
xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu

Ying Nian Wu2
ywu@stat.ucla.edu
1

Yixin Zhu3
y@bigai.ai

Song-Chun Zhu1,2,3
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

UCLA Department of Computer Science 2 UCLA Department of Statistics
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)

Abstract
We present Deep Region Competition (DRC), an algorithm designed to extract
foreground objects from images in a fully unsupervised manner. Foreground extraction can be viewed as a special case of generic image segmentation that focuses
on identifying and disentangling objects from the background. In this work, we
rethink the foreground extraction by reconciling energy-based prior with generative image modeling in the form of Mixture of Experts (MoE), where we further
introduce the learned pixel re-assignment as the essential inductive bias to capture the regularities of background regions. With this modeling, the foregroundbackground partition can be naturally found through Expectation-Maximization
(EM). We show that the proposed method effectively exploits the interaction between the mixture components during the partitioning process, which closely connects to region competition [1], a seminal approach for generic image segmentation. Experiments demonstrate that DRC exhibits more competitive performances
on complex real-world data and challenging multi-object scenes compared with
prior methods. Moreover, we show empirically that DRC can potentially generalize to novel foreground objects even from categories unseen during training.1

1

Introduction

Foreground extraction, being a special case of generic image segmentation, aims for a binary partition of the given image with specific semantic meaning, i.e., a foreground that typically contains
identifiable objects and the possibly less structural remaining regions as the background. There is a
rich literature on explicitly modeling and representing a given image as foreground and background
(or more general visual regions), such that a generic inference algorithm can produce plausible segmentations ideally for any images without or with little supervision [1–8]. However, such methods
essentially rely on low-level visual features (e.g., edges, color, and texture), and some further require human intervention at initialization [4, 5], which largely limits their practical performance on
modern datasets of complex natural images with rich semantic meanings [9, 10]. These datasets
typically come with fine-grained semantic annotations, exploited by supervised methods that learn
representation and inference algorithm as one monolithic network [11–16]. Despite the success of
densely supervised learning, the unsupervised counterpart is still favored due to its resemblance to
how humans perceive the world [17, 18].
1

Code and data available at https://github.com/yuPeiyu98/DRC

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

