De-randomizing MCMC dynamics with the diffusion
Stein operator

Zheyang Shen1
Markus Heinonen1
Samuel Kaski1,2
1
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology, HIIT,
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
{zheyang.shen, markus.o.heinonen, samuel.kaski}@aalto.fi

Abstract
Approximate Bayesian inference estimates descriptors of an intractable target
distribution – in essence, an optimization problem within a family of distributions. For example, Langevin dynamics (LD) extracts asymptotically exact samples
from a diffusion process because the time evolution of its marginal distributions
constitutes a curve that minimizes the KL-divergence via steepest descent in the
Wasserstein space. Parallel to LD, Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) similarly minimizes the KL , albeit endowed with a novel Stein-Wasserstein distance,
by deterministically transporting a set of particle samples, thus de-randomizes
the stochastic diffusion process. We propose de-randomized kernel-based particle
samplers to all diffusion-based samplers known as MCMC dynamics. Following
previous work in interpreting MCMC dynamics, we equip the Stein-Wasserstein
metric with a fiber-Riemannian Poisson structure, with the capacity of characterizing a fiber-gradient Hamiltonian flow that simulates MCMC dynamics. Such
dynamics discretize into generalized SVGD (GSVGD), a Stein-type deterministic particle sampler, with particle updates coinciding with applying the diffusion
Stein operator to a kernel function. We demonstrate empirically that GSVGD can
de-randomize complicated MCMC dynamics, which combine the advantages of
auxiliary momentum variables and Riemannian structure, while maintaining the
high sample quality from an interacting particle system.

1

Introduction

Evaluating an un-normalized target distribution π is a centerpiece of Bayesian inference, due to its
ubiquitous presence in posterior distributions. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods fulfill
this objective by generating asymptotically exact random samples from the distribution, a significant
subset of which involves discretization of continuous-time diffusion processes, most notably Langevin
diffusion, stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Chen et al., 2014) and their further
generalizations, which we collectively call MCMC dynamics (Ma et al., 2015). Despite its simplicity
and theoretical soundness, this diffusion-based sampling often suffers from slow convergence and
small effective sample sizes, largely due to the auto-correlation of the samples.
As an alternative to the simulation of stochastic systems, particle-based variational inference (Liu
and Wang, 2016; Chen et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019a) partially addresses the shortcomings of
MCMC by replacing the Langevin diffusion, the simplest MCMC dynamics, with a deterministic
interacting particle system that transports a set of interacting particles towards the target distribution.
Theoretically speaking, Langevin diffusion encodes an evolution of density that minimizes the
KL-divergence through steepest descent in the 2-Wasserstein space (Jordan et al., 1998), and particle35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

