Last-iterate Convergence in Extensive-Form Games

Chung-Wei Lee
University of Southern California
leechung@usc.edu

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
Regret-based algorithms are highly efficient at finding approximate Nash equilibria
in sequential games such as poker games. However, most regret-based algorithms,
including counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) and its variants, rely on iterate
averaging to achieve convergence. Inspired by recent advances on last-iterate convergence of optimistic algorithms in zero-sum normal-form games, we study this
phenomenon in sequential games, and provide a comprehensive study of last-iterate
convergence for zero-sum extensive-form games with perfect recall (EFGs), using
various optimistic regret-minimization algorithms over treeplexes. This includes algorithms using the vanilla entropy or squared Euclidean norm regularizers, as well
as their dilated versions which admit more efficient implementation. In contrast
to CFR, we show that all of these algorithms enjoy last-iterate convergence, with
some of them even converging exponentially fast. We also provide experiments to
further support our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Extensive-form games (EFGs) are an important class of games in game theory and artificial intelligence which can model imperfect information and sequential interactions. EFGs are typically solved
by finding or approximating a Nash equilibrium. Regret-minimization algorithms are among the
most popular approaches to approximate Nash equilibria. The motivation comes from a classical
result which says that in two-player zero-sum games, when both players use no-regret algorithms, the
average strategy converges to Nash equilibrium [Freund and Schapire, 1999, Hart and Mas-Colell,
2000, Zinkevich et al., 2007]. Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) [Zinkevich et al., 2007]
and it variants such as CFR+ [Tammelin, 2014] are based on this motivation.
However, due to their ergodic convergence guarantee,
√ theoretical convergence rates of regretminimization algorithms are typically limited to O(1/ T ) or O(1/T ) for T rounds, and this is also
the case in practice [Brown and Sandholm, 2019a, Burch et al., 2019]. In contrast, it is known that
linear convergence rates are achievable for certain other first-order algorithms [Tseng, 1995, Gilpin
et al., 2008]. Additionally, the averaging procedure can create complications. It not only increases
the computational and memory overhead [Bowling et al., 2015], but also makes things difficult when
incorporating neural networks in the solution process, where averaging is usually not possible. Indeed,
to address this issue, Brown et al. [2019] create a separate neural network to approximate the average
strategy in their Deep CFR model.
Therefore, a natural idea is to design regret-minimization algorithms whose last strategy converges (we
call this last-iterate convergence), ideally at a faster rate than the average iterate. Unfortunately, many
regret minimization algorithms such as regret matching, regret matching+, and hedge, are known not
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

