Dynamic Neural Representational Decoders for
High-Resolution Semantic Segmentation∗

Bowen Zhang,

Yifan Liu,

Zhi Tian,

Chunhua Shen

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Semantic segmentation requires per-pixel prediction for a given image. Typically,
the output resolution of a segmentation network is severely reduced due to the
downsampling operations in the CNN backbone. Most previous methods employ
upsampling decoders to recover the spatial resolution. Various decoders were
designed in the literature. Here, we propose a novel decoder, termed dynamic
neural representational decoder (NRD), which is simple yet significantly more
efficient. As each location on the encoder’s output corresponds to a local patch
of the semantic labels, in this work, we represent these local patches of labels
with compact neural networks. This neural representation enables our decoder
to leverage the smoothness prior in the semantic label space, and thus makes our
decoder more efficient. Furthermore, these neural representations are dynamically
generated and conditioned on the outputs of the encoder networks. The desired
semantic labels can be efficiently decoded from the neural representations, resulting
in high-resolution semantic segmentation predictions. We empirically show that
our proposed decoder outperforms the decoder in DeeplabV3+ with only ∼ 30%
computational complexity, and achieves competitive performance with the methods
using dilated encoders with only ∼ 15% computational costs. Experiments on the
Cityscapes, ADE20K, and PASCAL Context datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision, which requires pixel-level classification on an input image. Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) are the de facto standard approaches
to this task, which often consist of an encoder and a decoder. We focus on improving the decoder
in this work and assume the encoder to be any backbone networks such as ResNet [HZRS16]. Due
to the down-sampling layers (e.g., stridden convolutions or pooling) used in these networks, the
encoder’s outputs are often of much lower resolutions than the input image. Thus, a decoder is used
to spatially upsample the output. The decoder can simply be a bilinear upsampling, which directly
upscales the low-resolution outputs of encoders to desired resolutions, or it can be a sophisticated
network with a stack of convolutions and multi-level features. Note that another approach to tackle
the issue of low-resolution outputs is the use of dilation convolution as in DeepLab [CPK+ 17], which
balances the need for large receptive fields and maintaining a higher-resolution feature map. The
computational cost is significantly heavier introduced by dilation convolutions.
Popular decoders for semantic segmentation include the one in DeepLabV3+ [CPSA17], which fuses
the low-level feature maps with 1/4 resolution of the input image, and RefineNet [LMSR17] which
gradually combines multi-level feature maps. A potential drawback of these decodes may be that they
∗
BZ, YL, ZT contributed equally, and are listed alphabetically. CS is the corresponding author (e-mail:
chunhua@me.com).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

