A Topological Perspective on Causal Inference

Duligur Ibeling
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
duligur@stanford.edu

Thomas Icard
Department of Philosophy
Stanford University
icard@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a topological learning-theoretic perspective on causal inference
by introducing a series of topologies defined on general spaces of structural causal
models (SCMs). As an illustration of the framework we prove a topological causal
hierarchy theorem, showing that substantive assumption-free causal inference is
possible only in a meager set of SCMs. Thanks to a known correspondence between
open sets in the weak topology and statistically verifiable hypotheses, our results
show that inductive assumptions sufficient to license valid causal inferences are
statistically unverifiable in principle. Similar to no-free-lunch theorems for statistical inference, the present results clarify the inevitability of substantial assumptions
for causal inference. An additional benefit of our topological approach is that it
easily accommodates SCMs with infinitely many variables. We finally suggest that
the framework may be helpful for the positive project of exploring and assessing
alternative causal-inductive assumptions.

1

Introduction and Motivation

In the background of any investigation into learning algorithms are no-free-lunch phenomena: roughly,
the observation that assumption-free statistical learning is infeasible in general (see, e.g., [33, Ch.
5] for a formal statement). Common wisdom is that learning algorithms and architectures must
adequately reflect non-trivial features of the data-generating distribution to gain inductive purchase.
For many purposes we need to move beyond passive observation, focusing instead on what would
happen were we to act upon a given system. Even further, we sometimes desire to explain the behavior
of a system, raising questions about what would have occurred had some aspects of a situation been
different. Such questions depend not just on the data distribution; they depend on deeper features of
underlying data-generating processes or mechanisms. It is thus generally acknowledged that stronger
assumptions are required if we want to draw causal conclusions from data [35, 28, 20, 30, 32].
Whether implicit or explicit, any approach to causal inference involves a space of candidate causal
models, viz. data-generating processes. Indeed, a blunt way of incorporating inductive bias is simply
to omit some class of possible causal hypotheses from consideration. Many (im)possibility results in
the literature can accordingly be understood as pertaining to all models within a class. For instance, if
we can restrict attention to Markovian models that satisfy faithfulness, then we can always identify the
structure of a model from experimental data (e.g., [11, 35]). If we can restrict attention to Markovian
(continuous) models with linear functions and non-Gaussian noise, then every model can be learned
even from purely observational data [34]. As a negative example, in the larger class of (not necessarily
Markovian) models, no model can ever be determined from observational data alone [35, 2].
At the same time, in many settings it is sensible to aim for results with “nearly universal” force. It is
natural to ask, e.g., within the class of all Markovian models, how “typical” are those in which the
faithfulness condition is violated? This might tell us, for instance, how typically we could expect
failure of a method that depended on these assumptions. A well-known result shows that, fixing
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

