Decentralized Q-Learning in Zero-sum Markov
Games
Muhammed O. Sayin∗
Bilkent University
sayin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr
David S. Leslie
Lancaster University
d.leslie@lancaster.ac.uk

Kaiqing Zhang∗
MIT
kaiqing@mit.edu

Tamer Başar
UIUC
basar1@illinois.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
MIT
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
We study multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in infinite-horizon discounted zero-sum Markov games. We focus on the practical but challenging setting
of decentralized MARL, where agents make decisions without coordination by
a centralized controller, but only based on their own payoffs and local actions
executed. The agents need not observe the opponent’s actions or payoffs, possibly
being even oblivious to the presence of the opponent, nor be aware of the zero-sum
structure of the underlying game, a setting also referred to as radically uncoupled in
the literature of learning in games. In this paper, we develop a radically uncoupled
Q-learning dynamics that is both rational and convergent: the learning dynamics
converges to the best response to the opponent’s strategy when the opponent follows an asymptotically stationary strategy; when both agents adopt the learning
dynamics, they converge to the Nash equilibrium of the game. The key challenge
in this decentralized setting is the non-stationarity of the environment from an
agent’s perspective, since both her own payoffs and the system evolution depend
on the actions of other agents, and each agent adapts her policies simultaneously
and independently. To address this issue, we develop a two-timescale learning dynamics where each agent updates her local Q-function and value function estimates
concurrently, with the latter happening at a slower timescale.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved tremendous successes recently in a wide range of applications, including playing the game of Go [Silver et al., 2017], playing video games (e.g., Atari [Mnih
et al., 2015] and Starcraft [Vinyals et al., 2019]), robotics [Lillicrap et al., 2015, Kober et al., 2013],
and autonomous driving [Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016, Sallab et al., 2017]. Most of these applications
involve multiple decision-makers, where the agents’ rewards and the evolution of the system are
affected by the joint behaviors of all agents. This setting naturally leads to the problem of multi-agent
RL (MARL). In fact, MARL is arguably one key ingredient of large-scale and reliable autonomy, and
is significantly more challenging to analyze than single-agent RL. There has been a surging interest
recently in both a deeper theoretical and empirical understanding of MARL; see comprehensive
overviews on this topic in Busoniu et al. [2008], Zhang et al. [2021], Hernandez-Leal et al. [2019].
The pioneering work that initiated the sub-area of MARL, where the model of Markov/stochastic
games [Shapley, 1953] has been considered as a framework, is Littman [1994]. Since then, there
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

