IA-RED2: Interpretability-Aware Redundancy
Reduction for Vision Transformers
Bowen Pan1 , Rameswar Panda2 , Yifan Jiang3 , Zhangyang Wang3 , Rogerio Feris2 , Aude Oliva1,2
1
MIT CSAIL, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 UT Austin

Abstract
The self-attention-based model, transformer, is recently becoming the leading
backbone in the field of computer vision. In spite of the impressive success made
by transformers in a variety of vision tasks, it still suffers from heavy computation
and intensive memory costs. To address this limitation, this paper presents an
Interpretability-Aware REDundancy REDuction framework (IA-RED2 ). We start
by observing a large amount of redundant computation, mainly spent on uncorrelated input patches, and then introduce an interpretable module to dynamically
and gracefully drop these redundant patches. This novel framework is then extended to a hierarchical structure, where uncorrelated tokens at different stages
are gradually removed, resulting in a considerable shrinkage of computational
cost. We include extensive experiments on both image and video tasks, where
our method could deliver up to 1.4× speed-up for state-of-the-art models like
DeiT [53] and TimeSformer [3], by only sacrificing less than 0.7% accuracy. More
importantly, contrary to other acceleration approaches, our method is inherently
interpretable with substantial visual evidence, making vision transformer closer
to a more human-understandable architecture while being lighter. We demonstrate
that the interpretability that naturally emerged in our framework can outperform
the raw attention learned by the original visual transformer, as well as those generated by off-the-shelf interpretation methods, with both qualitative and quantitative
results. Project Page: http://people.csail.mit.edu/bpan/ia-red/.

1

Introduction

Transformer, a self-attention-based architecture processing sequential input without any recurrent or
convolutional operations, has set off a storm in the computer vision literature recently. By dividing
the input image into a series of patches and then tokenizing them with linear transformation, the
transformer can effectively process the visual data in different modalities [13, 53, 54, 28, 3, 17, 66].
Despite its versatility, the transformer is always deeply troubled with inefficient computation and its
vague interpretability. The vision transformer suffers heavy computational costs, especially when
the input sequence is long. As the attention module in the vision transformer computes the fullyconnected relations among all of the input patches, the computational cost is then quadratic with
regard to the length of the input sequence. On the other hand, previous works [6, 8] have already
shown the vulnerable interpretability of the original vision transformer, where the raw attention
comes from the architecture sometimes fails to perceive the informative region of the input images.
Recently, more designs of vision transformer architecture [34, 65, 18, 56, 14, 9, 3] are proposed to
get higher accuracy with less computational cost. Although these methods anchor good trade-offs
between efficiency and accuracy, their compression makes the vision transformer even more lack
interpretability. Most of these methods assume that the input sequences are sampled from a regular
visual input in a fixed shape rule, and thus their network architectures are not flexible as well, which
makes the vision transformer (1) no longer able to process the input sequence with arbitrary length as
the architecture is designed for a specific input shape; (2) neither model-agnostic nor task agnostic
anymore; or (3) neglect the fact that the model redundancy is also input-dependant. We yet argue that
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

