Exploiting Chain Rule and Bayes’ Theorem to
Compare Probability Distributions

Huangjie Zheng
Department of Statistics & Data Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
huangjie.zheng@utexas.edu

Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
To measure the difference between two probability distributions, referred to as
the source and target, respectively, we exploit both the chain rule and Bayes’
theorem to construct conditional transport (CT), which is constituted by both a
forward component and a backward one. The forward CT is the expected cost of
moving a source data point to a target one, with their joint distribution defined
by the product of the source probability density function (PDF) and a sourcedependent conditional distribution, which is related to the target PDF via Bayes’
theorem. The backward CT is defined by reversing the direction. The CT cost
can be approximated by replacing the source and target PDFs with their discrete
empirical distributions supported on mini-batches, making it amenable to implicit
distributions and stochastic gradient descent-based optimization. When applied
to train a generative model, CT is shown to strike a good balance between modecovering and mode-seeking behaviors and strongly resist mode collapse. On a wide
variety of benchmark datasets for generative modeling, substituting the default
statistical distance of an existing generative adversarial network with CT is shown
to consistently improve the performance. PyTorch code is provided.

1

Introduction

Measuring the difference between two probability distributions is a fundamental problem in statistics
and machine learning [1–3]. A variety of statistical distances, such as the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence [4], Jensen–Shannon (JS) divergence [5], maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [6], and
Wasserstein distance [7], have been proposed to quantify the difference. They have been widely used
for generative modeling with different mode covering/seeking behaviors [8–13]. The KL divergence,
directly related to both maximum likelihood estimation and variational inference [14–16], requires
the two probability distributions to share the same support and is often inapplicable if either is an
implicit distribution whose probability density function (PDF) is unknown [17–20]. Variational
auto-encoders (VAEs) [8], the KL divergence based deep generative models, are stable to train, but
often exhibit mode-covering behaviors in its generated data, producing blurred images. The JS
divergence is directly related to the min-max loss of a generative adversarial net (GAN) when the
discriminator is optimal [9], while the Wasserstein-1 distance is directly related to the min-max loss
of a Wasserstein GAN [11], whose critic is optimized under the 1-Lipschitz constraint. However, it is
difficult to maintain a good balance between the updates of the generator and discriminator/critic,
making (Wasserstein) GANs notoriously brittle to train. MMD [6] is an RKHS-based statistical
distance behind MMD-GANs [10, 21, 22], which have also shown promising results in generative
modeling when trained with a min-max loss. Different from VAEs, these GAN-based models often
exhibit mode dropping and face the danger of mode collapse if not well tuned during the training.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

