The decomposition of the higher-order homology
embedding constructed from the k-Laplacian

Yu-Chia Chen
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
yuchaz@uw.edu

Marina Meilă
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mmp2@uw.edu

Abstract
The null space of the k-th order Laplacian Lk , known as the k-th homology vector
space, encodes the non-trivial topology of a manifold or a network. Understanding
the structure of the homology embedding can thus disclose geometric or topological information from the data. The study of the null space embedding of the
graph Laplacian L0 has spurred new research and applications, such as spectral
clustering algorithms with theoretical guarantees and estimators of the Stochastic
Block Model. In this work, we investigate the geometry of the k-th homology
embedding and focus on cases reminiscent of spectral clustering. Namely, we
analyze the connected sum of manifolds as a perturbation of the direct sum of
their homology embeddings. We propose an algorithm to factorize the homology embedding into subspaces corresponding to a manifold’s simplest topological
components. The proposed framework is applied to the shortest homologous loop
detection problem, a problem known to be NP-hard in general. Our spectral loop
detection algorithm complements existing methods of topological data analysis. It
scales better than existing methods with no assumptions on the structure of data
and is effective on diverse data such as point clouds and images.

1

Motivation

The k-th homology vector space Hk provides rich geometric information on manifolds/networks.
For instance, the zeroth, the first, and the second homology vector spaces identify the connected
components, the loops, and the cavities in the manifold, respectively. Topological Data Analysis
(TDA) [24, 58] (as well as other early works in this field) has found wide use in analyzing biological
[31, 47], human behavior [1, 64], or other complex systems [58]. Even though they easily generalize
to k ≥ 1, additional efforts are needed to extract topological features (e.g., instances of loops)
besides ranks due to the combinatorial complexity of the structures that support them.
Spectral methods based on k-Laplacians (Lk ), by contrast, investigate Hk in a linear algebraic
manner; abundant geometric information can be extracted from the homology embedding Y (the
null space eigenvectors of Lk ) of Hk . Analysis of the eigenfunctions (of H0 ) [14, 37, 40, 49] of
the graph Laplacian L0 is pivotal in providing guarantees for spectral clustering and community
detection algorithms in well-separated datasets. Recent advances in this field [4, 12, 48] extend the
existing spectral algorithms based on L0 to k ≥ 1; however, the theoretical analysis of Y of Hk ,
unlike spectral clustering, is less developed, in spite of intriguing empirical results by [21]. Here,
we put these observations on a formal footing based on the concepts of connected sum and prime
decomposition of manifolds (Section 2 and 3). We examine these operations through the lens of the
(subspace) perturbation to the homology embedding Y of the discrete k-Laplacian Lk (an estimator
of the continuous k-Hodge Laplacian operator ∆k ) on finite samples (Section 4). This framework
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

