Understanding Deflation Process in
Over-parametrized Tensor Decomposition

Rong Ge∗
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Yunwei Ren*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2016renyunwei@sjtu.edu.cn

Xiang Wang*
Duke University
xwang@cs.duke.edu

Mo Zhou*
Duke University
mozhou@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the training dynamics for gradient flow on over-parametrized
tensor decomposition problems. Empirically, such training process often first fits
larger components and then discovers smaller components, which is similar to a
tensor deflation process that is commonly used in tensor decomposition algorithms.
We prove that for orthogonally decomposable tensor, a slightly modified version
of gradient flow would follow a tensor deflation process and recover all the tensor
components. Our proof suggests that for orthogonal tensors, gradient flow dynamics
works similarly as greedy low-rank learning in the matrix setting, which is a first
step towards understanding the implicit regularization effect of over-parametrized
models for low-rank tensors.

1

Introduction

Recently, over-parametrization has been recognized as a key feature of neural network optimization.
A line of works known as the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) showed that it is possible to achieve
zero training loss when the network is sufficiently over-parametrized (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2018b). However, the theory of NTK implies a particular dynamics called
lazy training where the neurons do not move much (Chizat et al., 2019), which is not natural in
many settings and can lead to worse generalization performance (Arora et al., 2019b). Many works
explored other regimes of over-parametrization (Chizat and Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018) and
analyzed dynamics beyond lazy training (Allen-Zhu et al., 2018a; Li et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020).
Over-parametrization does not only help neural network models. In this work, we focus on a closely
related problem of tensor (CP) decomposition. In this problem, we are given a tensor of the form
T∗ =

r
X

ai (U [:, i])⊗4 ,

i=1

where ai ≥ 0 and U [:, i] is the i-th column of U ∈ Rd×r . The goal is to fit T ∗ using a tensor T of a
similar form:
m
X
(W [:, i])⊗4
T =
.
kW [:, i]k2
i=1
∗

Alphabetical order.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

