On Margin-Based Cluster Recovery
with Oracle Queries
Marco Bressan
Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy
marco.bressan@unimi.it
Silvio Lattanzi
Google
silviol@google.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
DSRC & Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it
Andrea Paudice
Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy &
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
andrea.paudice@unimi.it

Abstract
We study an active cluster recovery problem where, given a set of n points and
an oracle answering queries like “are these two points in the same cluster?”, the
task is to recover exactly all clusters using as few queries as possible. We begin by
introducing a simple but general notion of margin between clusters that captures,
as special cases, the margins used in previous works, the classic SVM margin,
and standard notions of stability for center-based clusterings. Under our margin
assumptions we design algorithms that, in a variety of settings, recover all clusters
exactly using only O(log n) queries. For Rm , we give an algorithm that recovers
arbitrary convex clusters, in polynomial time, and with a number of queries that is
lower than the best existing algorithm by ⇥(mm ) factors. For general pseudometric
spaces, where clusters might not be convex or might not have any notion of shape,
we give an algorithm that achieves the O(log n) query bound, and is provably nearoptimal as a function of the packing number of the space. Finally, for clusterings
realized by binary concept classes, we give a combinatorial characterization of
recoverability with O(log n) queries, and we show that, for many concept classes
in Rm , this characterization is equivalent to our margin condition. Our results show
a deep connection between cluster margins and active cluster recoverability.

1

Introduction

This work investigates the problem of exact cluster recovery using oracle queries, in the well-known
framework introduced by Ashtiani et al. [2016]. We are given a set X of n points from some
domain X (e.g., from the Euclidean m-dimensional space Rm ) and an oracle answering to samecluster queries of the form “are these two points in the same cluster?” or label queries of the form
“which cluster does this point belong to?”. The oracle answers are consistent with some clustering
C = (C1 , . . . , Ck ) of X unknown to the algorithm, where k is a fixed constant. The goal is to design
an algorithm that recovers C by using as few queries as possible.
Clearly, if there are no restrictions on C, then any algorithm needs n queries in the worst case. Thus,
our goal is to understand when C can be recovered efficiently; ideally, in polynomial time, and by
making O(log n) queries. A natural attempt is to consider clusterings with well-separated clusters,
since this is what is often considered a “good clustering”. The existing work goes precisely in this
direction, starting with the following result of Ashtiani et al. [2016] for the case X ✓ Rm . If every
cluster Ci is separated from X \ Ci by a ball centered in the center of mass of Ci , and that ball
does not intersect other clusters even if expanded by a factor of 1 + , then with high probability
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

