HRFormer: High-Resolution Transformer for Dense
Prediction
Yuhui Yuan124

Rao Fu1

Lang Huang3 Weihong Lin4 Chao Zhang3 Xilin Chen12
Jingdong Wang5∗
1
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
4
5
Peking University
Microsoft Research Asia
Baidu

Abstract
We present a High-Resolution Transformer (HRFormer) that learns high-resolution
representations for dense prediction tasks, in contrast to the original Vision Transformer that produces low-resolution representations and has high memory and
computational cost. We take advantage of the multi-resolution parallel design
introduced in high-resolution convolutional networks (HRNet [46]), along with
local-window self-attention that performs self-attention over small non-overlapping
image windows [21], for improving the memory and computation efficiency. In
addition, we introduce a convolution into the FFN to exchange information across
the disconnected image windows. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the HighResolution Transformer on both human pose estimation and semantic segmentation
tasks, e.g., HRFormer outperforms Swin transformer [27] by 1.3 AP on COCO
pose estimation with 50% fewer parameters and 30% fewer FLOPs. Code is
available at: https://github.com/HRNet/HRFormer.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformer (ViT) [13] shows promising performance on ImageNet classification tasks.
Many follow-up works boost the classification accuracy through knowledge distillation [42], adopting
deeper architecture [43], directly introducing convolution operations [16, 48], redesigning input image
tokens [54], and etc. Besides, some studies attempt to extend the transformer to address broader
vision tasks such as object detection [4], semantic segmentation [63, 37], pose estimation [51, 23],
video understanding [61, 2, 30], and so on. This work focuses on the transformer for dense prediction
tasks, including pose estimation and semantic segmentation.
Vision Transformer splits an image into a sequence of image patches of size 16 × 16, and extracts the
feature representation of each image patch. Thus, the output representations of Vision Transformer
lose the fine-grained spatial details that are essential for accurate dense predictions. The Vision
Transformer only outputs a single-scale feature representation, and thus lacks the capability to handle
multi-scale variation. To mitigate the loss of feature granularity and model the multi-scale variation,
we present High-Resolution Transformer (HRFormer) that contains richer spatial information and
constructs multi-resolution representations for dense predictions.
The High-Resolution Transformer is built by following the multi-resolution parallel design that is
adopted in HRNet [46]. First, HRFormer adopts convolution in both the stem and the first stage
as several concurrent studies [11, 50] also suggest that convolution performs better in the early
stages. Second, HRFormer maintains a high-resolution stream through the entire process with parallel
medium- and low-resolution streams helping boost high-resolution representations. With feature
maps of different resolutions, thus HRFormer is capable to model the multi-scale variation. Third,
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

