Implicit Semantic Response Alignment for Partial
Domain Adaptation

Wenxiao Xiao
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02451
wenxiaoxiao@brandeis.edu

Zhengming Ding
Department of Computer Science
Tulane University
New Orleans, LA 70118
zding1@tulane.edu

Hongfu Liu
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02451
hongfuliu@brandeis.edu

Abstract
Partial Domain Adaptation (PDA) addresses the unsupervised domain adaptation
problem where the target label space is a subset of the source label space. Most
state-of-art PDA methods tackle the inconsistent label space by assigning weights
to classes or individual samples, in an attempt to discard the source data that
belongs to the irrelevant classes. However, we believe samples from those extra
categories would still contain valuable information to promote positive transfer. In
this paper, we propose the Implicit Semantic Response Alignment to explore the
intrinsic relationships among different categories by applying a weighted schema
on the feature level. Specifically, we design a class2vec module to extract the
implicit semantic topics from the visual features. With an attention layer, we
calculate the semantic response according to each implicit semantic topic. Then
semantic responses of source and target data are aligned to retain the relevant
information contained in multiple categories by weighting the features, instead of
samples. Experiments on several cross-domain benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method over the state-of-the-art PDA methods. Moreover,
we elaborate in-depth analyses to further explore implicit semantic alignment.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved impressive results in various supervised learning applications
such as object recognition [15, 18], semantic segmentation [51, 12, 48] and multi-modal learning
[34, 40], but annotating a large-scale dataset for deep learning models training could be tremendously
grueling and expensive. Thus, considerable efforts have been dedicated to domain adaptation (DA),
which attempts to circumvent labeling unfamiliar target data by transferring knowledge from a
well-studied source domain data. Existing DA methods align two differently-distributed domains
by finding invariant representations from the transferable feature structure[24]. Matching the source
and target distributions with a discrepancy loss based on high-order statistics such as maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) [1] is commonly used along with iterative pseudo pseudo labeling strategy
[16, 37, 22]. Recently efforts seek a domain-invariant feature space by adversarial learning, so that
the source classifier be directly used for the target data prediction. Adding a weighting schema further
improves the classification ability of adversarial methods. However, traditional domain adaptation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

