Benign Overfitting in Multiclass Classification:
All Roads Lead to Interpolation
Ke Wang
Department of Statistics and Applied Probability
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
kewang01@ucsb.edu
Vidya Muthukumar
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
vmuthukumar8@gatech.edu
Christos Thrampoulidis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC Canada V6T 1Z4
cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
The growing literature on “benign overfitting” in overparameterized models has
been mostly restricted to regression or binary classification settings; however, most
success stories of modern machine learning have been recorded in multiclass settings. Motivated by this discrepancy, we study benign overfitting in multiclass
linear classification. Specifically, we consider the following popular training algorithms on separable data: (i) empirical risk minimization (ERM) with cross-entropy
loss, which converges to the multiclass support vector machine (SVM) solution;
(ii) ERM with least-squares loss, which converges to the min-norm interpolating
(MNI) solution; and, (iii) the one-vs-all SVM classifier. Our first key finding is
that under a simple sufficient condition, all three algorithms lead to classifiers that
interpolate the training data and have equal accuracy. When the data is generated
from Gaussian mixtures or a multinomial logistic model, this condition holds under
high enough effective overparameterization. Second, we derive novel error bounds
on the accuracy of the MNI classifier, thereby showing that all three training algorithms lead to benign overfitting under sufficient overparameterization. Ultimately,
our analysis shows that good generalization is possible for SVM solutions beyond
the realm in which typical margin-based bounds apply.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks are overparameterized with respect to the amount of training data
and achieve zero training error, yet generalize well on test data. Recent analysis has shown that
fitting of noise in regression tasks can in fact be relatively benign for sufficiently high-dimensional
linear models [BLLT20, BHX20, HMRT19, MVSS20, KLS20]. However, these analyses do not
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

