Global Convergence of Gradient Descent for
Asymmetric Low-Rank Matrix Factorization

Tian Ye
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
yet17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Simon S. Du
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We study the asymmetric low-rank factorization problem:
min

1

U∈Rm×d ,V∈Rn×d 2

kUV> − Σk2F

where Σ is a given matrix of size m×n and rank d. This is a canonical problem that
admits two difficulties in optimization: 1) non-convexity and 2) non-smoothness
(due to unbalancedness of U and V). This is also a prototype for more complex
problems such as asymmetric matrix sensing and matrix completion. Despite being
non-convex and non-smooth, it has been observed empirically that the randomly
initialized gradient descent algorithm can solve this problem in polynomial time.
Existing theories to explain this phenomenon all require artificial modifications
of the algorithm, such as adding noise in each iteration and adding a balancing
regularizer to balance the U and V.
This paper presents the first proof that shows randomly initialized gradient descent
converges to a global minimum of the asymmetric low-rank factorization problem
with a polynomial rate. For the proof, we develop 1) a new symmetrization
technique to capture the magnitudes of the symmetry and asymmetry, and 2) a
quantitative perturbation analysis to approximate matrix derivatives. We believe
both are useful for other related non-convex problems.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the asymmetric low-rank matrix factorization problem:
min

U∈Rm×d ,V∈Rn×d

f (U, V) :=

1
kUV> − Σk2F .
2

(1)

where Σ ∈ Rm×n is a given matrix of rank d. While solving this optimization problem is not hard
(e.g., using power method), in this paper, we are interested in using randomly initialized gradient
descent to solve this problem:
Ut+1 =
Vt+1 =

Ut + η(Σ − Ut Vt> )Vt ;
Vt + η(Σ − Ut Vt> )> Ut ,

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(2)
(3)

