MobILE: Model-Based Imitation Learning From
Observation Alone
Rahul Kidambi∗
Amazon Search & AI
Berkeley CA 94704.
rk773@cornell.edu

Jonathan D. Chang
CS Department, Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853.
jdc396@cornell.edu

Wen Sun
CS Department, Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853.
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper studies Imitation Learning from Observations alone (ILFO) where the
learner is presented with expert demonstrations that consist only of states visited
by an expert (without access to actions taken by the expert). We present a provably
efficient model-based framework MobILE to solve the ILFO problem. MobILE involves carefully trading off strategic exploration against imitation - this is achieved
by integrating the idea of optimism in the face of uncertainty into the distribution matching imitation learning (IL) framework. We provide a unified analysis
for MobILE, and demonstrate that MobILE enjoys strong performance guarantees for classes of MDP dynamics that satisfy certain well studied notions of
structural complexity. We also show that the ILFO problem is strictly harder
than the standard IL problem by presenting an exponential sample complexity
separation between IL and ILFO. We complement these theoretical results with
experimental simulations on benchmark OpenAI Gym tasks that indicate the efficacy of MobILE. Code for implementing the MobILE framework is available at
https://github.com/rahulkidambi/MobILE-NeurIPS2021.

1

Introduction

This paper considers Imitation Learning from Observation Alone (ILFO). In ILFO, the learner is
presented with sequences of states encountered by the expert, without access to the actions taken by
the expert, meaning approaches based on a reduction to supervised learning (e.g., Behavior cloning
(BC) [49], DAgger [50]) are not applicable. ILFO is more general and has potential for applications
where the learner and expert have different action spaces, applications like sim-to-real [56, 14] etc.
Recently, [59] reduced the ILFO problem to a sequence of one-step distribution matching problems
that results in obtaining a non-stationary policy. This approach, however, is sample inefficient for
longer horizon tasks since the algorithm does not effectively reuse previously collected samples
when solving the current sub-problem. Another line of work considers model-based methods to infer
the expert’s actions with either an inverse dynamics [63] or a forward dynamics [16] model; these
recovered actions are then fed into an IL approach like BC to output the final policy. These works
rely on stronger assumptions that are only satisfied for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with
injective transition dynamics [68]; we return to this in the related works section.
∗

Work initiated when RK was a post-doc at Cornell University; work done outside Amazon.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

