Why Do Better Loss Functions
Lead to Less Transferable Features?
Simon Kornblith1∗, Ting Chen1 , Honglak Lee2†, Mohammad Norouzi1
1
Google Research, Toronto 2 University of Michigan

Abstract
Previous work has proposed many new loss functions and regularizers that improve
test accuracy on image classification tasks. However, it is not clear whether these
loss functions learn better representations for downstream tasks. This paper studies
how the choice of training objective affects the transferability of the hidden representations of convolutional neural networks trained on ImageNet. We show that
many objectives lead to statistically significant improvements in ImageNet accuracy over vanilla softmax cross-entropy, but the resulting fixed feature extractors
transfer substantially worse to downstream tasks, and the choice of loss has little
effect when networks are fully fine-tuned on the new tasks. Using centered kernel
alignment to measure similarity between hidden representations of networks, we
find that differences among loss functions are apparent only in the last few layers of
the network. We delve deeper into representations of the penultimate layer, finding
that different objectives and hyperparameter combinations lead to dramatically
different levels of class separation. Representations with higher class separation
obtain higher accuracy on the original task, but their features are less useful for
downstream tasks. Our results suggest there exists a trade-off between learning
invariant features for the original task and features relevant for transfer tasks.

1

Introduction

Features learned by deep neural networks on ImageNet transfer effectively to a wide range of computer
vision tasks [23, 60, 34]. These networks are often pretrained using vanilla softmax cross-entropy [10,
11], but recent work reports that other loss functions such as label smoothing [66] and sigmoid
cross-entropy [8] outperform softmax cross-entropy on ImageNet. Although a previous investigation
suggested that label smoothing and dropout can hurt transfer learning [34], the vast majority of work
studying alternatives to softmax cross-entropy has restricted its empirical investigation to the accuracy
of the trained networks on the original dataset. While it is valuable to study the impact of objective
functions on classification accuracy, improving transfer accuracy of learned representations can have
a more significant practical impact for many applications.
This paper takes a comparative approach to understand the effects of different training objectives
for image classification through the lens of neural network representations and their transferability.
We carefully tune hyperparameters of each loss function and confirm that several loss functions
outperform softmax cross-entropy by a statistically significant margin on ImageNet. However, we
find that these improvements do not transfer to other tasks (see Table 1 and Figure 1). We delve deeper
and explain these empirical findings in terms of effects of different objectives on neural network
representations. Our key findings are as follows:
• We analyze the performance of 9 different objectives on ImageNet and in transfer settings. Although
many loss functions and regularizers lead to statistically significant improvements over vanilla
∗
†

Correspondence to: skornblith@google.com
Work performed while at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

