Meta-Learning for Relative Density-Ratio Estimation

Atsutoshi Kumagai
NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
atsutoshi.kumagai.ht@hco.ntt.co.jp

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
tomoharu.iwata.gy@hco.ntt.co.jp

Yasuhiro Fujiwara
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
The ratio of two probability densities, called a density-ratio, is a vital quantity
in machine learning. In particular, a relative density-ratio, which is a bounded
extension of the density-ratio, has received much attention due to its stability and
has been used in various applications such as outlier detection and dataset comparison. Existing methods for (relative) density-ratio estimation (DRE) require many
instances from both densities. However, sufficient instances are often unavailable
in practice. In this paper, we propose a meta-learning method for relative DRE,
which estimates the relative density-ratio from a few instances by using knowledge
in related datasets. Specifically, given two datasets that consist of a few instances,
our model extracts the datasets’ information by using neural networks and uses it to
obtain instance embeddings appropriate for the relative DRE. We model the relative
density-ratio by a linear model on the embedded space, whose global optimum
solution can be obtained as a closed-form solution. The closed-form solution
enables fast and effective adaptation to a few instances, and its differentiability
enables us to train our model such that the expected test error for relative DRE
can be explicitly minimized after adapting to a few instances. We empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method by using three problems:
relative DRE, dataset comparison, and outlier detection.

1

Introduction

The ratio of two probability densities, called a density-ratio, has been used in various applications
such as outlier detection [14, 1], dataset comparison [49], covariate shift adaptation [42], change point
detection [30], positive and unlabeled (PU) learning [19, 18], density estimation [46], and generative
adversarial networks [47]. Thus, density-ratio estimation (DRE) is attracting a lot of attention. A
naive approach to DRE is to estimate each density and then take the ratio. However, this approach
does not work well since density estimation is a hard problem [48]. Therefore, direct DRE without
going through density estimation has been extensively studied [44, 17, 35, 13].
Although direct DRE is useful, its fundamental weakness is that the density-ratio is unbounded, i.e., it
can take infinity, which causes stability issues [29]. To cope with this problem, a relative density-ratio
has been proposed, which is a smoothed and bounded extension of the density-ratio [49]. In the above
applications, the density-ratio can be replaced with the relative density-ratio, and relative DRE has
shown excellent performance [49, 30, 6, 37, 47].
Existing methods for (relative) DRE require many instances from both densities. However, sufficient
instances are often unavailable for various reasons. For example, it is difficult to instantly collect
many instances from new data sources such as new users or new systems. Collecting instances is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

