Differentiable Synthesis of Program Architectures

He Zhu
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
hz375@cs.rutgers.edu

Guofeng Cui
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
gc669@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Differentiable programs have recently attracted much interest due to their interpretability, compositionality, and their efficiency to leverage differentiable training.
However, synthesizing differentiable programs requires optimizing over a combinatorial, rapidly exploded space of program architectures. Despite the development
of effective pruning heuristics, previous works essentially enumerate the discrete
search space of program architectures, which is inefficient. We propose to encode
program architecture search as learning the probability distribution over all possible
program derivations induced by a context-free grammar. This allows the search
algorithm to efficiently prune away unlikely program derivations to synthesize
optimal program architectures. To this end, an efficient gradient-descent based
method is developed to conduct program architecture search in a continuous relaxation of the discrete space of grammar rules. Experiment results on four sequence
classification tasks demonstrate that our program synthesizer excels in discovering
program architectures that lead to differentiable programs with higher F1 scores,
while being more efficient than state-of-the-art program synthesis methods.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis has recently emerged as an effective approach to address tasks in several fields
where deep learning is applied traditionally. A synthesized program in a domain-specific language
(DSL) provides a powerful abstraction for summarizing discovered knowledge from data and offers
greater interpretability and transferability across tasks than a deep neural network model, while
achieving competitive task performance [1–4].
A differentiable program encourages interpretability by using structured symbolic primitives to
compose a set of differentiable modules with trainable parameters in its architecture. These parameters
can be efficiently learned with respect to a differentiable loss function over the program’s outputs.
However, synthesizing a reasonable program architecture remains challenging because the architecture
search space is discrete and combinatorial. Various enumeration strategies have been developed to
explore the program architecture space, including greedy enumeration [1, 2], evolutionary search
[5], and Monte Carlo sampling [6]. To prioritize highly likely top-down search directions in the
combinatorial architecture space, NEAR [7] uses neural networks to approximate missing expressions
in a partial program whose F1 score serves as an admissible heuristic to effective graph search
algorithms such as A∗ [8]. However, since the discrete program architecture search space is intractably
large, enumeration-based search strategies are inefficient in general.
We propose to encode program architecture search as learning the probability distribution over all
possible program architecture derivations induced by a context-free DSL grammar. This problem
bears similarities with searching the structure of graphical models [9] and neural architecture search.
Specifically, to support differentiable search, DARTS [10] uses a composition of softmaxes over all
possible candidate operations between a fixed set of neural network nodes to relax the discrete search
space of neural architectures. However, applying this method to program synthesis is challenging
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

