Sequential Causal Imitation Learning with
Unobserved Confounders
Daniel Kumor
Purdue University
dkumor@purdue.edu

Junzhe Zhang
Columbia University
junzhez@cs.columbia.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
“Monkey see monkey do" is an age-old adage, referring to naïve imitation without a
deep understanding of a system’s underlying mechanics. Indeed, if a demonstrator
has access to information unavailable to the imitator (monkey), such as a different
set of sensors, then no matter how perfectly the imitator models its perceived
environment (S EE), attempting to reproduce the demonstrator’s behavior (D O) can
lead to poor outcomes. Imitation learning in the presence of a mismatch between
demonstrator and imitator has been studied in the literature under the rubric of
causal imitation learning (Zhang et al., 2020), but existing solutions are limited
to single-stage decision-making. This paper investigates the problem of causal
imitation learning in sequential settings, where the imitator must make multiple
decisions per episode. We develop a graphical criterion that is necessary and
sufficient for determining the feasibility of causal imitation, providing conditions
when an imitator can match a demonstrator’s performance despite differing capabilities. Finally, we provide an efficient algorithm for determining imitability and
corroborate our theory with simulations.

1

Introduction

Without access to observational data, an agent must learn how to operate at a suitable level of
performance through trial and error (Sutton et al., 1998; Mnih et al., 2013). This from-scratch
approach is often impractical in environments with the potential of extreme negative - and final outcomes (driving off a cliff). While both Nature and machine learning researchers have approached
the problem from a wide variety of perspectives, a particularly potent method which has been used
with great success in many learning machines, including humans, is exploiting observations of other
agents in the environment (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004; Hussein et al., 2017).
Learning to act by observing other agents offers a data multiplier, allowing agents to take into account
others’ experiences. Even when the precise loss function is unknown (what exactly goes into being
a good driver?), the agent can attempt to learn from “experts”, namely agents which are known to
gain an acceptable reward at the target task. This approach has been studied under the umbrella of
imitation learning (Argall et al., 2009; Billard et al., 2008; Hussein et al., 2017; Osa et al., 2018).
Several methods have been proposed, including inverse reinforcement learning (Ng et al., 2000;
Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Syed & Schapire, 2008; Ziebart et al., 2008) and behavior cloning (Widrow,
1964; Pomerleau, 1989; Muller et al., 2006; Mülling et al., 2013; Mahler & Goldberg, 2017). The
former attempts to reconstruct the loss/reward function that the experts minimize and then use it for
optimization; the latter directly copies the expert’s actions (behavior cloning).
Despite the power entailed by this approach, it relies on a somewhat stringent condition: the expert
and imitator’s sensory capabilities need to be perfectly matched. As an example, self-driving cars
rely solely on cameras or lidar, completely ignoring the auditory dimension - and yet most human
demonstrators are able to exploit this data, especially in dangerous situations (car horns, screeching
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

