Reducing Collision Checking for Sampling-Based
Motion Planning Using Graph Neural Networks

Chenning Yu
Computer Science and Engineering
UC San Diego
chy010@ucsd.edu

Sicun Gao
Computer Science and Engineering
UC San Diego
sicung@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Sampling-based motion planning is a popular approach in robotics for finding
paths in continuous configuration spaces. Checking collision with obstacles is the
major computational bottleneck in this process. We propose new learning-based
methods for reducing collision checking to accelerate motion planning by training
graph neural networks (GNNs) that perform path exploration and path smoothing.
Given random geometric graphs (RGGs) generated from batch sampling, the path
exploration component iteratively predicts collision-free edges to prioritize their
exploration. The path smoothing component then optimizes paths obtained from
the exploration stage. The methods benefit from the ability of GNNs of capturing
geometric patterns from RGGs through batch sampling and generalize better to
unseen environments. Experimental results show that the learned components can
significantly reduce collision checking and improve overall planning efficiency in
challenging high-dimensional motion planning tasks.

1

Introduction

Sampling-based planning is a popular approach to high-dimensional continuous motion planning in
robotics [36, 14, 31, 27, 19, 53, 35]. The idea is to iteratively sample configurations of the robots
and construct one or multiple exploration trees to probe the free space, such that the start and goal
states are eventually connected by some collision-free path through the sampled states, ideally with
path cost minimized. This motion planning problem is hard, theoretically PSPACE-complete [48],
and existing algorithms are challenged when planning motions of robots with a few degrees of
freedom [34, 15, 1, 39, 9, 15]. In particular, the planning algorithms need to repeatedly check whether
an edge connecting two sample states is feasible, i.e., that no state along the edge collides with any
obstacle. This collision checking operation is the major computational bottleneck in the planning
process and by itself NP-hard in general [28, 7]. For instance, consider the 7D Kuka arm planning
problem in the environment shown in Figure 1. The leading sampling-based planning algorithm
BIT* [19] spends about 28.6 seconds to find a complete motion plan for the robot, in which 20.2s
(70.6% of time) is spent on collision checking. In comparison, it only takes 0.06s (0.2% of time) for
sampling all the probing states needed for constructing random graphs for completing the search.
Learning-based approaches have become popular for accelerating motion planning. Many recent
approaches learn patterns of the configuration spaces to improve the sampling of the probing states,
typically through reinforcement learning or imitation learning [29, 25, 65, 47, 8]. For instance, Ichter
et al. [25] and motion planning networks [47] apply imitation learning on collected demonstrations to
bias the sampling process. The NEXT algorithm [8] provides a state-of-the-art design for embedding
high-dimensional continuous state spaces into low-dimensional representations, while balancing
exploration and exploitation in the sampling process. It has demonstrated clear benefits of using
learning-based components to reduce samples and accelerate planning. However, we believe two
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

