Shape from Blur: Recovering Textured 3D Shape and
Motion of Fast Moving Objects

Martin R. Oswald1,2
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
martin.oswald@inf.ethz.ch

Denys Rozumnyi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
denys.rozumnyi@inf.ethz.ch
Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research
Zurich, Switzerland
vittoferrari@google.com

2

Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

1

Abstract
We address the novel task of jointly reconstructing the 3D shape, texture, and
motion of an object from a single motion-blurred image. While previous approaches
address the deblurring problem only in the 2D image domain, our proposed rigorous
modeling of all object properties in the 3D domain enables the correct description of
arbitrary object motion. This leads to significantly better image decomposition and
sharper deblurring results. We model the observed appearance of a motion-blurred
object as a combination of the background and a 3D object with constant translation
and rotation. Our method minimizes a loss on reconstructing the input image via
differentiable rendering with suitable regularizers. This enables estimating the
textured 3D mesh of the blurred object with high fidelity. Our method substantially
outperforms competing approaches on several benchmarks for fast moving objects
deblurring. Qualitative results show that the reconstructed 3D mesh generates
high-quality temporal super-resolution and novel views of the deblurred object.

1

Introduction

Motion blur is a common cause of degraded image quality. It can originate from camera motion, fast
object motion, long exposure times due to low light settings, or a combination of these effects. In this
paper, we focus on deblurring of fast moving objects (FMOs), which move over a distance larger than
their size for the duration of the camera exposure of a single image. Since FMOs appear as a mixture
of motion-blurred object texture and the background, our first goal is to decompose the combined
appearance of the background and the one of the FMO in form of a matting mask [1]. Our main goal
is to recover the shape, motion, and sharp texture of the FMO in order to explain its appearance in the
input image in the best possible way (Fig. 1). The accurate reconstruction and motion estimation of
FMOs enables to generate videos with temporal super-resolution, as well as FMO motion analysis
and prediction. This is useful for a variety of applications like sports analysis (e.g. soccer, tennis,
baseball), meteorites detection in astrophysics, detecting fast moving obstacles in front of a vehicle
for driver alert or autonomous driving, and general video quality enhancement or compression. Our
work could eventually make FMO tracking accessible to everyone using regular cameras rather than
expensive high-speed cameras, or push the capabilities of current high-speed cameras to a new level,
e.g. by capturing gun shots.
The majority of deblurring methods aim for the generic task of removing any kind of blur in
images [2, 3, 4] or videos [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, they perform poorly on deblurring of FMOs as
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

