Towards Understanding Cooperative Multi-Agent
Q-Learning with Value Factorization

Jianhao Wang1∗, Zhizhou Ren2∗ † , Beining Han1 , Jianing Ye1 , Chongjie Zhang1
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
wjh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhizhour@illinois.edu
{hbn18, yejn21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Value factorization is a popular and promising approach to scaling up multi-agent
reinforcement learning in cooperative settings, which balances the learning scalability and the representational capacity of value functions. However, the theoretical
understanding of such methods is limited. In this paper, we formalize a multiagent fitted Q-iteration framework for analyzing factorized multi-agent Q-learning.
Based on this framework, we investigate linear value factorization and reveal that
multi-agent Q-learning with this simple decomposition implicitly realizes a powerful counterfactual credit assignment, but may not converge in some settings.
Through further analysis, we find that on-policy training or richer joint value function classes can improve its local or global convergence properties, respectively.
Finally, to support our theoretical implications in practical realization, we conduct
an empirical analysis of state-of-the-art deep multi-agent Q-learning algorithms on
didactic examples and a broad set of StarCraft II unit micromanagement tasks.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has great promise for addressing coordination problems in a variety of applications, such as robotic systems [1], autonomous cars [2], and
sensor networks [3]. Such complex tasks often require MARL to learn decentralized policies for
agents to jointly optimize a global cumulative reward signal, which posts a number of challenges,
including multi-agent credit assignment [4, 5], non-stationarity [6, 7], and scalability [3, 8]. Recently, by leveraging the strength of deep learning techniques, cooperative MARL has made great
progress [9–19], particularly in value-based methods that demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
on challenging tasks such as StarCraft unit micromanagement [20].
Value factorization is a popular approach to effectively scaling up cooperative multi-agent Q-learning
in complex domains. One fundamental problem of factorized multi-agent algorithms is the tradeoff between the learning scalability and the representational capacity of value functions. As a
representative method, value-decomposition network (VDN) [10] is proposed to obtain excellent
scalability based on a popular paradigm called centralized training with decentralized execution
(CTDE) [21], which learns a centralized but factorizable joint value function Qtot represented as the
summation of individual value functions Qi . During the execution, decentralized policies can be easily
derived by greedily selecting individual actions from the local value function Qi . An implicit multiagent credit assignment is realized because Qi is learned by neural network backpropagation from
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while Zhizhou was an undergraduate at Tsinghua University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

