Neural Auto-Curricula
Xidong Feng⇤,1 , Oliver Slumbers⇤,1 , Ziyu Wan2 , Bo Liu3 ,
Stephen McAleer 4 , Ying Wen2 , Jun Wang1 , Yaodong Yang†,5
1
University College London, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
3
Institute of Automation, CAS, 4 University of California, Irvine,
5
Institute for AI, Peking University

Abstract
When solving two-player zero-sum games, multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) algorithms often create populations of agents where, at each iteration,
a new agent is discovered as the best response to a mixture over the opponent
population. Within such a process, the update rules of "who to compete with" (i.e.,
the opponent mixture) and "how to beat them" (i.e., finding best responses) are
underpinned by manually developed game theoretical principles such as fictitious
play and Double Oracle. In this paper1 , we introduce a novel framework—Neural
Auto-Curricula (NAC)—that leverages meta-gradient descent to automate the
discovery of the learning update rule without explicit human design. Specifically,
we parameterise the opponent selection module by neural networks and the bestresponse module by optimisation subroutines, and update their parameters solely
via interaction with the game engine, where both players aim to minimise their
exploitability. Surprisingly, even without human design, the discovered MARL
algorithms achieve competitive or even better performance with the state-of-the-art
population-based game solvers (e.g., PSRO) on Games of Skill, differentiable
Lotto, non-transitive Mixture Games, Iterated Matching Pennies, and Kuhn Poker.
Additionally, we show that NAC is able to generalise from small games to large
games, for example training on Kuhn Poker and outperforming PSRO on Leduc
Poker. Our work inspires a promising future direction to discover general MARL
algorithms solely from data.

1

Introduction

Two-player zero-sum games have been a central interest of the recent development of multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) [60, 2, 53]. In solving such games, a MARL agent has a clear
objective: to minimise the worst case performance, its exploitability, against any potential opponents. When both agents achieve zero exploitability, they reach a Nash equilibrium (NE) [36], a
classical solution concept from Game Theory [34, 10]. Even though this objective is straightforward,
developing effective algorithms to optimise such an objective often requires tremendous human
efforts. One effective approach is through iterative methods, where players iteratively expand a
population of agents (a.k.a auto-curricula [26]) where at each iteration, a new agent is trained and
added to the player’s strategy pool. However, within the auto-curricula process, it is often non-trivial
to design effective update rules of "who to compete with" (i.e., opponent selections) and "how to beat
them" (i.e., finding best responses). The problem becomes more challenging when one considers
additional requirements such as generating agents that have behavioural diversity [58, 37, 3, 28] or
generalisation ability [47, 38].
1⇤

Equal contributions. † Corresponding to <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>. Code released at https://
github.com/waterhorse1/NAC
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

