Deep Networks Provably Classify Data on Curves

Tingran Wang
Columbia University
tw2579@columbia.edu

Sam Buchanan
Columbia University
s.buchanan@columbia.edu

Dar Gilboa
Harvard University
dar_gilboa@fas.harvard.edu

John Wright
Columbia University
jw2966@columbia.edu

Abstract
Data with low-dimensional nonlinear structure are ubiquitous in engineering and
scientific problems. We study a model problem with such structure—a binary
classification task that uses a deep fully-connected neural network to classify data
drawn from two disjoint smooth curves on the unit sphere. Aside from mild
regularity conditions, we place no restrictions on the configuration of the curves.
We prove that when (i) the network depth is large relative to certain geometric
properties that set the difficulty of the problem and (ii) the network width and
number of samples are polynomial in the depth, randomly-initialized gradient
descent quickly learns to correctly classify all points on the two curves with high
probability. To our knowledge, this is the first generalization guarantee for deep
networks with nonlinear data that depends only on intrinsic data properties. Our
analysis proceeds by a reduction to dynamics in the neural tangent kernel (NTK)
regime, where the network depth plays the role of a fitting resource in solving
the classification problem. In particular, via fine-grained control of the decay
properties of the NTK, we demonstrate that when the network is sufficiently deep,
the NTK can be locally approximated by a translationally invariant operator on the
manifolds and stably inverted over smooth functions, which guarantees convergence
and generalization.

1

Introduction

In applied machine learning, engineering, and the sciences, we are frequently confronted with
the problem of identifying low-dimensional structure in high-dimensional data. In certain wellstructured data sets, identifying a good low-dimensional model is the principal task: examples include
convolutional sparse models in microscopy [43] and neuroscience [10, 16], and low-rank models
in collaborative filtering [7, 8]. Even more complicated datasets from problems such as image
classification exhibit some form of low-dimensionality: recent experiments estimate the effective
dimension of CIFAR-10 as 26 and the effective dimension of ImageNet as 43 [61]. The variability in
these datasets can be thought of as comprising two parts: a “probabilistic” variability induced by the
distribution of geometries associated with a given class, and a “geometric” variability associated with
physical nuisances such as pose and illumination. The former is challenging to model analytically;
virtually all progress on this issue has come through the introduction of large datasets and highcapacity learning machines. The latter induces a much cleaner analytical structure: transformations of
a given image lie near a low-dimensional submanifold of the image space (Figure 1). The celebrated
successes of convolutional neural networks in image classification seem to derive from their ability
to simultaneously handle both types of variability. Studying how neural networks compute with
data lying near a low-dimensional manifold is an essential step towards understanding how neural
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

