A/B Testing for Recommender Systems in a Two-sided
Marketplace
Preetam Nandy, Divya Venugopalan, Chun Lo, Shaunak Chatterjee
LinkedIn Corporation
Mountain View, CA 94083
{pnandy, dvenugopalan, chunlo, shchatterjee}@linkedin.com

Abstract
Two-sided marketplaces are standard business models of many online platforms
(e.g., Amazon, Facebook, LinkedIn), wherein the platforms have consumers, buyers or content viewers on one side and producers, sellers or content-creators on
the other. Consumer side measurement of the impact of a treatment variant can
be done via simple online A/B testing. Producer side measurement is more challenging because the producer experience depends on the treatment assignment
of the consumers. Existing approaches for producer side measurement are either
based on graph cluster-based randomization or on certain treatment propagation
assumptions. The former approach results in low-powered experiments as the
producer-consumer network density increases and the latter approach lacks a strict
notion of error control. In this paper, we propose (i) a quantification of the quality
of a producer side experiment design, and (ii) a new experiment design mechanism
that generates high-quality experiments based on this quantification. Our approach,
called UniCoRn (Unifying Counterfactual Rankings), provides explicit control
over the quality of the experiment and its computation cost. Further, we prove
that our experiment design is optimal to the proposed design quality measure. Our
approach is agnostic to the density of the producer-consumer network and does
not rely on any treatment propagation assumption. Moreover, unlike the existing
approaches, we do not need to know the underlying network in advance, making
this widely applicable to the industrial setting where the underlying network is
unknown and challenging to predict a priori due to its dynamic nature. We use
simulations to validate our approach and compare it against existing methods. We
also deployed UniCoRn in an edge recommendation application that serves tens of
millions of members and billions of edge recommendations daily.

1

Introduction

Learning via experiments is one of the most powerful and popular ways to improve in many domains
of life. In the tech industry, experiments are very commonplace to better understand user preferences
and how to serve them best. Such experiments, known as A/B testing or bucket tests [5, 6, 16, 19],
are performed by randomized allocation of a treatment and control variant to some population and
measuring the average treatment effect (ATE) [1, 4] relative to control. The populations receiving
treatment and control are statistically identical since they were randomly selected.
A/B testing is a powerful tool because of its design simplicity and ease of setup. It is accurate in
applications where the behavior of a measurement unit (e.g., a user) is unaffected by the treatment
allocated to any other measurement unit. This principle is called “Stable Unit Treatment Value
Assumption” or SUTVA [11–13]. The SUTVA principle is reasonably accurate for experiments in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

