Piper: Multidimensional Planner
for DNN Parallelization
Jakub Tarnawski
Microsoft Research
jakub.tarnawski@microsoft.com

Deepak Narayanan
Microsoft Research
dnarayanan@microsoft.com

Amar Phanishayee
Microsoft Research
amar@microsoft.com

Abstract
The rapid increase in sizes of state-of-the-art DNN models, and consequently the
increase in the compute and memory requirements of model training, has led to the
development of many execution schemes such as data parallelism, pipeline model
parallelism, tensor (intra-layer) model parallelism, and various memory-saving
optimizations. However, no prior work has tackled the highly complex problem
of optimally partitioning the DNN computation graph across many accelerators
while combining all these parallelism modes and optimizations. In this work, we
introduce Piper, an efficient optimization algorithm for this problem that is based
on a two-level dynamic programming approach. Our two-level approach is driven
by the insight that being given tensor-parallelization techniques for individual
layers (e.g., Megatron-LM’s splits for transformer layers) significantly reduces the
search space and makes the global problem tractable, compared to considering
tensor-parallel configurations for the entire DNN operator graph.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Network (DNN) models have grown exponentially in size over the past two decades;
consequently, modern DNNs are extremely computationally expensive. For example, a state-of-theart language model, GPT-3 [2], has an astounding 175 billion parameters, requiring 314 ZettaFLOPS
(3.14 × 1023 FLOPS) of compute.
This trend of computationally expensive models with working-set sizes for training and inference
that far exceed the memory capacities of individual DNN accelerators (e.g., GPUs, TPUs, FPGAs,
ASICs) has reinvigorated the study of parallel training techniques that split DNN model state across
different devices. In the “modern era”, such model-parallel training techniques trace their roots
back to AlexNet [14] and early influential systems such as DistBelief [6] and Project Adam [3].
Recent advances in model-parallel training include tensor (intra-layer) model parallelism [22],
where individual operators of the model are partitioned over multiple workers, and pipeline model
parallelism that combines inter-layer model parallelism with pipelining [17, 18, 11]. Various hybrid
parallelism techniques that combine tensor, pipeline, and data parallelism across operators [13, 19]
have also been developed to more efficiently train a wider range of models. Additionally, memorysaving optimizations like activation recomputation, which trade off throughput for memory, are also
being used [18] to scale training to larger models such as GPT-3.
Combining these dimensions, however, is non-trivial [19], since each dimension has trade-offs with
respect to computational efficiency, amount of communication, and memory footprint. Given the
importance of efficient model-parallel training (and inference [7, 4]), partitioning a model across
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

