Efficient Statistical Assessment of Neural Network
Corruption Robustness

Karim Tit
Thales Land and Air Systems, BU IAS
Rennes, France
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
Rennes, France
karim.tit@inria.fr

Teddy Furon
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
Rennes, France
teddy.furon@inria.fr

Mathias Rousset
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRMAR
Rennes, France
mathias.rousset@inria.fr

Abstract
We quantify the robustness of a trained network to input uncertainties with a
stochastic simulation inspired by the field of Statistical Reliability Engineering.
The robustness assessment is cast as a statistical hypothesis test: the network
is deemed as locally robust if the estimated probability of failure is lower than
a critical level. The procedure is based on an Importance Splitting simulation
generating samples of rare events. We derive theoretical guarantees that are nonasymptotic w.r.t. sample size. Experiments tackling large scale networks outline
the efficiency of our method making a low number of calls to the network function.

1

Introduction

Despite state-of-the-art performances on many Computer Vision and NLP tasks, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been shown to be sensitive to both adversarial and random perturbations [Gilmer
et al., 2019, Franceschi et al., 2018]. Concerns about their safety and reliability have come forth as
their applications move to critical fields, such as the defense sector or self-driving vehicles.
Certification A posteriori certification aims at verifying the correct behavior of a trained network
f : Rn → Rm . This expected property is usually defined locally (a.k.a. instance-wise property): the
network performs correctly in the neighborhood V(xo ) ⊂ Rn of a particular input xo ∈ Rn . Let
us denote ι(·|xo ) : Rn → {0, 1} the function indicating a violation of the expected property. The
network is locally correct if ι(x|xo ) = 0 for any x ∈ V(xo ).
In classification, the property takes the name of robustness and reads as: the output of the network
remains unchanged over the neighborhood V(xo ). It certifies that the network is robust against inputs
corrupted by uncertainties of limited support or adversarial perturbations of constrained distortion.
The certification mechanism has two desired features as defined in [Singh et al., 2018]:
• Soundness: it does not certify the network when the property does not hold.
• Completeness: it does certify the network whenever the property holds.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

