Adversarial Robustness with Semi-Infinite
Constrained Learning

Alexander Robey∗
University of Pennsylvania
arobey1@seas.upenn.edu
George J. Pappas
University of Pennsylvania
pappasg@seas.upenn.edu

Luiz F. O. Chamon∗
University of California, Berkeley
lfochamon@berkeley.edu

Hamed Hassani
University of Pennsylvania
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Despite strong performance in numerous applications, the fragility of deep learning
to input perturbations has raised serious questions about its use in safety-critical
domains. While adversarial training can mitigate this issue in practice, state-ofthe-art methods are increasingly application-dependent, heuristic in nature, and
suffer from fundamental trade-offs between nominal performance and robustness.
Moreover, the problem of finding worst-case perturbations is non-convex and
underparameterized, both of which engender a non-favorable optimization landscape. Thus, there is a gap between the theory and practice of adversarial training,
particularly with respect to when and why adversarial training works. In this paper, we take a constrained learning approach to address these questions and to
provide a theoretical foundation for robust learning. In particular, we leverage
semi-infinite optimization and non-convex duality theory to show that adversarial
training is equivalent to a statistical problem over perturbation distributions, which
we characterize completely. Notably, we show that a myriad of previous robust
training techniques can be recovered for particular, sub-optimal choices of these
distributions. Using these insights, we then propose a hybrid Langevin Monte
Carlo approach of which several common algorithms (e.g., PGD) are special cases.
Finally, we show that our approach can mitigate the trade-off between nominal
and robust performance, yielding state-of-the-art results on MNIST and CIFAR-10.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/arobey1/advbench.

1

Introduction

Learning is at the core of many modern information systems, with wide-ranging applications in
clinical research [1–4], smart grids [5–7], and robotics [8–10]. However, it has become clear that
learning-based solutions suffer from a critical lack of robustness [11–17], leading to models that
are vulnerable to malicious tampering and unsafe behavior [18–22]. While robustness has been
studied in statistics for decades [23–25], this issue has been exacerbated by the opacity, scale, and
non-convexity of modern learning models, such as convolutional neural network (CNNs). Indeed,
the pernicious nature of these vulnerabilities has led to a rapidly-growing interest in improving
the so-called adversarial robustness of modern ML models. To this end, a great deal of empirical
evidence has shown adversarial training to be the most effective way to obtain robust classifiers,
wherein models are trained on perturbed samples rather than directly on clean data [26–31]. While
this approach is now ubiquitous in practice, adversarial training faces two fundamental challenges.
⋆

Alexander Robey and Luiz F. O. Chamon contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

