Causal Abstractions of Neural Networks
Atticus Geiger∗, Hanson Lu∗, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts
Stanford
Stanford, CA 94305-2150
{atticusg, hansonlu, icard, cgpotts}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Structural analysis methods (e.g., probing and feature attribution) are increasingly
important tools for neural network analysis. We propose a new structural analysis method grounded in a formal theory of causal abstraction that provides rich
characterizations of model-internal representations and their roles in input/output
behavior. In this method, neural representations are aligned with variables in
interpretable causal models, and then interchange interventions are used to experimentally verify that the neural representations have the causal properties of their
aligned variables. We apply this method in a case study to analyze neural models
trained on Multiply Quantified Natural Language Inference (MQNLI) corpus, a
highly complex NLI dataset that was constructed with a tree-structured natural
logic causal model. We discover that a BERT-based model with state-of-the-art
performance successfully realizes parts of the natural logic model’s causal structure,
whereas a simpler baseline model fails to show any such structure, demonstrating
that BERT representations encode the compositional structure of MQNLI.

1

Introduction

Explainability and interpretability have long been central issues for neural networks, and they have
taken on renewed importance as such models are now ubiquitous in research and technology. Recent
structural evaluation methods seek to reveal the internal structure of these “black box” models.
Structural methods include probes, attributions (feature importance methods), and interventions
(manipulations of model-internal states). These methods can complement standard behavioral
techniques (e.g., performance on gold evaluation sets), and they can yield insights into how and why
models make the predictions they do. However, these tools have their limitations, and it has often
been assumed that more ambitious and systematic causal analysis of such models is beyond reach.
Although there is a sense in which neural networks are “black boxes”, they have the virtue of being
completely closed and controlled systems. This means that standard empirical challenges of causal
inference due to lack of observability simply do not arise. The challenge is rather to identify high-level
causal regularities that abstract away from irrelevant (but arbitrarily observable and manipulable)
low-level details. Our contribution in this paper is to show that this challenge can be met. Drawing
on recent innovations in the formal theory of causal abstraction [1, 2, 5, 22], we offer a methodology
for meaningful causal explanations of neural network behavior.
Our methodology causal abstraction analysis2 consists of three stages. (1) Formulate a hypothesis
by defining a causal model that might explain network behavior. Candidate causal models can be
naturally adapted from theoretical and empirical modeling work in linguistics and cognitive sciences.
(2) Search for an alignment between neural representations in the network and variables in the
∗

equal contribution
We provide tools for causal abstraction analysis at http://github.com/hansonhl/antra and the code
base for this paper at http://github.com/atticusg/Interchange
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

