Learning-to-learn non-convex
piecewise-Lipschitz functions

Maria-Florina Balcan, Mikhail Khodak, Dravyansh Sharma
Carnegie Mellon University
{ninamf,mkhodak,dravyans}@cs.cmu.edu
Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University & Hewlett Packard Enterprise
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
We analyze the meta-learning of the initialization and step-size of learning algorithms for piecewise-Lipschitz functions, a non-convex setting with applications
to both machine learning and algorithms. Starting from recent regret bounds for
the exponential forecaster on losses with dispersed discontinuities, we generalize
them to be initialization-dependent and then use this result to propose a practical
meta-learning procedure that learns both the initialization and the step-size of the
algorithm from multiple online learning tasks. Asymptotically, we guarantee that
the average regret across tasks scales with a natural notion of task-similarity that
measures the amount of overlap between near-optimal regions of different tasks.
Finally, we instantiate the method and its guarantee in two important settings:
robust meta-learning and multi-task data-driven algorithm design.

1

Introduction

While learning-to-learn or meta-learning has long been an object of study [45], in recent years it
has gained significant attention as a multi-task paradigm for developing algorithms for learning in
dynamic environments, from multiple data sources, and in federated settings. Such methods focus on
using data from multiple tasks to improve performance when facing a new, potentially related task. A
popular approach is initialization-based meta-learning, in which the meta-learner uses multi-task data
to output an initialization for an iterative algorithm such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [25].
The flexibility of this approach has led to its widespread adoption, e.g. in robotics [23] and federated
learning [18], and to a growing number of attempts to understand it, both empirically and theoretically
[20, 29, 24, 40, 42]. However, outside some stylized setups our learning-theoretic understanding of
how to meta-learn an initialization is largely restricted to the convex Lipschitz setting.
We relax both assumptions to study the meta-learning of online algorithms over piecewise-Lipschitz
functions, which can be nonconvex and highly discontinuous. As no-regret online learning over such
functions is impossible in-general, we study the case of piecewise-Lipschitz functions with dispersed
discontinuities that do not concentrate in any small compact subset of the domain [11]. Such functions
arise frequently in data-driven algorithm design, where the goal is to learn the optimal parameter
settings of algorithms for difficult (often NP-Hard) problems over a distribution or sequence of
instances [4]; for example, a small change to the metric in cluster linkage can lead to a discontinuous
change in the classification error [7]. In this paper, we also demonstrate that such losses are relevant in
the setting of adversarial robustness, where we introduce a novel online formulation. For both cases,
the associated problems are often solved across many time periods or for many different problem
domains, resulting in natural multi-task structure that might improve performance. To the best of our
knowledge, ours is the first theoretical study of meta-learning in both of these application settings.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

