Adaptable Agent Populations
via a Generative Model of Policies
Kenneth Derek
MIT CSAIL

Phillip Isola
MIT CSAIL

kderek@alum.mit.edu

phillipi@mit.edu

Abstract
In the natural world, life has found innumerable ways to survive and often thrive.
Between and even within species, each individual is in some manner unique, and
this diversity lends adaptability and robustness to life. In this work, we aim to
learn a space of diverse and high-reward policies in a given environment. To this
end, we introduce a generative model of policies for reinforcement learning, which
maps a low-dimensional latent space to an agent policy space. Our method enables
learning an entire population of agent policies, without requiring the use of separate
policy parameters. Just as real world populations can adapt and evolve via natural
selection, our method is able to adapt to changes in our environment solely by
selecting for policies in latent space. We test our generative model’s capabilities in
a variety of environments, including an open-ended grid-world and a two-player
soccer environment. Code, visualizations, and additional experiments can be found
at https://kennyderek.github.io/adap/.

1

Introduction

Quick thought experiment: imagine our world was such that all people acted, thought, and looked
exactly the same in every situation. Would we ever have found the influential dissenters that sparked
scientific, political, and cultural revolutions?
In reinforcement learning (RL), it is common to learn a single policy that fits an environment.
However, it is often desirable to instead find an entire array of high performing policies. To this end,
we propose learning a generative model of policies. At a high level, we aim to show that purposefully
learning a diverse policy space for a given environment can be competitive to learning a single policy,
while better encompassing a range of skillful behaviors that are adaptable and robust to changes in the
task and environment. We name our method of learning a space of adaptable agent polices: ADAP.
Why should we bother with finding more than one policy per environment? We propose two primary
reasons. First, RL environments are continually approaching greater levels of open-endedness and
complexity. For a given environment, there might be an entire manifold of valid and near-equally
high performing strategies. By finding points across this manifold, we avoid ‘having all eggs in one
basket,’ granting robustness and adaptability to environmental changes. In the event of a change,
we are able to adapt our generated population to select individuals that can still survive given the
ablation, much like natural selection drives evolution in the real world. Secondly, using a generative
model of policies as a population of agents makes intuitive sense in multi-agent environments, in
which different agents should have the capacity to act like they are unique individuals. However, it is
common in many multi-agent reinforcement learning settings to deploy the same policy across all
agents, such that they are essentially distributed clones. Doing so may reduce the multi-modality of
the agent population, resulting in a single ‘average’ agent.
Previous work has touched on ideas akin to a generative model of policies. In hierarchical RL, the
high-level policy controller can be considered a generator of sub-policies that are ‘options’ [1, 2, 3].
But these methods are designed to find decomposable skills that aid in the construction of just one
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

