Instance-Conditional Knowledge Distillation for
Object Detection

Zijian Kang∗
Xi’an Jiaotong University
kzj123@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Peizhen Zhang∗
MEGVII Technology
zhangpeizhen@megvii.com

Jian Sun
MEGVII Technology
sunjian@megvii.com

Xiangyu Zhang
MEGVII Technology
zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

Nanning Zheng
Xi’an Jiaotong University
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation has shown great success in classification, however, it is still
challenging for detection. In a typical image for detection, representations from
different locations may have different contributions to detection targets, making
the distillation hard to balance. In this paper, we propose a conditional distillation
framework to distill the desired knowledge, namely knowledge that is beneficial
in terms of both classification and localization for every instance. The framework
introduces a learnable conditional decoding module, which retrieves information
given each target instance as query. Specifically, we encode the condition information as query and use the teacher’s representations as key. The attention between
query and key is used to measure the contribution of different features, guided by
a localization-recognition-sensitive auxiliary task. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our method: we observe impressive improvements under
various settings. Notably, we boost RetinaNet with ResNet-50 backbone from
37.4 to 40.7 mAP (+3.3) under 1× schedule, that even surpasses the teacher (40.4
mAP) with ResNet-101 backbone under 3× schedule. Code has been released on
https://github.com/megvii-research/ICD.

1

Introduction

Deep learning applications blossom in recent years with the breakthrough of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) [17, 24, 21]. In pursuit of high performance, advanced DNNs usually stack tons of blocks with
millions of parameters, which are computation and memory consuming. The heavy design hinders
the deployment of many practical downstream applications like object detection in resource-limited
devices. Plenty of techniques have been proposed to address this issue, like network pruning [15, 27,
18], quantization [22, 23, 35], mobile architecture design [38, 39] and knowledge distillation (KD)
[19, 37, 43]. Among them, KD is one of the most popular choices, since it can boost a target network
without introducing extra inference-time burden or modifications.
KD is popularized by Hinton et al. [19], where knowledge of a strong pretrained teacher network is
transferred to a small target student network in the classification scenario. Many good works emerge
following the classification track [50, 37, 32]. However, most methods for classification perform
badly in the detection: only slight improvements are observed [28, 51]. This can be attributed to
two reasons: (1) Other than category classification, another challenging goal to localize the object is
seldomly considered. (2) Multiple target objects are presented in an image for detection, where objects
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

