Set Prediction in the Latent Space

Konpat Preechakul1

Chawan Piansaddhayanon1

Tirasan Khandhawit2

Sira Sriswasdi3

Burin Naowarat1

Ekapol Chuangsuwanich1,3

1

Department of Computer Engineering, Chulalongkorn University
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences, Mahidol University
3
Computational Molecular Biology Group, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University
2

konpatp@gmail.com, {6372025021, 6270145221}@student.chula.ac.th
tirasan.kha@mahidol.ac.th, {sira.sr, ekapol.c}@chula.ac.th

Abstract
Set prediction tasks require the matching between predicted set and ground truth
set in order to propagate the gradient signal. Recent works have performed this
matching in the original feature space thus requiring predefined distance functions. We propose a method for learning the distance function by performing the
matching in the latent space learned from encoding networks. This method enables
the use of teacher forcing which was not possible previously since matching in
the feature space must be computed after the entire output sequence is generated.
Nonetheless, a naive implementation of latent set prediction might not converge
due to permutation instability. To address this problem, we provide sufficient conditions for permutation stability which begets an algorithm to improve the overall
model convergence. Experiments on several set prediction tasks, including image
captioning and object detection, demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Code
is available at https://github.com/phizaz/latent-set-prediction.

1

Introduction

Set prediction is a task where a model predicts multiple elements whose ordering is not relevant
for correctness. This task is central to many real-world problems such as object detection, image
captioning, and multi-speaker speech recognition. Object detection requires predicting a set of
bounding boxes without any specific ordering. Describing objects within an image is a kind of image
captioning yet perfectly suitable for set prediction. Multi-speaker speech recognition is also well
suited for set prediction since the order of transcripts is irrelevant. Though these tasks can naturally
be modeled as set prediction, traditional deep learning is not inherently suitable for these tasks.
Multi-layer perceptrons and convolution networks with traditional loss functions impose a specific
ordering on the prediction heads which hinders set prediction. A reasonable set prediction pipeline
requires the model’s prediction heads to be more flexible. Each head does not have a predefined target,
yet relies on its peers to determine what is best to predict to complete the target set. Recent works
[1, 2] emphasized using a Transformer model [3], which is permutation-invariant, coupled with a
permutation-invariant loss function as the main ingredients. Any traditional loss function can be made
permutation-invariant by solving for a minimum bijective matching between predicted set and ground
truth set via the Hungarian algorithm under a certain distance metric. After the assignment, the loss
function is calculated between the assigned pairs, and backpropagation is performed accordingly.
This scheme is known as Permutation Invariant Training (PIT).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

