TTT++: When Does Self-Supervised
Test-Time Training Fail or Thrive?

Yuejiang Liu

Parth Kothari

Baptiste Bellot-Gurlet

Taylor Mordan

Bastien van Delft
Alexandre Alahi

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Test-time training (TTT) through self-supervised learning (SSL) is an emerging
paradigm to tackle distributional shifts. Despite encouraging results, it remains
unclear when this approach thrives or fails. In this work, we first provide an indepth look at its limitations and show that TTT can possibly deteriorate, instead of
improving, the test-time performance in the presence of severe distribution shifts.
To address this issue, we introduce a test-time feature alignment strategy utilizing
offline feature summarization and online moment matching, which regularizes
adaptation without revisiting training data. We further scale this strategy in the
online setting through batch-queue decoupling to enable robust moment estimates
even with limited batch size. Given aligned feature distributions, we then shed
light on the strong potential of TTT by theoretically analyzing its performance post
adaptation. This analysis motivates our use of more informative self-supervision in
the form of contrastive learning for visual recognition problems. We empirically
demonstrate that our modified version of test-time training, termed TTT++, outperforms state-of-the-art methods by significant margins on several benchmarks. Our
result indicates that storing and exploiting extra information, in addition to model
parameters, can be a promising direction towards robust test-time adaptation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/vita-epfl/ttt-plus-plus.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models often struggle to generalize under distribution shifts. Even a perceptually
mild shift between training and test data, e.g., JPEG compression, may cause severe prediction errors
[1]. One popular family of methods to address this challenge is to learn an invariant representation
across domains by making use of labelled training data and unlabelled test data simultaneously [2–5].
However, revisiting training data at test time can be impractical due to increasing privacy concerns,
inflating sizes of datasets as well as many other real-world constraints. This shortcoming prompts a
more challenging yet appealing test-time adaptation paradigm: given a trained model, how can we
adapt it from one domain to another on the fly, without access to training data and human annotations?
One promising approach towards this goal is test-time training (TTT) through self-supervision [6].
The key idea of TTT is simple and straightforward: train the model on two tasks, namely a main task
and a self-supervised learning (SSL) task, and update the model based only on the SSL task at test
time. This technique implemented with self-supervised rotation prediction has shown encouraging
results for improving the robustness of image classifiers under a variety of distributional shifts. Yet,
its empirical performance is still inferior to other families of test-time algorithms [7, 8].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

