Is Automated Topic Model Evaluation Broken?:
The Incoherence of Coherence
Alexander Hoyle ∗

Pranav Goel ∗
Denis Peskov ∗
Computer Science
Jordan Boyd-Graber

Philip Resnik

CS , iSchool, UMIACS , LSC

UMIACS , Lingusitics

Andrew Hian-Cheong ∗

University of Maryland
{hoyle,pgoel1,dpeskov,andrewhc,jbg,resnik}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Topic model evaluation, like evaluation of other unsupervised methods, can be contentious.
However, the field has coalesced around automated estimates of topic coherence, which rely
on the frequency of word co-occurrences in a reference corpus. Contemporary neural topic
models surpass classical ones according to these metrics. At the same time, topic model
evaluation suffers from a validation gap: automated coherence, developed for classical
models, has not been validated using human experimentation for neural models. In addition,
a meta-analysis of topic modeling literature reveals a substantial standardization gap in automated topic modeling benchmarks. To address the validation gap, we compare automated
coherence with the two most widely accepted human judgment tasks: topic rating and word
intrusion. To address the standardization gap, we systematically evaluate a dominant classical model and two state-of-the-art neural models on two commonly used datasets. Automated
evaluations declare a winning model when corresponding human evaluations do not, calling
into question the validity of fully automatic evaluations independent of human judgments.

1

Revisiting Topic Model Evaluation

Topic models are a machine learning technique widely used outside computer science, including
political science (Grimmer and Stewart, 2013; Isoaho et al., 2021), social and cultural studies (Mohr
and Bogdanov, 2013), digital humanities (Meeks and Weingart, 2012), and bioinformatics (Liu
et al., 2016). Typically, topic model users are domain experts trying to identify global categories
or themes present in a document collection (Boyd-Graber et al., 2017). This practice constitutes
a computer-assisted form of content analysis (Krippendorff, 2004; Chuang et al., 2014), also related
to distant reading in literary studies (Underwood, 2017). In general, topic models help humans
understand large corpora. 2
Evaluation of topic models has vacillated between automated and human-centered. While real-world
users of topic models evaluate outputs based on their specific needs, topic model developers have
gravitated toward generalized, automated proxies of human judgment to help inform rapid iteration
of models (Doogan and Buntine, 2021). Initially, models were evaluated with held-out perplexity,
but it disagrees with human interpretability (Chang et al., 2009). Consequently, the field adopted
automated coherence metrics like normalized pointwise mutual information (NPMI), a measure of
word relatedness that does correlate with topic interpretability (Section 2.2; Newman et al., 2010;
Aletras and Stevenson, 2013; Lau et al., 2014). The balance shifted towards automated coherence.
Human evaluations have been abandoned by topic model developers in the years since automated
coherence metrics were adopted. In a thorough meta-analysis of contemporary topic model methods
∗

Equal contribution
Topic models are also used for other purposes, such as information retrieval or downstream document
classification. However, the discovery and application of categories for human interpretation is their dominant
use, and other computational applications have been largely eclipsed by modern neural approaches.
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

