Batch Normalization Orthogonalizes Representations
in Deep Random Networks

Hadi Daneshmand
INRIA Paris
seyed.daneshmand@inria.fr

Amir Joudaki
ETH Zurich
amir.joudaki@inf.ethz.ch

Francis Bach
INRIA-ENS-PSL Paris
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
This paper underlines a subtle property of batch-normalization (BN): Successive
batch normalizations with random linear transformations make hidden representations increasingly orthogonal across layers of a deep neural network. We establish
a non-asymptotic characterization of the interplay between depth, width, and the
orthogonality of deep representations. More precisely, under a mild assumption,
we prove that the deviation of the representations from orthogonality rapidly decays with depth up to a term inversely proportional to the network width. This
result has two main implications: 1) Theoretically, as the depth grows, the distribution of the representation –after the linear layers– contracts to a Wasserstein-2
ball around an isotropic Gaussian distribution. Furthermore, the radius of this
Wasserstein ball shrinks with the width of the network. 2) Practically, the orthogonality of the representations directly influences the performance of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). When representations are initially aligned, we observe
SGD wastes many iterations to orthogonalize representations before the classification. Nevertheless, we experimentally show that starting optimization from
orthogonal representations is sufficient to accelerate SGD, with no need for BN.

1

Introduction

Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) enhances training across a wide range of deep
network architectures and experimental setups (He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017; Silver et al.,
2017). The practical success of BN has inspired research into the underlying mechanism of BN (Santurkar et al., 2018; Karakida et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019b; Bjorck et al., 2018). BN influences
first-order optimization methods by avoiding the rank collapse in deep representation (Daneshmand
et al., 2020), direction-length decoupling of optimization (Kohler et al., 2018), influencing the convergence of the steepest descent (Arora et al., 2019b; Bjorck et al., 2018), and smoothing the optimization objective function (Santurkar et al., 2018; Karakida et al., 2019). However, the benefits
of BN go beyond its critical role in optimization. For example, Frankle et al. (2021) shows that
BN networks with random weights also achieve surprisingly high performance after only minor adjustments of their weights. This striking result motivates us to study the representational power of
random networks with BN.
We study hidden representations across layers of a laboratory random BN with linear activations.
Consider a batch of samples passing through consecutive BN and linear layers with Gaussian
weights. The representations of these samples are perturbed by each random linear transformation, followed by a non-linear BN. At first glance, the deep representations appear unpredictable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

