Generalization Bounds for Meta-Learning via
PAC-Bayes and Uniform Stability
Alec Farid
Anirudha Majumdar
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University
{afarid, ani.majumdar}@princeton.edu

Abstract
We are motivated by the problem of providing strong generalization guarantees in
the context of meta-learning. Existing generalization bounds are either challenging
to evaluate or provide vacuous guarantees in even relatively simple settings. We
derive a probably approximately correct (PAC) bound for gradient-based metalearning using two different generalization frameworks in order to deal with the
qualitatively different challenges of generalization at the “base” and “meta” levels.
We employ bounds for uniformly stable algorithms at the base level and bounds
from the PAC-Bayes framework at the meta level. The result of this approach is
a novel PAC bound that is tighter when the base learner adapts quickly, which is
precisely the goal of meta-learning. We show that our bound provides a tighter
guarantee than other bounds on a toy non-convex problem on the unit sphere and a
text-based classification example. We also present a practical regularization scheme
motivated by the bound in settings where the bound is loose and demonstrate
improved performance over baseline techniques.

1

Introduction

A major challenge with current machine learning systems is the need to acquire large amounts of
training data in order to learn a new task. Over the past few decades, meta-learning [62, 70] has
emerged as a promising avenue for addressing this challenge. Meta-learning relies on the intuition
that a new task often bears significant similarity to previous tasks; hence, a learner can learn to
perform a new task very quickly by exploiting data from previously-encountered related tasks. The
meta-learning problem formulation thus assumes access to datasets from a variety of tasks during
meta-training. The goal of the meta learner is then to learn inductive biases from these tasks in order
to train a base learner to achieve few-shot generalization on a new task.
Over the past few years, there has been tremendous progress in practical algorithms for metalearning (see, e.g., [61, 55, 25, 32]). Techniques such as model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML)
[25] have demonstrated the ability to perform few-shot learning in a variety of supervised learning
and reinforcement learning domains. However, our theoretical understanding of these techniques
lags significantly behind successes on the empirical front. In particular, the problem of deriving
generalization bounds for meta-learning techniques remains an outstanding challenge. Current
methods for obtaining generalization guarantees for meta-learning [5, 34, 77] either (i) produce
bounds that are extremely challenging to compute or (ii) produce vacuous or near-vacuous bounds in
even highly simplified settings (see Section 5 for numerical examples). Indeed, we note that existing
work on generalization theory for meta-learning techniques do not explicitly report numerical values
for generalization bounds. This is in contrast to the state of generalization theory in the supervised
learning setting, where recent techniques demonstrate the ability to obtain non-vacuous generalization
guarantees on benchmark problems (e.g. visual classification problems [24, 78, 54]).
The generalization challenge in meta-learning is similar to, but distinct from, the supervised learning
case. In particular, any generalization bound for meta-learning must account for two levels of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

