Robustifying Algorithms of Learning Latent Trees
with Vector Variables
Fengzhuo Zhang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
National University of Singapore
fzzhang@u.nus.edu
Vincent Y. F. Tan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
vtan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider learning the structures of Gaussian latent tree models with vector
observations when a subset of them are arbitrarily corrupted. First, we present
the sample complexities of Recursive Grouping (RG) and Chow-Liu Recursive
Grouping (CLRG) without the assumption that the effective depth is bounded in
the number of observed nodes, significantly generalizing the results in Choi et
al. (2011). We show that Chow-Liu initialization in CLRG greatly reduces the
sample complexity of RG from being exponential in the diameter of the tree to
only logarithmic in the diameter for the hidden Markov model (HMM). Second,
we robustify RG, CLRG, Neighbor Joining (NJ) and Spectral NJ (SNJ) by using
the truncated inner product. These robustified algorithms can tolerate a number
of corruptions up to the square root of the number of clean samples. Finally, we
derive the first known instance-dependent impossibility result for structure learning
of latent trees. The optimalities of the robust version of CLRG and NJ are verified
by comparing their sample complexities and the impossibility result.

1

Introduction

Latent graphical models provide a succinct representation of the dependencies among observed and
latent variables. Each node in the graphical model represents a random variable or a random vector,
and the dependencies among these variables are captured by the edges among nodes. Graphical
models are widely used in domains from biology [1], computer vision [2] and social networks [3].
This paper focuses on the structure learning problem of latent tree-structured Gaussian graphical
models (GGM) in which the node observations are random vectors and a subset of the observations
can be arbitrarily corrupted. This classical problem, in which the variables are clean scalar random
variables, has been studied extensively in the past decades. The first information distance-based
method, NJ, was proposed in [1] to learn the structure of phylogenetic trees. This method makes
use of additive information distances to deduce the existence of hidden nodes and introduce edges
between hidden and observed nodes. RG, proposed in [4], generalizes the information distance-based
methods to make it applicable for the latent graphical models with general structures. Different from
these information distance-based methods, quartet-based methods [5] utilize the relative geometry of
every four nodes to estimate the structure of the whole graph. Although experimental comparisons
of these algorithms were conducted in some works [4, 6, 7], since there is no instance-dependent
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

