Learning latent causal graphs via mixture oracles

Bohdan Kivva
University of Chicago
bkivva@uchicago.edu

Goutham Rajendran
University of Chicago
goutham@uchicago.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of reconstructing a causal graphical model from data in the
presence of latent variables. The main problem of interest is recovering the causal
structure over the latent variables while allowing for general, potentially nonlinear
dependencies. In many practical problems, the dependence between raw observations (e.g. pixels in an image) is much less relevant than the dependence between
certain high-level, latent features (e.g. concepts or objects), and this is the setting of
interest. We provide conditions under which both the latent representations and the
underlying latent causal model are identifiable by a reduction to a mixture oracle.
These results highlight an intriguing connection between the well-studied problem
of learning the order of a mixture model and the problem of learning the bipartite
structure between observables and unobservables. The proof is constructive, and
leads to several algorithms for explicitly reconstructing the full graphical model.
We discuss efficient algorithms and provide experiments illustrating the algorithms
in practice.

1

Introduction

Understanding causal relationships between objects and/or concepts is a core component of human
reasoning, and by extension, a core component of artificial intelligence [40, 53]. Causal relationships
are robust to perturbations, encode invariances in a system, and enable agents to reason effectively
about the effects of their actions in an environment. Broadly speaking, the problem of inferring
causal relationships can be broken down into two main steps: 1) The extraction of high-level causal
features from raw data, and 2) The inference of causal relationships between these high-level features.
From here, one may consider estimating the magnitude of causal effects, the effect of interventions,
reasoning about counterfactuals, etc. Our focus in this paper will be the problem of learning causal
relationships between latent variables, which is closely related to the problem of learning causal
representations [63]. This problem should be contrasted with the equally important problem of causal
inference in the presence of latent confounders [e.g. 3, 18, 35, 68, 72]; see also Remark 2.1.
Causal graphical models [53, 54] provide a natural framework for this problem, and have long been
used to model causal systems with hidden variables [23–26, 58, 59]. It is well-known that in general,
without additional assumptions, a causal graphical model given by a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
is not identifiable in the presence of latent variables [e.g., 53, 71]. In fact, this is a generic property
of nonparametric structural models: Without assumptions, identifiability is impossible, however,
given enough structure, identifiability can be rescued. Examples of this phenomenon include linearity
[3, 6, 15, 28, 78], independence [1, 10, 78], rank [15, 28], sparsity [6], and graphical constraints
[3, 4].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

