Permuton-induced Chinese Restaurant Process
Masahiro Nakano, Yasuhiro Fujiwara, Akisato Kimura, Takeshi Yamada, Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{masahiro.nakano.pr, yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh, akisato.kimura.xn,
takeshi.yamada.bc, naonori.ueda.fr}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
This paper proposes the permuton-induced Chinese restaurant process (PCRP),
a stochastic process on rectangular partitioning of a matrix. This distribution
is suitable for use as a prior distribution in Bayesian nonparametric relational
model to find hidden clusters in matrices and network data. Our main contribution
is to introduce the notion of permutons into the well-known Chinese restaurant
process (CRP) for sequence partitioning: a permuton is a probability measure on
[0, 1] × [0, 1] and can be regarded as a geometric interpretation of the scaling limit
of permutations. Specifically, we extend the model that the table order of CRPs has
a random geometric arrangement on [0, 1] × [0, 1] drawn from the permuton. By
analogy with the relationship between the stick-breaking process (SBP) and CRP
for the infinite mixture model of a sequence, this model can be regarded as a multidimensional extension of CRP paired with the block-breaking process (BBP), which
has been recently proposed as a multi-dimensional extension of SBP. While BBP
always has an infinite number of redundant intermediate variables, PCRP can be
composed of varying size intermediate variables in a data-driven manner depending
on the size and quality of the observation data. Experiments show that PCRP can
improve the prediction performance in relational data analysis by reducing the local
optima and slow mixing problems compared with the conventional BNP models
because the local transitions of PCRP in Markov chain Monte Carlo inference are
more flexible than the previous models.

1

Introduction

The multi-dimensional extension of the Chinese restaurant process (CRP) [9, 50] for infinitely
exchangeable random arrays is one of the most significant unsolved issues in the field of Bayesian
nonparametrics and its applications to machine learning. The standard CRP is the stochastic process
representing random clustering of a sequence using the metaphor of customers sitting at tables.
Typically, it is often used when we need to cluster a sequence where the number of clusters is
unknown in advance. The magic of CRP is that it requires only a finite number of parameters for finite
data; nevertheless, the model itself has infinite representational power. Specifically, it is known that a
mixture model using CRP is theoretically equivalent to the Dirichlet process mixture model (DPMM)
[51, 27] represented by the stick-breaking process (SBP) [57] with an infinite number of parameters.
The relationship between the two DPMM representations, CRP and SBP, can be explained by whether
the intermediate random variables in de Finetti’s representation theorem [28, 37] are marginalized
out or not (Figure 1, (a) and (b)). CRP has contributed greatly to the development of the BNP
machine learning field in the sense that it has made BNP not only theoretical but also practical. It
enables models with infinite representational power to be accurately simulated on a computer with a
finite number of parameters without any approximation (e.g., finite truncation). In fact, a variety of
extensions of CRP have been studied, including the nested CRP [16, 17, 60], the Chinese restaurant
franchise [61], the tree-structured CRP [6], the distance-dependent CRP [14, 15, 31]. However, in the
development of CRP, the extension to BNP relational models has remained a historical conundrum.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

