SyMetric: Measuring the Quality
of Learnt Hamiltonian Dynamics Inferred from Vision

Irina Higgins
DeepMind
London
irinah@deepmind.com

Peter Wirnsberger
DeepMind
London
pewi@deepmind.com

Andrew Jaegle
DeepMind
London
drewjaegle@deepmind.com

Aleksandar Botev
DeepMind
London
botev@deepmind.com

Abstract
A recently proposed class of models attempts to learn latent dynamics from
high-dimensional observations, like images, using priors informed by Hamiltonian
mechanics. While these models have important potential applications in areas like
robotics or autonomous driving, there is currently no good way to evaluate their
performance: existing methods primarily rely on image reconstruction quality,
which does not always reflect the quality of the learnt latent dynamics. In this work,
we empirically highlight the problems with the existing measures and develop
a set of new measures, including a binary indicator of whether the underlying
Hamiltonian dynamics have been faithfully captured, which we call Symplecticity
Metric or SyMetric. Our measures take advantage of the known properties of
Hamiltonian dynamics and are more discriminative of the model’s ability to
capture the underlying dynamics than reconstruction error. Using SyMetric, we
identify a set of architectural choices that significantly improve the performance
of a previously proposed model for inferring latent dynamics from pixels, the
Hamiltonian Generative Network (HGN). Unlike the original HGN, the new HGN++
is able to discover an interpretable phase space with physically meaningful latents on
some datasets. Furthermore, it is stable for significantly longer rollouts on a diverse
range of 13 datasets, producing rollouts of essentially infinite length both forward
and backwards in time with no degradation in quality on a subset of the datasets.1

1

Introduction

If you want to understand how the world will change, a good place to start is with simple physical
principles, such as the laws of motion. One way to achieve good performance in predicting dynamics
forward and backward in time is by building a model using the Hamiltonian formalism from classical
mechanics. This formalism aims to model physical systems which conserve energy. Apart from real
physical problems, other important dynamical systems can also be modelled using this formulation,
including GAN optimisation [35, 38, 34, 36], multi-agent learning in non-transitive zero-sum games
[5, 6, 53], or the transformations induced by flows in generative models [41]. While many naturally
observed dynamics do not preserve energy – for example, energy is often added or dissipated – they can
1
The code for reproducing all results is available on
deepmind-research/tree/master/physics_inspired_models.

https://github.com/deepmind/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

