Mixability made efficient:
Fast online multiclass logistic regression

Rémi Jézéquel
INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École
Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
Paris, France
remi.jezequel@inria.fr

Pierre Gaillard
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
Grenoble, France
pierre.gaillard@inria.fr

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École
Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
Paris, France
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Abstract
Mixability has been shown to be a powerful tool to obtain algorithms with optimal
regret. However, the resulting methods often suffer from high computational
complexity which has reduced their practical applicability. For example, in the
case of multiclass logistic regression, the aggregating forecaster (Foster et al.
(2018)) achieves a regret of O(log(Bn)) whereas Online Newton Step achieves
O(eB log(n)) obtaining a double exponential gain in B (a bound on the norm of
comparative functions). However, this high statistical performance is at the price
of a prohibitive computational complexity O(n37 ).
In this paper, we use quadratic surrogates to make aggregating forecasters more
efficient. We show that the resulting algorithm has still high statistical performance
for a large class of losses. In particular, we derive an algorithm for multi-class
logistic regression with a regret bounded by O(B log(n)) and a computational
complexity of only O(n4 ).

1

Introduction

In online learning, a learner sequentially interacts with an environment and tries to learn based on
data observed on the fly (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi (2006), Hazan et al. (2016)). More formally, at
each iteration t ≥ 1, the learner receives an input xt in some space X ; makes a prediction ybt in a
decision domain Yb and the environment reveals the output yt ∈ Y. The inputs xt and the outputs yt
are sequentially chosen by the environment and can be arbitrary. No stochastic assumption (except
boundedness) on the data sequence (xt , yt )1≤t≤n is made. The accuracy of a prediction ybt ∈ Yb at
instant t ≥ 1 for the outcome yt ∈ Y is measured through a loss function ` : Yb × Y → R. The
learner aims at minimizing his cumulative regret
Rn (f ) =

n
X

n
 X

` ybt , yt −
` f (xt ), yt ,

t=1

t=1

(1)

with respect to any function f ∈ F in a reference class. All along this paper, we will consider
parametric class of functions fθ indexed by θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rd . We will also assume convexity of the
loss according to index θ, which we denote `x,y : θ 7→ `(fθ (x), y) for any (x, y) ∈ X × Y. In this
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

