Spectrum-to-Kernel Translation for Accurate Blind
Image Super-Resolution

Guangpin Tao1∗
Yun Cao2
1

Xiaozhong Ji1,2

Wenzhuo Wang1

Tong Lu1†

Shuo Chen3

Donghao Luo2

Chuming Lin2
Ying Tai2

National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Tencent Youtu Lab 3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project

2

Abstract
Deep-learning based Super-Resolution (SR) methods have exhibited promising
performance under non-blind setting where blur kernel is known. However, blur
kernels of Low-Resolution (LR) images in different practical applications are
usually unknown. It may lead to significant performance drop when degradation
process of training images deviates from that of real images. In this paper, we
propose a novel blind SR framework to super-resolve LR images degraded by
arbitrary blur kernel with accurate kernel estimation in frequency domain. To our
best knowledge, this is the first deep learning method which conducts blur kernel
estimation in frequency domain. Specifically, we first demonstrate that feature
representation in frequency domain is more conducive for blur kernel reconstruction
than in spatial domain. Next, we present a Spectrum-to-Kernel (S2K) network to
estimate general blur kernels in diverse forms. We use a Conditional GAN (CGAN)
combined with SR-oriented optimization target to learn the end-to-end translation
from degraded images’ spectra to unknown kernels. Extensive experiments on both
synthetic and real-world images demonstrate that our proposed method sufficiently
reduces blur kernel estimation error, thus enables the off-the-shelf non-blind SR
methods to work under blind setting effectively, and achieves superior performance
over state-of-the-art blind SR methods, averagely by 1.39dB, 0.48dB on commom
blind SR setting (with Gaussian kernels) for scales 2× and 4×, respectively.

1

Introduction

Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is a low-level visual task to recover High-Resolution (HR) images from its degraded Low-Resolution (LR) counterparts. Deep learning methods have significantly
promoted SR research and achieved remarkable results on benchmarks [16, 26, 27, 13, 29, 35, 17].
Most of these works are based on the degradation model assuming that the LR image is down-sampled
with blur kernel (e.g., bicubic kernel) and additional noise from its HR source. Recent studies [6, 11]
show that pre-trained SR model is sensitive to the degradation of LR image. The mismatch for
Gaussian kernels may cause SR result either over-sharpening or over-smoothing, and for motion
kernels, it may bring unpleasant jitters and artifacts. Blind SR is to super-resolve a single LR image
with its kernel unknown. It has attracted more and more attention due to its close relationship with
the real scene. However, compared with the advanced non-blind SR researches, existing blind SR
methods are insufficient to meet the needs of various degradation processes in real general scenes.
∗
†

Work done during an intership at Tencent Youtu Lab.
Corresponding author (lutong@nju.edu.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

