PettingZoo: A Standard API for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

J. K. Terry∗ †
j.k.terry@swarmlabs.com
Mario Jayakumar†
mariojay@umd.edu
Luis Santos§
lss@umd.edu

Benjamin Black∗ †
benjamin.black@swarmlabs.com
Ananth Hari‡
ahari1@umd.edu

Rodrigo Perez ¶
rlazcano@umd.edu

Clemens Dieffendahl k
dieffendahl@campus.tu-berlin.de

Nathaniel Grammel†
ngrammel@umd.edu

Ryan Sullivan∗ †
ryan.sullivan@swarmlabs.com
Caroline Horsch∗ †
caroline.horsch@swarmlabs.com

Niall L. Williams†
niallw@umd.edu

Yashas Lokesh†
yashloke@umd.edu

Praveen Ravi†
pravi@umd.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces the PettingZoo library and the accompanying Agent Environment Cycle (“AEC”) games model. PettingZoo is a library of diverse sets of
multi-agent environments with a universal, elegant Python API. PettingZoo was
developed with the goal of accelerating research in Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (“MARL”), by making work more interchangeable, accessible and reproducible akin to what OpenAI’s Gym library did for single-agent reinforcement
learning. PettingZoo’s API, while inheriting many features of Gym, is unique
amongst MARL APIs in that it’s based around the novel AEC games model. We
argue, in part through case studies on major problems in popular MARL environments, that the popular game models are poor conceptual models of games
commonly used in MARL and accordingly can promote confusing bugs that are
hard to detect, and that the AEC games model addresses these problems.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has been behind many of the most publicized achievements of modern machine learning — AlphaGo Zero [Silver et al., 2017], OpenAI Five [OpenAI,
2018], AlphaStar [Vinyals et al., 2019]. These achievements motivated a boom in MARL research,
with Google Scholar indexing 9,480 new papers discussing multi-agent reinforcement learning in
2020 alone. Despite this boom, conducting research in MARL remains a significant engineering
∗

Swarm Labs
Department of Computer Science | University of Maryland, College Park
‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering | University of Maryland, College Park
§
Department of Mechanical Engineering | University of Maryland, College Park
¶
Maryland Robotics Center | University of Maryland, College Park
k
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science | Technical University of Berlin
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

