Training for the Future: A Simple Gradient
Interpolation Loss to Generalize Along Time

Anshul Nasery ∗ †

Soumyadeep Thakur∗
Vihari Piratla
Abir De
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay

Sunita Sarawagi

Abstract
In several real world applications, machine learning models are deployed to make
predictions on data whose distribution changes gradually along time, leading to
a drift between the train and test distributions. Such models are often re-trained
on new data periodically, and they hence need to generalize to data not too far
into the future. In this context, there is much prior work on enhancing temporal
generalization, e.g. continuous transportation of past data, kernel smoothed timesensitive parameters and more recently, adversarial learning of time-invariant
features. However, these methods share several limitations, e.g, poor scalability,
training instability, and dependence on unlabeled data from the future. Responding
to the above limitations, we propose a simple method that starts with a model with
time-sensitive parameters but regularizes its temporal complexity using a Gradient
Interpolation (GI) loss. GI allows the decision boundary to change along time
and can still prevent overfitting to the limited training time snapshots by allowing
task-specific control over changes along time. We compare our method to existing
baselines on multiple real-world datasets, which show that GI outperforms more
complicated generative and adversarial approaches on the one hand, and simpler
gradient regularization methods on the other.

1

Introduction

Many organizations operate their machine learning pipeline as follows: collect labeled data based on
day-to-day operations e.g. user-clicks for a recommendation model; periodically (say every ∆ = 48
hours) train the model on the data collected from the past; deploy the model to serve requests of the
next ∆ period; repeat the cycle. Real-world examples of such usage include recommendation models
for e-retails, loan approval models in banks, regression models to forecast future popularity of media
content, classification of malicious websites, and activity recognition models from sensor data.
A key motivation behind such periodic retraining is the implicit knowledge that the data distribution
is not stationary, requiring a revision of the decision boundary with time. While incorporating fresh
data in training does make the trained model more current, we investigate if we can improve the
training even further. In particular, when training the model at a time t, we know that the model
will not be deployed on data samples in the training interval, but on data from the immediate future
[t, t + ∆] which could differ from even the most recent training data. Our goal in this paper is to use
this knowledge more centrally to train a model tailored to the intended deployment period.
Formal Problem Statement. We consider prediction tasks over an input space X and output space
Y where the joint distribution P (X , Y) evolves with time. The prediction model should therefore
be conditioned on time as P (y|x, t) for x ∈ X , y ∈ Y, and time stamp t. During training we are
provided with labeled data from T time snapshots t1 ≤ t2 ... ≤ tT . Call these D1 , D2 , . . . DT where
each Ds = {(xi , yi ) : i = 1 . . . ns } is assumed to be sampled from P (x, y|ts ). The trained model
∗
†

Equal Contribution
anshulnasery@gmail.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

