Information is Power:
Intrinsic Control via Information Capture

Nicholas Rhinehart
UC Berkeley

Jenny Wang
UC Berkeley

Danijar Hafner
University of Toronto
Google Research, Brain Team

Glen Berseth
UC Berkeley
Chelsea Finn
Stanford University

John D. Co-Reyes
UC Berkeley
Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Humans and animals explore their environment and acquire useful skills even in
the absence of clear goals, exhibiting intrinsic motivation. The study of intrinsic
motivation in artificial agents is concerned with the following question: what is a
good general-purpose objective for an agent? We study this question in dynamic
partially-observed environments, and argue that a compact and general learning
objective is to minimize the entropy of the agent’s state visitation estimated using a
latent state-space model. This objective induces an agent to both gather information
about its environment, corresponding to reducing uncertainty, and to gain control
over its environment, corresponding to reducing the unpredictability of future
world states. We instantiate this approach as a deep reinforcement learning agent
equipped with a deep variational Bayes filter. We find that our agent learns to
discover, represent, and exercise control of dynamic objects in a variety of partiallyobserved environments sensed with visual observations without extrinsic reward.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning offers a framework for learning control policies that maximize a given
measure of reward – ideally, rewards that incentivize simple high-level goals, such as survival,
accumulating a particular resource, or accomplishing some long-term objective. However, extrinsic
rewards may be insufficiently informative to encourage an agent to explore and understand its
environment, particularly in partially observed settings where the agent has a limited view of
its environment. A generalist agent should instead acquire an understanding of its environment
before a specific objective or reward is provided. This goal motivates the study of self-supervised or
unsupervised reinforcement learning: algorithms that provide the agent with an intrinsically-grounded
drive to acquire understanding and control of its environment in the absence of an extrinsic reward
signal. Agents trained with intrinsic reward signals might accomplish tasks specified via simple and
sparse rewards more quickly, or may acquire broadly useful skills that could be adapted to specific
task objectives. Our aim is to design an embodied agent and a general-purpose intrinsic reward
signal that leads to the agent controlling partially-observed environments when equipped only with a
high-dimensional sensor (camera) and no prior knowledge.
A large body of prior methods for self-supervised reinforcement learning focus on attaining coverage,
typically through novelty-seeking or skill-discovery. As argued in prior work [18, 16, 14, 6], a compelling alternative to coverage suited to complex and dynamic environments is to minimize surprise,
which incentivizes an agent to control aspects of its environment to achieve homeostasis within it –
i.e. constructing and maintaining a niche where it can reliably remain despite external perturbations.
We generally expect agents that succeed at minimizing surprise in complex environments to develop
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

