Batch Active Learning at Scale

Gui Citovsky, Giulia DeSalvo, Claudio Gentile, Lazaros Karydas,
Anand Rajagopalan, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
{gcitovsky,giuliad,cgentile,lkary,anandbr,rostami,sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
The ability to train complex and highly effective models often requires an abundance of training data, which can easily become a bottleneck in cost, time, and
computational resources. Batch active learning, which adaptively issues batched
queries to a labeling oracle, is a common approach for addressing this problem.
The practical benefits of batch sampling come with the downside of less adaptivity
and the risk of sampling redundant examples within a batch – a risk that grows
with the batch size. In this work, we analyze an efficient active learning algorithm,
which focuses on the large batch setting. In particular, we show that our sampling
method, which combines notions of uncertainty and diversity, easily scales to batch
sizes (100K-1M) several orders of magnitude larger than used in previous studies and provides significant improvements in model training efficiency compared
to recent baselines. Finally, we provide an initial theoretical analysis, proving
label complexity guarantees for a related sampling method, which we show is
approximately equivalent to our sampling method in specific settings.

1

Introduction

Training highly effective models for complex tasks often hinges on the abundance of training data.
Acquiring this data can easily become a bottleneck in cost, time, and computational resources. One
major approach for addressing this problem is active learning, where labels for training examples are
sampled selectively and adaptively to more efficiently train the desired model over several iterations.
The adaptive nature of active learning algorithms, which allows for improved data-efficiency, comes
at the cost of frequent retraining of the model and calling the labeling oracle. Both of these costs
can be significant. For example, many modern deep networks can take days or weeks to train and
require hundreds of CPU/GPU hours. At the same time, training human labelers to become proficient
in potentially nuanced labeling tasks require significant investment from both the designers of the
labeling task and the raters themselves. A sufficiently large set of queries should be queued in order
to justify these costs.
To address these overhead costs, previous works have developed algorithms for the batch active
learning setting, where label requests are batched and model updates are made less frequently,
reducing the number of active learning iterations. Of course, there is a trade-off, and the practical
benefits of batch sampling come with the downside of less adaptivity and the risk of sampling
redundant or otherwise less effective training examples within a batch. Batch active learning methods
directly combat these risks in several different ways, for example, by incorporating diversity inducing
regularizers or explicitly optimizing over the choice of samples within a batch to optimize some
notion of information.
However, as the size of datasets grows to include hundreds of thousands and even millions of labeled
examples (cf. Deng et al. [2009], Krasin et al. [2017], Van Horn et al. [2018]), we expect the active
learning batch sizes to grow accordingly as well. The challenge with very large batch sizes is two-fold:
first, the risks associated with reduced adaptivity continue to be compounded and, second, the batch
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

