Learning Conjoint Attentions for Graph Neural Nets

Tiantian He1,2 Yew-Soon Ong1,2 Lu Bai1,2
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
2
DSAIR, Nanyang Technological University
{He_Tiantian,Bai_Lu}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, Ong_Yew_Soon@hq.a-star.edu.sg
{tiantian.he,bailu,asysong}@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
In this paper, we present Conjoint Attentions (CAs), a class of novel learningto-attend strategies for graph neural networks (GNNs). Besides considering the
layer-wise node features propagated within the GNN, CAs can additionally incorporate various structural interventions, such as node cluster embedding, and
higher-order structural correlations that can be learned outside of GNN, when
computing attention scores. The node features that are regarded as significant by
the conjoint criteria are therefore more likely to be propagated in the GNN. Given
the novel Conjoint Attention strategies, we then propose Graph conjoint attention
networks (CATs) that can learn representations embedded with significant latent
features deemed by the Conjoint Attentions. Besides, we theoretically validate
the discriminative capacity of CATs. CATs utilizing the proposed Conjoint Attention strategies have been extensively tested in well-established benchmarking
datasets and comprehensively compared with state-of-the-art baselines. The obtained notable performance demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed Conjoint
Attentions.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown much success in the learning of graph structured data.
Amongst these noteworthy GNNs, attention-based GNNs [33] have drawn increasing interest lately,
and have been applied to solve a plethora of real-world problems competently, including node
classification [17, 33], image segmentation [35], and social recommendations [30].
Empirical attention mechanisms adopted by GNNs aim to leverage the node features (node embeddings) to compute the normalized correlations between pairs of nodes that are observed to connect.
Treating normalized correlations (attention scores/coefficients) as the relative weights between node
pairs, attention-based GNN typically performs a weighted sum of node features which are subsequently propagated to higher layers. Compared with other GNNs, especially those that aggregate
node features with predefined strategies [1, 17, 19], attention-based GNNs provide a dynamical
way for feature aggregation, which enables highly correlated features from neighboring nodes to
be propagated in the multi-layer neural architecture. Representations that embed with multi-layer
correlated features are consequently learned by attention-based GNNs, and can be used for various
downstream tasks.
Though effective, present empirical graph attention has several shortcomings when aggregating
node features. First, the computation of attention coefficients is limited solely to the correlations of
internal factors, i.e., layer-wise node features within the neural nets. External factors such as cluster
structure and higher-order structural similarities, which comprise heterogeneous node-node relevance
have remained underexplored to be positively incorporated into the computation of more purposeful
attention scores. Second, the empirical attention heavily leaning on the node features may cause
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

