Learning Student-Friendly Teacher Networks for
Knowledge Distillation
Dae Young Park∗,1 , Moon-Hyun Cha1 , Changwook Jeong1 , Dae Sin Kim1 , and Bohyung Han∗,2
1
DIT Center, Samsung Electronics, Korea
ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
{p30.daeyoung, moonhyun.cha, chris.jeong, daesin.kim}@samsung.com
bhhan@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract
We propose a novel knowledge distillation approach to facilitate the transfer of
dark knowledge from a teacher to a student. Contrary to most of the existing
methods that rely on effective training of student models given pretrained teachers,
we aim to learn the teacher models that are friendly to students and, consequently,
more appropriate for knowledge transfer. In other words, at the time of optimizing
a teacher model, the proposed algorithm learns the student branches jointly to
obtain student-friendly representations. Since the main goal of our approach lies
in training teacher models and the subsequent knowledge distillation procedure
is straightforward, most of the existing knowledge distillation methods can adopt
this technique to improve the performance of diverse student models in terms of
accuracy and convergence speed. The proposed algorithm demonstrates outstanding
accuracy in several well-known knowledge distillation techniques with various
combinations of teacher and student models even in the case that their architectures
are heterogeneous and there is no prior knowledge about student models at the time
of training teacher networks.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation [1] is a well-known technique to learn compact deep neural network models
with competitive accuracy, where a smaller network (student) is trained to simulate the representations
of a larger one (teacher). The popularity of knowledge distillation is mainly due to its simplicity and
generality; it is straightforward to learn a student model based on a teacher and there is no restriction
about the network architectures of both models. The main goal of most approaches is how to transfer
dark knowledge to student models effectively, given predefined and pretrained teacher networks.
Although knowledge distillation is a promising and convenient method, it sometimes fails to achieve
satisfactory performance in terms of accuracy. This is partly because the model capacity of a student is
too limited compared to that of a teacher and knowledge distillation algorithms are suboptimal [2, 3].
In addition to this reason, we claim that the consistency of teacher and student features is critical
to knowledge transfer and the inappropriate representation learning of a teacher often leads to the
suboptimality of knowledge distillation.
We are interested in making a teacher network hold better transferable knowledge by providing the
teacher with a snapshot of the student model at the time of its training. We take advantage of the
typical structures of convolutional neural networks with multiple blocks and make the representations
of each block in teachers easy to be transferred to students. The proposed approach aims to train
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

