Introspective Distillation for Robust Question
Answering

Yulei Niu
Nanyang Technological University
yn.yuleiniu@gmail.com

Hanwang Zhang
Nanyang Technological University
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Question answering (QA) models are well-known to exploit data bias, e.g., the
language prior in visual QA and the position bias in reading comprehension. Recent
debiasing methods achieve good out-of-distribution (OOD) generalizability with
a considerable sacrifice of the in-distribution (ID) performance. Therefore, they
are only applicable in domains where the test distribution is known in advance. In
this paper, we present a novel debiasing method called Introspective Distillation
(IntroD) to make the best of both worlds for QA. Our key technical contribution
is to blend the inductive bias of OOD and ID by introspecting whether a training
sample fits in the factual ID world or the counterfactual OOD one. Experiments on
visual QA datasets VQA v2, VQA-CP, and reading comprehension dataset SQuAD
demonstrate that our proposed IntroD maintains the competitive OOD performance
compared to other debiasing methods, while sacrificing little or even achieving
better ID performance compared to the non-debiasing ones.

Introduction

Ensemble-based Methods
Baseline
Ours

ID Accuracy (VQA v2 val)

1

UpDn [4]

Debiasing Methods

Ours

CFVQA+IntroD

CSS+IntroD
Question answering (QA), which requires machines to
LMH+IntroD
S-MRL [6]
answer questions given a context, is one of the most
CFVQA [25]
fundamental AI tasks. Popular contexts are vision (e.g.,
image for VQA [5]) and natural language (e.g., pasCSS [7]
LMH [11]
sage for extractive QA [27]). A common observation is
OOD Accuracy (VQA-CP v2 test)
that QA models prefer to over-exploit the training bias,
which bypasses the context comprehension for a short- Figure 1: Recent debiasing methods
cut answer. For example, by only using the linguistic achieve high OOD accuracy with the sacricorrelations between questions and answers, VQA mod- fice of ID accuracy. Our proposed IntroD
els can answer most questions correctly [16, 2, 5, 20]. makes the best of both worlds.
Similarly, extractive QA models may use the spurious
positional cues to locate the answer in the passage [22]. As a result, QA models that have already
achieved strong in-distribution (ID) performance may inevitably fail in out-of-distribution (OOD)
test scenarios, regardless of the scale of training data and models [14, 22, 37].

Recently, several debiasing methods aim to close the gap between the ID and OOD performances [6,
11, 7, 25]. However, many of them hold the assumption that the training and test distributions are
very different or even reversed, e.g., if there are more “yes” answers in training, there must be more
“no” answers in testing. As a result, these methods encounter a severe performance drop under the
ID evaluation, although they significantly outperform non-debiasing baselines in terms of OOD
performance. An interesting observation from Figure 1 is that non-debiasing methods (circles) obtain
high ID but low OOD performance, while debiasing methods (squares) achieve high OOD but low
ID performance. This observation motivates us to ask: can we make the best of both worlds?
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

