USCO-Solver: Solving Undetermined Stochastic
Combinatorial Optimization Problems

Guangmo Tong
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
amotong@udel.edu

Abstract
Real-world decision-making systems are often subject to uncertainties that have to
be resolved through observational data. Therefore, we are frequently confronted
with combinatorial optimization problems of which the objective function is unknown and thus has to be debunked using empirical evidence. In contrast to the
common practice that relies on a learning-and-optimization strategy, we consider
the regression between combinatorial spaces, aiming to infer high-quality optimization solutions from samples of input-solution pairs – without the need to learn
the objective function. Our main deliverable is a universal solver that is able to
handle abstract undetermined stochastic combinatorial optimization problems. For
learning foundations, we present learning-error analysis under the PAC-Bayesian
framework using a new margin-based analysis. In empirical studies, we demonstrate our design using proof-of-concept experiments, and compare it with other
methods that are potentially applicable. Overall, we obtain highly encouraging
experimental results for several classic combinatorial problems on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization problems are not only of great theoretical interest but also central to
enormous applications. Traditional research assumes that the problem settings (i.e., objective function)
are completely known [1], but the reality is that the underlying system is often very complicated
and only partial knowledge (from historical data) is provided. In a recommendation system, the
item-user similarities could be unknown [2], which makes it impossible to compute the optimal
recommendation scheme. In the study of wireless communications, the backbone network depends
on stochastic node connections [3], incurring extra difficulties in designing management strategies.
In the most general sense, we can formalize such scenarios by assuming that the objective function
is governed by a configuration space associated with an unknown distribution, where our goal is
to maximize the expected objective. For example, the configuration space may specify possible
item-user similarities or candidate network structures. We call such problems as undetermined
stochastic combinatorial optimization (USCO) problems.
Since the distribution of the configuration space is unknown, one can adopt the learning-andoptimization strategy [4], where the unknown distribution is first learned from data so that the
subsequent optimization problem can be solved using existing methods. While such a strategy is
natural and proved successful in several applications [5], it may require a large amount of data to
learn an excessive number of parameters – for example, the weight between each pair of nodes in a
network or the similarity between each pair of user and item in a recommendation system. In the
worst case, we may not even have access to such kind of data (due to, for example, privacy issues
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

