Provable Guarantees for Self-Supervised Deep
Learning with Spectral Contrastive Loss
Jeff Z. HaoChen
Stanford University

Colin Wei
Stanford University

Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University

Abstract
Recent works in self-supervised learning have advanced the state-of-the-art by
relying on the contrastive learning paradigm, which learns representations by
pushing positive pairs, or similar examples from the same class, closer together
while keeping negative pairs far apart. Despite the empirical successes, theoretical
foundations are limited – prior analyses assume conditional independence of the
positive pairs given the same class label, but recent empirical applications use
heavily correlated positive pairs (i.e., data augmentations of the same image). Our
work analyzes contrastive learning without assuming conditional independence of
positive pairs using a novel concept of the augmentation graph on data. Edges in
this graph connect augmentations of the same datapoint, and ground-truth classes
naturally form connected sub-graphs. We propose a loss that performs spectral
decomposition on the population augmentation graph and can be succinctly written
as a contrastive learning objective on neural net representations. Minimizing this
objective leads to features with provable accuracy guarantees under linear probe
evaluation. By standard generalization bounds, these accuracy guarantees also
hold when minimizing the training contrastive loss. Empirically, the features
learned by our objective can match or outperform several strong baselines on
benchmark vision datasets. In all, this work provides the first provable analysis
for contrastive learning where guarantees for linear probe evaluation can apply to
realistic empirical settings.

1

Introduction

Recent empirical breakthroughs have demonstrated the effectiveness of self-supervised learning,
which trains representations on unlabeled data with surrogate losses and self-defined supervision
signals [4, 6, 10, 14, 23, 24, 35, 38, 41, 42, 50–52]. Self-supervision signals in computer vision are
often defined by using data augmentation to produce multiple views of the same image. For example,
the recent contrastive learning objectives [3, 12, 13, 15, 22] encourage closer representations for
augmentations (views) of the same natural data than for randomly sampled pairs of data.
Despite the empirical successes, there is a limited theoretical understanding of why self-supervised
losses learn representations that can be adapted to downstream tasks, for example, using linear
heads. Recent mathematical analyses by Arora et al. [3], Lee et al. [28], Tosh et al. [44, 45] provide
guarantees under the assumption that two views are somewhat independent conditioned on the label.
However, the pair of augmented examples used in practical algorithms usually exhibit a strong
correlation, even conditioned on the label. For instance, two augmentations of the same dog image
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

