Bandits with Knapsacks beyond the Worst Case
Karthik Abinav Sankararaman
Facebook AI, Menlo Park
karthikabinavs@gmail.com

Aleksandrs Slivkins
Microsoft Research, New York City
slivkins@microsoft.com

Abstract
Bandits with Knapsacks (BwK) is a general model for multi-armed bandits under supply/budget constraints. While worst-case regret bounds for BwK are wellunderstood, we present three results that go beyond the worst-case perspective.
First, we provide upper and lower bounds which amount to a full characterization
for logarithmic, instance-dependent regret rates. Second, we consider “simple
regret" in BwK, which tracks algorithm’s performance in a given round, and prove
that it is small in all but a few rounds. Third, we provide a general “reduction"
from BwK to bandits which takes advantage of some known helpful structure, and
apply this reduction to combinatorial semi-bandits, linear contextual bandits, and
multinomial-logit bandits. Our results build on the BwK algorithm from Agrawal
and Devanur [3], providing new analyses thereof.

1

Introduction

We study multi-armed bandit problems with supply or budget constraints. Multi-armed bandits
is a simple model for exploration-exploitation tradeoff, i.e., the tension between acquiring new
information and making optimal decisions. It is an active research area, spanning computer science,
operations research, and economics. Supply/budget constraints arise in many realistic applications,
e.g., a seller who dynamically adjusts the prices or product assortment may have a limited inventory,
and an algorithm that optimizes ad placement is constrained by the advertisers’ budgets. Other
motivating examples concern repeated auctions, crowdsourcing markets, and network routing.
We consider a general model called Bandits with Knapsacks (BwK), which subsumes the examples
mentioned above. There are d 2 resources that are consumed over time, one of which is time itself.
Each resource i starts out with budget Bi . In each round t, the algorithm chooses an action (arm)
a = at from a fixed set of K actions. The outcome is a vector in [0, 1]d+1 : it consists of a reward
and consumption of each resource. This vector is drawn independently from some distribution over
[0, 1]d+1 , which depends on the chosen arm but not on the round, and is not known to the algorithm.
The algorithm observes bandit feedback, i.e., only the outcome of the chosen arm. The algorithm
stops at a known time horizon T , or when the total consumption of some resource exceeds its budget.
The goal is to maximize the total reward, denoted REW.
The presence of supply/budget constraints makes the problem much more challenging. First, algorithm’s choices constrain what it can do in the future. Second, the algorithm is no longer looking
for arms with maximal expected per-round reward (because such arms may consume too much
resources). Third, the best fixed distribution over arms can be much better than the best fixed arm.
Accordingly, we compete with the best fixed distribution benchmark: the total expected reward of the
best distribution, denoted OPTFD . All this complexity is already present even when d = 2, i.e., when
there is only one resource other than time, and the minimal budget is B = mini Bi = ⌦(T ).
BwK were introduced in [14, 16] and extensively
p studied since then. The optimal worst-case regret
rate is well-understood. In particular, it is Õ( KT ) when B = ⌦(T ).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

