Active Assessment of Prediction Services as Accuracy
Surface Over Attribute Combinations
Vihari Piratla∗

Soumen Chakrabarty
Sunita Sarawagi
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay

Abstract
Our goal is to evaluate the accuracy of a black-box classification model, not as
a single aggregate on a given test data distribution, but as a surface over a large
number of combinations of attributes characterizing multiple test data distributions.
Such attributed accuracy measures become important as machine learning models
get deployed as a service, where the training data distribution is hidden from
clients, and different clients may be interested in diverse regions of the data
distribution. We present Attributed Accuracy Assay (AAA) — a Gaussian Process
(GP)-based probabilistic estimator for such an accuracy surface. Each attribute
combination, called an ‘arm’, is associated with a Beta density from which the
service’s accuracy is sampled. We expect the GP to smooth the parameters of
the Beta density over related arms to mitigate sparsity. We show that obvious
application of GPs cannot address the challenge of heteroscedastic uncertainty over
a huge attribute space that is sparsely and unevenly populated. In response, we
present two enhancements: pooling sparse observations, and regularizing the scale
parameter of the Beta densities. After introducing these innovations, we establish
the effectiveness of AAA in terms of both its estimation accuracy and exploration
efficiency, through extensive experiments and analysis. Our code and dataset can
be found at: https://github.com/vihari/AAA.

1

Introduction

Increasing concentration of big data and computing resources has resulted in widespread adoption of
machine learning as a service (MLaaS). The best-performing NLP, speech, image and video recognition tools are now provided as network services. MLaaS comes with few accuracy specifications
or service level agreements, perhaps only leaderboard numbers from benchmarks that may not be
closely related to most clients’ deployment data distributions. The client, therefore, finds it difficult
to choose the best provider without extensive pilot trials [1]. Different clients may need to deploy the
service on very different data distributions, with possibly widely different accuracy.
In such circumstances, we propose that a service provider, or a service standardization agency, publish
the accuracy of the classifier, not as one or few aggregate numbers, but as a surface defined on a space
of input instance attributes that capture the variability of consumer expectations. Indoor/outdoor,
day/night, urban/rural may be attributes of input images for visual object recognition tasks. Speaker
age, gender, ethnicity/accent may be attributes of input audio for speech recognition tasks. We call
a combination of attributes in their Cartesian space an arm (borrowing from bandit terminology)2 .
The labeled instances used by the service provider may not represent or cover well the space of
attributes of interest to subscribers. Labeled data may be proprietary and inaccessible to prospective
consumers and standardization agencies. Whoever estimates the accuracy surface, therefore, needs to
∗
2

vihari@cse.iitb.ac.in
Figure 1 shows an example of diverse accuracy over arms.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

