An Improved Analysis of Gradient Tracking
for Decentralized Machine Learning

Anastasia Koloskova
EPFL
anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch

Tao Lin
EPFL
tao.lin@epfl.ch

Sebastian U. Stich
EPFL∗
sebastian.stich@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider decentralized machine learning over a network where the training data
is distributed across n agents, each of which can compute stochastic model updates
on their local data. The agent’s common goal is to find a model that minimizes the
average of all local loss functions. While gradient tracking (GT) algorithms can
overcome a key challenge, namely accounting for differences between workers’
local data distributions, the known convergence rates for GT algorithms are not
optimal with respect to their dependence on the mixing parameter p (related to the
spectral gap of the connectivity matrix).
We provide a tighter analysis of the GT method in the stochastic strongly convex,
convex and non-convex settings. We improve the dependency on p from O(p−2 )
to O(p−1 c−1 ) in the noiseless case and from O(p−3/2 ) to O(p−1/2 c−1 ) in the
general stochastic case, where c ≥ p is related to the negative eigenvalues of the
connectivity matrix (and is a constant in most practical applications). This improvement was possible due to a new proof technique which could be of independent
interest.

1

Introduction

Methods that train machine learning models on decentralized data offer many advantages over
traditional centralized approaches in core aspects such as data ownership, privacy, fault tolerance
and scalability [12, 33]. Many current efforts in this direction come under the banner of federated
learning [17, 29, 28, 12], where a central entity orchestrates the training and collects aggregate
updates from the participating devices. Fully decentralized methods, that do not rely on a central
coordinator and that communicate only with neighbors in an arbitrary communication topology, are
still in their infancy [24, 18].
The work of Lian et al. [24] on decentralized stochastic gradient descent (D-SGD) has spurred the
research on decentralized training methods for machine learning models. This lead to improved
theoretical analyses [16] and to improved practical schemes, such as support for time-varying
topologies [32, 3, 16] and methods with communication compression [45, 51, 15, 47]. One of the
most challenging aspect when training over decentralized data is data-heterogeneity, i.e. training
data that is in a non-IID fashion distributed over the devices (for instance in data-center training) or
generated in non-IID fashion on client devices [21, 13, 22, 23]. For example, the D-SGD method has
been shown to be affected by the heterogenity [16].
In contrast, certain methods can mitigate the impact of heterogeneous data in decentralized optimization. For instance the gradient tracking (GT) methods developed by Lorenzo and Scutari [26] and
Nedić et al. [34], or the later D2 method by Tang et al. [46] which is designed for communication
typologies that remain fixed and do not change over time.
∗

Current affiliation: CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

