Wisdom of the Crowd Voting: Truthful Aggregation
of Voter Information and Preferences
Grant Schoenebeck
School of Information
University of Michigan
schoeneb@umich.edu

Biaoshuai Tao∗
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
bstao@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider two-alternative elections where voters’ preferences depend on a state
variable that is not directly observable. Each voter receives a private signal that is
correlated to the state variable. Voters may be “contingent" with different preferences in different states; or predetermined with the same preference in every state.
In this setting, even if every voter is a contingent voter, agents voting according to
their private information need not result in the adoption of the universally preferred
alternative, because the signals can be systematically biased.
We present an easy-to-deploy mechanism that elicits and aggregates the private
signals from the voters, and outputs the alternative that is favored by the majority.
In particular, voters truthfully reporting their signals forms a strong Bayes Nash
equilibrium (where no coalition of voters can deviate and receive a better outcome).

1

Introduction

Social choice theory studies how to aggregate participants’ heterogeneous opinions/preferences and
output a collective decision from a set of alternatives. Typically, though not always, it is assumed
that each participant has a clear preference over the alternatives, e.g., a preference order over all the
alternatives, a valuation for each alternative, etc. However, even with only two alternatives, this is not
the typical case for all participants. In addition to the participants who have clear, predetermined
preferences for one alternative over the other, typically there are also contingent participants who
only have partial information on which alternative is “preferable for them” and yet would like to
select the alternative that is “preferable for them.”
A standard example would be an election with two candidates a and b coming from political parties
A and B respectively. Voters are normally partitioned into three types: some partisans for Party A
prefer candidate a based on his support for the platform of party A; other partisans for Party B prefer
candidate b based on her support for the platform of party B; finally, there are swing voters who are
largely indifferent between the parties’ platforms and would like to elect whichever candidate can
make more progress on non-partisan issues. However, swing voters do not have perfect information
about which candidate is better suited for addressing the non-partisan needs of the community.
Instead, each voter has a hunch of which candidate will perform better on the non-partisan problems
facing the community based on both public information and their private experiences and beliefs.
Additional examples where participants have preferences, but may or may not know what is “preferable for them”, abound. In votes for corporate strategies, for hiring decisions, and for policy decisions
typically some participants would like to select according to some truth they are collectively trying to
A full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03749.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2007256.
∗
corresponding author
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

