Implicit Sparse Regularization:
The Impact of Depth and Early Stopping
Jiangyuan Li
jiangyuanli@tamu.edu
Texas A&M University

Thanh V. Nguyen
thanhng.cs@gmail.com
AWS AI

Chinmay Hegde
chinmay.h@nyu.edu
New York University

Raymond K. W. Wong
raywong@tamu.edu
Texas A&M University

Abstract
In this paper, we study the implicit bias of gradient descent for sparse regression.
We extend results on regression with quadratic parametrization, which amounts to
depth-2 diagonal linear networks, to more general depth-N networks, under more
realistic settings of noise and correlated designs. We show that early stopping is
crucial for gradient descent to converge to a sparse model, a phenomenon that we
call implicit sparse regularization. This result is in sharp contrast to known results
for noiseless and uncorrelated-design cases. We characterize the impact of depth
and early stopping and show that for a general depth parameter N , gradient descent
with early stopping achieves minimax optimal sparse recovery with sufficiently
small initialization w0 and step size ⌘. In particular, we show that increasing depth
enlarges the scale of working initialization and the early-stopping window so that
this implicit sparse regularization effect is more likely to take place.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Central to recent research in learning theory is the insight that the choice of optimization
algorithms plays an important role in model generalization [1, 2, 3]. A widely adopted view is that
(stochastic) gradient descent — the most popular optimization algorithm in machine learning —
exhibits some implicit form of regularization. Indeed for example, in the classical under-determined
least squares setting, gradient descent (with small step size) starting from the origin converges to
the model with minimum Euclidean norm. Similar implicit biases are also observed in deep neural
network training in which the networks typically have many more parameters than the sample size.
There, gradient descent without explicit regularization finds solutions that not only interpolate the
training data points but also generalize well on test sets [2, 4, 5, 6, 7].
This insight, combined with the empirical success stories of deep learning, has sparked significant
interest among theoretical researchers to rigorously understand implicit regularization. The majority
of theoretical results focus on well-understood problems such as regression with linear models
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] and matrix factorization [14, 15, 16, 17], and show that the parametrization (or
architecture) of the model plays a crucial role. For the latter, Gunasekar et al. [15] conjectured that
gradient descent on factorized matrix representations converges to the solution with minimum nuclear
norm. The conjecture was partially proved by Li et al. [16] under the Restricted Isometry Property
(RIP) and the absence of noise. Arora et al. [17] further show the same nuclear-norm implicit bias
using depth-N linear networks (i.e., the matrix variable is factorized into N components).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

