Characterizing the risk of fairwashing
Ulrich Aïvodji
École de Technologie Supérieure ⇤
ulrich.aivodji@etsmtl.ca
Sébastien Gambs
Université du Québec à Montréal
gambs.sebastien@uqam.ca

Hiromi Arai
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
hiromi.arai@riken.jp
Satoshi Hara
Osaka University
satohara@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Fairwashing refers to the risk that an unfair black-box model can be explained by a
fairer model through post-hoc explanation manipulation. In this paper, we investigate the capability of fairwashing attacks by analyzing their fidelity-unfairness
trade-offs. In particular, we show that fairwashed explanation models can generalize beyond the suing group (i.e., data points that are being explained), meaning that
a fairwashed explainer can be used to rationalize subsequent unfair decisions of a
black-box model. We also demonstrate that fairwashing attacks can transfer across
black-box models, meaning that other black-box models can perform fairwashing
without explicitly using their predictions. This generalization and transferability of
fairwashing attacks imply that their detection will be difficult in practice. Finally,
we propose an approach to quantify the risk of fairwashing, which is based on the
computation of the range of the unfairness of high-fidelity explainers.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models are increasingly integrated into the pipeline of high-stakes decision
processes, concerns about their transparency are becoming prominent and difficult to ignore for the
actors deploying them. As a result, post-hoc explanation techniques have recently gained popularity
as they may appear as a potentially viable solution to regain trust in machine learning models’
predictions. More precisely, post-hoc explanation techniques refer to methods used to explain how
black-box ML models produce their outcomes [26, 9]. Current existing techniques for post-hoc
explanations include global and local explanations. In a nutshell, global explanations focus on
explaining the whole logic of the black-box model by training a surrogate model that is interpretable
by design (e.g., linear models, rule-based models or decision trees) while maximizing its fidelity to the
black-box model. In contrast, local explanations aim at explaining a single decision by approximating
the black-box model in the vicinity of the input point through an interpretable model.
However, a growing body of works has recently shown that post-hoc explanation techniques not
only can be misleading [38, 46] but are also vulnerable to adversarial manipulations, wherein an
adversary misleads users’ trust by devising deceiving explanations. This phenomenon has been
demonstrated for a broad range of post-hoc explanation techniques, including global and local
explanations [4, 49], example-based explanations [25], visualization-based explanations [31, 20] and
counterfactual explanations [36]. For instance, in a fairwashing attack [4], the adversary manipulates
the explanations to under-report the unfairness of the black-box models being explained. This attack
can significantly impact individuals who have received a negative outcome following the model’s
prediction while depriving them of the possibility of contesting it.
⇤

Work done while at Université du Québec à Montréal

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

