CLIP-It!
Language-Guided Video Summarization

Medhini Narasimhan Anna Rohrbach Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley
{medhini, anna.rohrbach, trevordarrell}@berkeley.edu

https://medhini.github.io/clip_it
Generic Summary

Query: All the scenes containing restaurants and shopping centers

National Park Day Tour

Query: All water bodies such as lakes, rivers, and waterfalls

Figure 1: We introduce CLIP-It, a language-guided multimodal transformer for generic and query-focused video
summarization. The figure shows results from our method. Given a day-long video of a national park tour, the
generic summary (top) is a video with relevant and diverse keyframes. When using the query “All the scenes
containing restaurants and shopping centers”, the generated query-focused summary includes all the matching
scenes. Similarly, the query “All water bodies such as lakes, rivers, and waterfalls”, yields a short summary
containing all the water bodies present in the video.

Abstract
A generic video summary is an abridged version of a video that conveys the whole
story and features the most important scenes. Yet the importance of scenes in
a video is often subjective, and users should have the option of customizing the
summary by using natural language to specify what is important to them. Further,
existing models for fully automatic generic summarization have not exploited
available language models, which can serve as an effective prior for saliency. This
work introduces CLIP-It, a single framework for addressing both generic and queryfocused video summarization, typically approached separately in the literature. We
propose a language-guided multimodal transformer that learns to score frames
in a video based on their importance relative to one another and their correlation
with a user-defined query (for query-focused summarization) or an automatically
generated dense video caption (for generic video summarization). Our model can be
extended to the unsupervised setting by training without ground-truth supervision.
We outperform baselines and prior work by a significant margin on both standard
video summarization datasets (TVSum and SumMe) and a query-focused video
summarization dataset (QFVS). Particularly, we achieve large improvements in the
transfer setting, attesting to our method’s strong generalization capabilities.

1

Introduction

An effective video summary captures the essence of the video and provides a quick overview as an
alternative to viewing the whole video; it should be succinct yet representative of the entire video.
Summarizing videos has many use cases - for example, viewers on YouTube may want to watch a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

