Shift-Robust GNNs: Overcoming the Limitations of
Localized Graph Training Data

Qi Zhu∗

Natalia Ponomareva†

Jiawei Han∗

Bryan Perozzi†

*: University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
†: Google Research
*{qiz3,hanj}@illinois.edu,
†{nponomareva,bperozzi}@google.com

Abstract
There has been a recent surge of interest in designing Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) for semi-supervised learning tasks. Unfortunately this work has assumed
that the nodes labeled for use in training were selected uniformly at random (i.e.
are an IID sample). However in many real world scenarios gathering labels for
graph nodes is both expensive and inherently biased – so this assumption can not
be met. GNNs can suffer poor generalization when this occurs, by overfitting
to superfluous regularities present in the training data. In this work we present
a method, Shift-Robust GNN (SR-GNN), designed to account for distributional
differences between biased training data and a graph’s true inference distribution.
SR-GNN adapts GNN models to the presence of distributional shift between the
nodes labeled for training and the rest of the dataset. We illustrate the effectiveness
of SR-GNN in a variety of experiments with biased training datasets on common
GNN benchmark datasets for semi-supervised learning, where we see that SRGNN outperforms other GNN baselines in accuracy, addressing at least ∼40% of
the negative effects introduced by biased training data. On the largest dataset we
consider, ogb-arxiv, we observe a 2% absolute improvement over the baseline
and are able to mitigate 30% of the negative effects from training data bias 1 .

1

Introduction

The goal of graph-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) is to use relationships between data (its
graph inductive bias), along with a small set of labeled items, to predict the labels for the rest of a
dataset. Unsurprisingly, varying exactly which nodes are labeled can have a profound effect on the
generalization capability of a SSL classifier. Any bias in the sampling process to select nodes for
training can create distributional differences between the training set and the rest of the graph. During
inference any portion of the graph can be used, so any uneven labeling for training data can cause
training and test data to have different distributions. An SSL classifier may then overfit to training
data irregularities, thus hurting the performance at inference time.
Recently, GNNs have emerged as a way to combine graph structure with deep neural networks.
Surprisingly, most work on semi-supervised learning using GNNs for node classification [15, 11, 1]
have ignored this critical problem, and even the most recently proposed GNN benchmarks [12]
assume that an independent and identically distributed (IID) sample is possible for training labels.
1

Code and processed data are available at https://github.com/GentleZhu/Shift-Robust-GNNs.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Online.

