Combinatorial Pure Exploration with Bottleneck
Reward Function
Yihan Du
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yuko Kuroki
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN
Tokyo, Japan
yukok@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the Combinatorial Pure Exploration problem with the
Bottleneck reward function (CPE-B) under the fixed-confidence (FC) and fixedbudget (FB) settings. In CPE-B, given a set of base arms and a collection of subsets
of base arms (super arms) following a certain combinatorial constraint, a learner
sequentially plays a base arm and observes its random reward, with the objective
of finding the optimal super arm with the maximum bottleneck value, defined as
the minimum expected reward of the base arms contained in the super arm. CPE-B
captures a variety of practical scenarios such as network routing in communication
networks, and its unique challenges fall on how to utilize the bottleneck property to
save samples and achieve the statistical optimality. None of the existing CPE studies
(most of them assume linear rewards) can be adapted to solve such challenges,
and thus we develop brand-new techniques to handle them. For the FC setting,
we propose novel algorithms with optimal sample complexity for a broad family
of instances and establish a matching lower bound to demonstrate the optimality
(within a logarithmic factor). For the FB setting, we design an algorithm which
achieves the state-of-the-art error probability guarantee and is the first to run
efficiently on fixed-budget path instances, compared to existing CPE algorithms.
Our experimental results on the top-k, path and matching instances validate the
empirical superiority of the proposed algorithms over their baselines.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem [25, 30, 4, 2] is a classic model to solve the explorationexploitation trade-off in online decision making. Pure exploration [3, 21, 7, 26] is an important
variant of the MAB problem, which aims to identify the best arm under a given confidence or
a given sample budget. There are various works studying pure exploration, such as top-k arm
identification [17, 21, 7, 24], top-k arm under matriod constraints [9] and multi-bandit best arm
identification [18, 7].
The Combinatorial Pure Exploration (CPE) framework, firstly proposed by Chen et al. [11], encompasses a rich class of pure exploration problems [3, 21, 9]. In CPE, there are a set of base arms, each
associated with an unknown reward distribution. A subset of base arms is called a super arm, which
follows a certain combinatorial structure. At each timestep, a learner plays a base arm and observes a
random reward sampled from its distribution, with the objective to identify the optimal super arm
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

