Conditional Generation Using Polynomial Expansions

Grigorios G Chrysos
EPFL, Switzerland
grigorios.chrysos@epfl.ch

Markos Georgopoulos
Imperial College London, UK
m.georgopoulos@imperial.ac.uk

Yannis Panagakis
University of Athens, GR
yannisp@di.uoa.gr

Abstract
Generative modeling has evolved to a notable field of machine learning. Deep
polynomial neural networks (PNNs) have demonstrated impressive results in unsupervised image generation, where the task is to map an input vector (i.e., noise)
to a synthesized image. However, the success of PNNs has not been replicated
in conditional generation tasks, such as super-resolution. Existing PNNs focus
on single-variable polynomial expansions which do not fare well to two-variable
inputs, i.e., the noise variable and the conditional variable. In this work, we
introduce a general framework, called CoPE, that enables a polynomial expansion of two input variables and captures their auto- and cross-correlations. We
exhibit how CoPE can be trivially augmented to accept an arbitrary number of
input variables. CoPE is evaluated in five tasks (class-conditional generation,
inverse problems, edges-to-image translation, image-to-image translation, attributeguided generation) involving eight datasets. The thorough evaluation suggests that
CoPE can be useful for tackling diverse conditional generation tasks. The source
code of CoPE is available at https://github.com/grigorisg9gr/
polynomial_nets_for_conditional_generation.

1

Introduction

Modelling high-dimensional distributions and generating samples from complex distributions are
fundamental tasks in machine learning. Among prominent generative models, StyleGAN [Karras
et al., 2019] has demonstrated unparalleled performance in unsupervised image generation. Its success
can be attributed to the higher-order correlations of the input vector z captured by the generator. As
Chrysos et al. [2019] argue, StyleGAN1 is best explained as a deep polynomial neural network (PNN).
PNNs have demonstrated impressive generation results in faces, animals, cars [Karras et al., 2020b],
paintings, medical images [Karras et al., 2020a]. Nevertheless, PNNs have yet to demonstrate similar
performance in conditional generation tasks, such as super-resolution or image-to-image translation.
In contrast to unsupervised generators that require a single-variable input z, in conditional generation
(at least) two inputs are required: i) one (or more) conditional variables c, e.g., a low-resolution
image, and ii) a noise sample z. A trivial extension of PNNs for conditional generation would be to
concatenate all the input variables into a fused variable. The fused variable is then the input to the
single-variable polynomial expansion of PNNs. However, the concatenation reduces the flexibility of
the model significantly. For instance, concatenating a noise vector and a vectorized low-resolution
image results in sub-optimal super-resolution, since the spatial correlations of the input image are
lost in the vectorization. Additionally, the concatenation of the vectorized conditional variable c and
1

This work focuses on the generator network; any reference to StyleGAN refers to its generator.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

