Robust and differentially private mean estimation

Xiyang Liu, Weihao Kong, Sham Kakade, Sewoong Oh
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington
{xiyangl,whkong,sham,sewoong}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In statistical learning and analysis from shared data, which is increasingly widely
adopted in platforms such as federated learning and meta-learning, there are two
major concerns: privacy and robustness. Each participating individual should be
able to contribute without the fear of leaking one’s sensitive information. At the
same time, the system should be robust in the presence of malicious participants
inserting corrupted data. Recent algorithmic advances in learning from shared
data focus on either one of these threats, leaving the system vulnerable to the
other. We bridge this gap for the canonical problem of estimating the mean from
i.i.d. samples. We introduce PRIME, which is the first efficient algorithm that
achieves both privacy and robustness for a wide range of distributions. We further
complement this result with a novel exponential time algorithm that improves the
sample complexity of PRIME, achieving a near-optimal guarantee and matching a
known lower bound for (non-robust) private mean estimation. This proves that there
is no extra statistical cost to simultaneously guaranteeing privacy and robustness.

1

Introduction

When releasing database statistics on a collection of entries from individuals, we would ideally
like to make it impossible to reverse-engineer each individual’s potentially sensitive information.
Privacy-preserving techniques add just enough randomness tailored to the statistical task to guarantee
protection. At the same time, it is becoming increasingly common to apply such techniques to
databases collected from multiple sources, not all of which can be trusted. Emerging data access
frameworks, such as federated analyses across users’ devices or data silos [50], make it easier to
temper with such collected datasets, leaving private statistical analyses vulnerable to a malicious
corruption of a fraction of the data.
Differential privacy has emerged as a widely accepted de facto measure of privacy, which is now a
standard in releasing the statistics of the U.S. Census data [2] statistics and also deployed in real-world
commercial systems [74, 40, 41]. A statistical analysis is said to be differentially private (DP) if
the likelihood of the (randomized) outcome does not change significantly when a single arbitrary
entry is added/removed (formally defined in §1.2). This provides a strong privacy guarantee: even
a powerful adversary who knows all the other entries in the database cannot confidently identify
whether a particular individual is participating in the database based on the outcome of the analysis.
This ensures plausible deniability, central to protecting an individual’s privacy.
In this paper, we focus on one of the most canonical problems in statistics: estimating the mean of a
distribution from i.i.d. samples. For distributions with unbounded support, such as sub-Gaussian and
heavy-tailed distributions, fundamental trade-offs between accuracy, sample size, and privacy have
only recently been identified [58, 52, 54, 3] and efficient private estimators proposed. However, these
approaches are brittle when a fraction of the data is corrupted, posing a real threat, referred to as data
poisoning attacks [19, 79]. In defense of such attacks, robust (but not necessarily private) statistics
has emerged as a popular setting of recent algorithmic and mathematical breakthroughs [73, 30].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

