On Provable Benefits of Depth in Training
Graph Convolutional Networks

Weilin Cong
Penn State
wxc272@psu.edu

Morteza Ramezani
Penn State
morteza@cse.psu.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Penn State
mzm616@psu.edu

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are known to suffer from performance
degradation as the number of layers increases, which is usually attributed to oversmoothing. Despite the apparent consensus, we observe that there exists a discrepancy between the theoretical understanding of over-smoothing and the practical
capabilities of GCNs. Specifically, we argue that over-smoothing does not necessarily happen in practice, a deeper model is provably expressive, can converge
to global optimum with linear convergence rate, and achieve very high training
accuracy as long as properly trained. Despite being capable of achieving high
training accuracy, empirical results show that the deeper models generalize poorly
on the testing stage and existing theoretical understanding of such behavior remains
elusive. To achieve better understanding, we carefully analyze the generalization
capability of GCNs, and show that the training strategies to achieve high training
accuracy significantly deteriorate the generalization capability of GCNs. Motivated
by these findings, we propose a decoupled structure for GCNs that detaches weight
matrices from feature propagation to preserve the expressive power and ensure
good generalization performance. We conduct empirical evaluations on various
synthetic and real-world datasets to validate the correctness of our theory.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in dealing with graph-structured applications, including social networks [28, 21, 51, 12, 44], traffic
prediction [10, 45, 34, 31], knowledge graphs [52, 53, 43], drug reaction [14, 16] and recommendation
system [2, 60]. Despite the success of GCNs, applying a shallow GCN model that only uses the
information of a very limited neighborhood on a large sparse graph has shown to be not effective [23,
6, 20, 9, 46]. As a result, a deeper GCN model would be desirable to reach and aggregate information
from farther neighbors. The inefficiency of shallow GCNs is exacerbated even further when the
labeled nodes compared to graph size is negligible, as a shallow GCN cannot sufficiently propagate
the label information to the entire graph with only a few available labels [35].
Although a deeper GCN is preferred to perceive more graph structure information, unlike traditional
deep neural networks, it has been pointed out that deeper GCNs potentially suffer from oversmoothing [35, 41, 26, 4, 58], vanishing/exploding gradients [33], over-squashing [1], and training
difficulties [62, 38], which significantly affect the performance of GCNs as the depth increases.
Among these, the most widely accepted reason is “over-smoothing”, which is referred to as a
phenomenon due to applying multiple graph convolutions such that all node embeddings converge to
a single subspace (or vector) and leads to indistinguishable node representations.
The conventional wisdom is that adding to the number of layers causes over-smoothing, which impairs
the expressiveness power of GCNs and consequently leads to a poor training accuracy. However, we
observe that there exists a discrepancy between theoretical understanding of their inherent capabilities
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

