Stochastic Solutions for Linear Inverse Problems
using the Prior Implicit in a Denoiser
Zahra Kadkhodaie
Center for Data Science,
New York University
zk388@nyu.edu

Eero P. Simoncelli
Center for Neural Science, and
Courant Inst. of Mathematical Sciences,
New York University
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have provided state-of-the-art solutions for problems such
as image denoising, which implicitly rely on a prior probability model of natural
images. Two recent lines of work – Denoising Score Matching and Plug-and-Play –
propose methodologies for drawing samples from this implicit prior and using it to
solve inverse problems, respectively. Here, we develop a parsimonious and robust
generalization of these ideas. We rely on a classic statistical result that shows
the least-squares solution for removing additive Gaussian noise can be written
directly in terms of the gradient of the log of the noisy signal density. We use
this to derive a stochastic coarse-to-fine gradient ascent procedure for drawing
high-probability samples from the implicit prior embedded within a CNN trained
to perform blind denoising. A generalization of this algorithm to constrained
sampling provides a method for using the implicit prior to solve any deterministic
linear inverse problem, with no additional training, thus extending the power of
supervised learning for denoising to a much broader set of problems. The algorithm
relies on minimal assumptions and exhibits robust convergence over a wide range of
parameter choices. To demonstrate the generality of our method, we use it to obtain
state-of-the-art levels of unsupervised performance for deblurring, super-resolution,
and compressive sensing.

1

Introduction

Many problems in image processing and computer vision rely, explicitly or implicitly, on prior
probability models. Describing the full density of natural images is a daunting problem, given the high
dimensionality of the signal space. Traditionally, models have been developed by combining assumed
symmetry properties (e.g., translation-invariance, dilation-invariance), with simple parametric forms
(e.g., Gaussian, exponential, Gaussian mixtures), often within pre-specified transformed coordinate
systems (e.g., Fourier transform, multi-scale wavelets). While these models have led to steady
advances in problems such as denoising (e.g., [1–7]), they are too simplistic to generate complex
features that occur in our visual world, or to solve more demanding statistical inference problems.
In recent years, nearly all problems in image processing and computer vision have been revolutionalized by the use of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). These networks are generally
optimized in supervised fashion to obtain a direct input-output mapping for a specific task. This
approach does not explicitly rely on a known prior, and offers performance far superior to prior-based
methods. The downside, however, is that the learned mappings are intertwined with the task for
which they are optimized, and in most cases require training a separate network for each new application. In contrast, a prior probability model can provide a universal substrate for solving inference
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

