Optimal Underdamped Langevin MCMC Method

Zhengmian Hu, Feihu Huang, Heng Huang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{huzhengmian,huangfeihu2018}@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
In the paper, we study the underdamped Langevin diffusion (ULD) with stronglyconvex potential consisting of finite summation of N smooth components, and
2
2
1
propose an efficient discretization method,pwhich requires O(N + d 3 N 3 /ε 3 )
gradient evaluations to achieve ε-error (in E∥·∥22 distance) for approximating
d-dimensional ULD. Moreover, we prove a lower bound of gradient complexity as
2
2
1
Ω(N + d 3 N 3 /ε 3 ), which indicates that our method is optimal in dependence of
N , ε, and d. In particular, we apply our method to sample the strongly-log-concave
distribution and obtain gradient complexity better than all existing gradient based
sampling algorithms. Experimental results on both synthetic and real-world data
show that our new method consistently outperforms the existing ULD approaches.

1

Introduction

Sampling is an important research problem in statistics learning with many applications such as
Bayesian inference [1], multi-arm bandit optimization [2], and reinforcement learning [3]. One
of the fundamental problems in these applications is to sample from a high-dimensional stronglylog-concave distribution. Recently, several Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based methods
were proposed to solve this problem based on underdamped Langevin diffusion (ULD). This continuous diffusion process converges to the target distribution exponentially fast. Thus, the methods
approximating a ULD process could be used to sample from the target distribution within certain
accuracy.
Multiple discretization methods have been proposed for approximating ULD. Among them, the
Euler-Maruyama discretization [4] is the simplest one but generates the largest error. Recently the
left point method (LPM) 1 [5] was introduced to fix the gradient term in ULD to be the gradient
at k-th iteration, and then integrate the new linear stochastic differential equation (SDE) with a
small time-interval. Subsequently, Shen and Lee [6] proposed randomized midpoint method (RMM)
with smaller error. There are also discretization schemes based on splitting [7] or Runge-Kutta
method [8, 9]. More recently, Cao et al. [10] derived an information-based complexity lower bound
for simulating a d-dimensional ULD. Under the assumption that the full gradient oracle ∇f (x) is
evaluated at most n times, they show a lower bound for worst-case error by perturbation analysis,
which matches the discretization error upper bound of RMM in the dependence of d and n.
Although the ULD-MCMC methods with full gradient oracle are largely understood, many real-world
applications involve summation form of potential function and large-scale data, which leads to the
need of stochastic gradient methods. The vanilla stochastic gradient methods have been used to
replace full gradient [5]. Albeit the computational cost for each iteration is reduced, the variance of
1

Although this method is mostly just denoted as ULD-MCMC, we adopt the name LPM to distinguish it
from other discretization methods. The name comes from the fact that gradient is evaluated at the left point of
the time interval.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

