Few-Shot Object Detection
via Association and DIscrimination
Yuhang Cao1 Jiaqi Wang1,2B Ying Jin1 Tong Wu1
Kai Chen2,3 Ziwei Liu4 Dahua Lin1,2
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 SenseTime Research
4
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{cy020,wj017,jy021,wt020,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
chenkai@sensetime.com
ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Object detection has achieved substantial progress in the last decade. However,
detecting novel classes with only few samples remains challenging, since deep
learning under low data regime usually leads to a degraded feature space. Existing
works employ a holistic fine-tuning paradigm to tackle this problem, where the
model is first pre-trained on all base classes with abundant samples, and then
it is used to carve the novel class feature space. Nonetheless, this paradigm is
still imperfect. Durning fine-tuning, a novel class may implicitly leverage the
knowledge of multiple base classes to construct its feature space, which induces
a scattered feature space, hence violating the inter-class separability. To overcome these obstacles, we propose a two-step fine-tuning framework, Few-shot
object detection via Association and DIscrimination (FADI), which builds up a
discriminative feature space for each novel class with two integral steps. 1) In
the association step, in contrast to implicitly leveraging multiple base classes, we
construct a compact novel class feature space via explicitly imitating a specific
base class feature space. Specifically, we associate each novel class with a base
class according to their semantic similarity. After that, the feature space of a novel
class can readily imitate the well-trained feature space of the associated base class.
2) In the discrimination step, to ensure the separability between the novel classes
and associated base classes, we disentangle the classification branches for base and
novel classes. To further enlarge the inter-class separability between all classes, a
set-specialized margin loss is imposed. Extensive experiments on standard Pascal
VOC and MS-COCO datasets demonstrate that FADI achieves new state-of-the-art
performance, significantly improving the baseline in any shot/split by +18.7. Notably, the advantage of FADI is most announced on extremely few-shot scenarios
(e.g. 1- and 3- shot). Code is available at: https://github.com/yhcao6/FADI

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved impressive performance on object detection [21, 11, 1] in recent years.
However, their strong performance heavily relies on a large amount of labeled training data, which
limits the scalability and generalizability of the model in the data scarcity scenarios. In contrast,
human visual systems can easily generalize to novel classes with only a few supervisions. Therefore,
great interests have been invoked to explore few-shot object detection (FSOD), which aims at training
a network from limited annotations of novel classes with the aid of sufficient data of base classes.
B

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

