MetaAvatar: Learning Animatable
Clothed Human Models from Few Depth Images

Shaofei Wang1
shaofei.wang@inf.ethz.ch

Marko Mihajlovic1
marko.mihajlovic@inf.ethz.ch

Qianli Ma1,2
qianli.ma@tue.mpg.de

Andreas Geiger2,3
a.geiger@uni-tuebingen.de

Siyu Tang1
siyu.tang@inf.ethz.ch
1

ETH Zürich

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

3

University of Tübingen

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to create generalizable and controllable neural signed distance
fields (SDFs) that represent clothed humans from monocular depth observations.
Recent advances in deep learning, especially neural implicit representations, have
enabled human shape reconstruction and controllable avatar generation from different sensor inputs. However, to generate realistic cloth deformations from novel
input poses, watertight meshes or dense full-body scans are usually needed as
inputs. Furthermore, due to the difficulty of effectively modeling pose-dependent
cloth deformations for diverse body shapes and cloth types, existing approaches
resort to per-subject/cloth-type optimization from scratch, which is computationally expensive. In contrast, we propose an approach that can quickly generate
realistic clothed human avatars, represented as controllable neural SDFs, given
only monocular depth images. We achieve this by using meta-learning to learn
an initialization of a hypernetwork that predicts the parameters of neural SDFs.
The hypernetwork is conditioned on human poses and represents a clothed neural
avatar that deforms non-rigidly according to the input poses. Meanwhile, it is metalearned to effectively incorporate priors of diverse body shapes and cloth types and
thus can be much faster to fine-tune, compared to models trained from scratch. We
qualitatively and quantitatively show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches that require complete meshes as inputs while our approach requires
only depth frames as inputs and runs orders of magnitudes faster. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that our meta-learned hypernetwork is very robust, being the first
to generate avatars with realistic dynamic cloth deformations given as few as 8
monocular depth frames.

1

Introduction

Representing clothed humans as neural implicit functions is a rising research topic in the computer
vision community. Earlier works in this direction address geometric reconstruction of clothed humans
from static monocular images [35, 36, 63, 64], RGBD videos [37, 38, 71, 78, 80] or sparse point
clouds [12] as direct extensions of neural implicit functions for rigid objects [11, 45, 46, 52]. More
recent works advocate to learn shapes in a canonical pose [7, 27, 75] in order to not only handle
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

