Solving Graph-based Public Good Games with Tree
Search and Imitation Learning

1

Victor-Alexandru Darvariu1,2 , Stephen Hailes1 , Mirco Musolesi1,2,3
University College London 2 The Alan Turing Institute 3 University of Bologna
{v.darvariu, s.hailes, m.musolesi}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Public goods games represent insightful settings for studying incentives for individual agents to make contributions that, while costly for each of them, benefit
the wider society. In this work, we adopt the perspective of a central planner with
a global view of a network of self-interested agents and the goal of maximizing
some desired property in the context of a best-shot public goods game. Existing
algorithms for this known NP-complete problem find solutions that are sub-optimal
and cannot optimize for criteria other than social welfare.
In order to efficiently solve public goods games, our proposed method directly
exploits the correspondence between equilibria and the Maximal Independent Set
(mIS) structural property of graphs. In particular, we define a Markov Decision
Process which incrementally generates an mIS, and adopt a planning method to
search for equilibria, outperforming existing methods. Furthermore, we devise a
graph imitation learning technique that uses demonstrations of the search to obtain
a graph neural network parametrized policy which quickly generalizes to unseen
game instances. Our evaluation results show that this policy is able to reach 99.5%
of the performance of the planning method while being three orders of magnitude
faster to evaluate on the largest graphs tested. The methods presented in this work
can be applied to a large class of public goods games of potentially high societal
impact and more broadly to other graph combinatorial optimization problems.

1

Introduction

In a public goods game (PGG), individuals can choose to invest in an expensive good (paying a cost),
with benefits being shared by wider society [37]. It is a form of n-party social dilemma that has been
used to study the tension between decisions that benefit the individual and the common good [36].
Aspects characteristic to public goods are observed in many important societal problems such as
meeting climate change targets [32, 41], the dynamics of research and innovation [29], the design
of effective vaccination programs [19], and, more generally, situations in which contributions are
non-excludable. The analysis of this class of games is related to ongoing efforts to study cooperation
in multi-agent systems as a means of driving progress on societal challenges [13].
The best-shot PGG is a variant in which investment decisions are binary and agents benefit if either
they or a neighbor own the good [26]. Since patterns of connections along social and geographical
dimensions in networks are known to shape individual decision-making [9, 23], a natural restriction
is to limit the impact of contributions to an agent’s neighbors. Graph-based best-shot public goods
games exhibit multiple pure-strategy Nash equilibria (PSNE) [16]. Given this multiplicity, a natural
question that arises is how to compute equilibria that satisfy some properties, a task known to be
NP-complete in general for multiplayer games [22, 12]. Examples of desirable equilibria are those
that maximize the social welfare (total utility) of agents or those with a high degree of fairness in
terms of contributions. For graph-based best-shot PGGs, it has been shown that each equilibrium
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

