Scatterbrain: Unifying
Sparse and Low-rank Attention Approximation
Beidi Chen⇤† , Tri Dao⇤† , Eric Winsor † , Zhao Song § , Atri Rudra ‡ , Christopher Ré †
†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
§
Adobe Research
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
{beidic,trid,winsor,chrismre}@stanford.edu, zsong@adobe.com, atri@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in efficient Transformers have exploited either the sparsity or
low-rank properties of attention matrices to reduce the computational and memory
bottlenecks of modeling long sequences. However, it is still challenging to balance
the trade-off between model quality and efficiency to perform a one-size-fits-all
approximation for different tasks. To better understand this trade-off, we observe
that sparse and low-rank approximations excel in different regimes, determined
by the softmax temperature in attention, and sparse + low-rank can outperform
each individually. Inspired by the classical robust-PCA algorithm for sparse and
low-rank decomposition, we propose Scatterbrain, a novel way to unify sparse
(via locality sensitive hashing) and low-rank (via kernel feature map) attention for
accurate and efficient approximation. The estimation is unbiased with provably
low error. We empirically show that Scatterbrain can achieve 2.1⇥ lower error
than baselines when serving as a drop-in replacement in BigGAN image generation
and pre-trained T2T-ViT. On a pre-trained T2T Vision transformer, even without
fine-tuning, Scatterbrain can reduce 98% of attention memory at the cost of only 1%
drop in accuracy. We demonstrate Scatterbrain for end-to-end training with up to 4
points better perplexity and 5 points better average accuracy than sparse or low-rank
efficient transformers on language modeling and long-range-arena tasks.

1

Introduction

Transformer models [64] have been adapted in a wide variety of applications, including natural
language processing [26, 7, 51], image processing [10, 48], and speech recognition [43]. Training large
Transformers requires extensive computational and memory resources, especially when modeling long
sequences, mainly due to the quadratic complexity (w.r.t. sequence length) in attention layers. Recent
advances in efficient transformers [36, 17, 35, 66, 22] leverage attention approximation to overcome
the bottleneck by approximating the attention matrices. However, it is challenging to find a robust
approximation method that balances the efficiency-accuracy trade-off on a wide variety of tasks [58, 59].
We categorize most of the existing approaches for efficient attention matrix computation into two
major groups: exploiting either the sparsity, e.g., Reformer [36], SMYRF [22], or low-rank properties
of the attention matrices, e.g., Linformer [66], Linear Transformer [35], and Performer [17]. However,
these techniques usually have different strengths and focus on the performance of specific tasks, so
their approximations still cause accuracy degradation on many other tasks. For instance, according to a
recent benchmark paper [58] and our experiments, low-rank-based attention might be less effective on
hierarchically structured data or language modeling tasks, while sparse-based variants do not perform
well on classification tasks.
⇤

Equal contribution. Order determined by coin flip.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

