Augmented Shortcuts for Vision Transformers

Yehui Tang1,2 , Kai Han2 , Chang Xu3 , An Xiao2 ,
Yiping Deng4 , Chao Xu1 , Yunhe Wang2
1
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 4 Central Software Institution, Huawei Technologies.
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.
yhtang@pku.edu.cn, {kai.han, yunhe.wang, an.xiao, yiping.deng}@huawei.com,
c.xu@sydney.edu.au, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn.

Abstract
Transformer models have achieved great progress on computer vision tasks recently. The rapid development of vision transformers is mainly contributed by their
high representation ability for extracting informative features from input images.
However, the mainstream transformer models are designed with deep architectures, and the feature diversity will be continuously reduced as the depth increases,
i.e., feature collapse. In this paper, we theoretically analyze the feature collapse
phenomenon and study the relationship between shortcuts and feature diversity in
these transformer models. Then, we present an augmented shortcut scheme, which
inserts additional paths with learnable parameters in parallel on the original shortcuts. To save the computational costs, we further explore an efficient approach that
uses the block-circulant projection to implement augmented shortcuts. Extensive
experiments conducted on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method, which brings about 1% accuracy increase of the state-of-the-art
visual transformers without obviously increasing their parameters and FLOPs.

1

Introduction

Originating from the natural language processing field, transformer models [35, 9] have recently
made great progress in various computer vision tasks such as image classification [9, 34, 23], object
detection [3] and image processing [4]. Wherein, the ViT model [9] divides the input images as visual
sequences and obtains an 88.36% top-1 accuracy which is competitive to the SOTA convolutional
neural network (CNN) models (e.g., EfficientNet [31]). Compared to CNNs which are usually
customized for vision tasks with prior knowledge (e.g., translation equivalence and locality), vision
transformers introduce less inductive bias and have a larger potential to achieve better performance
on different visual tasks. Besides, considering the high performance of transformers in various fields
(e.g., natural language processing and computer vision), we may only need to support transformer for
processing different tasks which can significantly simplify the software/hardware design.
Besides the self-attention layers in vision transformers, a shortcut is often included to directly connect
multiple layers with identity projection [15, 35, 9]. The introduce of shortcut is motivated by the
architecture designs in CNNs, and has been demonstrated to be beneficial for a stable convergence and
better performance [16, 33, 22, 39, 38]. There is a series of works on interpreting and understanding
the role of shortcut. For example, Balduzzi et al. [1] analyze the gradients of deep networks and show
that shortcut connection can effectively alleviate the problem of gradient vanishing and exploding.
Veit et al. [36] reckon ResNet [15] as the ensemble of a collection of paths with different lengths,
and the gradient vanishing problem is addressed by short paths. From a theoretical perspective,
Liu et al. [22] prove that shortcut connection can avoid network parameters trapped by spurious local
optimum and help them converge to a global optimum. Apart from CNNs, shortcut connection is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

