Universal Approximation For Log-concave
Distributions Using Well-conditioned Normalizing
Flows
Holden Lee
Mathematics Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
holden.lee@duke.edu

Chirag Pabbaraju
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
cpabbara@cs.stanford.edu

Anish Sevekari
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
asevekar@andrew.cmu.edu

Andrej Risteski
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Normalizing flows are a widely used class of latent-variable generative models
with a tractable likelihood. Affine-coupling models [Dinh et al., 2014, 2016] are
a particularly common type of normalizing flows, for which the Jacobian of the
latent-to-observable-variable transformation is triangular, allowing the likelihood
to be computed in linear time. Despite the widespread usage of affine couplings,
the special structure of the architecture makes understanding their representational
power challenging. The question of universal approximation was only recently
resolved by three parallel papers [Huang et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2020, Koehler
et al., 2020] – who showed reasonably regular distributions can be approximated
arbitrarily well using affine couplings—albeit with networks with a nearly-singular
Jacobian. As ill-conditioned Jacobians are an obstacle for likelihood-based training,
the fundamental question remains: which distributions can be approximated using
well-conditioned affine coupling flows?
In this paper, we show that any log-concave distribution can be approximated using
well-conditioned affine-coupling flows. In terms of proof techniques, we uncover
and leverage deep connections between affine coupling architectures, underdamped
Langevin dynamics (a stochastic differential equation often used to sample from
Gibbs measures) and Hénon maps (a structured dynamical system that appears in
the study of symplectic diffeomorphisms). Our results also inform the practice of
training affine couplings: we approximate a padded version of the input distribution
with iid Gaussians—a strategy which Koehler et al. [2020] empirically observed
to result in better-conditioned flows, but had hitherto no theoretical grounding.
Our proof can thus be seen as providing theoretical evidence for the benefits of
Gaussian padding when training normalizing flows.

1

Introduction

Normalizing flows [Dinh et al., 2014, Rezende and Mohamed, 2015] are a class of generative models
parametrizing a distribution in Rd as the pushfoward of a simple distribution (e.g. Gaussian) through
an invertible map g✓ : Rd ! Rd with trainable parameter ✓. The fact that g✓ is invertible allows us to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

