On UMAP’s True Loss Function
Sebastian Damrich
Fred A. Hamprecht
HCI/IWR at Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
{sebastian.damrich, fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
UMAP has supplanted t-SNE as state-of-the-art for visualizing high-dimensional
datasets in many disciplines, but the reason for its success is not well understood.
In this work, we investigate UMAP’s sampling based optimization scheme in detail.
We derive UMAP’s true loss function in closed form and find that it differs from
the published one in a dataset size dependent way. As a consequence, we show
that UMAP does not aim to reproduce its theoretically motivated high-dimensional
UMAP similarities. Instead, it tries to reproduce similarities that only encode
the k nearest neighbor graph, thereby challenging the previous understanding of
UMAP’s effectiveness. Alternatively, we consider the implicit balancing of attraction and repulsion due to the negative sampling to be key to UMAP’s success. We
corroborate our theoretical findings on toy and single cell RNA sequencing data.

1

Introduction

Today’s most prominent methods for non-parametric, non-linear dimension reduction are
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) [20, 19] and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction (UMAP) [13]. The heart of UMAP is claimed to
be its sophisticated method for extracting the high-dimensional similarities. However, the reason
for UMAP’s excellent visualizations is not immediately obvious from this approach. In particular,
UMAP’s eponymous uniformity assumption, see Section 3, is arguably difficult to defend for the
wide range of datasets on which UMAP performs well. Therefore, it is not well understood what
aspect of UMAP is responsible for its great visualizations.
Both t-SNE and UMAP have to overcome the computational obstacle of considering the quadratic
number of interactions between all pairs of points. The breakthrough for t-SNE came with a
Barnes-Hut approximation [19]. Instead, UMAP employs a sampling based approach to avoid a
quadratic number of repulsive interactions. Other than [4] little attention has been paid to this
sampling based optimization scheme. In this work, we fill this gap and analyze UMAP’s optimization
method in detail. In particular, we derive the effective, closed form loss function which is truly
minimized by UMAP’s optimization scheme. While UMAP’s use of negative sampling was intended
to avoid quadratic complexity, we find, surprisingly, that the resulting effective loss function differs
significantly from UMAP’s purported loss function. The weight of the loss function’s repulsive term
is drastically reduced. As a consequence, UMAP is not actually geared towards reproducing the
clever high-dimensional similarities. In fact, we show that most information beyond the shared kNN
graph connectivity is essentially ignored as UMAP actually approximates a binarized version of the
high-dimensional similarities. These theoretical findings underpin some empirical observations in [4]
and demonstrate that the gist of UMAP is not its high-dimensional similarities. This resolves the
disconnect between UMAP’s uniformity assumption and its success on datasets of varying density.
From a user’s perspective it is important to gain an intuition for deciding which features of a
visualization can be attributed to the data and which ones are more likely artifacts of the visualization
method. With our analysis, we can explain UMAP’s tendency to produce crisp, over-contracted
substructures, which increases with the dataset size, as a side effect of its optimization.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

