Lip to Speech Synthesis with Visual Context
Attentional GAN
Minsu Kim, Joanna Hong, Yong Man Ro∗
Image and Video Systems Lab
KAIST
{ms.k, joanna2587, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel lip-to-speech generative adversarial network,
Visual Context Attentional GAN (VCA-GAN), which can jointly model local and
global lip movements during speech synthesis. Specifically, the proposed VCAGAN synthesizes the speech from local lip visual features by finding a mapping
function of viseme-to-phoneme, while global visual context is embedded into
the intermediate layers of the generator to clarify the ambiguity in the mapping
induced by homophene. To achieve this, a visual context attention module is
proposed where it encodes global representations from the local visual features,
and provides the desired global visual context corresponding to the given coarse
speech representation to the generator through audio-visual attention. In addition
to the explicit modelling of local and global visual representations, synchronization
learning is introduced as a form of contrastive learning that guides the generator
to synthesize a speech in sync with the given input lip movements. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed VCA-GAN outperforms existing stateof-the-art and is able to effectively synthesize the speech from multi-speaker that
has been barely handled in the previous works.

1

Introduction

Lip to speech synthesis (Lip2Speech) is to predict an audio speech by watching a silent talking face
video. While conventional visual speech recognition tasks require human annotations (i.e., text),
Lip2Speech does not require additional annotations. Thus, it has drawn big attention as another form
of lip reading. However, due to the ambiguity of homophenes that have similar lip movements and the
voice characteristics varying from different identities, it is still considered as a challenging problem.
Basically, synthesizing a speech from a silent lip movement video can be viewed as finding a mapping
function of visemes into corresponding phonemes. However, only watching short clip-level (i.e.,
local) lip movements could be challenging to distinguish the homophenes. Thus, global-level lip
movements containing the visual context, hints for ambiguity of viseme-to-phoneme mapping, should
also be considered along with local-level lip movements. Early deep learning-based works [1, 2, 3]
predict each auditory feature (e.g., LPC, mel-spectrogram, spectrogram) within a short video clip and
extend the prediction to the entire speech by sliding a window over the whole video sequences. As
they operate with clip-level videos of fixed length, they could fail on capturing the global context of
the spoken speech. A recent work [4] brings Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) architecture [5, 6]
that predicts the auditory feature conditioned on both the encoded visual context and the previous
prediction and shows a promising performance. However, since they do not explicitly consider
local visual features, they may produce out-of-sync speech to the input video. Moreover, due to the
sequential nature of the Seq2Seq architecture, the method demands heavy inference time. Since the
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

