Indexed Minimum Empirical Divergence for
Unimodal Bandits
Hassan Saber
Université de Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
hassan.saber@inria.fr

Pierre Ménard
Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg
pierre.menard@ovgu.de

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
Université de Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider a multi-armed bandit problem specified by a set of one-dimensional
family exponential distributions endowed with a unimodal structure. We introduce
IMED-UB, an algorithm that optimally exploits the unimodal-structure, by adapting
to this setting the Indexed Minimum Empirical Divergence (IMED) algorithm
introduced by Honda and Takemura [2015]. Owing to our proof technique, we are
able to provide a concise finite-time analysis of the IMED-UB algorithm. Numerical
experiments show that IMED-UB competes with the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit problem is a popular framework to formalize sequential decision making
problems. It was first introduced in the context of medical trials [Thompson, 1933, 1935] and later
formalized by Robbins [1952]: A bandit is specified by a configuration, that is a set of unknown
probability distributions, ν = (νa )a∈A with means (µa )a∈A . At each time t ∈ N, the learner chooses an
arm at ∈ A, based only on the past, the learner then receives and observes a reward Xt , conditionally
independent, sampled according to νat . The goal of the learner is to maximize the expected sum of
rewards received over time (up to some unknown horizon T ), or equivalently minimize the regret
with respect to the algorithm constantly receiving the highest mean reward
" T
#
X
?
R(ν, T ) = Eν
µ − Xt where µ? = max µa .
t=1

a∈A

Both means and distributions are unknown, which makes the problem non trivial, and the learner
only knows that ν ∈ D where D is a given set of bandit configurations. This problem received
increased attention in the middle of the 20th century, and the seminal paper Lai and Robbins [1985]
established the first lower bound on the cumulative regret, showing that designing an algorithm that
is optimal uniformly over a given set of configurations D comes with a price. The study of the lower
performance bounds in multi-armed bandits successfully lead to the development of asymptotically
optimal algorithms for specific configuration sets, such as the KLUCB algorithm [Lai, 1987, Cappé
et al., 2013, Maillard, 2018] for exponential families, or alternatively the DMED and IMED algorithms
from Honda and Takemura [2011, 2015]. The lower bounds from Lai and Robbins [1985], later
extended by Burnetas and Katehakis [1997] did not cover all possible configurations, and in particular
structured configuration sets were not handled until Agrawal et al. [1989] and then Graves and
Lai [1997] established generic lower bounds. Here, structure refers to the fact that pulling an arm
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

