Stochastic L\-convex Function Minimization
Haixiang Zhang
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
haixiang_zhang@berkeley.edu

Zeyu Zheng
Department of IEOR
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
zyzheng@berkeley.edu

Javad Lavaei
Department of IEOR
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
lavaei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study an extension of the stochastic submodular minimization problem, namely,
the stochastic L\ -convex minimization problem. We develop the first polynomialtime algorithms that return a near-optimal solution with high probability. We design
a novel truncation operation to further reduce the computational complexity of
the proposed algorithms. When applied to a stochastic submodular function, the
computational complexity of the proposed algorithms is lower than that of the
existing stochastic submodular minimization algorithms. In addition, we provide a
strongly polynomial approximate algorithm. The algorithm execution also does not
require any prior knowledge about the objective function except the L\ -convexity.
A lower bound on the computational complexity that is required to achieve a high
probability error bound is also derived. Numerical experiments are implemented to
demonstrate the efficiency of our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

As an important branch of optimization, discrete stochastic optimization problems (Futschik & Pflug,
1995; Gutjahr & Pflug, 1996; Futschik & Pflug, 1997; Kleywegt et al., 2002; Semelhago et al., 2020)
appear in a wide range of applications such as image processing (Jegelka & Bilmes, 2011), pricing
optimization (Ito & Fujimaki, 2016) and simulation-based optimization (Altman et al., 2003; Freund
et al., 2017). Since a discrete optimization problem is generally N P-hard to solve, specific structures
are necessary to guarantee the existence of polynomial-time algorithms. In the special case when the
feasible set is {0, 1}d for some positive integer d, submodular functions are viewed as the discrete
analogy of convex functions in the field of combinatorial optimization. The submodular function
minimization (SFM) problem has wide applications in computer vision, economics, game theory
and is well-studied in literature (Lee et al., 2015; Axelrod et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). However,
for certain problems, because of the stochastic structure, the exact value of the objective function is
not available but only noisy samples of the objective function value are available. These scenarios,
for example, include the optimization of expected performances for complex stochastic systems.
In contrast to the deterministic problem, the stochastic SFM problem is less understood (Ito, 2019;
Chakrabarty et al., 2017; Blais et al., 2019; Axelrod et al., 2020).
In this work, we consider the stochastic minimization problem of a class of generalized submodular functions, named the L\ -convex functions (Murota, 2003). More concretely, a function
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

