Conformal Prediction using Conditional Histograms

Matteo Sesia
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California, USA
sesia@marshall.usc.edu
Yaniv Romano
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
yromano@technion.ac.il

Abstract
This paper develops a conformal method to compute prediction intervals for nonparametric regression that can automatically adapt to skewed data. Leveraging
black-box machine learning algorithms to estimate the conditional distribution of
the outcome using histograms, it translates their output into the shortest prediction
intervals with approximate conditional coverage. The resulting prediction intervals
provably have marginal coverage in finite samples, while asymptotically achieving conditional coverage and optimal length if the black-box model is consistent.
Numerical experiments with simulated and real data demonstrate improved performance compared to state-of-the-art alternatives, including conformalized quantile
regression and other distributional conformal prediction approaches.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem statement and motivation

We consider the problem of predicting with confidence a response variable Y ∈ R given p features
X ∈ Rp for a test point n+1, utilizing n pairs of observations {(X (i) , Y (i) )}ni=1 drawn exchangeably
(e.g., i.i.d.) from some unknown distribution, and leveraging any machine-learning algorithm.
Precisely, ∀α ∈ (0, 1), we seek a prediction interval Ĉn,α (Xn+1 ) ⊂ R for Yn+1 satisfying the
following three criteria. First, Ĉn,α should have finite-sample marginal coverage at level 1 − α,
h
i
P Yn+1 ∈ Ĉn,α (Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − α.
(1)
Second, Ĉn,α should approximately have conditional coverage at level 1 − α,
h
i
P Yn+1 ∈ Ĉn,α (x) | Xn+1 = x ≥ 1 − α,
∀x ∈ Rp ,

(2)

meaning it should approximate this objective in practice, and ideally achieve it asymptotically under
suitable conditions in the limit of large sample sizes. Third, Ĉn,α should be as narrow as possible.
We tackle this challenge with conformal inference [24, 35], which allows one to convert the output
of any black-box machine learning algorithm into prediction intervals with provable marginal coverage (1). The key idea of this framework is to compute a conformity score for each observation,
measuring the discrepancy, according to some metric, between the true value of Y and that predicted
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

