Reinforcement Learning in Reward-Mixing MDPs

Jeongyeol Kwon
The University of Texas at Austin
kwonchungli@utexas.edu

Yonathan Efroni
Microsoft Research, NYC
jonathan.efroni@gmail.com

Constantine Caramanis
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Shie Mannor
Technion, NVIDIA
shie@ee.technion.ac.il,
smannor@nvidia.com

Abstract
Learning a near optimal policy in a partially observable system remains an elusive
challenge in contemporary reinforcement learning. In this work, we consider
episodic reinforcement learning in a reward-mixing Markov decision process (MDP).
There, a reward function is drawn from one of multiple possible reward models
at the beginning of every episode, but the identity of the chosen reward model is
not revealed to the agent. Hence, the latent state space, for which the dynamics
are Markovian, is not given to the agent. We study the problem of learning a
near optimal policy for two reward-mixing MDPs. Unlike existing approaches
that rely on strong assumptions on the dynamics, we make no assumptions and
study the problem in full generality. Indeed, with no further assumptions, even
for two switching reward-models, the problem requires several new ideas beyond
existing algorithmic and analysis techniques for efficient exploration. We provide
the first polynomial-time algorithm that finds an -optimal policy after exploring
Õ(poly(H, −1 )·S 2 A2 ) episodes, where H is time-horizon and S, A are the number
of states and actions respectively. This is the first efficient algorithm that does not
require any assumptions in partially observed environments where the observation
space is smaller than the latent state space.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent solves a sequential decision-making problem in an unknown
dynamic environment to maximize the long-term reward [46]. The agent interacts with the environment
by receiving feedback on its actions in the form of a state-dependent reward and observation.
One of the key challenges in RL is exploration: in the absence of auto-exploratory properties such as
ergodicity of the system, the agent has to devise a clever scheme to collect data from under-explored
parts of the system. In a long line of work, efficient exploration in RL has been extensively studied for
fully observable environments, i.e., under the framework of Markov decision process (MDP) with a
number of polynomial-time algorithms proposed [34, 27, 43, 40, 18]. For instance, in tabular MDPs,
i.e., environments with a finite number of states and actions, we can achieve sample-optimality or
minimax regret without any assumptions on system dynamics [3, 50].
In contrast to fully observable environments, very little is known about the exploration in partially
observable MDPs (POMDPs). In general, RL in POMDPs may require an exponential number of
samples (without simplifying structural assumptions) [35, 31]. Therefore, it is important to consider
natural sub-classes of POMDPs which admit tractable solutions. Previous studies focus on a special
class of POMDPs where observation spaces are large enough such that a single observation provides
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

