Evolution Gym: A Large-Scale Benchmark for
Evolving Soft Robots

Jagdeep Singh Bhatia
MIT CSAIL
jagdeep@mit.edu

Holly Jackson
MIT CSAIL
hjackson@mit.edu

Jie Xu
MIT CSAIL
jiex@csail.mit.edu

Yunsheng Tian
MIT CSAIL
yunsheng@csail.mit.edu

Wojciech Matusik
MIT CSAIL
wojciech@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Both the design and control of a robot play equally important roles in its task
performance. However, while optimal control is well studied in the machine learning and robotics community, less attention is placed on finding the optimal robot
design. This is mainly because co-optimizing design and control in robotics is
characterized as a challenging problem, and more importantly, a comprehensive
evaluation benchmark for co-optimization does not exist. In this paper, we propose
Evolution Gym, the first large-scale benchmark for co-optimizing the design and
control of soft robots. In our benchmark, each robot is composed of different
types of voxels (e.g., soft, rigid, actuators), resulting in a modular and expressive
robot design space. Our benchmark environments span a wide range of tasks,
including locomotion on various types of terrains and manipulation. Furthermore,
we develop several robot co-evolution algorithms by combining state-of-the-art
design optimization methods and deep reinforcement learning techniques. Evaluating the algorithms on our benchmark platform, we observe robots exhibiting
increasingly complex behaviors as evolution progresses, with the best evolved
designs solving many of our proposed tasks. Additionally, even though robot designs are evolved autonomously from scratch without prior knowledge, they often
grow to resemble existing natural creatures while outperforming hand-designed
robots. Nevertheless, all tested algorithms fail to find robots that succeed in our
hardest environments. This suggests that more advanced algorithms are required
to explore the high-dimensional design space and evolve increasingly intelligent
robots – an area of research in which we hope Evolution Gym will accelerate
progress. Our website with code, environments, documentation, and tutorials is
available at http://evogym.csail.mit.edu.

1

Introduction

One of the main goals of artificial intelligence is to develop effective approaches for the creation
of embodied intelligent systems. Inspired from real organisms, where body structure and brain are
two key factors for completing any task in a real environment, a successful intelligent robot typically
requires concurrently optimizing its structure design and control mechanism. Such a co-design
problem has been a long-standing key challenge in the robotics and machine learning communities.
Surprisingly, despite its importance, most previous research works still either only develop complex
control algorithms for existing robot structures [1, 2, 17, 30], or conduct co-optimization over robot
morphology and control for only a few simple tasks (e.g., running, jumping) [7, 14, 31, 32], especially
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

