Learning the optimal Tikhonov regularizer for
inverse problems

Giovanni S. Alberti
MaLGa Center, Department of Mathematics
University of Genoa, Italy
giovanni.alberti@unige.it

Ernesto De Vito
MaLGa Center, Department of Mathematics
University of Genoa, Italy
ernesto.devito@unige.it

Matti Lassas
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Helsinki, Finland
matti.lassas@helsinki.fi

Luca Ratti
MaLGa Center, Department of Mathematics
University of Genoa, Italy
luca.ratti@unige.it

Matteo Santacesaria
MaLGa Center, Department of Mathematics
University of Genoa, Italy
matteo.santacesaria@unige.it

Abstract
In this work, we consider the linear inverse problem y = Ax+ε, where A : X → Y
is a known linear operator between the separable Hilbert spaces X and Y , x is
a random variable in X and ε is a zero-mean random process in Y . This setting
covers several inverse problems in imaging including denoising, deblurring and Xray tomography. Within the classical framework of regularization, we focus on the
case where the regularization functional is not given a priori, but learned from data.
Our first result is a characterization of the optimal generalized Tikhonov regularizer,
with respect to the mean squared error. We find that it is completely independent of
the forward operator A and depends only on the mean and covariance of x. Then,
we consider the problem of learning the regularizer from a finite training set in two
different frameworks: one supervised, based on samples of both x and y, and one
unsupervised, based only on samples of x. In both cases we prove generalization
bounds, under some weak assumptions on the distribution of x and ε, including the
case of sub-Gaussian variables. Our bounds hold in infinite-dimensional spaces,
thereby showing that finer and finer discretizations do not make this learning
problem harder. The results are validated through numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

The aim of an inverse problem is to recover information about a physical quantity from indirect
measurements. Virtually all imaging problems and modalities fall within this framework, including
denoising, deblurring [14], computed tomography [41] and magnetic resonance imaging [15]. Classical and general approaches to solve inverse problems consist in studying a variational (minimization)
problem and can be divided into two classes.
The first is based on the so-called regularization theory [14]. The aim is to recover a single, deterministic, unknown x† from noisy data y = F (x† ) + ε by solving a minimization problem
min dY (F (x), y) + J(x)
(1)
x

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

