Non-Local Latent Relation Distillation for
Self-Adaptive 3D Human Pose Estimation

Jogendra Nath Kundu1 Siddharth Seth1 Anirudh Jamkhandi1 Pradyumna YM1
Varun Jampani2 Anirban Chakraborty1 R. Venkatesh Babu1
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

2

Google Research

Abstract
Available 3D human pose estimation approaches leverage different forms of strong
(2D/3D pose) or weak (multi-view or depth) paired supervision. Barring synthetic
or in-studio domains, acquiring such supervision for each new target environment
is highly inconvenient. To this end, we cast 3D pose learning as a self-supervised
adaptation problem that aims to transfer the task knowledge from a labeled source
domain to a completely unpaired target. We propose to infer image-to-pose via
two explicit mappings viz. image-to-latent and latent-to-pose where the latter
is a pre-learned decoder obtained from a prior-enforcing generative adversarial
auto-encoder. Next, we introduce relation distillation as a means to align the
unpaired cross-modal samples i.e. the unpaired target videos and unpaired 3D pose
sequences. To this end, we propose a new set of non-local relations in order to
characterize long-range latent pose interactions unlike general contrastive relations
where positive couplings are limited to a local neighborhood structure. Further,
we provide an objective way to quantify non-localness in order to select the most
effective relation set. We evaluate different self-adaptation settings and demonstrate
state-of-the-art 3D human pose estimation performance on standard benchmarks.1

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation systems have garnered immense attention due to their innumerable applications [55, 19, 85]. The successes of such systems are mostly driven by large-scale datasets containing
images with paired 3D pose annotations [25]. Unlike 2D joint landmarks, annotating a 3D pose
requires body-worn sensors or multi-camera structure-from-motion setup [71] which is challenging
to install outdoors. Hence, the available datasets are either captured in constrained laboratory settings
or are limited in size and diversity. Unsurprisingly, models trained on such datasets exhibit poor
cross-dataset generalization. Addressing this, several approaches [11, 77, 56, 34] resort to weaklysupervised methods that rely on images with paired 2D landmark annotations. Certain methods
require additional supervision such as depth [81, 11] or multi-view image pairs [66, 33]. However,
they still suffer from dataset-bias due to their strong reliance on some form of paired supervision.
In this work, we digress from any form of paired supervision or auxiliary cues (multi-view or depth)
thereby avoiding the curse of dataset-bias. We thus introduce a self-supervised domain adaptation
framework for 3D human pose estimation (Fig. 1). In the proposed setting, we consider access
to three different datasets. First, a labeled source dataset obtained from graphics-based synthetic
environments such as SURREAL [79] or in-studio datasets such as Human3.6M [25]. Second,
unlabeled video sequences from the target domain. Third, a set of unpaired 3D pose sequences.
Following this, image-to-pose inference is carried out via two explicit mappings i.e., image-to-latent
CNN followed by a latent-to-pose network. Here, the latent-to-pose network is pre-learned as a
decoder of a prior-enforcing generative adversarial auto-encoder [47] (AAE) in order to restrict the
1

Webpage: https://sites.google.com/view/sa3dhp

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

