Fast Abductive Learning by
Similarity-based Consistency Optimization

Yu-Xuan Huang1 , Wang-Zhou Dai2 , Le-Wen Cai1 , Stephen Muggleton2 , Yuan Jiang1
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{huangyx, cailw, jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
2
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
{w.dai, s.muggleton}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
To utilize the raw inputs and symbolic knowledge simultaneously, some recent
neuro-symbolic learning methods use abduction, i.e., abductive reasoning, to integrate sub-symbolic perception and logical inference. While the perception model,
e.g., a neural network, outputs some facts that are inconsistent with the symbolic
background knowledge base, abduction can help revise the incorrect perceived facts
by minimizing the inconsistency between them and the background knowledge.
However, to enable effective abduction, previous approaches need an initialized perception model that discriminates the input raw instances. This limits the application
of these methods, as the discrimination ability is usually acquired from a thorough
pre-training when the raw inputs are difficult to classify. In this paper, we propose
a novel abduction strategy, which leverages the similarity between samples, rather
than the output information by the perceptual neural network, to guide the search
in abduction. Based on this principle, we further present ABductive Learning with
Similarity (ABLSim) and apply it to some difficult neuro-symbolic learning tasks.
Experiments show that the efficiency of ABLSim is significantly higher than the
state-of-the-art neuro-symbolic methods, allowing it to achieve better performance
with less labeled data and weaker domain knowledge.

1

Introduction

To address the limitations of current machine learning methods, the next generation of Artificial
Intelligence calls for the integration of data-driven machine learning and knowledge-driven reasoning
such as logic inference [1]. Neuro-Symbolic Learning [8, 22] and Statistical Relational AI [23] are
representative works in this direction. However, most of these approaches try to approximate logical
calculus with differentiable functions using distributed representations in a neural network, and train
the model in an end-to-end manner, which usually demand a large number of labeled data.
Abductive Learning (ABL) [5, 29] is a novel framework attaching machine learning models to a firstorder logical reasoning model while preserving the full expressive power of each side: The machine
learning model learns to convert raw input data (e.g., images, text) into symbolic representations, and
the logical model tries to reason about them. Because ABL allows full-featured logical reasoning, it
can directly consult symbolic background knowledge bases and reduce the requirement for massive
labeled data. The logical reasoning model adopts abductive reasoning [20], or abduction, to search
for the labels of the unlabeled instances, which are used for updating the machine learning model.
Because abductive reasoning is non-deterministic, for each unlabeled instance there could be multiple
abduced labels. To choose the best labels, one needs to minimize the inconsistency between the
abduced labels and the symbolic background knowledge.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

