Training Certifiably Robust Neural Networks with
Efficient Local Lipschitz Bounds
Yujia Huang1 Huan Zhang2 Yuanyuan Shi3 J. Zico Kolter2,4 Anima Anandkumar1,5
1
California Institute of Technology 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 UC San Diego
4
Bosch Center for AI 5 NVIDIA
yjhuang@caltech.edu huan@huan-zhang.com yyshi@eng.ucsd.edu
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
Certified robustness is a desirable property for deep neural networks in safetycritical applications, and popular training algorithms can certify robustness of a
neural network by computing a global bound on its Lipschitz constant. However,
such a bound is often loose: it tends to over-regularize the neural network and degrade its natural accuracy. A tighter Lipschitz bound may provide a better tradeoff
between natural and certified accuracy, but is generally hard to compute exactly
due to non-convexity of the network. In this work, we propose an efficient and
trainable local Lipschitz upper bound by considering the interactions between
activation functions (e.g. ReLU) and weight matrices. Specifically, when computing the induced norm of a weight matrix, we eliminate the corresponding rows
and columns where the activation function is guaranteed to be a constant in the
neighborhood of each given data point, which provides a provably tighter bound
than the global Lipschitz constant of the neural network. Our method can be used
as a plug-in module to tighten the Lipschitz bound in many certifiable training
algorithms. Furthermore, we propose to clip activation functions (e.g., ReLU and
MaxMin) with a learnable upper threshold and a sparsity loss to assist the network
to achieve an even tighter local Lipschitz bound. Experimentally, we show that
our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both clean and
certified accuracy on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and TinyImageNet datasets with various
network architectures.

1

Introduction

With the ever-growing deployment of deep neural networks, formal robustness guarantees are needed
in many safety-critical applications. Strategies to improve robustness such as adversarial training
only provide empirical robustness, without formal guarantees, and many existing adversarial defenses
have been successfully broken using stronger attacks [1]. In contrast, certified defenses give formal
robustness guarantees that any norm-bounded adversary cannot alter the prediction of a given network.
Bounding the global Lipschitz constant of a neural network is a computationally efficient and scalable
approach to provide certifiable robustness guarantees [2–4]. The global Lipschitz bound is typically
computed as the product of the spectral norm of each layer. However, this bound can be quite loose
because it needs to hold for all points from the input domain, including those inputs that are far away
from each other. Training a network while constraining this loose bound often imposes to high a
degree of regularization and reduces network capacity. It leads to considerably lower clean accuracy
in certified training compared to standard and adversarial training [5, 6].
A local Lipschitz constant, on the other hand, bounds the norm of output perturbation only for
inputs from a small region, usually selected as a neighborhood around each data point. It produces a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

