Differentiable Unsupervised Feature Selection based
on a Gated Laplacian

Ofir Lindenbaum ∗
Faculty of Engineering
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat Gan, Israel 5290002
ofir.lindenbaum@biu.ac.il
Erez Peterfreund
Hebrew University

Uri Shaham ∗
Center for Outcome Research and Evaluation
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06510, USA
uri.shaham@yale.edu

Jonathan Svirsky
Independent Researcher

Nicolas Casey
University of Pennsylvania

Yuval Kluger
Program in Applied Math
Department of Pathology
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06510, USA
yuval.kluger@yale.edu

Abstract
Scientific observations may consist of a large number of variables (features). Selecting a subset of meaningful features is often crucial for identifying patterns hidden
in the ambient space. In this paper, we present a method for unsupervised feature
selection, and we demonstrate its advantage in clustering, a common unsupervised
task. We propose a differentiable loss that combines a graph Laplacian-based score
that favors low-frequency features with a gating mechanism for removing nuisance
features. Our method improves upon the naive graph Laplacian score by replacing
it with a gated variant computed on a subset of low-frequency features. We identify
this subset by learning the parameters of continuously relaxed Bernoulli variables,
which gate the entire feature space. We mathematically motivate the proposed
approach and demonstrate that it is crucial to compute the graph Laplacian on the
gated inputs rather than on the full feature space in the high noise regime. Using
several real-world examples, we demonstrate the efficacy and advantage of the
proposed approach over leading baselines.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised and self-supervised learning studies have been significantly growing interest in the
neural network research community. This was prompted by the impressive empirical results that
unsupervised learning methods produce in analyzing large amounts of unlabeled data, such as in
natural language processing. Many scientific domains, such as biology and physics, have seen
the growth of computational and storage resources, alongside advancements in the simultaneous
measurement of numerous features, making the analysis of large, high-dimensional datasets a vital
research need.
∗

Indicates equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

