Video Instance Segmentation using
Inter-Frame Communication Transformers
Sukjun Hwang1

Miran Heo1
Seoung Wug Oh2
Seon Joo Kim1
2
Yonsei University
Adobe Research
{sj.hwang, miran, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr
seoh@adobe.com
1

Abstract
We propose a novel end-to-end solution for video instance segmentation (VIS)
based on transformers. Recently, the per-clip pipeline shows superior performance
over per-frame methods leveraging richer information from multiple frames. However, previous per-clip models require heavy computation and memory usage to
achieve frame-to-frame communications, limiting practicality. In this work, we propose Inter-frame Communication Transformers (IFC), which significantly reduces
the overhead for information-passing between frames by efficiently encoding the
context within the input clip. Specifically, we propose to utilize concise memory
tokens as a means of conveying information as well as summarizing each frame
scene. The features of each frame are enriched and correlated with other frames
through exchange of information between the precisely encoded memory tokens.
We validate our method on the latest benchmark sets and achieved state-of-the-art
performance (AP 42.6 on YouTube-VIS 2019 val set using the offline inference)
while having a considerably fast runtime (89.4 FPS). Our method can also be
applied to near-online inference for processing a video in real-time with only a
small delay. The code is available at https://github.com/sukjunhwang/IFC.

1

Introduction

With the growing interest toward the video domain in computer vision, the task of video instance
segmentation (VIS) is emerging [1]. Most of the current approaches [1, 2, 3, 4] extend image instance
segmentation models [5, 6, 7, 8] and take frame-wise inputs. These per-frame methods extend the
concept of temporal tracking by matching frame-wise predictions of high similarities. The models
can be easily customized to real-world applications as they run in an online [9] fashion, but they show
limitations in dealing with occlusions and motion blur that are common in videos.
On the contrary, per-clip models are designed to overcome such challenges by incorporating multiple
frames while sacrificing the efficiency. Previous per-clip approaches [10, 11, 12] aggregate information within a clip to generate instance-specific features. As the features are generated per instance,
the number of instances in addition to the number of frames has a significant impact on the overall
computation. Recently proposed VisTR [11] adapted DETR [13] to the VIS task and reduced the
inference time by inserting the entire video, not a clip, to its offline end-to-end network. However, its
full self-attention transformers [14] over the space-time inputs involve explosive computations and
memories. In this work, we raise the following question: can a per-clip method be efficient while
attaining great accuracy?
To achieve our goal, we introduce Inter-frame Communication Transformers (IFC) to greatly reduce
the computations of the full space-time transformers. Similar to recent works [15, 16, 17] that
alleviate the explosive computational growth inherent in attention-based models [14, 18], IFC takes a
decomposition strategy utilizing two transformers. The first transformer (Encode-Receive, E) encodes
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

