Matching a Desired Causal State
via Shift Interventions
Jiaqi Zhang
LIDS, EECS, and IDSS, MIT
viczhang@mit.edu

Chandler Squires
LIDS, EECS, and IDSS, MIT
csquires@mit.edu

Caroline Uhler
LIDS, EECS, and IDSS, MIT
cuhler@mit.edu

Abstract
Transforming a causal system from a given initial state to a desired target state
is an important task permeating multiple fields including control theory, biology,
and materials science. In causal models, such transformations can be achieved
by performing a set of interventions. In this paper, we consider the problem of
identifying a shift intervention that matches the desired mean of a system through
active learning. We define the Markov equivalence class that is identifiable from
shift interventions and propose two active learning strategies that are guaranteed to
exactly match a desired mean. We then derive a worst-case lower bound for the
number of interventions required and show that these strategies are optimal for
certain classes of graphs. In particular, we show that our strategies may require
exponentially fewer interventions than the previously considered approaches, which
optimize for structure learning in the underlying causal graph. In line with our
theoretical results, we also demonstrate experimentally that our proposed active
learning strategies require fewer interventions compared to several baselines.

1

Introduction

Consider an experimental biologist attempting to turn cells from one type into another, e.g., from
fibroblasts to neurons (Vierbuchen et al., 2010), by altering gene expression. This is known as
cellular reprogramming and has shown great promise in recent years for regenerative medicine
(Rackham et al., 2016). A common approach is to model gene expression of a cell, which is
governed by an underlying gene regulatory network, using a structural causal model (Friedman
et al., 2000; Badsha et al., 2019). Through a set of interventions, such as gene knockouts or overexpression of transcription factors (Dominguez et al., 2016), a biologist can infer the structure of the
underlying regulatory network. After inferring enough about this structure, a biologist can identify
the intervention needed to successfully reprogram a cell. More generally, transforming a causal
system from an initial state to a desired state through interventions is an important task pervading
multiple applications. Other examples include closed-loop control (Touchette and Lloyd, 2004) and
pathway design of microstructures (Wodo et al., 2015).
With little prior knowledge of the underlying causal model, this task is intrinsically difficult. Previous
works have addressed the problem of intervention design to achieve full identifiability of the causal
model (Hauser and Bühlmann, 2014; Greenewald et al., 2019; Squires et al., 2020a). However,
since interventional experiments tend to be expensive in practice, one wishes to minimize the
number of trials and learn just enough information about the causal model to be able to identify the
intervention that will transform it into the desired state. Furthermore, in many realistic cases, the set
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

