What training reveals about neural network
complexity

Andreas Loukas
EPFL
andreas.loukas@epfl.ch

Marinos Poiitis
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
mpoiitis@csd.auth.gr

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
This work explores the Benevolent Training Hypothesis (BTH) which argues that
the complexity of the function a deep neural network (NN) is learning can be
deduced by its training dynamics. Our analysis provides evidence for BTH by
relating the NN’s Lipschitz constant at different regions of the input space with the
behavior of the stochastic training procedure. We first observe that the Lipschitz
constant close to the training data affects various aspects of the parameter trajectory,
with more complex networks having a longer trajectory, bigger variance, and often
veering further from their initialization. We then show that NNs whose 1st layer
bias is trained more steadily (i.e., slowly and with little variation) have bounded
complexity even in regions of the input space that are far from any training point.
Finally, we find that steady training with Dropout implies a training- and datadependent generalization bound that grows poly-logarithmically with the number
of parameters. Overall, our results support the intuition that good training behavior
can be a useful bias towards good generalization.

1

Introduction

Though neural networks (NNs) trained on relatively small datasets can generalize well, when employing them on unfamiliar tasks significant trial and error may be needed to select an architecture
that does not overfit [1]. Could it be possible that NN designers favor architectures that can be easily
trained and this biases them towards models with better generalization?
In the heart of this question lies what we refer to as the “Benevolent Training Hypothesis” (BTH),
which argues that the behavior of the training procedure can be used as an indicator of the complexity
of the function a NN is learning. Some empirical evidence for BTH already exists: (a) It has been
observed that the training is becoming more tedious for high frequency directions in the input
space [2] and that low frequencies are learned first [3]. (b) Training also slows down the more
images/labels are corrupted [4], e.g., the Inception [5] architecture is 3.5× slower to train when
used to predict random labels than real ones. (c) Finally, Arpit et al. [6] noticed that the loss is
more sensitive with respect to specific training points when the network is memorizing data and that
training slows down faster as the NN size decreases when the data contain noise.
From the theory side, it is known that the training of shallow networks converges faster for more
separable classes [7] and slower when fitting random labels [8]. In addition, the stability [9] of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) implies that (under assumptions) NNs that can be trained with
a small number of iterations provably generalize [10, 11]. Intuitively, since each gradient update
conveys limited information, a NN that sees each training point few times (typically one or two) will
not learn enough about the training set to overfit. Despite the elegance of this claim, the provided
explanation does not necessarily account for what is observed in practice, where NNs trained for
thousands of epochs can generalize even without rapidly decaying learning rates.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

