Modality-Agnostic Topology Aware Localization

Farhad G. Zanjani
Simone Merlin

Ilia Karmanov

Hanno Ackermann

Max Welling

Daniel Dijkman
Fatih Porikli

Qualcomm AI Research∗
{fzanjani,ikarmano,hackerma,ddijkman,smerlin,mwelling,fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
This work presents a data-driven approach for the indoor localization of an observer
on a 2D topological map of the environment. State-of-the-art techniques may yield
accurate estimates only when they are tailor-made for a specific data modality like
camera-based system that prevents their applicability to broader domains. Here,
we establish a modality-agnostic framework (called OT-Isomap) and formulate
the localization problem in the context of parametric manifold learning while
leveraging optimal transportation. This framework allows jointly learning a lowdimensional embedding as well as correspondences with a topological map. We
examine the generalizability of the proposed algorithm by applying it to data from
diverse modalities such as image sequences and radio frequency signals. The
experimental results demonstrate decimeter-level accuracy for localization using
different sensory inputs.

1

Introduction

Self-localization or localizing objects are primary tasks in navigation and surveillance systems. This
problem has been the subject of many studies in the machine learning community. It has been
addressed in several areas such as visual odometry [Engel et al., 2017, Brahmbhatt et al., 2018], visual
simultaneous mapping and localization (VSLAM) [Davison et al., 2007, Mur-Artal et al., 2015],
self-localization [Arth et al., 2011, Sattler et al., 2019, Sarlin et al., 2021], etc., and many approaches
have been proposed.
Recent localization methods achieve decimeter precision in the positioning of a moving camera
in an indoor environment by leveraging the advances in neural networks [Brahmbhatt et al., 2018,
Kendall et al., 2015]. However, such techniques are highly entangled with the modality of data
in use; thus, applying such specialized algorithms to other modalities is often not possible. For
example, the existing visual odometry and VSLAM techniques that rely on visual features or camera
projection models are incompatible with different sensory systems like radio frequency (RF) or audio
signals. Still, all instantiate the same problem. In contrast to existing solutions tailored for a particular
modality, we formulate the localization problem in terms of low-dimensional manifold learning to
represent the input samples in their intrinsic space and transport them to a given topological map
by inferring correspondences between intrinsic space and map. This approach allows a broader and
more generalizable solution that can be used with data from different modalities.
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

