Adversarial Regression
with Doubly Non-negative Weighting Matrices

Tam Le∗
RIKEN AIP
tam.le@riken.jp

Truyen Nguyen∗
University of Akron
tnguyen@uakron.edu

Jose Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Makoto Yamada
Kyoto University and RIKEN AIP
makoto.yamada@riken.jp

Viet Anh Nguyen
Stanford University and VinAI Research
v.anhnv81@vinai.io

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks that involve predicting an output response can be
solved by training a weighted regression model. Unfortunately, the predictive
power of this type of models may severely deteriorate under low sample sizes or
under covariate perturbations. Reweighting the training samples has aroused as
an effective mitigation strategy to these problems. In this paper, we propose a
novel and coherent scheme for kernel-reweighted regression by reparametrizing the
sample weights using a doubly non-negative matrix. When the weighting matrix is
confined in an uncertainty set using either the log-determinant divergence or the
Bures-Wasserstein distance, we show that the adversarially reweighted estimate
can be solved efficiently using first-order methods. Numerical experiments show
that our reweighting strategy delivers promising results on numerous datasets.

1

Introduction

We are interested in learning a parameter β that has a competitive predictive performance on a
response variable Y . Given N training samples (b
zi , x
bi , ybi )N
zi , x
bi ) are the contexts that
i=1 in which (b
possess explanatory power on ybi , learning the parameter β can be posed as a weighted regression
problem of the form
N
X
min
ω(b
zi )`(β, x
bi , ybi ).
(1)
β

i=1

In problem (1), ω is a weighting function that indicates the contribution of the sample-specific loss
to the objective. By aligning the covariate (b
zi , x
bi ) appropriately to the weighting term ω(b
zi ) and
the loss term `(β, x
bi , ybi ), the generic formulation of problem (1) can be adapted to many popular
learning and estimation tasks in machine learning. For example, problem (1) encapsulates the family
of kernel smoothers, including the Nadaraya-Watson estimator [16, 22, 39].
Example 1.1 (Nadaraya-Watson (NW) estimator for conditional expectation). Given the samples
(b
zi , ybi )N
i=1 , we are interested in estimating the conditional expectation of Y given Z = z0 for some
2
covariate z0 ∈ Z. The NW estimator is the optimizer of problem (1) with `(β, y) = kβ − yk2 and
the weighting function ω is given through a kernel K via ω(b
zi ) = K(z0 , zbi ). The NW estimate of
E[Y |Z = z0 ] admits a closed form expression
PN
K(z0 , zbi )b
yi
βNW = Pi=1
.
N
bi )
i=1 K(z0 , z
∗

: equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

