Weak-shot Fine-grained Classiﬁcation
via Similarity Transfer
Junjie Chen, Li Niu∗, Liu Liu, Liqing Zhang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{chen.bys, ustcnewly, shirlley}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recognizing ﬁne-grained categories remains a challenging task, due to the subtle distinctions among different subordinate categories, which results in the need
of abundant annotated samples. To alleviate the data-hungry problem, we consider the problem of learning novel categories from web data with the support
of a clean set of base categories, which is referred to as weak-shot learning. In
this setting, we propose a method called SimTrans to transfer pairwise semantic similarity from base categories to novel categories. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrstly
train a similarity net on clean data, and then leverage the transferred similarity
to denoise web training data using two simple yet effective strategies. In addition, we apply adversarial loss on similarity net to enhance the transferability
of similarity. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
weak-shot setting and our SimTrans method. Datasets and codes are available at
https://github.com/bcmi/SimTrans-Weak-Shot-Classiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have made a signiﬁcant advance on extensive computer vision tasks. A
large part of this advance has come from the available large-scale labeled datasets. For ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation, it is more necessary but more expensive to collect large-scale datasets. On the one
hand, the subtle differences among ﬁne-grained categories dramatically boost the demand for abundant samples. On the other hand, professional knowledge is usually required to annotate images for
enormous subcategories belonging to one category. As a consequence, ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation is
critically limited by the scarcity of well-labeled training images.
In practice, we often have a set of base categories with sufﬁcient well-labeled data, and the problem
is how to learn novel categories with less expense, in which base categories and novel categories
have no overlap. Such problem motivates zero-shot learning [19], few-shot learning [6], as well
as our setting. To bridge the gap between base (resp., seen) categories and novel (resp., unseen)
categories, zero-shot learning requires category-level semantic representation (e.g., word vector [27]
or human annotated attributes [19]) for all categories, while few-shot learning requires a few clean
examples (e.g., 5, 10) for novel categories. Despite the great success of zero-shot learning and fewshot learning, they have the following drawbacks: 1) Annotating attributes or a few clean samples
require expert knowledge, which is not always available; 2) Word vector is free, but much weaker
than human annotated attributes [1]. Fortunately, large-scale images are freely available from public
websites by using category names as queries, which is a promising data source to complement the
learning of novel ﬁne-grained categories without any manual annotation.
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

