Partial success in closing the gap between
human and machine vision
Robert Geirhos1-2§
Tizian Thieringer1

Kantharaju Narayanappa1

Matthias Bethge1∗

Benjamin Mitzkus1

Felix A. Wichmann1∗

Wieland Brendel1∗

1

University of Tübingen
International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems
∗
Joint senior authors
§
To whom correspondence should be addressed: robert.geirhos@uni-tuebingen.de
2

Abstract
A few years ago, the first CNN surpassed human performance on ImageNet. However, it soon became clear that machines lack robustness on more challenging test
cases, a major obstacle towards deploying machines “in the wild” and towards
obtaining better computational models of human visual perception. Here we ask:
Are we making progress in closing the gap between human and machine vision?
To answer this question, we tested human observers on a broad range of out-ofdistribution (OOD) datasets, recording 85,120 psychophysical trials across 90
participants. We then investigated a range of promising machine learning developments that crucially deviate from standard supervised CNNs along three axes:
objective function (self-supervised, adversarially trained, CLIP language-image
training), architecture (e.g. vision transformers), and dataset size (ranging from 1M
to 1B).
Our findings are threefold. (1.) The longstanding distortion robustness gap between humans and CNNs is closing, with the best models now exceeding human
feedforward performance on most of the investigated OOD datasets. (2.) There is
still a substantial image-level consistency gap, meaning that humans make different
errors than models. In contrast, most models systematically agree in their categorisation errors, even substantially different ones like contrastive self-supervised
vs. standard supervised models. (3.) In many cases, human-to-model consistency
improves when training dataset size is increased by one to three orders of magnitude. Our results give reason for cautious optimism: While there is still much
room for improvement, the behavioural difference between human and machine
vision is narrowing. In order to measure future progress, 17 OOD datasets with
image-level human behavioural data and evaluation code are provided as a toolbox
and benchmark at https://github.com/bethgelab/model-vs-human/.

1

Introduction

Looking back at the last decade, deep learning has made tremendous leaps of progress by any standard.
What started in 2012 with AlexNet [1] as the surprise winner of the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge quickly became the birth of a new AI “summer”, a summer lasting much
longer than just a season. With it, just like with any summer, came great expectations: the hope
that the deep learning revolution will see widespread applications in industry, that it will propel
breakthroughs in the sciences, and that it will ultimately close the gap between human and machine
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

