Per-Pixel Classification is Not All You Need
for Semantic Segmentation

Bowen Cheng1,2∗ Alexander G. Schwing2
1

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

2

Alexander Kirillov1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)

Abstract
Modern approaches typically formulate semantic segmentation as a per-pixel classification task, while instance-level segmentation is handled with an alternative mask
classification. Our key insight: mask classification is sufficiently general to solve
both semantic- and instance-level segmentation tasks in a unified manner using
the exact same model, loss, and training procedure. Following this observation,
we propose MaskFormer, a simple mask classification model which predicts a
set of binary masks, each associated with a single global class label prediction.
Overall, the proposed mask classification-based method simplifies the landscape
of effective approaches to semantic and panoptic segmentation tasks and shows
excellent empirical results. In particular, we observe that MaskFormer outperforms
per-pixel classification baselines when the number of classes is large. Our mask
classification-based method outperforms both current state-of-the-art semantic
(55.6 mIoU on ADE20K) and panoptic segmentation (52.7 PQ on COCO) models.1

1

Introduction

The goal of semantic segmentation is to partition an image into regions with different semantic
categories. Starting from Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) work of Long et al. [28], most deep
learning-based semantic segmentation approaches formulate semantic segmentation as per-pixel
classification (Figure 1 left), applying a classification loss to each output pixel [8, 46]. Per-pixel
predictions in this formulation naturally partition an image into regions of different classes.
Mask classification is an alternative paradigm that disentangles the image partitioning and classification aspects of segmentation. Instead of classifying each pixel, mask classification-based methods
predict a set of binary masks, each associated with a single class prediction (Figure 1 right). The
more flexible mask classification dominates the field of instance-level segmentation. Both Mask
R-CNN [19] and DETR [3] yield a single class prediction per segment for instance and panoptic
segmentation. In contrast, per-pixel classification assumes a static number of outputs and cannot
return a variable number of predicted regions/segments, which is required for instance-level tasks.
Our key observation: mask classification is sufficiently general to solve both semantic- and instancelevel segmentation tasks. In fact, before FCN [28], the best performing semantic segmentation
methods like O2P [4] and SDS [18] used a mask classification formulation. Given this perspective, a
natural question emerges: can a single mask classification model simplify the landscape of effective
approaches to semantic- and instance-level segmentation tasks? And can such a mask classification
model outperform existing per-pixel classification methods for semantic segmentation?
To address both questions we propose a simple MaskFormer approach that seamlessly converts any
existing per-pixel classification model into a mask classification. Using the set prediction mechanism
proposed in DETR [3], MaskFormer employs a Transformer decoder [37] to compute a set of pairs,
∗
1

Work partly done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
Project page: https://bowenc0221.github.io/maskformer

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

