3D Siamese Voxel-to-BEV Tracker for Sparse Point
Clouds
Le Hui† , Lingpeng Wang† , Mingmei Cheng, Jin Xie∗ , Jian Yang∗
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{le.hui, cslpwang, chengmm, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object tracking in point clouds is still a challenging problem due to the sparsity
of LiDAR points in dynamic environments. In this work, we propose a Siamese
voxel-to-BEV tracker, which can significantly improve the tracking performance in
sparse 3D point clouds. Specifically, it consists of a Siamese shape-aware feature
learning network and a voxel-to-BEV target localization network. The Siamese
shape-aware feature learning network can capture 3D shape information of the
object to learn the discriminative features of the object so that the potential target
from the background in sparse point clouds can be identified. To this end, we
first perform template feature embedding to embed the template’s feature into
the potential target and then generate a dense 3D shape to characterize the shape
information of the potential target. For localizing the tracked target, the voxel-toBEV target localization network regresses the target’s 2D center and the z-axis
center from the dense bird’s eye view (BEV) feature map in an anchor-free manner.
Concretely, we compress the voxelized point cloud along z-axis through max
pooling to obtain a dense BEV feature map, where the regression of the 2D center
and the z-axis center can be performed more effectively. Extensive evaluation on
the KITTI and nuScenes datasets shows that our method significantly outperforms
the current state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. Code is available at https:
//github.com/fpthink/V2B.

1

Introduction

Object tracking is an essential task in computer vision and has been widely in various applications,
such as autonomous vehicle, mobile robotics, and augmented reality. In the past few years, many
efforts [33, 2, 12, 64] have been made on 2D object tracking from RGB data. Recently, with the
development of 3D sensor such as LiDAR and Kinect, 3D object tracking [37, 72, 53, 28, 42] has
attracted more attention. Lately, some pioneering works [22, 18, 52] have focused on point cloud
based 3D object tracking. However, due to the sparsity of 3D point clouds, 3D object tracking on
point clouds is still a challenging task.
Few works are dedicated to 3D single object tracking (SOT) with only point clouds. As a pioneer,
SC3D [21] is the first 3D Siamese tracker that performs matching between the template and candidate
3D target proposals generated by Kalman filtering [22]. Furthermore, a shape completion network is
used to enhance shape information of candidate proposals in sparse point clouds, thereby improving
the accuracy of matching. However, SC3D cannot perform the end-to-end training, and consumes
†

Equal Contributions, ∗ Corresponding authors.
Le Hui, Lingpeng Wang, Mingmei Cheng, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent
Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of
Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, China.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

