Get Fooled for the Right Reason: Improving
Adversarial Robustness through a Teacher-guided
Curriculum Learning Approach

Anindya Sarkar ∗
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
anindyasarkar.ece@gmail.com

Anirban Sarkar *
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
cs16resch11006@iith.ac.in

Sowrya Gali *
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
cs18btech11012@iith.ac.in

Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
vineethnb@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Current SOTA adversarially robust models are mostly based on adversarial training
(AT) and differ only by some regularizers either at inner maximization or outer
minimization steps. Being repetitive in nature during the inner maximization step,
they take a huge time to train. We propose a non-iterative method that enforces
the following ideas during training. Attribution maps are more aligned to the
actual object in the image for adversarially robust models compared to naturally
trained models. Also, the allowed set of pixels to perturb an image (that changes
model decision) should be restricted to the object pixels only, which reduces the
attack strength by limiting the attack space. Our method achieves significant
performance gains with a little extra effort (10-20%) over existing AT models and
outperforms all other methods in terms of adversarial as well as natural accuracy.
We have performed extensive experimentation with CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and
TinyImageNet datasets and reported results against many popular strong adversarial
attacks to prove the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Ever since deep neural network (DNN) models have emerged as the de facto technique to be applied
for many vision problems, adversarial robustness has emerged as a critical need. Goodfellow et al.
[1] identified this serious issue to show very different predictive behavior of a DNN model with
similar looking images. Many efforts have followed since either to come up with fooling techniques
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] or defend deep models against them [3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. Nevertheless, both these research directions are important at this moment
and require more attention. In this work, our effort lies on devising an adversarially robust training
technique.
Adversarial training (AT) [3] is the most widely used method for adversarial robustness and most of
the improvements have since come by adding regularizers without changing the min-max formulation.
The regularizers are added either in the inner maximization [27, 8, 15] or outer minimization [19, 14]
term. Though AT-based methods are shown to perform well, they incur additional cost due to an
iterative inner maximization step. Our proposed robust training method circumvents this fundamental
issue.
With an objective of not following the costly min-max optimization of AT, we revisit adversarial
robustness in terms of standard model training. Adversarially robust models are shown to satisfy
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

