PerSim: Data-efficient Offline Reinforcement
Learning with Heterogeneous Agents
via Personalized Simulators
Anish Agarwal
MIT
anish90@mit.edu

Abdullah Alomar
MIT
aalomar@mit.edu

Dennis Shen
MIT
deshen@mit.edu

Varkey Alumootil
MIT
varkey@mit.edu

Zhi Xu
MIT
zhixu@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
MIT
devavrat@mit.edu
Cindy Yang
MIT
cxy99@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider offline reinforcement learning (RL) with heterogeneous agents under
severe data scarcity, i.e., we only observe a single historical trajectory for every agent
under an unknown, potentially sub-optimal policy. We find that the performance
of state-of-the-art offline and model-based RL methods degrade significantly given
such limited data availability, even for commonly perceived “solved” benchmark
settings such as “MountainCar” and “CartPole”. To address this challenge, we
propose PerSim, a model-based offline RL approach which first learns a personalized
simulator for each agent by collectively using the historical trajectories across all
agents, prior to learning a policy. We do so by positing that the transition dynamics
across agents can be represented as a latent function of latent factors associated
with agents, states, and actions; subsequently, we theoretically establish that this
function is well-approximated by a “low-rank” decomposition of separable agent,
state, and action latent functions. This representation suggests a simple, regularized
neural network architecture to effectively learn the transition dynamics per agent,
even with scarce, offline data. We perform extensive experiments across several
benchmark environments and RL methods. The consistent improvement of our
approach, measured in terms of both state dynamics prediction and eventual reward,
confirms the efficacy of our framework in leveraging limited historical data to
simultaneously learn personalized policies across agents.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) coupled with expressive deep neural networks has now become a generic
yet powerful solution for learning complex decision-making policies for an agent of interest; it provides
the key algorithmic foundation underpinning recent successes such as game solving [34, 45, 44] and
robotics [30, 22]. However, many state-of-the-art RL methods are data hungry and require the ability
to query samples at will, which is infeasible for numerous settings such as healthcare, autonomous
driving, and socio-economic systems. As a result, there has been a rapidly growing literature on “offline
RL” [31, 24, 32, 15], which focuses on leveraging existing datasets to learn decision-making policies.
Within offline RL, we consider a regime of severe data scarcity: there are multiple agents and for
each agent, we only observe a single historical trajectory generated under an unknown, potentially
sub-optimal policy; further, the agents are heterogeneous, i.e., each agent has unique state transition dynamics. Importantly, the characteristics of the agents that make their transition dynamics heterogeneous
are latent. Using such limited offline data to simultaneously learn a good “personalized” policy for each
agent is a challenging setting that has received limited attention. Below, we use a prevalent example
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

