Preconditioned Gradient Descent for
Over-Parameterized Nonconvex Matrix Factorization
Gavin Zhang
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
jialun2@illinois.edu

Salar Fattahi
University of Michigan
fattahi@umich.edu

Richard Y. Zhang
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
ryz@illinois.edu

Abstract
In practical instances of nonconvex matrix factorization, the rank of the true solution
r⋆ is often unknown, so the rank r of the model can be overspecified as r > r⋆ .
This over-parameterized regime of matrix factorization significantly slows down the
convergence of local search algorithms, from a linear rate with r = r⋆ to a sublinear
rate when r > r⋆ . We propose an inexpensive preconditioner for the matrix
sensing variant of nonconvex matrix factorization that restores the convergence
rate of gradient descent back to linear, even in the over-parameterized case, while
also making it agnostic to possible ill-conditioning in the ground truth. Classical
gradient descent in a neighborhood of the solution slows down due to the need for
the model matrix factor to become singular. Our key result is that this singularity
can be corrected by ℓ2 regularization with a specific range of values for the damping
parameter. In fact, a good damping parameter can be inexpensively estimated
from the current iterate. The resulting algorithm, which we call preconditioned
gradient descent or PrecGD, is stable under noise, and converges linearly to an
information theoretically optimal error bound. Our numerical experiments find that
PrecGD works equally well in restoring the linear convergence of other variants of
nonconvex matrix factorization in the over-parameterized regime.

1

Introduction

Numerous problems in machine learning can be reduced to the matrix factorization problem of
recovering a low-rank positive semidefinite matrix M ⋆ ⪰ 0, given a small number of potentially
noisy observations [1–7]. In every case, the most common approach is to formulate an n×n candidate
matrix M = XX T in factored form, and to minimize a nonconvex empirical loss f (X) over its n × r
low-rank factor X. But in most real applications of nonconvex matrix factorization, the rank of the
ground truth r⋆ = rank(M ⋆ ) is unknown. It is reasonable to choose the rank r of the model XX T
conservatively, setting it to be potentially larger than r⋆ , given that the ground truth can be exactly
recovered so long as r ≥ r⋆ . In practice, this will often lead to an over-parameterized regime, in
which r > r⋆ , and we have specified more degrees of freedom in our model XX T than exists in the
underlying ground truth M ⋆ .
Zhuo et al. [8] recently pointed out that nonconvex matrix factorization becomes substantially less
efficient in the over-parameterized regime. For the prototypical instance of matrix factorization
known as matrix sensing (see Section 3 below for details) it is well-known that, if r = r⋆ , then
(classic) gradient descent or GD
Xk+1 = Xk − α∇f (Xk )
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(GD)

