Multi-modal Dependency Tree for Video Captioning

Wentian Zhao, Xinxiao Wu∗
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science
Beijing Institute of Technology
No. 5, Zhongguancun South Street, Beijing, China
{wentian_zhao,wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn

Jiebo Luo
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Generating fluent and relevant language to describe visual content is critical for the
video captioning task. Many existing methods generate captions using sequence
models that predict words in a left-to-right order. In this paper, we investigate
a graph structured model by explicitly modeling the hierarchical structure in the
sentences to further improve the fluency and relevance of the generated captions. To
this end, we propose a novel video captioning method that generates a sentence by
first constructing a multi-modal dependency tree and then traversing the constructed
tree, where the syntactic structure and semantic relationship in the sentence are
represented by the tree topology. To take full advantage of the information from
both vision and language, both the visual and textual representation features are
encoded into each tree node. Different from existing dependency parsing methods
that generate uni-modal dependency trees for language understanding, our method
constructs multi-modal dependency trees for language generation of videos. We
also propose a tree-structured reinforcement learning algorithm to effectively
optimize the captioning model, where a novel reward is designed by evaluating
the semantic consistency between the generated sub-trees and the ground-truth
tree. Extensive experiments on several video captioning datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Video captioning has received extensive attention from researchers in both computer vision and
natural language processing. It is a challenging task since it requires not only understanding the
visual content but also generating fluent and relevant sentences. With the success of deep neural
networks in natural language processing, many existing video captioning methods [1, 2] use recurrent
neural network (RNN) to generate sentences, which processes sequences by updating hidden states.
Several recent studies [3–6] apply Transformer [7], which relates the words in the sequences using
a self-attention mechanism, to video captioning. All these methods treat each sentence as a word
sequence and generate words in a predefined left-to-right order by capturing the relatively close
contextual relationship between words in the sentence.
In this paper, we investigate a graph structured model for video captioning to explicitly model the
hierarchical structure in the sentence and capture the long-range dependency between words. With
this in mind, we propose to generate a sentence by first constructing a multi-modal dependency tree
in a top-down and depth-first order, and then traversing the tree in a recursive manner, as shown
in Figure 1. Each node of the tree is represented by a multi-modal embedding representation that
integrates the information from both visual and textual modalities. During the tree construction, each
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

