Non-asymptotic convergence bounds for
Wasserstein approximation using point clouds

Quentin Mérigot
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS,
Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay,
91405, Orsay, France
Institut Universitaire de France

Filippo Santambrogio
Univ Lyon,
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS
UMR 5208, Institut Camille Jordan
F-69622 Villeurbanne
Institut Universitaire de France

Clément Sarrazin
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS,
Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay
91405, Orsay, France

Abstract
Several issues in machine learning and inverse problems require to generate discrete
data, as if sampled from a model probability distribution. A common way to do
so relies on the construction of a uniform probability distribution over a set of N
points which minimizes the Wasserstein distance to the model distribution. This
minimization problem, where the unknowns are the positions of the atoms, is
non-convex. Yet, in most cases, a suitably adjusted version of Lloyd’s algorithm —
in which Voronoi cells are replaced by Power cells — leads to configurations with
small Wasserstein error. This is surprising because, again, of the non-convex nature
of the problem, as well as the existence of spurious critical points. We provide
explicit estimates for the convergence of this Lloyd-type algorithm, starting from
a cloud of points that are sufficiently far from each other. Our estimates are tight
when the algorithm is initialized from an point cloud that is evenly distributed in
the ambient space. Similar bounds can be deduced for the corresponding gradient
descent. These bounds naturally lead to a modified Poliak-Łojasiewicz inequality
for the Wasserstein distance cost, with an error term depending on the distances
between Dirac masses in the discrete distribution.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the theory of optimal transport has been the source of stimulating ideas in machine
learning and in inverse problems. Optimal transport can be used to define distances, called Wasserstein
or earth-mover distances, between probability distributions over a metric space. These distances
allows one to measure the closeness between a generated distribution and a model distribution, and
they have been used with success as data attachment terms in inverse problems. Practically, it has been
observed for several different inverse problems that replacing usual loss functions with Wasserstein
distances tend to increase the basin of convergence of the methods towards a good solution of the
problem, or even to convexify the landscape of the minimized energy [8, 7]. This good behaviour is
not fully understood, but one may attribute it partly to the fact that the Wasserstein distances encodes
the geometry of the underlying space. A notable use of Wasserstein distances in machine learning is
in the field of generative adversarial networks, where one seeks to design a neural network able to
produce random examples whose distribution is close to a prescribed model distribution [2].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

