Individual Privacy Accounting via a Rényi Filter

Vitaly Feldman
Apple
vitaly.edu@gmail.com

Tijana Zrnic
University of California, Berkeley
tijana.zrnic@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We consider a sequential setting in which a single dataset of individuals is used to
perform adaptively-chosen analyses, while ensuring that the differential privacy loss
of each participant does not exceed a pre-specified privacy budget. The standard
approach to this problem relies on bounding a worst-case estimate of the privacy
loss over all individuals and all possible values of their data, for every single
analysis. Yet, in many scenarios this approach is overly conservative, especially
for “typical” data points which incur little privacy loss by participation in most of
the analyses. In this work, we give a method for tighter privacy loss accounting
based on the value of a personalized privacy loss estimate for each individual in
each analysis. To implement the accounting method we design a filter for Rényi
differential privacy. A filter is a tool that ensures that the privacy parameter of a
composed sequence of algorithms with adaptively-chosen privacy parameters does
not exceed a pre-specified budget. Our filter is simpler and tighter than the known
filter for (, δ)-differential privacy by Rogers et al. [29]. We apply our results to the
analysis of noisy gradient descent and show that personalized accounting can be
practical, easy to implement, and can only make the privacy-utility tradeoff tighter.

1

Introduction

Understanding how privacy of an individual degrades as the number of analyses using their data
grows is of paramount importance in privacy-preserving data analysis. This allows individuals to
participate in multiple disjoint statistical analyses, all the while knowing that their privacy cannot be
compromised by aggregating the resulting reports. Furthermore, this feature is crucial for privacypreserving algorithm design—instead of having to reason about the privacy properties of a complex
algorithm, it allows reasoning about the privacy of the subroutines that make up the final algorithm.
For differential privacy (DP) [13], this accounting of privacy losses is typically done using composition
theorems. Importantly, given that statistical analyses often rely on the outputs of previous analyses,
and that algorithmic subroutines feed into one another, the composition theorems need to be adaptive,
namely, allow the choice of which algorithm to run next to depend on the outputs of all previous
computations. For example, in gradient descent, the computation of the gradient depends on the value
of the current iterate, which itself is the output of the previous steps of the algorithm.
Given the central role of adaptive composition theorems in differential privacy, they have been
investigated in numerous works (e.g. [16, 23, 11, 27, 26, 4, 29, 8, 30]). While they differ in some
aspects, they also share one limitation. Namely, all of these theorems reason about the worst-case
privacy loss for each constituent algorithm in the composition. Here, “worst-case” refers to the
worst choice of individual in the dataset and worst choice of value for their data. This pessimistic
accounting implies that every algorithm is summarized via a single privacy parameter, shared among
all participants in the analysis.
In most scenarios, however, different individuals have different effects on each of the algorithms,
as measured by differential privacy. More precisely, the output of an analysis may have little to no
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

