Continuous-time edge modelling using non-parametric
point processes
Xuhui Fan1 , Bin Li2 , Feng Zhou3 , and Scott A. Sisson1
1

UNSW Data Science Hub, and School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of New South Wales
2
Shanghai Key Lab of IIP, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University,
{xuhui.fan, scott.sisson}@unsw.edu.au; libin@fudan.edu.cn; zhoufeng6288@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The mutually-exciting Hawkes process (ME-HP) is a natural choice to model
reciprocity, which is an important attribute of continuous-time edge (dyadic) data.
However, existing ways of implementing the ME-HP for such data are either
inflexible, as the exogenous (background) rate functions are typically constant
and the endogenous (excitation) rate functions are specified parametrically, or
inefficient, as inference usually relies on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
with high computational costs. To address these limitations, we discuss various
approaches to model design, and develop three variants of non-parametric point
processes for continuous-time edge modelling (CTEM). The resulting models are
highly adaptable as they generate intensity functions through sigmoidal Gaussian
processes, and so provide greater modelling flexibility than parametric forms. The
models are implemented via a fast variational inference method enabled by a
novel edge modelling construction. The superior performance of the proposed
CTEM models is demonstrated through extensive experimental evaluations on four
real-world continuous-time edge data sets.

1

Introduction

Continuous-time edge (or dyadic) data, which comprise information on edges (between two individuals or nodes) and their times of occurrence, arise naturally in many applications, such as sending and
receiving messages, posting and answering comments on social networks, and purchasing groceries
in online stores. Reciprocity is an important attribute of edge data, in that many edges are induced
as responses to previous oppositely-directed edges (e.g. a reply email is written in response to an
initial message between two individuals). As a result, mutually-exciting Hawkes processes (MEHP) [13, 12], which regard the directed edges as events, are commonly used to analyse edge data
[3, 8, 25, 29, 26, 20]. For example, [3] uses the ME-HP to model the reciprocity of group-wise edges,
and [20] uses sparse exchangeable random measures [4, 28] to model the ME-HPs exogenous values.
However, these existing methods are either limited in modelling flexibility, or inefficient to implement.
For the former, the exogenous (background rate) functions in the ME-HP are typically assumed
to be static and the endogenous (excitation) functions are specified parametrically, which may be
inadequate for modelling complex real-world systems. E.g., the exogenous intensities may exhibit
daily or weekly periodicity, and the endogenous functions might not be strictly decreasing over time.
For the latter, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are usually adopted for model inference,
which usually require high computational costs and large output storage. Without proper scalable
inference methods, it is difficult to deploy these models to larger-scale datasets.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

