Supervising the Transfer
of Reasoning Patterns in VQA
Corentin Kervadec*1,2
1

Orange Innovation, France

Christian Wolf*2 Grigory Antipov1
Madiha Nadri3
2

LIRIS, INSA-Lyon, France

3

Moez Baccouche1

LAGEPP, Université de Lyon, France

firstname.lastname@orange.com, christian.wolf@insa-lyon.fr,
madiha.nadri@lagep.univ-lyon1.fr, *equal contribution

Abstract
Methods for Visual Question Anwering (VQA) are notorious for leveraging dataset
biases rather than performing reasoning, hindering generalization. It has been
recently shown that better reasoning patterns emerge in attention layers of a stateof-the-art VQA model when they are trained on perfect (oracle) visual inputs. This
provides evidence that deep neural networks can learn to reason when training
conditions are favorable enough. However, transferring this learned knowledge
to deployable models is a challenge, as much of it is lost during the transfer. We
propose a method for knowledge transfer based on a regularization term in our
loss function, supervising the sequence of required reasoning operations. We
provide a theoretical analysis based on PAC-learning, showing that such program
prediction can lead to decreased sample complexity under mild hypotheses. We
also demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach experimentally on the GQA
dataset and show its complementarity to BERT-like self-supervised pre-training.

1

Introduction

Reasoning over images is the main goal of Visual Question Anwering (VQA), a task where a model
is asked to answer questions over images. This problem is a test bed for the creation of agents capable
of high-level reasoning, as it involves multi-modal and high-dimensional data as well as complex
decision functions requiring latent representations and multiple hops. State-of-the-art models are
notorious for leveraging dataset biases and shortcuts in learning rather than performing reasoning,
leading to lack of generalization, as evidenced by extensive recent work on bias oriented benchmarks
for vision-and-language reasoning [1, 20, 21, 31]. Even large-scale semi-supervised pre-training
methods, which successfully managed to increase overall VQA performance, still struggle to address
questions whose answers are rare given a context [20].
It has been recently shown that reasoning patterns emerge in attention layers of a SOTA VQA model
when trained on perfect (oracle) visual inputs, which provides evidence that deep neural networks
can learn to reason, when training conditions are favorable enough [21]. In particular, uncertainty
and noise in visual inputs seems to be a major cause for shortcut learning in VQA. While this kind
of methods provide strong empirical results and insights on the bottlenecks in problems involving
learning to reason, they still suffer from significant loss in reasoning capabilities during the transfer
phase, when the model is required to adapt from perfectly clean visual input to the noisy input it
will encounter after deployment. We conjecture, that reasoning on noisy data involves additional
functional components not necessary in the clean case due to different types of domain shifts: (1) a
presence shift, caused by imperfect object detectors, leading to missing visual objects necessary for
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

