SOFT: Softmax-free Transformer with Linear
Complexity

Jiachen Lu1 Jinghan Yao1 Junge Zhang1 Xiatian Zhu2 Hang Xu3
Weiguo Gao1 Chunjing Xu3 Tao Xiang2 Li Zhang1∗
1

Fudan University

2

University of Surrey

3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

https://fudan-zvg.github.io/SOFT

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have pushed the state-of-the-art for various visual recognition tasks by patch-wise image tokenization followed by self-attention. However,
the employment of self-attention modules results in a quadratic complexity in
both computation and memory usage. Various attempts on approximating the selfattention computation with linear complexity have been made in Natural Language
Processing. However, an in-depth analysis in this work shows that they are either
theoretically flawed or empirically ineffective for visual recognition. We further
identify that their limitations are rooted in keeping the softmax self-attention during
approximations. Specifically, conventional self-attention is computed by normalizing the scaled dot-product between token feature vectors. Keeping this softmax
operation challenges any subsequent linearization efforts. Based on this insight,
for the first time, a softmax-free transformer or SOFT is proposed. To remove softmax in self-attention, Gaussian kernel function is used to replace the dot-product
similarity without further normalization. This enables a full self-attention matrix to be approximated via a low-rank matrix decomposition. The robustness
of the approximation is achieved by calculating its Moore-Penrose inverse using
a Newton-Raphson method. Extensive experiments on ImageNet show that our
SOFT significantly improves the computational efficiency of existing ViT variants.
Crucially, with a linear complexity, much longer token sequences are permitted in
SOFT, resulting in superior trade-off between accuracy and complexity.

1

Introduction

Recently the step change brought by Transformers [33] in natural language processing (NLP) [10, 4]
seems to have arrived in vision [11, 41, 47, 46]. Indeed, with less inductive bias in its architecture
design than Convolution neural networks (CNNs), pure Vision Transformer (ViT) [11] and its variants
have shown to be able to outperform CNNs on various vision tasks [8, 15]. However, there is a
bottleneck in any Transformer based model, namely its quadratic complexity in both computation
and memory usage. This is intrinsic to the self-attention mechanism: given a sequence of tokens
(e.g., words or image patches) as input, the self-attention module iteratively learns the feature
representations by relating one token to all other tokens. This results in a quadratic complexity O(n2 )
with the token sequence length n in both computation (time) and memory (space) since an n × n
sized attention matrix needs to be computed and saved during inference. This problem is particularly
acute in vision: a 2D image after tokenization will produce a far longer sequence than those in NLP
even with a moderate spatial resolution. This quadratic complexity thus prevents a ViT model from
modeling images at high spatial resolutions, which are often crucial for visual recognition tasks.
∗

Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author with School of Data Science, Fudan
University.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

