An Image is Worth More Than a Thousand Words:
Towards Disentanglement in the Wild

Aviv Gabbay
Niv Cohen
Yedid Hoshen
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Project webpage: http://www.vision.huji.ac.il/zerodim

Abstract
Unsupervised disentanglement has been shown to be theoretically impossible
without inductive biases on the models and the data. As an alternative approach,
recent methods rely on limited supervision to disentangle the factors of variation
and allow their identifiability. While annotating the true generative factors is only
required for a limited number of observations, we argue that it is infeasible to
enumerate all the factors of variation that describe a real-world image distribution.
To this end, we propose a method for disentangling a set of factors which are only
partially labeled, as well as separating the complementary set of residual factors that
are never explicitly specified. Our success in this challenging setting, demonstrated
on synthetic benchmarks, gives rise to leveraging off-the-shelf image descriptors
to partially annotate a subset of attributes in real image domains (e.g. of human
faces) with minimal manual effort. Specifically, we use a recent language-image
embedding model (CLIP) to annotate a set of attributes of interest in a zero-shot
manner and demonstrate state-of-the-art disentangled image manipulation results.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional data (e.g. images) is commonly assumed to be generated from a low-dimensional
latent variable representing the true factors of variation [3, 29]. Learning to disentangle and identify
these hidden factors given a set of observations is a cornerstone problem in machine learning, which
has recently attracted much research interest [17, 22, 5, 30]. Recent progress in disentanglement has
contributed to various downstream tasks as controllable image generation [44], image manipulation
[14, 15, 42] and domain adaptation [33]. Furthermore, disentangled representations pave the way for
better interpretability [18], abstract reasoning [40] and fairness [10].
A seminal study [29] proved that unsupervised disentanglement is fundamentally impossible without
any form of inductive bias. While several different priors have been explored in recent works [24, 45],
the prominent approach is to introduce a limited amount of supervision at training time, i.e. assuming
that a few samples are labeled with the true factors of variation [30]. There are two major limitations
of such semi-supervised methods; (i) Manual annotation can be painstaking even if it is only required
for part of the images (e.g. 100 to 1000 samples). (ii) For real-world data, there is no complete set of
semantic and interpretable attributes that describes an image precisely. For example, one might ask:
“Can an image of a human face be uniquely described with natural language?”. The answer is clearly
negative, as a set of attributes (e.g. age, gender, hair color) is far from uniquely defining a face.
Therefore, in this work we explore how to disentangle a few partially-labeled factors (named as
attributes of interest) in the presence of additional completely unlabeled attributes. We then show
that we can obtain labels for these attributes of interest with minimal human effort by specifying their
optional values as adjectives in natural language (e.g. "blond hair" or "wearing glasses"). Specifically,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

