Neural Tangent Kernel Maximum Mean Discrepancy

Xiuyuan Cheng
Department of Mathematics
Duke University
xiuyuan.cheng@duke.edu

Yao Xie
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial
and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
We present a novel neural network Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) statistic by identifying a new connection between neural tangent kernel (NTK) and
MMD. This connection enables us to develop a computationally efficient and
memory-efficient approach to compute the MMD statistic and perform NTK based
two-sample tests towards addressing the long-standing challenge of memory and
computational complexity of the MMD statistic, which is essential for online implementation to assimilating new samples. Theoretically, such a connection allows
us to understand the NTK test statistic properties, such as the Type-I error and
testing power for performing the two-sample test, by adapting existing theories for
kernel MMD. Numerical experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets validate
the theory and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed NTK-MMD statistic.

1

Introduction

Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) statistic is a popular method in machine learning and statistics.
In particular, kernel MMD [2, 23] has been applied to evaluating and training neural network
generative models [34, 44, 31, 3, 30]. Though a widely used non-parametric test [23], kernel MMD
encounters several challenges in practice. The roadblocks for large-scale implementation of kernel
MMD involve heavy memory requirement (due to the computation and storage of the Gram matrix,
which grows quadratically with the data size) and the choice of a good kernel function for high
dimensional data. While Gaussian RBF kernel was shown to provide a metric between pairs of
probability distributions with infinite data samples, applying isotropic Gaussian kernel to data in
applications, such as image data and discrete events data, may invoke issues in terms of kernel
expressiveness [25, 29, 36] and sampling complexity [38].
A potential path forward in developing more computationally and memory-efficient testing statistics
is to leverage deep neural networks’ representation and optimization advantage. For example, the
idea of training a classification neural network for testing problems has been revisited recently in
[37, 10], and the connection between classification and two-sample testing dates back to earlier works
[19, 43, 40]. However, in applying deep models to testing problems, the test consistency analysis is
usually incomplete due to the lack of optimization guarantee of the trained network. For one thing,
assuming perfect training of a deep network to achieve global minimizer is too strong an assumption
to fulfill in practice.
A recent focus of neural network optimization research is the so-called lazy training regime of
over-parametrized neural networks [13], where the neural network training dynamics exhibit certain
linearized property and provable learning guarantee can be obtained [33, 17, 15, 1]. In this regime,
the training time is sufficiently short, and networks are sufficiently parametrized such that network
parameters stay close to the randomized initial values over the training process. In particular, the
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory, as firstly described by [28], shows that the network optimization
can be well approximated by the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) formulation. The NTK
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

