Continual Auxiliary Task Learning
Matthew McLeod, Chunlok Lo, Matthew Schlegel, Andrew Jacobsen, Raksha Kumaraswamy
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
{mmcleod2,chunlok,mkschleg,ajjacobs,kumarasw}@ualberta.ca
Martha White, Adam White
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
CIFAR Canada AI Chair, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
{whitem,amw8}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Learning auxiliary tasks, such as multiple predictions about the world, can provide
many benefits to reinforcement learning systems. A variety of off-policy learning
algorithms have been developed to learn such predictions, but as yet there is little
work on how to adapt the behavior to gather useful data for those off-policy predictions. In this work, we investigate a reinforcement learning system designed to
learn a collection of auxiliary tasks, with a behavior policy learning to take actions
to improve those auxiliary predictions. We highlight the inherent non-stationarity
in this continual auxiliary task learning problem, for both prediction learners and
the behavior learner. We develop an algorithm based on successor features that
facilitates tracking under non-stationary rewards, and prove the separation into
learning successor features and rewards provides convergence rate improvements.
We conduct an in-depth study into the resulting multi-prediction learning system.

1

Introduction

In never-ending learning systems, the agent often faces long periods of time when the external reward
is uninformative. A smart agent should use this time to practice reaching subgoals, learning new
skills, and refining model predictions. Later, the agent should use this prior learning to efficiently
maximize external reward. The agent engages in this self-directed learning during times when the
primary drives of the agent (e.g., hunger) are satisfied. Other times, the agent might have to trade-off
directly acting towards internal auxiliary learning objectives and taking actions that maximize reward.
In this paper we investigate how an agent should select actions to balance the needs of several
auxiliary learning objectives in a no-reward setting where no external reward is present. In particular,
we assume the agent’s auxiliary objectives are to learn a diverse set of value functions corresponding
to a set of fixed policies. Our solution at a high-level is straightforward. Each auxiliary value function
is learned in parallel and off-policy, and the behavior selects actions to maximize learning progress.
Prior work investigated similar questions in a state-less bandit like setting, where both off-policy
learning and function approximation are not required [Linke et al., 2020].
Otherwise, the majority of prior work has focused on how the agent could make use of auxiliary
learning objectives, not how behavior could be used to improve auxiliary task learning. Some work
has looked at defining (predictive) features, such as successor features and a basis of policies [Barreto
et al., 2018, Borsa et al., 2019, Barreto et al., 2020, 2019]; universal value function approximators
[Schaul et al., 2015]; and features based on value predictions [Schaul and Ring, 2013, Schlegel et al.,
2021]. The other focus has been exploration, using auxiliary learning objectives to generate bonuses
to aid exploration on the main task [Pathak et al., 2017, Stadie et al., 2015, Badia et al., 2020, Burda
et al., 2019]; using a given set of policies in a call-return fashion for scheduled auxiliary control
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

