Blending Anti-Aliasing into Vision Transformer

Shengju Qian1∗ Hao Shao2
1

Yi Zhu3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2

Mu Li3

Jiaya Jia1

Tsinghua University

3

Amazon Inc.

Abstract
The transformer architectures, based on self-attention mechanism and convolutionfree design, recently found superior performance and booming applications in
computer vision. However, the discontinuous patch-wise tokenization process
implicitly introduces jagged artifacts into attention maps, arising the traditional
problem of aliasing for vision transformers. Aliasing effect occurs when discrete
patterns are used to produce high frequency or continuous information, resulting in
the indistinguishable distortions. Recent researches have found that modern convolution networks still suffer from this phenomenon. In this work, we analyze the
uncharted problem of aliasing in vision transformer and explore to incorporate antialiasing properties. Specifically, we propose a plug-and-play Aliasing-Reduction
Module (ARM) to alleviate the aforementioned issue. We investigate the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed method across multiple tasks and various
vision transformer families. This lightweight design consistently attains a clear
boost over several famous structures. Furthermore, our module also improves data
efficiency and robustness of vision transformers1 .

1

Introduction

Transformers have led to impressive breakthroughs in language understanding, dominating a wide
range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Meanwhile, continuous researches strive to
leverage transformers for vision tasks, revolutionizing the conventional inductive bias in convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). After a big leap made by vision transformer (ViT) [1], promising results
on vision tasks have recently emerged [2–4], demonstrating a possibility of using transformers as a
primary backbone for vision applications.
While appealing advantages such as long-range context modeling and parameter efficiency are
introduced by self-attention, this mechanism also brings an inevitable aliasing issue to vision
transformers. Aliasing [5] traditionally refers to the phenomenon that high-frequency signals become
indistinguishable when undersampled [6]. This effect occurs when discrete patterns are utilized to
capture a more continuous signal, resulting in frequency ambiguity. In terms of ViT [1], images are
split into non-overlapping patches during tokenization, which are then fed into transformer blocks.
Compare to the more “continuous” representation of image, tokenization and self-attention performed
on its discontinuous patch embeddings can be regarded as subsampling operations. While alleviating
computational costs, these operations leave a side-effect which leads to possible aliasing.
A simple solution to mitigate aliasing phenomenon is to increase the sampling rate. Similar properties
emerge in vision transformers, where overlapped tokens [7] and smaller patch sizes [1, 8] lead
to improved performance. As increased sampling rates lead to quadratic computation costs, we
hereby conjecture that proper anti-aliasing filters that integrated into the “attending” process could
also provide a fix. A potential concern is that the general purpose of anti-aliasing: to introduce
∗
1

Work done during an internship at Amazon.
Code is made available at https://github.com/amazon-research/anti-aliasing-transformer.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

