Few-Shot Segmentation via Cycle-Consistent
Transformer
Gengwei Zhang1,2∗,

Guoliang Kang3 , Yi Yang4 , Yunchao Wei5,6†
1
Baidu Research
2
ReLER, Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
3
University of Texas, Austin
4
CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
5
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
6
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
{zgwdavid, kgl.prml, wychao1987, yee.i.yang}@gmail.com

Abstract
Few-shot segmentation aims to train a segmentation model that can fast adapt to
novel classes with few exemplars. The conventional training paradigm is to learn
to make predictions on query images conditioned on the features from support
images. Previous methods only utilized the semantic-level prototypes of support
images as the conditional information. These methods cannot utilize all pixel-wise
support information for the query predictions, which is however critical for the
segmentation task. In this paper, we focus on utilizing pixel-wise relationships
between support and query images to facilitate the few-shot segmentation task.
We design a novel Cycle-Consistent TRansformer (CyCTR) module to aggregate
pixel-wise support features into query ones. CyCTR performs cross-attention
between features from different images, i.e. support and query images. We observe
that there may exist unexpected irrelevant pixel-level support features. Directly
performing cross-attention may aggregate these features from support to query and
bias the query features. Thus, we propose using a novel cycle-consistent attention
mechanism to filter out possible harmful support features and encourage query
features to attend to the most informative pixels from support images. Experiments
on all few-shot segmentation benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed CyCTR
leads to remarkable improvement compared to previous state-of-the-art methods.
Specifically, on Pascal-5i and COCO-20i datasets, we achieve 67.5% and 45.6%
mIoU for 5-shot segmentation, outperforming previous state-of-the-art method by
5.6% and 7.1% respectively.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed great progress in semantic segmentation [19, 4, 47]. The success can be
largely attributed to large amounts of annotated data [48, 17]. However, labeling dense segmentation
masks are very time-consuming [45]. Semi-supervised segmentation [15, 39, 38] has been broadly
explored to alleviate this problem, which assumes a large amount of unlabeled data is accessible.
However, semi-supervised approaches may fail to generalize to novel classes with very few exemplars.
In the extreme low data regime, few-shot segmentation [26, 35] is introduced to train a segmentation
model that can quickly adapt to novel categories.
∗
†

Part of this work was done when Gengwei Zhang was an intern at Baidu Research.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

