Automated Dynamic Mechanism Design

Hanrui Zhang
Duke University
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Vincent Conitzer
Duke University
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
We study Bayesian automated mechanism design in unstructured dynamic environments, where a principal repeatedly interacts with an agent, and takes actions based
on the strategic agent’s report of the current state of the world. Both the principal
and the agent can have arbitrary and potentially different valuations for the actions
taken, possibly also depending on the actual state of the world. Moreover, at any
time, the state of the world may evolve arbitrarily depending on the action taken by
the principal. The goal is to compute an optimal mechanism which maximizes the
principal’s utility in the face of the self-interested strategic agent.
We give an efficient algorithm for computing optimal mechanisms, with or without
payments, under different individual-rationality constraints, when the time horizon
is constant. Our algorithm is based on a sophisticated linear program formulation,
which can be customized in various ways to accommodate richer constraints.
For environments with large time horizons, we show that the principal’s optimal
utility is hard to approximate within a certain constant factor, complementing our
algorithmic result. These results paint a relatively complete picture for automated
dynamic mechanism design in unstructured environments. We further consider a
special case of the problem where the agent is myopic, and give a refined efficient
algorithm whose time complexity scales linearly in the time horizon.
In the full version of the paper, we show that memoryless mechanisms, which are
without loss of generality optimal in Markov decision processes without strategic
behavior, do not provide a good solution for our problem, in terms of both optimality and computational tractability. Moreover, we present experimental results
where our algorithms are applied to synthetic dynamic environments with different
characteristics, which not only serve as a proof of concept for our algorithms, but
also exhibit intriguing phenomena in dynamic mechanism design.

1

Introduction

Consider the following scenario. A company assembles an internal research group to develop key
technologies to be used in the company’s next-generation product in 5 years. The more progress
the group makes, the more successful the product is likely to be. Since research progress is hard to
monitor, the company manages the group based on its annual reports. At the beginning of each year,
the group submits a report, summarizing its progress in the preceding year, as well as its needs for
the current year. Taking into consideration this report (and possibly also reports from previous years),
the company then decides the compensation level and the headcount of the group in the current year.
Moreover, after the product launches, the company may also pay a bonus to members of the group,
depending on how successful the product is.
For simplicity, suppose an annual report consists of two items: research progress (satisfactory/unsatisfactory), and need to expand (no request/request for an intern/request for a full-time
employee). The company’s goal is to encourage and facilitate research progress while keeping the
expenses reasonable. So, a natural managing strategy is to increase (resp. decrease) the compensation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

