Near-Optimal Multi-Perturbation Experimental
Design for Causal Structure Learning

Scott Sussex
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
scott.sussex@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland

Caroline Uhler
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA

Abstract
Causal structure learning is a key problem in many domains. Causal structures
can be learnt by performing experiments on the system of interest. We address
the largely unexplored problem of designing a batch of experiments that each
simultaneously intervene on multiple variables. While potentially more informative
than the commonly considered single-variable interventions, selecting such interventions is algorithmically much more challenging, due to the doubly-exponential
combinatorial search space over sets of composite interventions. In this paper, we
develop efficient algorithms for optimizing different objective functions quantifying
the informativeness of a budget-constrained batch of experiments. By establishing
novel submodularity properties of these objectives, we provide approximation
guarantees for our algorithms. Our algorithms empirically perform superior to both
random interventions and algorithms that only select single-variable interventions.

1

Introduction

The problem of finding the causal relationships between a set of variables is ubiquitous throughout the
sciences. For example, scientists are interested in reconstructing gene regulatory networks (GRNs) of
biological cells [11]. Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) are a natural way to represent causal structures,
with a directed edge from variable X to Y representing X being a direct cause of Y [33].
Learning the causal structure of a set of variables is fundamentally difficult. With only observational
data, in general we can only identify the true DAG up to a set of DAGs called its Markov Equivalence
Class (MEC) [35]. Empirically, for sparse DAGs the size of the MEC grows exponentially in the
number of nodes [17]. Identifiability can be improved by intervening on variables, meaning one
perturbs a subset of the variables and then observes more samples from the system [8, 16, 40]. There
exist various inference algorithms for learning causal structures from a combination of observational
and interventional data [16, 36, 40, 28, 34]. Here we focus on the identification of DAGs that have
no unobserved confounding variables.
Performing experiments is often expensive, however. Thus, we are interested in learning as much
about the causal structure as possible given some constraints on the interventions. In this work, we
focus on the batched setting, where several interventions are performed in parallel. This is a natural
setting in scientific domains like reconstructing GRNs. Existing works propose meaningful objective
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

