Understanding Instance-based Interpretability of
Variational Auto-Encoders
Zhifeng Kong
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
z4kong@eng.ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Instance-based interpretation methods have been widely studied for supervised
learning methods as they help explain how black box neural networks predict.
However, instance-based interpretations remain ill-understood in the context of
unsupervised learning. In this paper, we investigate influence functions [Koh and
Liang, 2017], a popular instance-based interpretation method, for a class of deep
generative models called variational auto-encoders (VAE). We formally frame
the counter-factual question answered by influence functions in this setting, and
through theoretical analysis, examine what they reveal about the impact of training
samples on classical unsupervised learning methods. We then introduce VAETracIn, a computationally efficient and theoretically sound solution based on Pruthi
et al. [2020], for VAEs. Finally, we evaluate VAE-TracIn on several real world
datasets with extensive quantitative and qualitative analysis.

1

Introduction

Instance-based interpretation methods have been popular for supervised learning as they help explain
why a model makes a certain prediction and hence have many applications [Barshan et al., 2020, Basu
et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020, Ghorbani and Zou, 2019, Hara et al., 2019, Harutyunyan et al., 2021,
Koh and Liang, 2017, Koh et al., 2019, Pruthi et al., 2020, Yeh et al., 2018, Yoon et al., 2020]. For a
classifier and a test sample z, an instance-based interpretation ranks all training samples x according
to an interpretability score between x and z. Samples with high (low) scores are considered positively
(negatively) important for the prediction of z.
However, in the literature of unsupervised learning especially generative models, instance-based
interpretations are much less understood. In this work, we investigate instance-based interpretation
methods for unsupervised learning based on influence functions [Cook and Weisberg, 1980, Koh and
Liang, 2017]. In particular, we theoretically analyze certain classical non-parametric and parametric
methods. Then, we look at a canonical deep generative model, variational auto-encoders (VAE,
[Higgins et al., 2016, Kingma and Welling, 2013]), and explore some of the applications.
The first challenge is framing the counter-factual question for unsupervised learning. For instancebased interpretability in supervised learning, the counter-factual question is "which training samples
are most responsible for the prediction of a test sample?" – which heavily relies on the label
information. However, there is no label in unsupervised learning. In this work, we frame the counterfactual question for unsupervised learning as "which training samples are most responsible for
increasing the likelihood (or reducing the loss when likelihood is not available) of a test sample?" We
show that influence functions can answer this counter-factual question. Then, we examine influence
functions for several classical unsupervised learning methods. We present theory and intuitions on
how influence functions relate to likelihood and pairwise distances.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

