TransGAN: Two Pure Transformers Can Make One
Strong GAN, and That Can Scale Up

Yifan Jiang1 , Shiyu Chang2,3 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin
2
UC Santa Barbara 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{yifanjiang97,atlaswang}@utexas.edu, chang87@ucsb.edu

Abstract
The recent explosive interest on transformers has suggested their potential to
become powerful “universal" models for computer vision tasks, such as classification, detection, and segmentation. While those attempts mainly study the
discriminative models, we explore transformers on some more notoriously difficult vision tasks, e.g., generative adversarial networks (GANs). Our goal is to
conduct the first pilot study in building a GAN completely free of convolutions,
using only pure transformer-based architectures. Our vanilla GAN architecture,
dubbed TransGAN, consists of a memory-friendly transformer-based generator
that progressively increases feature resolution, and correspondingly a multi-scale
discriminator to capture simultaneously semantic contexts and low-level textures.
On top of them, we introduce the new module of grid self-attention for alleviating
the memory bottleneck further, in order to scale up TransGAN to high-resolution
generation. We also develop a unique training recipe including a series of techniques that can mitigate the training instability issues of TransGAN, such as data
augmentation, modified normalization, and relative position encoding. Our best
architecture achieves highly competitive performance compared to current stateof-the-art GANs using convolutional backbones. Specifically, TransGAN sets the
new state-of-the-art inception score of 10.43 and FID of 18.28 on STL-10. It also
reaches the inception score of 9.02 and FID of 9.26 on CIFAR-10, and 5.28 FID on
CelebA 128 × 128, respectively: both on par with the current best results. When it
comes to higher-resolution (e.g. 256 × 256) generation tasks, such as on CelebAHQ and LSUN-Church, TransGAN continues to produce diverse visual examples
with high fidelity and reasonable texture details. In addition, we dive deep into
the transformer-based generation models to understand how their behaviors differ
from convolutional ones, by visualizing training dynamics. The code is available
at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/TransGAN.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have gained considerable success on numerous tasks [1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Unfortunately, GANs suffer from the notorious training instability, and numerous efforts
have been devoted to stabilizing GAN training, introducing various regularization terms [8, 9, 10, 11],
better losses [1, 12, 13, 14], and training recipes [15, 16]. Among them, one important route to
improving GANs examines their neural architectures. [17, 8] reported a large-scale study of GANs
and observed that when serving as (generator) backbones, popular neural architectures perform
comparably well across the considered datasets. Their ablation study suggested that most of the
variations applied in the ResNet family resulted in very marginal improvements. Nevertheless, neural
architecture search (NAS) was later introduced to GANs and suggests enhanced backbone designs
are also important for improving GANs, just like for other computer vision tasks. Those works
are consistently able to discover stronger GAN architectures beyond the standard ResNet topology
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

