Associative Memories via Predictive Coding

Tommaso Salvatori1 , Yuhang Song1,3,∗ , Yujian Hong1 , Lei Sha1 , Simon Frieder1 ,
Zhenghua Xu2 , Rafal Bogacz3 , Thomas Lukasiewicz1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment,
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
3
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford, UK
{tommaso.salvatori, yuhang.song, yujian.hong, lei.sha, frieder.simon, thomas.lukasiewicz}
@cs.ox.ac.uk, zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn, rafal.bogacz@ndcn.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Associative memories in the brain receive and store patterns of activity registered
by the sensory neurons, and are able to retrieve them when necessary. Due to their
importance in human intelligence, computational models of associative memories
have been developed for several decades now. In this paper, we present a novel
neural model for realizing associative memories, which is based on a hierarchical
generative network that receives external stimuli via sensory neurons. It is trained
using predictive coding, an error-based learning algorithm inspired by information
processing in the cortex. To test the model’s capabilities, we perform multiple
retrieval experiments from both corrupted and incomplete data points. In an extensive comparison, we show that this new model outperforms in retrieval accuracy
and robustness popular associative memory models, such as autoencoders trained
via backpropagation, and modern Hopfield networks. In particular, in completing
partial data points, our model achieves remarkable results on natural image datasets,
such as ImageNet, with a surprisingly high accuracy, even when only a tiny fraction
of pixels of the original images is presented. Our model provides a plausible
framework to study learning and retrieval of memories in the brain, as it closely
mimics the behavior of the hippocampus as a memory index and generative model.

1

Introduction

Throughout our lives, we learn a huge number of associations between concepts: the taste of a
particular food, the meaning of a gesture, or to stop when we see a red light. Every time we acquire
new information of this kind, it gets stored in our long-term memory, situated in distributed networks
of brain areas [1]. In particular, visual memories are stored in a hierarchical network of visual and
associative areas [2]. These regions learn progressively more abstract representations of visual stimuli,
so they participate in both perception and memory as each area memorizes relationships present in
their inputs [3]. Accordingly, early visual areas learn common regularities present in the stimuli [4],
while at the top of this hierarchy, associative areas (such as hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and
perirhinal cortex) store the relationships between extracted features, which encode an entire stimulus
or episode [5]. The memory system of the brain is able to both recall complex memories [1, 6], and
use them to generate predictions to guide behavior [7]. Learning in these associative memories shapes
our understanding of the world around us and builds the foundations of human intelligence.
Building models that are able to store and retrieve information has been an important direction of
research in artificial intelligence. Particularly, such models include (auto)associative memories (AMs),
which allow for the storage of data points and their contents-based retrieval, i.e., for retrieving a stored
* Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

