A first-order primal-dual method with adaptivity to
local smoothness
Yura Malitsky†

Maria-Luiza Vladarean?

Volkan Cevher?

{maria-luiza.vladarean, volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch
yurii.malitskyi@liu.se
?

LIONS, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
†
Linköping University, Sweden

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding a saddle point for the convex-concave objective
minx maxy f (x) + hAx, yi − g ∗ (y), where f is a convex function with locally
Lipschitz gradient and g is convex and possibly non-smooth. We propose an
adaptive version of the Condat-Vũ algorithm, which alternates between primal
gradient steps and dual proximal steps. The method achieves stepsize adaptivity
through a simple rule involving kAk and the norm of recently computed gradients
of f . Under standard assumptions, we prove an O(k −1 ) ergodic convergence rate.
Furthermore, when f is also locally strongly convex and A has full row rank we
show that our method converges with a linear rate. Numerical experiments are
provided for illustrating the practical performance of the algorithm.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study a particular instance of the composite minimization problem
min f (x) + g(Ax),

x∈X

(1)

where f and g are convex, proper and lower-semicontinuous (l.s.c.), and A is a linear operator.
Problems of the form (1) have been studied in the literature under various assumptions on f and g.
For the particular instances where g ◦ A is proximal-friendly and f is L-smooth, the objective is
suitable for applying forward-backward splitting algorithms like the Proximal Gradient algorithm
and its accelerated counterpart [Nesterov, 2013, Beck and Teboulle, 2009]. In general, however,
the proximal operator of g ◦ A is not easily computable and in such cases a popular approach is to
decouple A and g by reformulating problem (1) as a convex-concave saddle-point problem:
min maxhAx, yi + f (x) − g ∗ (y),

x∈X y∈Y

(2)

where g ∗ denotes the Fenchel conjugate of g. Objective (2) is typically addressed by primal-dual
splitting algorithms which, under strong duality, can recover the solution to the original problem (1).
In the particular case when f and g are proximal-friendly and possibly non-smooth, a very popular
method is the Primal-Dual Hybrid Gradient proposed in [Chambolle and Pock, 2011], which was
further extended to handle an additional L-smooth component with the Condat-Vũ algorithm [Condat,
2013, Vũ, 2013]. Convergence rates for the latter are studied in [Chambolle and Pock, 2016a].
Together, these classes of algorithms cover a broad range of problems in diverse fields such as signal
processing, machine learning, inverse problems, telecommunications and many others. As a result,
a great amount of research effort has gone into addressing practical concerns such as robustness
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

