Aligned Structured Sparsity Learning for Efficient
Image Super-Resolution

Yulun Zhang1,†
Huan Wang1,†,∗
Can Qin1
Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of ECE, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University

Abstract
Lightweight image super-resolution (SR) networks have obtained promising results with moderate model size. Many SR methods have focused on designing
lightweight architectures, which neglect to further reduce the redundancy of network parameters. On the other hand, model compression techniques, like neural
architecture search and knowledge distillation, typically consume considerable
memory and computation resources. In contrast, network pruning is a cheap and
effective model compression technique. However, it is hard to be applied to SR networks directly, because filter pruning for residual blocks is well-known tricky. To
address the above issues, we propose aligned structured sparsity learning (ASSL),
which introduces a weight normalization layer and applies L2 regularization to the
scale parameters for sparsity. To align the pruned filter locations across different
layers, we propose a sparsity structure alignment penalty term, which minimizes
the norm of soft mask gram matrix. We apply aligned structured sparsity learning strategy to train efficient image SR network, named as ASSLN, with smaller
model size and lower computation than state-of-the-art methods. We conduct extensive comparisons with lightweight SR networks. Our ASSLN achieves superior
performance gains over recent methods quantitatively and visually.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental computer vision application, which aims to recover
a high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. In general, image SR is
an ill-posed problem, because there exist many HR candidates for one LR input. To alleviate this
problem, more and more researchers have been investigating plenty of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [11, 31, 38] to achieve more accurate mapping from LR image to its HR target.
Deep CNN was firstly introduced for image SR in SRCNN [11] and has attracted continuous attention
from both academic and industry communities with its promising SR performance. SRCNN only
consists of three convolutional (Conv) layers, hindering its performance. Kim et al. achieved notable
improvements over SRCNN by increasing the network depth in VDSR [30] with residual learning.
Deeper CNNs could be trained successfully with residual blocks [22]. By utilizing simplified residual
blocks, Lim et al. [38] built a much deeper network EDSR. Zhang et al. [64] proposed a residual
channel attention network (RCAN), which is one of the deepest SR networks. With increased network
size (i.e., deeper and wider), very deep networks, like EDSR [38] and RCAN [64], have achieved
remarkable SR performance. However, they also suffer from some drawbacks, such as heavy model
parameters, number of operations, and inference time. Therefore, it is impractical to directly deploy
them on resource-limited platforms without neural processing units or off-chip memory [36].
†

Equal Contribution

* Corresponding author: Huan Wang (wang.huan@northeastern.edu)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

