ELLA: Exploration through Learned
Language Abstraction

Suvir Mirchandani
Computer Science
Stanford University
suvir@cs.stanford.edu

Siddharth Karamcheti
Computer Science
Stanford University
skaramcheti@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Building agents capable of understanding language instructions is critical to effective and robust human-AI collaboration. Recent work focuses on training these
agents via reinforcement learning in environments with synthetic language; however, instructions often define long-horizon, sparse-reward tasks, and learning
policies requires many episodes of experience. We introduce ELLA: Exploration
through Learned Language Abstraction, a reward shaping approach geared towards
boosting sample efficiency in sparse reward environments by correlating high-level
instructions with simpler low-level constituents. ELLA has two key elements: 1) A
termination classifier that identifies when agents complete low-level instructions,
and 2) A relevance classifier that correlates low-level instructions with success on
high-level tasks. We learn the termination classifier offline from pairs of instructions and terminal states. Notably, in departure from prior work in language and
abstraction, we learn the relevance classifier online, without relying on an explicit
decomposition of high-level instructions to low-level instructions. On a suite of
complex BabyAI [11] environments with varying instruction complexities and
reward sparsity, ELLA shows gains in sample efficiency relative to language-based
shaping and traditional RL methods.

1

Introduction

A long-standing goal for robotics and embodied agents is to build systems that can perform tasks
specified in natural language [1, 8, 20, 25, 38, 41, 42]. Central to the promise of language is its ability
to cleanly specify complex, multi-step instructions. Instructions like make a cup of coffee define
long-horizon tasks as abstractions over lower-level components—simple instructions like pick up a
cup or turn on the coffee maker. Leveraging these abstractions can help amplify the sample efficiency
and generalization potential of our autonomous agents.
One way to do this is through the lens of instruction following, which can be framed in several ways.
One common framing—and the one we use in this work—is via reinforcement learning (RL): an
agent is given a start state, a language instruction, and a corresponding reward function to optimize
that usually denotes termination [20, 30]. While RL can be a useful framing, such approaches are
often not sample efficient [11, 20]. Especially in the case of complex, highly compositional language
instructions, RL agents can fail to make progress quickly—or at all. There are several reasons for
poor performance in these settings; paramount is that in many environments, these instructions are
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

