PLUR: A Unifying, Graph-Based View of Program
Learning, Understanding, and Repair

Zimin Chen∗
KTH Royal Institute
of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
zimin@kth.se

Vincent J. Hellendoorn†
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
vhellend@cs.cmu.edu

Petros Maniatis
Google Research
Mountain View, USA
maniatis@google.com

Pascal Lamblin, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, Daniel Tarlow, Subhodeep Moitra
Google Research
Montreal, Canada
lamblinp,manzagop,dtarlow,smoitra@google.com

Abstract
Machine learning for understanding and editing source code has recently attracted
significant interest, with many developments in new models, new code representations, and new tasks. This proliferation can appear disparate and disconnected,
making each approach seemingly unique and incompatible, thus obscuring the
core machine learning challenges and contributions. In this work, we demonstrate
that the landscape can be significantly simplified by taking a general approach
of mapping a graph to a sequence of tokens and pointers. Our main result is to
show that 16 recently published tasks of different shapes can be cast in this form,
based on which a single model architecture achieves near or above state-of-theart results on nearly all tasks, outperforming custom models like code2seq and
alternative generic models like Transformers. This unification further enables multitask learning and a series of cross-cutting experiments about the importance of
different modeling choices for code understanding and repair tasks. The full framework, called PLUR, is easily extensible to more tasks, and will be open-sourced
(https://github.com/google-research/plur).

1

Introduction

The advent of sequence-to-sequence [Sutskever et al., 2014] and, more recently, text-to-text [Raffel
et al., 2019, Radford et al., 2019] abstractions has provided a simplifying and unifying view of much
work in natural-language processing. By casting problems in this framework, one can apply a single
model architecture to many different problems. This benefits machine learning (ML) researchers
by focusing attention on the core modeling problem. It also amplifies ML advances, because a
general formulation allows practitioners to frame new problems in terms of a standardized abstraction
and then to apply state-of-the-art architectures easily, which also facilitates multi-task and transfer
learning.
In this paper, we ask: What is the equivalent unifying abstraction for machine learning for source
code (ML4Code)? While many ML4Code tasks have been cast in terms of the sequence-to-sequence
abstraction, source code is inherently different from natural language [Hindle et al., 2016]. It is
∗
†

Work done during internship at Google.
Work done during visiting-faculty appointment at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

