Double Machine Learning Density Estimation for
Local Treatment Effects with Instruments
Yonghan Jung
Purdue University
jung222@purdue.edu

Jin Tian
Iowa State University
jtian@iastate.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Local treatment effects are a common quantity found throughout the empirical
sciences that measure the treatment effect among those who comply with what
they are assigned. Most of the literature is focused on estimating the average of
such quantity, which is called the “local average treatment effect (LATE)” [31]).
In this work, we study how to estimate the density of the local treatment effect,
which is naturally more informative than its average. Specifically, we develop
two families of methods for this task, namely, kernel-smoothing and model-based
approaches. The kernel-smoothing-based approach estimates the density through
some smooth kernel functions. The model-based approach estimates the density
by projecting it onto a finite-dimensional density class. For both approaches, we
derive the corresponding double/debiased machine learning-based estimators [13].
We further study the asymptotic convergence rates of the estimators and show
that they are robust to the biases in nuisance function estimation. The use of the
proposed methods is illustrated through both synthetic and a real dataset called
401(k).

1

Introduction

Controlled experimentation is one powerful tool used throughout the empirical sciences to infer the
effect of a certain treatment on a given outcome. The idea is to randomize the treatment assignment
so as to neutralize the effect of unobserved confounders. However, in some practical settings, it
may be challenging to ascertain that individuals who are selected for treatment will follow their
recommendations. Issues of non-compliance and unmeasured confounding are quite common and
lead to the non-identification of treatment effects in many real-world cases [29, 50, 32, 56].
An approach known as instrumental variables (IVs) has been proposed to try to circumvent this issue
[68]. The idea is to find a set of variables (possibly singleton) that are not the target of the analysis
by itself but that will help to control for the unobserved confounding between the treatment and the
outcome. In particular, IVs are special variables that (i) are correlated with the treatment, (ii) do
not directly influence the outcome, and (iii) are not affected by certain unmeasured confounders.
For concreteness, consider a study of the effect of 401(k) participation (X) on the distribution of
net financial assets (Y ) [2]. This setting is represented in the causal graph in Fig. 1. Note that a
dashed-bidirected arrow exists between X and Y , which in graphical language represents unobserved
confounding affecting both X and Y . The variable Z in this model represents the eligibility of 401(k).
We note that Z qualifies as an instrument in this case – (i) it does affect the participation of 401(k)
(X) and (ii) has no direct influence on the net financial asset (Y ), (iii) is not affected by unmeasured
confounders between X and Y . The variable W represents observed covariates (e.g., gender, age,
ethnicity, income, family size).
We are interested in the particular setting where only individuals who were offered the treatment
may have access to it [31]. For instance, in the case of 401(k) participation (X = 1), only eligible
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

