Asymptotically Best Causal Effect Identification with
Multi-Armed Bandits
Alan Malek
DeepMind London
alanmalek@deepmind.com

Silvia Chiappa
DeepMind London
csilvia@deepmind.com

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of selecting a formula for identifying a causal
quantity of interest among a set of available formulas. We assume an sequential
setting in which the investigator may alter the data collection mechanism in a
data-dependent way with the aim of identifying the formula with lowest asymptotic
variance in as few samples as possible. We formalize this setting by using the bestarm-identification bandit framework where the standard goal of learning the arm
with the lowest loss is replaced with the goal of learning the arm that will produce
the best estimate. We introduce new tools for constructing finite-sample confidence
bounds on estimates of the asymptotic variance that account for the estimation
of potentially complex nuisance functions, and adapt the best-arm-identification
algorithms of LUCB and Successive Elimination to use these bounds. We validate
our method by providing upper bounds on the sample complexity and an empirical
study on artificially generated data.

1

Introduction

Many scientific disciplines, including biology, healthcare, and social and behavioral sciences, are
concerned with estimating the causal effect of some exposure on an outcome of interest through an
observational study. When the structure of the causal relationships between relevant variables is
known and satisfies certain conditions, the investigator can use identification formulas derived from
the do-calculus to express a causal quantity τ as a functional of the distribution of the observations
[23, 24], after which an estimate of τ can be obtained with an appropriate estimator1 . For many
structures, τ can be identified using several formulas involving different variables. In most real-world
applications, the costs of measuring different variables can vary considerably. For instance, different
medical tests can be more or less expensive or difficult to perform. Ideally, the investigator should
conduct the observational study using the formula that optimally balances statistical performance
with observational cost.
Recently introduced graphical criteria allow the comparison of identification formulas derived
from the popular adjustment criterion w.r.t. the asymptotic variance of linear and nonparametric
estimators [7, 27, 29, 31]. However, information about the causal graph structure alone does not allow
comparison of certain adjustment formulas nor of arbitrary identification formulas. In addition, such
criteria only focus on statistical performance and disregard observational cost. A selection method
that is applicable to arbitrary identification formulas and accounts for both statistical performance
and observational cost must make use of data.
A naïve approach to choose a formula would be to collect a dataset in which each observation includes
all variables needed by all formulas, and then compare the cost-adjusted statistical performances of
1
For simplicity of exposition, we assume that an identification formula is associated with only one estimator,
but the method proposed in this paper can also be used in the more general case of several estimators.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

