Fair Exploration via Axiomatic Bargaining∗

Vivek F. Farias
Sloan School of Management
MIT
vivekf@mit.edu

Jackie Baek
Operations Research Center
MIT
baek@mit.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the consideration of fairly sharing the cost of exploration between
multiple groups in learning problems, we develop the Nash bargaining solution in
the context of multi-armed bandits. Specifically, the ‘grouped’ bandit associated
with any multi-armed bandit problem associates, with each time step, a single group
from some finite set of groups. The utility gained by a given group under some
learning policy is naturally viewed as the reduction in that group’s regret relative to
the regret that group would have incurred ‘on its own’. We derive policies that yield
the Nash bargaining solution relative to the set of incremental utilities possible
under any policy. We show that on the one hand, the ‘price of fairness’ under such
policies is limited, while on the other hand, regret optimal policies are arbitrarily
unfair under generic conditions. Our theoretical development is complemented by
a case study on contextual bandits for warfarin dosing where we are concerned
with the cost of exploration across multiple races and age groups.

1

Introduction

Exploration in learning problems has an implicit cost, insomuch that exploring actions that are
eventually revealed to be sub-optimal incurs regret. We study how this cost of exploration is shared
in a system with multiple stakeholders. At the outset, we present two motivating examples.
Personalized Medicine and Adaptive Trials: Multi-stage, adaptive designs [1, 2, 3, 4], are widely
viewed as a frontier in clinical trials. More generally, the ability to collect detailed patient level
data, and real time monitoring (eg. glucose monitoring for diabetes [5, 6]) has raised the specter
of learning personalized treatments. Among other formulations, such problems may be viewed as
contextual bandits. For instance, for the problem of optimal warfarin dosing [7], the context at each
time step corresponds to a patient’s covariates, arms correspond to different dosages of warfarin, and
the reward is the observed efficacy of the assigned dose. In examining such a study in retrospect, it is
natural to measure the regret incurred by distinct groups of patients (eg. by race or age). What makes
a profile of regret across such groups fair or unfair?
Revenue Management for Search Advertising: Ad platforms enjoy a tremendous amount of
flexibility in the the choice of ads served against search queries. Specifically, this flexibility exists
both in selecting a slate of advertisers to compete for a specific search, and then in picking a winner
from this slate. Now a key goal for the platform is learning the affinity of any given ad for a given
search. In solving such a learning problem – for which many variants have been proposed [8, 9] – we
may again ask the question of who bears the cost of exploration, and whether the profile of such costs
across various groups of advertisers is fair.
∗

The full version of the paper can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02553.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

