A Causal Lens for Controllable Text Generation
Zhiting Hu1,2 , Li Erran Li2
1

UC San Diego, 2 AWS AI, Amazon
zhh019@ucsd.edu, lilimam@amazon.com

Abstract
Controllable text generation concerns two fundamental tasks of wide applications,
namely generating text of given attributes (i.e., attribute-conditional generation),
and minimally editing existing text to possess desired attributes (i.e., text attribute
transfer). Extensive prior work has largely studied the two problems separately, and
developed different conditional models which, however, are prone to producing
biased text (e.g., various gender stereotypes). This paper proposes to formulate
controllable text generation from a principled causal perspective which models the
two tasks with a unified framework. A direct advantage of the causal formulation
is the use of rich causality tools to mitigate generation biases and improve control.
We treat the two tasks as interventional and counterfactual causal inference based
on a structural causal model, respectively. We then apply the framework to the
challenging practical setting where confounding factors (that induce spurious
correlations) are observable only on a small fraction of data. Experiments show
significant superiority of the causal approach over previous conditional models for
improved control accuracy and reduced bias.

1

Introduction

Controllable text generation aims at producing fluent language with control over various attributes,
ranging from sentiment, topic, politeness, to gender, persona, and so forth [60, 22]. The problem
lies at the heart of many NLP applications such as emotional chatbot, news article writing, language
detoxification, etc. Of particular interest in this increasingly significant area are two settings for
control, namely (1) attribute-conditional generation [14, 30] which generates sentences that entail a
given attribute, and (2) text attribute transfer [64, 26] which rewrites a given sentence to possess a
desired attribute while preserving all other original characteristics (Figure 1). The goal is to learn the
control in each setting with (attribute, text) training pairs1 .
The two settings have usually been considered as separate tasks and each led to various solutions,
respectively. Let x denote a sentence and a an attribute. Previous attribute-conditional generation
work typically concerns the conditional distribution p(x|a) [14, 30, 33]. Despite the success of
simulating observed real text, the conditional distribution is known to be susceptible to capture
spurious correlations or biases in the data [48, 84]. For example, when generating biographical text
given a gender attribute, the conditional model tends to generate text related to specific occupations
such as nurse and yoga teacher for female, and architect and attorney for male [57, 69] (Figure 1).
The learned biases could impair the model generalization to new domains, and make negative social
impact in downstream applications. A few very recent attempts have been made to mitigate the
biases in the model with various machine learning techniques. Yet those methods are often specific
to a particular attribute (e.g., gender) [68, 86], or rely on access to additional resources, such as
fully observed confounding labels or a priori debiased classifiers [23, 40, 67], which can be costly
to obtain in real applications. Furthermore, it is unclear how the diverse methods designed for
1
Thus, for text attribute transfer (a.k.a., text style transfer), there is no direct supervision data, i.e., (original
text, attribute, target text) triples.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

