ViSER: Video-Specific Surface Embeddings for
Articulated 3D Shape Reconstruction

Gengshan Yang1

Deqing Sun2

Varun Jampani2

Ce Liu4∗
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Daniel Vlasic2

Forrester Cole2

Deva Ramanan1,3

3
Google Research
Argo AI
ViSER-webpage

4

Microsoft Azure AI

Abstract
We introduce ViSER, a method for recovering articulated 3D shapes and dense 3D
trajectories from monocular videos. Previous work on high-quality reconstruction
of dynamic 3D shapes typically relies on multiple synchronized cameras, strong
category-specific priors, or 2D keypoint supervision. We show that none of these are
required if one can reliably estimate long-range correspondences in a video, making
use of only 2D object masks and two-frame optical flow as inputs. ViSER infers
correspondences by matching 2D pixels to a canonical, deformable 3D mesh via
video-specific surface embeddings that capture the view-independent appearance
features of each surface point. These embeddings behave as a continuous set of
keypoint descriptors defined over the mesh surface, which can be used to establish
dense long-range correspondences across pixels. The surface embeddings are
implemented as coordinate-based MLPs that are fit to each video via self-supervised
losses. Experimental results show that ViSER compares favorably against prior
work on challenging videos of humans with loose clothing and unusual poses as
well as animal videos from DAVIS and YTVOS.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing the world from a sequence of monocular frames is a long-standing task in computer
vision. While there has been tremendous progress in reconstructing rigid scenes (via SfM and
SLAM [7, 39, 43], or recent techniques based on neural rendering [28]), reconstructing dynamic
scenes with articulated objects remains elusive. For example, given a monocular video, it is still
challenging to reconstruct an everyday scene of a moving person with loose clothing. In this work,
we tackle the problem of estimating the deforming mesh of articulated objects given a segmented
monocular video of that object. Our method avoids the use of any mesh templates or category-specific
priors and generalizes to unknown deformable articulated objects in the wild.
Nonrigid shape recovery is highly under-constrained due to fundamental ambiguities between shape,
appearance, and time-varying deformation. Current approaches for addressing these challenges fall
into two camps: better data “likelihoods” or better “priors”. The first camp extracts richer sensor data,
via multi-camera studio setups [15] or depth sensors [30], but requires substantial efforts to work
in the wild. The second camp makes use of category-level priors over object shapes [18, 20] and is
particularly effective for human reconstruction. However, building such models requires considerable
offline efforts in the form of registered 3D scans [26] or manual keypoint annotations [12], both of
which are difficult to scale to arbitrary object categories.
∗

Work done at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

