Sparsely Changing Latent States for Prediction and
Planning in Partially Observable Domains

Christian Gumbsch
Autonomous Learning Group
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
& Neuro-Cognitive Modeling Group
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
christian.gumbsch@tuebingen.mpg.de

Martin V. Butz
Neuro-Cognitive Modeling Group
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
martin.butz@uni-tuebingen.de

Georg Martius
Autonomous Learning Group
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
georg.martius@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
A common approach to prediction and planning in partially observable domains is
to use recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which ideally develop and maintain a
latent memory about hidden, task-relevant factors. We hypothesize that many of
these hidden factors in the physical world are constant over time, changing only
sparsely. To study this hypothesis, we propose Gated L0 Regularized Dynamics
(GateL0RD), a novel recurrent architecture that incorporates the inductive bias
to maintain stable, sparsely changing latent states. The bias is implemented by
means of a novel internal gating function and a penalty on the L0 norm of latent
state changes. We demonstrate that GateL0RD can compete with or outperform
state-of-the-art RNNs in a variety of partially observable prediction and control
tasks. GateL0RD tends to encode the underlying generative factors of the environment, ignores spurious temporal dependencies, and generalizes better, improving
sampling efficiency and overall performance in model-based planning and reinforcement learning tasks. Moreover, we show that the developing latent states can
be easily interpreted, which is a step towards better explainability in RNNs.

1

Introduction

When does the meeting start? Where are my car keys? Is the stove turned off? Humans memorize
lots of information over extended periods of time. In contrast, classical planning methods assume
that the state of the environment is fully observable at every time step [1]. This assumption does not
hold for realistic applications, where generative processes are only indirectly observable or entities
are occluded. Planning in such Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP) is a
challenging problem, because suitably-structured memory is required for decision making.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are often used to deal with partial observability [2–4]. They
encode past observations by maintaining latent states, which are iteratively updated. However,
continuously updating the latent state causes past information to quickly “wash out”. Long-Short
Term Memory networks (LSTM, [5]) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU, [6]) deal with this problem
by using internal gates. However, they cannot leave their latent states completely unchanged, because
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

