Neural Pseudo-Label Optimism for the Bank Loan
Problem
Aldo Pacchiano∗
Microsoft Research

Shaun Singh∗ Edward Chou
FAIR
FAIR

Alexander C. Berg
FAIR

Jakob Foerster
FAIR

Abstract
We study a class of classification problems best exemplified by the bank loan
problem, where a lender decides whether or not to issue a loan. The lender only
observes whether a customer will repay a loan if the loan is issued to begin with,
and thus modeled decisions affect what data is available to the lender for future
decisions. As a result, it is possible for the lender’s algorithm to “get stuck” with a
self-fulfilling model. This model never corrects its false negatives, since it never
sees the true label for rejected data, thus accumulating infinite regret. In the
case of linear models, this issue can be addressed by adding optimism directly
into the model predictions. However, there are few methods that extend to the
function approximation case using Deep Neural Networks. We present PseudoLabel Optimism (PLOT), a conceptually and computationally simple method for
this setting applicable to DNNs. PLOT adds an optimistic label to the subset of
decision points the current model is deciding on, trains the model on all data so
far (including these points along with their optimistic labels), and finally uses
the resulting optimistic model for decision making. PLOT achieves competitive
performance on a set of three challenging benchmark problems, requiring minimal
hyperparameter tuning. We also show that PLOT satisfies a logarithmic regret
guarantee, under a Lipschitz and logistic mean label model, and under a separability
condition on the data.

1

Introduction

Binary classification models are used for online decision-making in a wide variety of practical settings.
These settings include bank lending [44, 22, 42], criminal recidivism prediction [43, 45, 5], credit card
fraud [7, 41], spam detection [20, 39], self-driving motion planning [35, 28], and recommendation
systems [36, 10, 18]. In many of these tasks, the model only receives the true labels for examples
accepted by the learner. We refer to this class of online learning problem as the bank loan problem
(BLP), motivated by the following prototypical task. A learner interacts with an online sequence
of loan applicants. At the beginning of each time-step the learner receives features describing a
loan applicant, from which the learner decides whether or not to issue the requested loan. If the
learner decides to issue the loan, the learner, at some point in the future, observes whether or not the
applicant repays the loan. If the loan is not issued, no further information is observed by the learner.
The process is then repeated in the subsequent time-steps. The learner’s objective is to maximize its
reward by handing out loans to as many applicants that can repay them and deny loans to applicants
unable to pay them back.
The BLP can be viewed as a contextual bandit problem with two actions: accepting/rejecting a loan
application. Rejection carries a fixed, known, reward of 0: with no loan issued, there is no dependency
on the applicant. If in contrast the learner accepts a loan application, it receives a reward of 1 in case
the loan is repaid and suffers a loss of −1 if the loan is not repaid. The probabilities of repayment
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

