Amortized Synthesis of Constrained Configurations
Using a Differentiable Surrogate

1

Xingyuan Sun1 , Tianju Xue2 , Szymon Rusinkiewicz1 , Ryan P. Adams1
Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Princeton University
{xs5, txue, smr, rpa}@princeton.edu

Abstract
In design, fabrication, and control problems, we are often faced with the task of
synthesis, in which we must generate an object or configuration that satisfies a set
of constraints while maximizing one or more objective functions. The synthesis
problem is typically characterized by a physical process in which many different
realizations may achieve the goal. This many-to-one map presents challenges
to the supervised learning of feed-forward synthesis, as the set of viable designs
may have a complex structure. In addition, the non-differentiable nature of many
physical simulations prevents efficient direct optimization. We address both of
these problems with a two-stage neural network architecture that we may consider
to be an autoencoder. We first learn the decoder: a differentiable surrogate that
approximates the many-to-one physical realization process. We then learn the
encoder, which maps from goal to design, while using the fixed decoder to evaluate
the quality of the realization. We evaluate the approach on two case studies:
extruder path planning in additive manufacturing and constrained soft robot inverse
kinematics. We compare our approach to direct optimization of the design using
the learned surrogate, and to supervised learning of the synthesis problem. We
find that our approach produces higher quality solutions than supervised learning,
while being competitive in quality with direct optimization, at a greatly reduced
computational cost.

1

Introduction

One of the ambitions of artificial intelligence is to automate problems in design, fabrication, and
control that demand efficient and accurate interfaces between machine learning algorithms and
physical systems. Whether it is optimizing the topology of a mechanical structure or identifying
the feasible paths for a manufacturing robot, we can often view these problems through the lens
of synthesis. In a synthesis task, we seek configurations of a physical system that achieve certain
desiderata while satisfying given constraints; i.e., we must optimize a physically-realizable design.
In this work, design refers to the parametric space over which we have control and in which, e.g., we
optimize. A realization is the object that arises when the design is instantiated, while goal refers to
its desired properties. For example, in fabrication, the design might be a set of assembly steps, the
realization would be the resulting object, while the goal could be to match target dimensions while
maximizing strength. Synthesis, then, refers to finding a design whose realization achieves the goal.
Synthesis problems are challenging for several reasons. The physical realization process may be
costly and time-consuming, making evaluation of many designs difficult. Moreover, the realization
process—or even a simulation of it—is generally not differentiable, rendering efficient gradient-based
methods inapplicable. Finally, there may be a many-to-one map from the parametric space of feasible
and equally-desirable designs to realizations; i.e., there may be multiple ways to achieve the goal.
Surrogate modeling is widely used to address the first two challenges, though it can still be expensive
because of the need for optimization, sampling, or search algorithms to find a feasible design. More
seriously, the third challenge—lack of uniqueness—creates difficulties for naïve supervised learning
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

