Long-Short Transformer: Efficient Transformers
for Language and Vision
Chen Zhu‡1∗ , Wei Ping†2 , Chaowei Xiao†2,3 , Mohammad Shoeybi2 , Tom Goldstein1 ,
Anima Anandkumar2,4 , and Bryan Catanzaro2
1

2

University of Maryland, College Park
NVIDIA Arizona State University 4 California Institute of Technology
‡
chenzhu@cs.umd.edu, † {wping, chaoweix}@nvidia.com
3

Abstract
Transformers have achieved success in both language and vision domains. However,
it is prohibitively expensive to scale them to long sequences such as long documents
or high-resolution images, because self-attention mechanism has quadratic time
and memory complexities with respect to the input sequence length. In this paper,
we propose Long-Short Transformer (Transformer-LS), an efficient self-attention
mechanism for modeling long sequences with linear complexity for both language
and vision tasks. It aggregates a novel long-range attention with dynamic projection
to model distant correlations and a short-term attention to capture fine-grained local
correlations. We propose a dual normalization strategy to account for the scale
mismatch between the two attention mechanisms. Transformer-LS can be applied
to both autoregressive and bidirectional models without additional complexity.
Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art models on multiple tasks in language
and vision domains, including the Long Range Arena benchmark, autoregressive
language modeling, and ImageNet classification. For instance, Transformer-LS
achieves 0.97 test BPC on enwik8 using half the number of parameters than
previous method, while being faster and is able to handle 3× as long sequences
compared to its full-attention version on the same hardware. On ImageNet, it can
obtain the state-of-the-art results (e.g., a moderate size of 55.8M model solely
trained on 224 × 224 ImageNet-1K can obtain Top-1 accuracy 84.1%), while being
more scalable on high-resolution images. The source code and models are released
at https://github.com/NVIDIA/transformer-ls.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models [1] have achieved great success in the domains of natural language
processing (NLP) [2, 3] and computer vision [4–6]. These models benefit from the self-attention
module, which can capture both adjacent and long-range correlations between tokens while efficiently
scaling on modern hardware. However, the time and memory consumed by self-attention scale
quadratically with the input length, making it very expensive to process long sequences. Many
language and vision tasks benefit from modeling long sequences. In NLP, document-level tasks
require processing long articles [e.g., 7, 8], and the performance of language models often increases
with sequence length [e.g., 9, 10]. In computer vision, many tasks involve high-resolution images,
which are converted to long sequences of image patches before being processed with Transformer
models [4, 6, 11]. As a result, it is crucial to design an efficient attention mechanism for long sequence
modeling that generalizes well across different domains.
∗

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

