Learning Semantic Representations to Verify
Hardware Designs

Shobha Vasudevan ∗
Google Research, Brain Team
shovasu@google.com
Rishabh Singh
Google X
rising@google.com

Wenjie Jiang ∗
Google Research, Brain Team
wenjiej@google.com

David Bieber
Google Research, Brain Team
dbieber@google.com

Hamid Shojaei
Google
hamids@google.com

Richard Ho
Google
riho@google.com

Charles Sutton
Google Research, Brain Team
charlessutton@google.com

Abstract
Verification is a serious bottleneck in the industrial hardware design cycle, routinely
requiring person-years of effort. Practical verification relies on a “best effort”
process that simulates the design on test inputs. This suggests a new research
question: Can this simulation data be exploited to learn a continuous representation
of a hardware design that allows us to predict its functionality? As a first approach
to this new problem, we introduce Design2Vec, a deep architecture that learns
semantic abstractions of hardware designs. The key idea is to work at a higher level
of abstraction than the gate or the bit level, namely the Register Transfer Level
(RTL), which is similar to software source code, and can be represented by a graph
that incorporates control and data flow. This allows us to learn representations
of RTL syntax and semantics using a graph neural network. We apply these
representations to several tasks within verification, including predicting what cover
points of the design will be covered (simulated) by a test, and generating new
tests to cover desired cover points. We evaluate Design2Vec on three real-world
hardware designs, including the TPU, Google’s industrial chip used in commercial
data centers. Our results demonstrate that Design2Vec dramatically outperforms
baseline approaches that do not incorporate the RTL semantics and scales to
industrial designs. It generates tests that cover design points that are considered
hard to cover with manually written tests by design verification experts in a fraction
of the time.

1

Introduction

Hardware designs are verified to check if a design implements the architectural specification correctly.
Verification is widely considered the most serious bottleneck in the contemporary industrial hardware
design cycle [2, 16, 15]. It requires 60-75% of the time, compute, and human resources during the
design phase, routinely taking multiple person-years of effort. Verification is a complex problem
because modern hardware has billions of inputs and flops, and the number of states is exponential in
the number of flops and inputs. Checking every state of the system is infeasible due to a combinatorial
∗

Equal contributors

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

