Diversity Matters When Learning From Ensembles

Giung Nam1∗ , Jongmin Yoon1∗ , Yoonho Lee2,3 , Juho Lee1,2
KAIST1 , Daejeon, South Korea, AITRICS2 , Seoul, South Korea, Stanford University3 , USA
{giung, jm.yoon, juholee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep ensembles excel in large-scale image classification tasks both in terms of
prediction accuracy and calibration. Despite being simple to train, the computation
and memory cost of deep ensembles limits their practicability. While some recent
works propose to distill an ensemble model into a single model to reduce such
costs, there is still a performance gap between the ensemble and distilled models.
We propose a simple approach for reducing this gap, i.e., making the distilled
performance close to the full ensemble. Our key assumption is that a distilled model
should absorb as much function diversity inside the ensemble as possible. We first
empirically show that the typical distillation procedure does not effectively transfer
such diversity, especially for complex models that achieve near-zero training error.
To fix this, we propose a perturbation strategy for distillation that reveals diversity
by seeking inputs for which ensemble member outputs disagree. We empirically
show that a model distilled with such perturbed samples indeed exhibits enhanced
diversity, leading to improved performance.

1

Introduction

Deep Ensemble (DE) [Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017], a simple method to ensemble the same model
trained multiple times with different random initializations, is considered to be a competitive method
for various tasks involving deep neural networks both in terms of prediction accuracy and uncertainty
estimation. Several works have tried to reveal the secret behind DE’s effectiveness. As stated by
Duvenaud et al. [2016] and Wilson and Izmailov [2020], DE can be considered as an approximate
Bayesian Model Average (BMA) procedure. Fort et al. [2019] studied the loss landscape of DEs and
showed that the effectiveness comes from the diverse modes reached by ensemble members, making
it well suited for approximating BMA. It is quite frustrating that most sophisticated approximate
Bayesian inference algorithms, especially the ones based on variational approximations, are not as
effective as DEs in terms of exploring various modes in parameter spaces.
Despite being simple to train, DE incurs significant overhead in inference time and memory usage. It
is therefore natural to develop a way to reduce such costs. An example of such a method is Knowledge
Distillation (KD) [Hinton et al., 2015], which transfers knowledge from a large teacher network to a
relatively smaller student network. The student network is trained with a loss that encourages it to
copy the outputs of the teacher networks evaluated at the training data. With KD, there have been
several works that learn a single student network by distilling from DE teacher networks. A naïve
approach would be to directly distill ensembled outputs of DE teachers to the single student network.
A better way proven to be more effective is to set up a student network having multiple subnetworks
(multiple heads [Tran et al., 2020] or rank-one factors [Mariet et al., 2020]) and distill the outputs
of each ensemble member to each subnetwork in a one-to-one fashion. Nevertheless, the empirical
performance of such distilled networks is still far inferior to DE teachers.
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

