Learning Dynamic Graph Representation of Brain
Connectome with Spatio-Temporal Attention

Byung-Hoon Kim ∗
Department of Psychiatry
Institute of Behavioral Sciences in Medicine
College of Medicine, Yonsei University
egyptdj@yonsei.ac.kr

Jong Chul Ye
Department of Bio/Brain Engineering
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST
jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr

Jae-Jin Kim
Department of Psychiatry
Institute of Behavioral Sciences in Medicine
College of Medicine, Yonsei University
jaejkim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Functional connectivity (FC) between regions of the brain can be assessed by the
degree of temporal correlation measured with functional neuroimaging modalities. Based on the fact that these connectivities build a network, graph-based
approaches for analyzing the brain connectome have provided insights into the
functions of the human brain. The development of graph neural networks (GNNs)
capable of learning representation from graph structured data has led to increased
interest in learning the graph representation of the brain connectome. Although
recent attempts to apply GNN to the FC network have shown promising results,
there is still a common limitation that they usually do not incorporate the dynamic characteristics of the FC network which fluctuates over time. In addition,
a few studies that have attempted to use dynamic FC as an input for the GNN
reported a reduction in performance compared to static FC methods, and did not
provide temporal explainability. Here, we propose STAGIN, a method for learning dynamic graph representation of the brain connectome with spatio-temporal
attention. Specifically, a temporal sequence of brain graphs is input to the STAGIN
to obtain the dynamic graph representation, while novel READOUT functions
and the Transformer encoder provide spatial and temporal explainability with attention, respectively. Experiments on the HCP-Rest and the HCP-Task datasets
demonstrate exceptional performance of our proposed method. Analysis of the
spatio-temporal attention also provide concurrent interpretation with the neuroscientific knowledge, which further validates our method. Code is available at
https://github.com/egyptdj/stagin

1

Introduction

Neuroimaging modalities provide measurements of brain activity by capturing the signals of neural
activity. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a non-invasive imaging method that
measures the blood-oxygen level dependence (BOLD) in order to estimate the neural activity of
the whole brain over time [20]. Functional connectivity (FC) is defined as the degree of temporal
∗

This work was conducted while the first author was at KAIST

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

