PolarStream: Streaming Lidar Object Detection and
Segmentation with Polar Pillars

Qi Chen∗
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
qchen42@jhu.edu

Sourabh Vora
Motional
Santa Monica, CA 90401
sourabh.vora@motional.com

Oscar Beijbom
Motional
Santa Monica, CA 90401
oscar.beijbom@motional.com

Abstract
Recent works recognized lidars as an inherently streaming data source and showed
that the end-to-end latency of lidar perception models can be reduced significantly
by operating on wedge-shaped point cloud sectors rather then the full point cloud.
However, due to use of cartesian coordinate systems these methods represent the
sectors as rectangular regions, wasting memory and compute. In this work we
propose using a polar coordinate system and make two key improvements on this
design. First, we increase the spatial context by using multi-scale padding from
neighboring sectors: preceding sector from the current scan and/or the following
sector from the past scan. Second, we improve the core polar convolutional
architecture by introducing feature undistortion and range stratified convolutions.
Experimental results on the nuScenes dataset show significant improvements over
other streaming based methods. We also achieve comparable results to existing
non-streaming methods but with lower latencies.

1

Introduction

The ability to accurately perceive objects in dense urban environments still remains a challenging
problem for self-driving cars. While such self-driving cars typically deploy a wide variety of sensors
lidars play a key role due to the accurate range information provided. Driven in part by the availability
of benchmark datasets [12, 3, 27], the last decade has seen tremendous progress in lidar based 3D
object detection [39, 16, 32, 21, 10]. However, these methods all ignore the fact that most lidar
sensors scan the scene sequentially as the lidar rotates around the z-axis. They instead wait for
the rotational scan to complete (colloquially known as full sweep) before processing data, thereby
introducing a large data capture latency (usually 50 to 100 ms).
First, Han et al. [13] and then STROBE [11] recognized this problem and proposed solutions which
processed lidar sectors (shown in Fig. 1) as soon as they arrived. They showed that a streaming based
architecture can achieve significantly reduced latency over the traditional non-streaming baselines.
Both of these methods encode the point clouds as an image in bird’s-eye view (BEV) using cuboidshaped voxels. In doing so, they ignore the natural polar representation formed by the lidar sectors.
Using cuboid-shaped voxels restricts them to performing convolutions on the minimal rectangular
region enclosing the point cloud sector which wastes both computation and memory. As shown in
Fig. 1, a large portion of the enclosed rectangular region remains empty.
∗

work done while interning at Motional

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

