Practical, Provably-Correct Interactive Learning in
the Realizable Setting: The Power of True Believers
Julian Katz-Samuels
University of Wisconsin, Madison
katzsamuels@wisc.edu

Blake Mason
Rice University
bm63@rice.edu

Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu

Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin, Madison
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider interactive learning in the realizable setting and develop a general
framework to handle problems ranging from best arm identification to active classification. We begin our investigation with the observation that agnostic algorithms
cannot be minimax-optimal in the realizable setting. Hence, we design novel computationally efficient algorithms for the realizable setting that match the minimax
lower bound up to logarithmic factors and are general-purpose, accommodating
a wide variety of function classes including kernel methods, Hölder smooth functions, and convex functions. The sample complexities of our algorithms can be
quantified in terms of well-known quantities like the extended teaching dimension and haystack dimension. However, unlike algorithms based directly on those
combinatorial quantities, our algorithms are computationally efficient. To achieve
computational efficiency, our algorithms sample from the version space using
Monte Carlo “hit-and-run” algorithms instead of maintaining the version space
explicitly. Our approach has two key strengths. First, it is simple, consisting of
two unifying, greedy algorithms. Second, our algorithms have the capability to
seamlessly leverage prior knowledge that is often available and useful in practice.
In addition to our new theoretical results, we demonstrate empirically that our
algorithms are competitive with Gaussian process UCB methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study interactive learning where an algorithm makes a decision and observes feedback
that it then uses to update its behavior. Interactive learning problems are becoming increasingly
widespread in the information era. Examples include A/B/n testing where technology companies
perform large-scale experiments to adaptively collect data to optimize their products on platforms like
websites or smart phone applications [1]; active classification where learning algorithms adaptively
collect data with the hope of learning high-quality predictive models using a much smaller number
of labels than is typically required in supervised learning [2]; and environmental monitoring using
sensor networks [3].
At a high-level, there are two main algorithmic paradigms for interactive learning: agnostic algorithms
and realizability-based algorithms. Agnostic algorithms may use a model class F to guide learning,
but do not assume that the true data-generating process is well-modeled by F. Because of this,
agnostic algorithms tend to have the advantages of being robust to model misspecification and noise.
Due to these virtues, agnostic algorithms have received much attention in the literature on interactive
learning, e.g., in active classification [4, 5, 6]. By contrast, realizability-based algorithms assume
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

