Low-Rank Constraints for Fast Inference in
Structured Models
Justin T. Chiu∗
Cornell University
jtc257@cornell.edu

Yuntian Deng∗
Harvard University
dengyuntian@seas.harvard.edu
Alexander M. Rush
Cornell University
arush@cornell.edu

Abstract
Structured distributions, i.e. distributions over combinatorial spaces, are commonly
used to learn latent probabilistic representations from observed data. However,
scaling these models is bottlenecked by the high computational and memory
complexity with respect to the size of the latent representations. Common models
such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and Probabilistic Context-Free Grammars
(PCFGs) require time and space quadratic and cubic in the number of hidden
states respectively. This work demonstrates a simple approach to reduce the
computational and memory complexity of a large class of structured models. We
show that by viewing the central inference step as a matrix-vector product and using
a low-rank constraint, we can trade off model expressivity and speed via the rank.
Experiments with neural parameterized structured models for language modeling,
polyphonic music modeling, unsupervised grammar induction, and video modeling
show that our approach matches the accuracy of standard models at large state
spaces while providing practical speedups.

1

Introduction

When modeling complex sequential spaces, such as sentences, musical scores, or video frames, a key
choice is the internal structural representations of the model. A common choice in recent years is to
use neural representations [Bengio et al., 2003, Mikolov et al., 2011, Brown et al., 2020, BoulangerLewandowski et al., 2012, Huang et al., 2018, Weissenborn et al., 2020] to store a deterministic
history. These models yield strong predictive accuracy but their deterministic, continuous forms
provide little insight into the intermediate decisions of the model.
Latent structured models provide an alternative approach where complex modeling decisions are
broken down into a series of probabilistic steps. Structured models provide a principled framework
for reasoning about the probabilistic dependencies between decisions and for computing posterior
probabilities. The structure of the decision processes and the ability to answer queries through probabilistic inference afford interpretability and controllability that are lacking in neural models [Koller
and Friedman, 2009, Levine, 2018].
Despite the benefits of structured models, the computational complexity of training scales asymptotically much worse than for neural models, as inference, and therefore training, requires marginalizing
∗

Equal contribution
Code is available here.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

