Provably Efficient Reinforcement Learning with
Linear Function Approximation under Adaptivity
Constraints
Tianhao Wang∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
tianhao.wang@yale.edu

Dongruo Zhou∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) with linear function approximation under
the adaptivity constraint. We consider two popular limited adaptivity models: the
batch learning model and the rare policy switch model, and propose two efficient
online RL algorithms for episodic linear Markov decision processes, where the
transition probability and the reward function can be represented as a linear function
of some known feature mapping. In specific, for the
√batch learning model, our
e d3 H 3 T + dHT /B) regret,
proposed LSVI-UCB-Batch algorithm achieves an O(
where d is the dimension of the feature mapping, H is the episode length, T is
the number of interactionspand B is the number of batches.
√ Our result suggests
e
that it suffices to use only T /dH batches to obtain O( d3 H 3 T ) regret. For the
rare policy
p switch model, our proposed LSVI-UCB-RareSwitch algorithm enjoys
an e
O( d3 H 3 T [1 + T /(dH)]dH/B
√) regret, which implies that dH log T policy
e
switches suffice to obtain the O( d3 H 3 T ) regret. Our algorithms achieve the
same regret as the LSVI-UCB algorithm (Jin et al., 2020), yet with a substantially
smaller amount of adaptivity. We also establish a lower bound for the batch learning
model, which suggests that the dependency on B in our regret bound is tight.

1

Introduction

Real-world reinforcement learning (RL) applications often come with possibly infinite state and
action space, and in such a situation classical RL algorithms developed in the tabular setting are
not applicable anymore. A popular approach to overcoming this issue is by applying function
approximation techniques to the underlying structures of the Markov decision processes (MDPs).
For example, one can assume that the transition probability and the reward are linear functions of a
known feature mapping φ : S × A → Rd , where S and A are the state space and action space, and
d is the dimension of the embedding. This gives rise to the so-called linear MDP model (Yang and
Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020). Assuming access to a generative model, efficient algorithms under
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

