Fast Federated Learning in the Presence of
Arbitrary Device Unavailability

Xinran Gu∗
IIIS
Tsinghua University
gxr21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Kaixuan Huang∗
ECE
Princeton University
kaixuanh@princeton.edu

Jingzhao Zhang
EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jzhzhang@mit.edu

Longbo Huang†
IIIS
Tsinghua University
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) coordinates with numerous heterogeneous devices to
collaboratively train a shared model while preserving user privacy. Despite its
multiple advantages, FL faces new challenges. One challenge arises when devices
drop out of the training process beyond the control of the central server. In
this case, the convergence of popular FL algorithms such as FedAvg is severely
influenced by the straggling devices. To tackle this challenge, we study federated
learning algorithms under arbitrary device unavailability and propose an algorithm
named Memory-augmented Impatient Federated Averaging (MIFA). Our algorithm
efficiently avoids excessive latency induced by inactive devices, and corrects the
gradient bias using the memorized latest updates from the devices. We prove that
MIFA achieves minimax optimal convergence rates on non-i.i.d. data for both
strongly convex and non-convex smooth functions. We also provide an explicit
characterization of the improvement over baseline algorithms through a case study,
and validate the results by numerical experiments on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a machine learning setting in which a central server coordinates with a large
number of devices to collectively train a shared model [28, 34, 20, 33, 25, 26]. Practical advantages
of this training scheme are mainly twofold. First, each device keeps the private data locally and hence
preserves its data privacy. Second, federated learning can make use of idle computing resources and
lower computation costs. Although federated learning successfully scales up with data sizes and
accelerates training via more affordable computing power [43, 38, 36], the collaborative setup leads
to new challenges due to large variations among individual computing devices. Our work aims to
formulate and investigate the impact of device variations on FL from an optimization perspective.
In FL, a device can differ from its peers in multiple aspects [17, 25]. First, the data distribution and
local task can be different among devices. To address the data variation, non-i.i.d. objective models
were proposed and analyzed by [26, 18, 19, 42, 25]. We follow this line of work and formulate our
optimization objective as a sum of stochastic functions on individual devices (See Eqn. (1)).
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

