The Complexity of Bayesian Network Learning:
Revisiting the Superstructure

Robert Ganian and Viktoriia Korchemna
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien
{rganian,vkorchemna}@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We investigate the parameterized complexity of Bayesian Network Structure Learning (BNSL), a classical problem that has received significant attention in empirical
but also purely theoretical studies. We follow up on previous works that have
analyzed the complexity of BNSL w.r.t. the so-called superstructure of the input.
While known results imply that BNSL is unlikely to be fixed-parameter tractable
even when parameterized by the size of a vertex cover in the superstructure, here we
show that a different kind of parameterization—notably by the size of a feedback
edge set—yields fixed-parameter tractability. We proceed by showing that this
result can be strengthened to a localized version of the feedback edge set, and
provide corresponding lower bounds that complement previous results to provide a
complexity classification of BNSL w.r.t. virtually all well-studied graph parameters.
We then analyze how the complexity of BNSL depends on the representation of the
input. In particular, while the bulk of past theoretical work on the topic assumed
the use of the so-called non-zero representation, here we prove that if an additive
representation can be used instead then BNSL becomes fixed-parameter tractable
even under significantly milder restrictions to the superstructure, notably when
parameterized by the treewidth alone. Last but not least, we show how our results
can be extended to the closely related problem of Polytree Learning.

1

Introduction

Bayesian networks are among the most prominent graphical models for probability distributions. The
key feature of Bayesian networks is that they represent conditional dependencies between random
variables via a directed acyclic graph; the vertices of this graph are the variables, and an arc ab means
that the distribution of variable b depends on the value of a. One beneficial property of Bayesian
networks is that they can be used to infer the distribution of random variables in the network based
on the values of the remaining variables.
The problem of constructing a Bayesian network with an optimal network structure is NP-hard, and
remains NP-hard even on highly restricted instances [4]. This initial negative result has prompted
an extensive investigation of the problem’s complexity, with the aim of identifying new tractable
fragments as well as the boundaries of its intractability [26, 32, 27, 22, 11, 6, 19]. The problem—
which we simply call BAYESIAN N ETWORK S TRUCTURE L EARNING (BNSL)—can be stated as
follows: given a set of V of variables (represented as vertices), a family F of score functions which
assign each variable v ∈ V a score based on its parents, and a target value `, determine if there exists
a directed acyclic graph over V that achieves a total score of at least `1 .
1

Formal definitions are provided in Section 2. We consider the decision version of BNSL for complexitytheoretic reasons only; all of the provided algorithms are constructive and can output a network as a witness.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

