Stochastic Gradient Descent-Ascent and
Consensus Optimization for Smooth Games:
Convergence Analysis under Expected Co-coercivity

Nicolas Loizou∗
Mila and DIRO,
Université de Montréal

Hugo Berard
Mila and DIRO,
Université de Montréal

Ioannis Mitliagkas†
Mila and DIRO,
Université de Montréal

Gauthier Gidel†
Mila and DIRO,
Université de Montréal

Simon Lacoste-Julien†
Mila and DIRO,
Université de Montréal

Abstract
Two of the most prominent algorithms for solving unconstrained smooth games
are the classical stochastic gradient descent-ascent (SGDA) and the recently introduced stochastic consensus optimization (SCO) [Mescheder et al., 2017]. SGDA is
known to converge to a stationary point for specific classes of games, but current
convergence analyses require a bounded variance assumption. SCO is used successfully for solving large-scale adversarial problems, but its convergence guarantees
are limited to its deterministic variant. In this work, we introduce the expected
co-coercivity condition, explain its benefits, and provide the first last-iterate convergence guarantees of SGDA and SCO under this condition for solving a class of
stochastic variational inequality problems that are potentially non-monotone. We
prove linear convergence of both methods to a neighborhood of the solution when
they use constant step-size, and we propose insightful stepsize-switching rules to
guarantee convergence to the exact solution. In addition, our convergence guarantees hold under the arbitrary sampling paradigm, and as such, we give insights into
the complexity of minibatching.

1

Introduction

Motivated from the recent interest in solving adversarial formulations in machine learning such as
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014], we consider in this paper a more
abstract formulation of the problem and focus on solving the following unconstrained stochastic
variational inequality (VI) problem:2
n
1X
Find x∗ ∈ Rd such that ξ(x∗ ) =
ξi (x∗ ) = 0,
(1)
n i=1
where each ξi : Rd → Rd is Lipschitz continuous. Further, we assume that the problem (1) has a
unique3 solution x∗ and that the operator ξ is µ-quasi-strongly monotone: there is a µ ≥ 0 such that:
∗

hξ(x), x − x∗ i ≥ µkx − x∗ k2
†

∀x ∈ Rd

(2)

Corresponding author: nicolasloizou1@gmail.com. Canada CIFAR AI Chair.
While our presentation focuses on this finite-sum structure, most of our convergence results can easily
be adapted to the general stochastic setting (see App. D). Also, we do not use the full power of variational
inequalities that usually have constraints [Harker and Pang, 1990], but standard algorithms for (1) are coming
from this literature [Gidel et al., 2018].
3
This assumption can be relaxed; but for simplicity of exposition we enforce it.
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

