Automorphic Equivalence-aware
Graph Neural Network

Fengli Xu1 , Quanming Yao1,2 , Pan Hui3 , Yong Li1
1
BNRIST & EE Department, Tsinghua University
2
4Paradigm Inc.
3
CSE Department, HKUST.
liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Distinguishing the automorphic equivalence of nodes in a graph plays an essential
role in many scientific domains, e.g., computational biologist and social network
analysis. However, existing graph neural networks (GNNs) fail to capture such
an important property. To make GNN aware of automorphic equivalence, we
first introduce a localized variant of this concept — ego-centered automorphic
equivalence (Ego-AE). Then, we design a novel variant of GNN, i.e., GRAPE,
that uses learnable AE-aware aggregators to explicitly differentiate the Ego-AE
of each node’s neighbors with the aids of various subgraph templates. While the
design of subgraph templates can be hard, we further propose a genetic algorithm
to automatically search them from graph data. Moreover, we theoretically prove
that GRAPE is expressive in terms of generating distinct representations for nodes
with different Ego-AE features, which fills in a fundamental gap of existing GNN
variants. Finally, we empirically validate our model on eight real-world graph data,
including social network, e-commerce co-purchase network, and citation network,
and show that it consistently outperforms existing GNNs. The source code is public
available at https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/GRAPE.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed the phenomenal success of GNNs in numerous graph learning tasks,
such as node classification [24], link prediction [59], and community detection [19], which is largely
due to their capability of simultaneously modelling the connecting patterns and feature distribution
in each node’s local neighborhood. As a result, it leads to a surge of interests from both academia
and industry to develop more powerful GNN models [52]. Despite of various architectures, the
most popular GNNs, like GCN [24], GraphSAGE [19], GAT [48] and GIN [55], apply permutation
invariant aggregate function on each node’s local neighborhood to learn node embeddings, which
leads to concerns about their representational power [17, 55].
In this paper, we investigate GNN’s expressiveness from an important but largely overlooked angle,
i.e., the capacity to distinguish automorphic equivalence within each node’s local neighborhood.
Automorphic equivalence (AE) [14] is a classic concept to differentiate the structural role of each node
in a given graph. Specifically, two nodes are considered to be AE only if they are interchangeable in
some index permutations that preserve the connection matrix, i.e., graph automorphisms [35]. AE can
identify the nodes that exhibit identical structural features in a graph, which makes it a central topic in
computational biologist, social network analysis and other scientific domains [33, 34]. For example,
empirical studies show AE is an important indicator of social position and behavior similarity in
social network [16, 37], which thus might significantly benefit GNN architecture design.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

