Does enforcing fairness mitigate biases caused by
subpopulation shift?

Subha Maity*
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
smaity@umich.edu

Debarghya Mukherjee*
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
mdeb@umich.edu

Mikhail Yurochkin
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Yuekai Sun
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yuekai@umich.edu

Abstract
Many instances of algorithmic bias are caused by subpopulation shifts. For example,
ML models often perform worse on demographic groups that are underrepresented
in the training data. In this paper, we study whether enforcing algorithmic fairness
during training improves the performance of the trained model in the target domain.
On one hand, we conceive scenarios in which enforcing fairness does not improve
performance in the target domain. In fact, it may even harm performance. On the
other hand, we derive necessary and sufficient conditions under which enforcing
algorithmic fairness leads to the Bayes model in the target domain. We also
illustrate the practical implications of our theoretical results in simulations and on
real data.

1

Introduction

There are many instances of distribution shifts causing performance disparities in machine learning
(ML) models. For example, Buolamwini and Gebru [7] report commercial gender classification
models are more likely to misclassify dark-skinned people (than light-skinned people). This is (in
part) due to the abundance of light-skinned examples in training data. Similarly, pedestrian detection
models sometimes have trouble recognizing dark-skinned pedestrians [22]. Another prominent
example is the poor performance of image processing models on images from developing countries
due to the scarcity of images from such countries in publically available image datasets [20].
Unfortunately, many algorithmic fairness practices were not developed with distribution shifts in
mind. For example, the common algorithmic fairness practice of enforcing performance parity on
certain demographic groups [1, 11] implicitly assumes performance parity on training data generalize
to the target domain, but distribution shifts between the training data and target domain renders this
assumption invalid.
In this paper, we consider subpopulation shifts as a source of algorithmic biases and study whether
the common algorithmic fairness practice of enforcing performance parity on certain demographic
groups mitigate the resulting (algorithmic) biases in the target domain. Such algorithmic fairness
practices are common enough that there are methods [1, 2] and software (e.g. TensorFlow Constrained
Optimization [10]) devoted to operationalizing them. There are other sources of algorithmic biases
* Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

