Interesting Object, Curious Agent:
Learning Task-Agnostic Exploration

Simone Parisi1∗
Victoria Dean2∗
1
Facebook AI Research

Deepak Pathak2
Abhinav Gupta1
Carnegie Mellon University

2

Abstract
Common approaches for task-agnostic exploration learn tabula-rasa –the agent
assumes isolated environments and no prior knowledge or experience. However,
in the real world, agents learn in many environments and always come with prior
experiences as they explore new ones. Exploration is a lifelong process. In this
paper, we propose a paradigm change in the formulation and evaluation of taskagnostic exploration. In this setup, the agent first learns to explore across many
environments without any extrinsic goal in a task-agnostic manner. Later on, the
agent effectively transfers the learned exploration policy to better explore new
environments when solving tasks. In this context, we evaluate several baseline
exploration strategies and present a simple yet effective approach to learning taskagnostic exploration policies. Our key idea is that there are two components of
exploration: (1) an agent-centric component encouraging exploration of unseen
parts of the environment based on an agent’s belief; (2) an environment-centric
component encouraging exploration of inherently interesting objects. We show that
our formulation is effective and provides the most consistent exploration across
several training-testing environment pairs. We also introduce benchmarks and
metrics for evaluating task-agnostic exploration strategies. The source code is
available at https://github.com/sparisi/cbet/.

1

Introduction

Exploration is one of the key unsolved problems in building intelligent agents capable of behaving
like humans. In reinforcement learning (RL), exploration is usually studied under two different
settings. The first is task-driven exploration, where the reward is well-defined and the agent’s goal is
to explore in order to maximize long-term rewards. However, in real life, external rewards are either
sparse or unknown altogether. In this setting, exploration is task-agnostic: given a new environment,
the agent has to explore it in absence of any external reward. Common approaches to encourage
task-agnostic exploration use intrinsically motivated rewards such as prediction curiosity [35, 47],
empowerment [39], or visitation counts [4, 34]. But does this setup represent how humans explore?
We argue that the commonly-used task-agnostic exploration setup is unrealistic, both from practical
and academic viewpoints. This setup assumes environments in isolation and agents exploring tabularasa, i.e., with no prior knowledge or experience. By contrast, we as humans do not learn from one
environment in isolation and we do not throw away our past knowledge every time we encounter
a new environment [14]. Exploration is rather a lifelong process: every time we encounter new
environments, we use our prior knowledge and experience to develop new efficient exploration
strategies. In this paper, we view the exploration problem from a continual learning lens. More
specifically, in this setup, the learning agent interacts with one or many environments without any
extrinsic goal. At this time, the agent learns to explore the environments. Later on, the agent
effectively transfers the learned exploration policy to explore new environments, rather than exploring
the new environment tabula-rasa.
∗

Equal contribution. Contacts: sparisi@fb.com and vdean@cmu.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

