D OCTOR: A Simple Method for Detecting
Misclassification Errors
Federica Granese∗ †
Lix, Inria, Institute Polytechnique de Paris,
Sapienza University of Rome
federica.granese@inria.fr
Daniele Gorla
Sapienza University of Rome
gorla@di.uniroma1.it

Marco Romanelli∗
L2S, CentraleSupélec,
CNRS, Université Paris Saclay
marco.romanelli@centralesupelec.fr
Catuscia Palamidessi†
Lix, Inria, Institute Polytechnique de Paris,
catuscia@lix.polytechnique.fr

Pablo Piantanida‡
L2S, CentraleSupélec,
CNRS, Université Paris Saclay
pablo.piantanida@centralesupelec.fr

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown to perform very well on large scale
object recognition problems and lead to widespread use for real-world applications,
including situations where DNN are implemented as “black boxes”. A promising
approach to secure their use is to accept decisions that are likely to be correct while
discarding the others. In this work, we propose D OCTOR, a simple method that
aims to identify whether the prediction of a DNN classifier should (or should not)
be trusted so that, consequently, it would be possible to accept it or to reject it. Two
scenarios are investigated: Totally Black Box (TBB) where only the soft-predictions
are available and Partially Black Box (PBB) where gradient-propagation to perform
input pre-processing is allowed. Empirically, we show that D OCTOR outperforms
all state-of-the-art methods on various well-known images and sentiment analysis
datasets. In particular, we observe a reduction of up to 4% of the false rejection
rate (FRR) in the PBB scenario. D OCTOR can be applied to any pre-trained model,
it does not require prior information about the underlying dataset and is as simple
as the simplest available methods in the literature.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of state-of-the-art Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), there has been rapid
adoption of these technologies in a broad range of applications to critical systems, such as autonomous
driving vehicles or industrial robots, including–but not limited to–classification and decision making
tasks. Nevertheless, these solutions still exhibit unwanted behaviors as they tend to be overconfident
even in presence of wrong decisions [17]. Developing methods and tools to make these algorithms
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work
This paper is supported by the ERC project Hypatia under the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program. Grant agreement №835294.
‡
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement №792464.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

