Generalization Bounds for Meta-Learning:
An Information-Theoretic Analysis

Qi Chen∗
Université Laval

Changjian Shui†
Université Laval

Mario Marchand‡
Université Laval

Abstract
We derive a novel information-theoretic analysis of the generalization property
of meta-learning algorithms. Concretely, our analysis proposes a generic understanding of both the conventional learning-to-learn framework [1] and the modern
model-agnostic meta learning (MAML) algorithms [2]. Moreover, we provide a
data-dependent generalization bound for a stochastic variant of MAML, which is
non-vacuous for deep few-shot learning. As compared to previous bounds that
depend on the square norm of gradients, empirical validations on both simulated
data and a well-known few-shot benchmark show that the proposed bound is orders
of magnitude tighter in most situations.

1

Introduction

Learning a task with limited samples is crucial for real-world machine learning applications, where
proper prior knowledge is a key component for a successful transfer. Meta-Learning [3] or learningto-learn (LTL) aims to extract such information through previous training tasks, which has recently
re-emerged as an important topic.
Modern approaches based on MAML [2] have gained tremendous success by exploiting the capabilities of deep neural networks [4–9]. However, many theoretical questions still remain elusive. For
instance, in the most popular methods for few-shot learning [10], the task-specific parameters and
meta-parameter are updated in support (also called meta-train) and query (also called meta-validation)
set, respectively. However, the majority of existing theoretical results such as [1, 11–14] do not provide a formal understanding of such popular practice. Moreover, modern meta-learning approaches
have incorporated over-parameterized deep neural networks, where conducting the theoretical analysis
becomes even more challenging.
In this paper, we introduce a novel theoretical understanding of the generalization property of metalearning through an information-theoretical perspective [15]. Compared with previous theoretical
results, the highlights of our contributions are as follows:
Unified Approach We analyze two popular scenarios. 1) The conventional LTL [11], where the
meta-parameters and task-specific parameters are updated within the same data set (referred as joint
training). 2) The modern MAML-based approaches where the meta-parameters and task specific
parameters are updated on distinct data sets (referred as alternate training), and for which the existing
theoretical analysis is rare.
Flexible Bounds The proposed meta-generalization error bounds are highly flexible: they are
algorithm-dependant, data-dependant, and are valid for non-convex loss functions. 1) Specifically, the
generalization error bound for joint-training (Theorem 5.1) is controlled by the mutual information
∗

Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, <qi.chen.1@ulaval.ca>
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering, <changjian.shui.1@ulaval.ca>
‡
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, <mario.marchand@ift.ulaval.ca>
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

