Characterizing possible failure modes
in physics-informed neural networks

Aditi S. Krishnapriyan∗,1,2 , Amir Gholami∗,2 ,
Shandian Zhe3 , Robert M. Kirby3 , Michael W. Mahoney2,4
1
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2 University of California, Berkeley,
3
University of Utah, 4 International Computer Science Institute
{aditik1, amirgh, mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu, {zhe, kirby}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Recent work in scientific machine learning has developed so-called physicsinformed neural network (PINN) models. The typical approach is to incorporate
physical domain knowledge as soft constraints on an empirical loss function and
use existing machine learning methodologies to train the model. We demonstrate
that, while existing PINN methodologies can learn good models for relatively
trivial problems, they can easily fail to learn relevant physical phenomena for
even slightly more complex problems. In particular, we analyze several distinct
situations of widespread physical interest, including learning differential equations
with convection, reaction, and diffusion operators. We provide evidence that the
soft regularization in PINNs, which involves PDE-based differential operators,
can introduce a number of subtle problems, including making the problem more
ill-conditioned. Importantly, we show that these possible failure modes are not
due to the lack of expressivity in the NN architecture, but that the PINN’s setup
makes the loss landscape very hard to optimize. We then describe two promising
solutions to address these failure modes. The first approach is to use curriculum
regularization, where the PINN’s loss term starts from a simple PDE regularization,
and becomes progressively more complex as the NN gets trained. The second
approach is to pose the problem as a sequence-to-sequence learning task, rather
than learning to predict the entire space-time at once. Extensive testing shows that
we can achieve up to 1-2 orders of magnitude lower error with these methods as
compared to regular PINN training.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are commonly used to describe different phenomena in science
and engineering. These PDEs are often derived by starting from governing first principles (e.g.,
conservation of mass or energy). It is typically not possible to find analytical solutions to these PDEs
for many real-world settings. Thus, many different numerical methods (e.g., the finite element method
[44], pseudo-spectral methods [9], etc.) have been introduced to approximate their solutions/behavior.
However, these PDEs can be quite complex for several settings (e.g., turbulence simulations), and
numerical integration techniques, which typically update and improve a candidate solution iteratively
until convergence, are often quite computationally expensive. Motivated by this—as well as the
increasing quantities of data available in many scientific and engineering applications—there has
been recent interest in developing machine learning (ML) approaches to find the solution of the
underlying PDEs (and/or work in tandem with numerical solutions). As a result, the area of Scientific
Machine Learning (SciML)—which aims to couple traditional scientific mechanistic modeling
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

