The Out-of-Distribution Problem in Explainability
and Search Methods for Feature Importance
Explanations

Peter Hase, Harry Xie, and Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{peter, fengyu.xie, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Feature importance (FI) estimates are a popular form of explanation, and they are
commonly created and evaluated by computing the change in model confidence
caused by removing certain input features at test time. For example, in the standard
Sufficiency metric, only the top-k most important tokens are kept. In this paper, we
study several under-explored dimensions of FI explanations, providing conceptual
and empirical improvements for this form of explanation. First, we advance a
new argument for why it can be problematic to remove features from an input
when creating or evaluating explanations: the fact that these counterfactual inputs
are out-of-distribution (OOD) to models implies that the resulting explanations
are socially misaligned. The crux of the problem is that the model prior and
random weight initialization influence the explanations (and explanation metrics)
in unintended ways. To resolve this issue, we propose a simple alteration to the
model training process, which results in more socially aligned explanations and
metrics. Second, we compare among five approaches for removing features from
model inputs. We find that some methods produce more OOD counterfactuals than
others, and we make recommendations for selecting a feature-replacement function.
Finally, we introduce four search-based methods for identifying FI explanations
and compare them to strong baselines, including LIME, Anchors, and Integrated
Gradients. Through experiments with six diverse text classification datasets, we
find that the only method that consistently outperforms random search is a Parallel
Local Search (PLS) that we introduce. Improvements over the second best method
are as large as 5.4 points for Sufficiency and 17 points for Comprehensiveness.1

1

Introduction

Estimating feature importance (FI) is a common approach to explaining how learned models make
predictions for individual data points [51, 46, 34, 57, 36, 11]. FI methods assign a scalar to each
feature of an input representing its “importance” to the model’s output, where a feature may be an
individual component of an input (such as a pixel or a word) or some combination of components.
Alongside these methods, many approaches have been proposed for evaluating FI estimates (also
known as attributions) [41, 1, 13, 22, 20, 67]. Many of these approaches use test-time input ablations,
where features marked as important are removed from the input, with the expectation that the model’s
confidence in its original prediction will decline if the selected features were truly important.
1

All supporting code for experiments in this paper is publicly available at https://github.com/
peterbhase/ExplanationSearch.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

