Estimating the Long-Term Effects of Novel
Treatments
Keith Battocchi∗
Microsoft Research

Eleanor W. Dillon
Microsoft Research

Maggie Hei
Microsoft Research

Miruna Oprescu
Microsoft Research

Greg Lewis
Microsoft Research

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Policy makers often need to estimate the long-term effects of newly-developed
treatments, while only having historical data of older treatment options. We propose
a surrogate-based approach using a long-term dataset where only past treatments
were administered and a short-term dataset where novel treatments have been administered. Our approach generalizes previous surrogate-style methods, allowing
for continuous treatments and serially-correlated treatment policies while maintaining consistency and root-n asymptotically normal estimates under a Markovian
assumption on the data and the observational policy. Using a semi-synthetic dataset
on customer incentives from a major corporation, we evaluate the performance
of our method and discuss solutions to practical challenges when deploying our
methodology.

1

Introduction

Businesses invent new ways of interacting with their customers. Marketing departments devise new
campaigns. Pharmaceutical companies roll out trials of new drugs. In many cases, decision makers
expect these novel treatments to affect outcomes like sales or health over several years, but they are
eager to begin evaluating these innovations within months of deployment.
We propose an estimation methodology that leverages historical data, collected under earlier treatment
regimes, to derive early estimates of the long-term effects of novel, newly-deployed treatments. Athey
et al. (2020) develop a surrogate index as one solution to this problem. This method relies on an
assumption that causal effects on long-term outcomes are channeled through a set of observable
short-term proxies. This assumption allows one to use the historical long-term data set to learn a
mapping from short-term signals to a projected long-term reward and subsequently estimate the
causal effect of novel treatments on this index of surrogates.
In practice, treatment policies are often dynamic: treatments are assigned repeatedly, and their
assignments depend on past treatments and short-term outcomes. Unfortunately, this pattern can
easily break the assumptions needed for the surrogate index to work. For example, suppose that a
firm offers multiple investments to a particular customer in the historical data and these investments
are auto-correlated, i.e. if a customer receives an investment this month, then they will receive an
investment with high probability in one of the subsequent months. These future investments can
substantially increase the long-term outcome of interest, and this increase will be attributed to the
short-term proxies. The surrogate index thus formed will tend to over-predict long-run outcomes, and
so when it is used to measure the treatment effect of some new treatment in the short-run data, the
estimated treatment effect will be bigger (in absolute magnitude) than the truth.
∗

Correspondence to: Vasilis Syrgkanis <vasy@microsoft.com>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

