Nested Counterfactual Identification
from Arbitrary Surrogate Experiments

Juan D. Correa
Columbia University
jdcorrea@cs.columbia.edu

Sanghack Lee
Seoul National University
sanghack@snu.ac.kr

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The Ladder of Causation describes three qualitatively different types of activities
an agent may be interested in engaging in, namely, seeing (observational), doing
(interventional), and imagining (counterfactual) (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018). The
inferential challenge imposed by the causal hierarchy is that data is collected by an
agent observing or intervening in a system (layers 1 and 2), while its goal may be
to understand what would have happened had it taken a different course of action,
contrary to what factually ended up happening (layer 3). While there exists a solid
understanding of the conditions under which cross-layer inferences are allowed
from observations to interventions, the results are somewhat scarcer when targeting
counterfactual quantities. In this paper, we study the identification of nested
counterfactuals from an arbitrary combination of observations and experiments.
Specifically, building on a more explicit definition of nested counterfactuals, we
prove the counterfactual unnesting theorem (CUT), which allows one to map
arbitrary nested counterfactuals to unnested ones. For instance, applications in
mediation and fairness analysis usually evoke notions of direct, indirect, and
spurious effects, which naturally require nesting. Second, we introduce a sufficient
and necessary graphical condition for counterfactual identification from an arbitrary
combination of observational and experimental distributions. Lastly, we develop
an efficient and complete algorithm for identifying nested counterfactuals; failure
of the algorithm returning an expression for a query implies it is not identifiable.

1

Introduction

Counterfactuals provide the basis for notions pervasive throughout human affairs, such as credit
assignment, blame and responsibility, and regret. One of the most powerful constructs in human
reasoning —“what if?” questions— evokes hypothetical conditions usually contradicting the factual
evidence. Judgment and understanding of critical situations found from medicine to psychology to
business involve counterfactual reasoning, e.g.: “Joe received the treatment and died, would he be
alive had he not received it?,” “Had the candidate been male instead of female, would the decision
from the admissions committee be more favorable?,” or “Would the profit this quarter remain within
5% of its value had we increased the price by 2%?”. By and large, counterfactuals are key ingredients
that go in the construction of explanations about why things happened as they did [17, 19].
The structural interpretation of causality provides proper semantics for representing counterfactuals
[17, Ch. 7]. Specifically, each structural causal model (SCM) M induces a collection of distributions
related to the activities of seeing (called observational), doing (interventional), and imagining
(counterfactual). The collection of these distributions is known as the Ladder of causation [19], and
has also been called the Pearl’s Causal Hierarchy (PCH, for short) [2]. The PCH is a containment
hierarchy; each type of distribution can be put in increasingly refined layers: observational content
goes in layer 1; experimental in layer 2; counterfactual in layer 3; see Fig. 1.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

