Reliable and Trustworthy Machine Learning for
Health Using Dataset Shift Detection
Chunjong Park, Anas Awadalla, Tadayoshi Kohno, Shwetak Patel
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
{cjparkuw, anasa2, yoshi, shwetak}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Unpredictable ML model behavior on unseen data, especially in the health domain,
raises serious concerns about its safety as repercussions for mistakes can be fatal.
In this paper, we explore the feasibility of using state-of-the-art out-of-distribution
detectors for reliable and trustworthy diagnostic predictions. We select publicly
available deep learning models relating to various health conditions (e.g., skin
cancer, lung sound, and Parkinson’s disease) using various input data types (e.g.,
image, audio, and motion data). We demonstrate that these models show unreasonable predictions on out-of-distribution datasets. We show that Mahalanobis
distance- and Gram matrices-based out-of-distribution detection methods are able
to detect out-of-distribution data with high accuracy for the health models that
operate on different modalities. We then translate the out-of-distribution score
into a human interpretable CONFIDENCE SCORE to investigate its effect on the
users’ interaction with health ML applications. Our user study shows that the
CONFIDENCE SCORE helped the participants only trust the results with a high
score to make a medical decision and disregard results with a low score. Through
this work, we demonstrate that dataset shift is a critical piece of information for
high-stake ML applications, such as medical diagnosis and healthcare, to provide
reliable and trustworthy predictions to the users.

1

Introduction

Advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning have made medical diagnostic and screening
tools more accurate and accessible. AI-powered diagnostic tools [5, 14] are intended to assist medical
personnel by making unbiased decision based on thousands of examples. In recent years, these
models [15, 44, 48, 32] are even becoming available to consumers through the growth of mobile
health with the intention of expediting diagnoses through increasingly frequent testing. Moreover,
mobile health [4, 50] aims to improve access to medical expertise for those who are uninsured or live
far away from hospitals.
Despite the potential benefits of health AI systems, there are concerns about their performance in
real-world settings. Data-driven models learn from examples, making them heavily reliant on the
data upon which they have been trained. However, datasets often fail to get complete coverage
over a domain, particularly for emerging datasets; when new pulmonary diseases (e.g., MERS and
COVID-19) emerge, a pulmonary classifier trained on the existing lung sounds would not be able to
interpret sound of the new diseases. Previous work [42, 78] has found that machine learning models
behave unpredictably on the unseen data. This problem [4, 69] is especially critical for medical
diagnostic and screening tools since there are significant repercussions for mistakes.
Researchers have proposed methods to estimate the uncertainty of a machine learning models’
predictions based on the input [29, 41, 40, 64, 43]. Out-of-distribution detection methods can
distinguish whether the input lies within the distribution of the training dataset, with out-of-distribution
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

