Scaling Neural Tangent Kernels
via Sketching and Random Features

Amir Zandieh∗
Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik
azandieh@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Neta Shoham
Tel Aviv University
shohamne@gmail.com

Insu Han∗
Yale University
insu.han@yale.edu

Chaewon Kim
KAIST
chaewonk@kaist.ac.kr

Haim Avron
Tel Aviv University
haimav@tauex.tau.ac.il
Jinwoo Shin
KAIST
jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) characterizes the behavior of infinitely-wide
neural networks trained under least squares loss by gradient descent. Recent works
also report that NTK regression can outperform finitely-wide neural networks
trained on small-scale datasets. However, the computational complexity of kernel
methods has limited its use in large-scale learning tasks. To accelerate learning
with NTK, we design a near input-sparsity time approximation algorithm for NTK,
by sketching the polynomial expansions of arc-cosine kernels: our sketch for the
convolutional counterpart of NTK (CNTK) can transform any image using a linear
runtime in the number of pixels. Furthermore, we prove a spectral approximation
guarantee for the NTK matrix, by combining random features (based on leverage
score sampling) of the arc-cosine kernels with a sketching algorithm. We benchmark our methods on various large-scale regression and classification tasks and
show that a linear regressor trained on our CNTK features matches the accuracy of
exact CNTK on CIFAR-10 dataset while achieving 150× speedup.

1

Introduction

Recent results have shown that over-parameterized Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), generalize
surprisingly well. In an effort to understand this phenomena, researchers have studied ultra-wide
DNNs and shown that in the infinite width limit, a fully connected DNN trained by gradient descent
under least-squares loss is equivalent to kernel regression with respect to the Neural Tangent Kernel
(NTK) [5, 11, 22, 28]. This connection has shed light on DNNs’ ability to generalize [10, 34] and
optimize (train) their parameters efficiently [3, 4, 16]. More recently, Arora et al. [5] proved an analogous equivalence between convolutional DNNs with infinite number of channels and Convolutional
NTK (CNTK). Beyond the aforementioned theoretical purposes, several papers have explored the
algorithmic use of this kernel. Arora et al. [6] and Geifman et al. [19] showed that NTK based
kernel models can outperform trained DNNs (of finite width). Additionally, CNTK kernel regression
sets an impressive performance record on CIFAR-10 for kernel methods without trainable kernels [5].
The NTK has also been used in experimental design [39] and predicting training time [43].
However, the NTK-based approaches encounter the computational bottlenecks of kernel learning.
In particular, for a datasetof n images x1 , x2 , . . . xn ∈ Rd×d , only writing down the CNTK kernel
matrix requires Ω d4 · n2 operations [5]. Running regression or PCA on the resulting kernel matrix
takes additional cubic time in n, which is infeasible in large-scale setups.
* Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

