Adversarial Attacks on Graph Classification via
Bayesian Optimisation

Xingchen Wan Henry Kenlay Binxin Ru
Arno Blaas Michael A. Osborne Xiaowen Dong
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
{xwan,kenlay,robin,arno,mosb,xdong}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph neural networks, a popular class of models effective in a wide range of
graph-based learning tasks, have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
While the majority of the literature focuses on such vulnerability in node-level
classification tasks, little effort has been dedicated to analysing adversarial attacks
on graph-level classification, an important problem with numerous real-life applications such as biochemistry and social network analysis. The few existing methods
often require unrealistic setups, such as access to internal information of the victim
models, or an impractically-large number of queries. We present a novel Bayesian
optimisation-based attack method for graph classification models. Our method is
black-box, query-efficient and parsimonious with respect to the perturbation applied.
We empirically validate the effectiveness and flexibility of the proposed method
on a wide range of graph classification tasks involving varying graph properties,
constraints and modes of attack. Finally, we analyse common interpretable patterns
behind the adversarial samples produced, which may shed further light on the adversarial robustness of graph classification models. An open-source implementation is
available at https://github.com/xingchenwan/grabnel.

1

Introduction

Graphs are a general-purpose data structure consisting of entities represented by nodes and edges
which encode pairwise relationships. Graph-based machine learning models has been widely used
in a variety of important applications such as semi-supervised learning, link prediction, community
detection and graph classification [3, 51, 14]. Despite the growing interest in graph-based machine
learning, it has been shown that, like many other machine learning models, graph-based models are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks [33, 17]. If we want to deploy such models in environments where
the risk and costs associated with a model failure are high e.g. in social networks, it would be crucial
to understand and assess the model stability and vulnerability by simulating adversarial attacks.
Adversarial attacks on graphs can be aimed at different learning tasks. This paper focuses on graphlevel classification, where given an input graph (potentially with node and edge attributes), we wish
to learn a function that predicts a property of interest related to the graph. Graph classification
is an important task with many real-life applications, especially in bioinformatics and chemistry
[24, 25]. For example, the task may be to accurately classify if a molecule, modelled as a graph
whereby nodes represent atoms and edges model bonds, inhibits HIV replication or not. Although
there are a few attempts on performing adversarial attacks on graph classification [10, 23], they all
operate under unrealistic assumptions such as the need to query the target model a large number of
times or access a portion of the test set to train the attacking agent. To address these limitations,
we formulate the adversarial attack on graph classification as a black-box optimisation problem and
solve it with Bayesian optimisation (BO), a query-efficient state-of-the-art zeroth-order black-box
optimiser. Unlike existing work, our method is query-efficient, parsimonious in perturbations and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

