A Highly-Efficient Group Elastic Net Algorithm with
an Application to Function-On-Scalar Regression

Tobia Boschi
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
tub37@psu.edu

Matthew Reimherr
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
mlr36@psu.edu

Francesca Chiaromonte
Department of Statistics
Penn State University,
EMbeDS
Sant’Anna School of
Advanced Studies
fxc11@psu.edu

Abstract
Feature Selection and Functional Data Analysis are two dynamic areas of research,
with important applications in the analysis of large and complex data sets. Straddling these two areas, we propose a new highly efficient algorithm to perform
Group Elastic Net with application to function-on-scalar feature selection, where
a functional response is modeled against a very large number of potential scalar
predictors. First, we introduce a new algorithm to solve Group Elastic Net in ultrahigh dimensional settings, which exploits the sparsity structure of the Augmented
Lagrangian to greatly reduce computational burden. Next, taking advantage of the
properties of Functional Principal Components, we extend our algorithm to the
function-on-scalar regression framework. We use simulations to demonstrate the
CPU time gains afforded by our approach compared to its best existing competitors,
and present an application to data from a Genome Wide Association Study on
childhood obesity.

1

Introduction

As problems involving very large and potentially structured data become ever more ubiquitous,
attention is being devoted to the integration of approaches and techniques from the areas of Feature
Selection and Functional Data Analysis (FDA). Indeed, more and more regression applications
comprise a large number number of variables – some of which are scalar and some of which are
suitable for a functional representation, such as longitudinal measurements or biomedical images
(Sørensen et al., 2013; Ullah and Finch, 2013; Cremona et al., 2019). A great deal of recent work has
been concerned with feature selection in these applications. Matsui and Konishi (2011); Gertheiss et al.
(2013); Fan et al. (2015) study the case where the response is scalar and the features are functional.
Chen et al. (2016); Fan and Reimherr (2016); Barber et al. (2017); Parodi et al. (2018); Mirshani
and Reimherr (2019) tackle the so called function-on-scalar case, where the response is functional
and the features are scalar – focusing on settings in which the number of features is bigger than
the number of observations. However, recent developments in optimization have demonstrated that
substantial computational gains can still be made when the number of features is massive (e.g ∼1e6).
In this article, we present Functional Group Elastic Net (fgen), a novel and highly efficient method
to solve the function-on-scalar feature selection problem in ultra-high-dimensional settings – where
the number of features is indeed massive and much larger than the number of observations. The
ability to solve these problems with a lower computational burden is increasingly critical. Given the
complex, noisy nature of much contemporary data, changing some aspects of their pre-processing
or some of the tuning parameters involved in the analysis can lead to completely different results
(Krawczyk and Cano, 2018; Murdoch et al., 2019). For this reason, repeating an analysis multiple
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

