Unbalanced Optimal Transport through
Non-negative Penalized Linear Regression

Laetitia Chapel∗
IRISA, Université Bretagne-Sud
Vannes, France
laetitia.chapel@irisa.fr

Rémi Flamary∗
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu

Haoran Wu
LITIS & IRISA
Rouen & Vannes, France
haoran.wu@univ-ubs.fr

Cédric Févotte
IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS
Toulouse, France
cedric.fevotte@irit.fr

Gilles Gasso
LITIS, INSA Rouen Normandie
Rouen, France
gilles.gasso@insa-rouen.fr

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) in
which the marginal conditions are relaxed (using weighted penalties in lieu of
equality) and no additional regularization is enforced on the OT plan. In this
context, we show that the corresponding optimization problem can be reformulated
as a non-negative penalized linear regression problem. This reformulation allows
us to propose novel algorithms inspired from inverse problems and nonnegative
matrix factorization. In particular, we consider majorization-minimization which
leads in our setting to efficient multiplicative updates for a variety of penalties.
Furthermore, we derive for the first time an efficient algorithm to compute the
regularization path of UOT with quadratic penalties. The proposed algorithm
provides a continuity of piece-wise linear OT plans converging to the solution
of balanced OT (corresponding to infinite penalty weights). We perform several
numerical experiments on simulated and real data illustrating the new algorithms,
and provide a detailed discussion about more sophisticated optimization tools that
can further be used to solve OT problems thanks to our reformulation.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) theory provides powerful tools for comparing probability distributions and
has been successfully employed in a wide range of machine learning applications such as supervised
learning (Frogner et al., 2015), clustering (Ho et al., 2017), generative modelling (Arjovsky et al.,
2017), domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2017), learning of structured data (Maretic et al., 2019;
Vayer et al., 2019) or natural language processing (Kusner et al., 2015), among many others. One
reason for those recent successes is the introduction of entropy-regularized OT that can be solved
with the efficient Sinkhorn-Knopp matrix scaling algorithm (Cuturi, 2013). However, the classical
OT problem seeks the optimal cost to transport all the mass from a source distribution to a target one
∗

First two authors have equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

