An Efficient Transfer Learning Framework
for Multiagent Reinforcement Learning

Tianpei Yang1∗, Weixun Wang1∗, Hongyao Tang1∗, Jianye Hao12†, Zhaopeng Meng1 ,
Hangyu Mao2 , Dong Li2 , Wulong Liu2 , Chengwei Zhang3 , Yujing Hu4 ,
Yingfeng Chen4 , Changjie Fan4
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{tpyang,wxwang,bluecontra,jianye.hao,mengzp}@tju.edu.cn
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, {maohangyu1,lidong106,liuwulong}@huawei.com
3
Dalian Maritime University, chenvy@dlmu.edu.cn
4
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, {huyujing, chenyingfeng1, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com

Abstract
Transfer Learning has shown great potential to enhance single-agent Reinforcement
Learning (RL) efficiency. Similarly, Multiagent RL (MARL) can also be accelerated if agents can share knowledge with each other. However, it remains a problem
of how an agent should learn from other agents. In this paper, we propose a novel
Multiagent Policy Transfer Framework (MAPTF) to improve MARL efficiency.
MAPTF learns which agent’s policy is the best to reuse for each agent and when to
terminate it by modeling multiagent policy transfer as the option learning problem.
Furthermore, in practice, the option module can only collect all agent’s local experiences for update due to the partial observability of the environment. While in this
setting, each agent’s experience may be inconsistent with each other, which may
cause the inaccuracy and oscillation of the option-value’s estimation. Therefore,
we propose a novel option learning algorithm, the successor representation option
learning to solve it by decoupling the environment dynamics from rewards and
learning the option-value under each agent’s preference. MAPTF can be easily
combined with existing deep RL and MARL approaches, and experimental results
show it significantly boosts the performance of existing methods in both discrete
and continuous state spaces.

1

Introduction

Transfer Learning has achieved expressive success of accelerating single-agent Reinforcement
Learning (RL) via leveraging prior knowledge from past learned policies of relevant tasks [37, 36].
Inspired by this, transfer learning in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [6, 17, 4, 16, 7, 8]
is also studied with two major directions: 1) transferring knowledge across different but similar
tasks and 2) transferring knowledge among multiple agents in the same task. The former usually
explicitly computes similarities between tasks [18, 3, 10] to transfer across similar tasks with the
same number of agents, or design network structures to transfer across tasks with different numbers
of agents [1, 33]. In this paper, we focus on the latter due to the following intuition: in a Multiagent
System (MAS), each agent’s experience is different, so the states each agent visits (the familiarities
to different regions of the environment) are also different; if we figure out some principled ways to
transfer knowledge across different agents, all agents could form a big picture even without exploring
the whole space of the environment, which will facilitate more efficient MARL.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

