One Question Answering Model for Many Languages
with Cross-lingual Dense Passage Retrieval
†

†

†

†‡

Akari Asai , Xinyan Yu , Jungo Kasai , Hannaneh Hajishirzi
†
‡
University of Washington, Allen Institute for AI
{akari, xyu530, jkasai, hannaneh}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We present Cross-lingual Open-Retrieval Answer Generation (CORA), the first
unified many-to-many question answering (QA) model that can answer questions
across many languages, even for ones without language-specific annotated data
or knowledge sources. We introduce a new dense passage retrieval algorithm that
is trained to retrieve documents across languages for a question. Combined with
a multilingual autoregressive generation model, CORA answers directly in the
target language without any translation or in-language retrieval modules as used
in prior work. We propose an iterative training method that automatically extends
annotated data available only in high-resource languages to low-resource ones. Our
results show that CORA substantially outperforms the previous state of the art on
multilingual open QA benchmarks across 26 languages, 9 of which are unseen
during training. Our analyses show the significance of cross-lingual retrieval and
generation in many languages, particularly under low-resource settings. Our code
and trained model are publicly available at https://github.com/AkariAsai/
CORA.

1

Introduction

Multilingual open question answering (QA) is the task of answering a question from a large collection
of multilingual documents. Most recent progress in open QA is made for English by building a
pipeline based on a dense passage retriever trained on large-scale English QA datasets to find evidence
passages in English (Lee et al., 2019; Karpukhin et al., 2020), followed by a reader that extracts an
answer from retrieved passages. However, extending this approach to multilingual open QA poses
new challenges. Answering multilingual questions requires retrieving evidence from knowledge
sources of other languages than the original question since many languages have limited reference
documents or the question sometimes inquires about concepts from other cultures (Asai et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2020). Nonetheless, large-scale cross-lingual open QA training data whose questions and
evidence are in different languages are not available in many of those languages.
To address these challenges, previous work in multilingual open QA (Ture and Boschee, 2016; Asai
et al., 2021) translates questions into English, applies an English open QA system to answer in
English, and then translates answers back to the target language. Those pipeline approaches suffer
from error propagation of the machine translation component into the downstream QA, especially
for low-resource languages. Moreover, they are not able to answer questions whose answers can be
found in resources written in languages other than English or the target languages.
In this paper, we introduce a unified many-to-many QA model that can answer questions in any target
language by retrieving evidence from any language and generating answers in the target language.
Our method (called CORA, Fig. 1) extends the retrieve-then-generate approach of English open
QA (Lewis et al., 2020; Izacard and Grave, 2021b) with a single cross-lingual retriever and a generator
that do not rely on language-specific retrievers or machine translation modules. The multilingual
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

