Garment4D: Garment Reconstruction
from Point Cloud Sequences

Fangzhou Hong1 , Liang Pan1 , Zhongang Cai1,2,3 , Ziwei Liu1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{fangzhou001, liang.pan, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg caizhongang@sensetime.com

1

Abstract
Learning to reconstruct 3D garments is important for dressing 3D human bodies of
different shapes in different poses. Previous works typically rely on 2D images as
input, which however suffer from the scale and pose ambiguities. To circumvent the
problems caused by 2D images, we propose a principled framework, Garment4D,
that uses 3D point cloud sequences of dressed humans for garment reconstruction.
Garment4D has three dedicated steps: sequential garments registration, canonical
garment estimation, and posed garment reconstruction. The main challenges
are two-fold: 1) effective 3D feature learning for fine details, and 2) capture of
garment dynamics caused by the interaction between garments and the human
body, especially for loose garments like skirts. To unravel these problems, we
introduce a novel Proposal-Guided Hierarchical Feature Network and Iterative
Graph Convolution Network, which integrate both high-level semantic features
and low-level geometric features for fine details reconstruction. Furthermore, we
propose a Temporal Transformer for smooth garment motions capture. Unlike
non-parametric methods, the reconstructed garment meshes by our method are
separable from the human body and have strong interpretability, which is desirable
for downstream tasks. As the first attempt at this task, high-quality reconstruction
results are qualitatively and quantitatively illustrated through extensive experiments.
Codes are available at https://github.com/hongfz16/Garment4D.

1

Introduction

Garment reconstruction is a crucial technique in many applications, e.g. virtual try-on [1], VR/ AR
[2] and visual effects [3]. Extensive efforts [4–15] have been put into reconstructing the human
body and garments as a whole with the help of implicit representation or volumetric representation.
However, it is desirable to have a controllable garment model in many applications. In this work, we
focus on the parametric modeling of 3D garment, which has advantages in the following two ways.
Firstly, we can separate garments from human body. Secondly, the topology of the reconstructed
meshes can be controlled, and therefore allows downstream tasks that require high interpretability.
Different from previous parametric methods for garment reconstruction [7, 8, 16, 17] that take 2D
RGB images as input, we choose to approach the problem from the perspective of 3D, specifically
point cloud sequences (shown in Fig. 1), for the following three reasons. Firstly, 3D inputs eliminate
scale and pose ambiguities that are difficult to avoid when using 2D images. Secondly, exploiting
temporal information is important for garment dynamics capturing, at which there are few attempts.
Thirdly, recent development in 3D sensors (e.g. LiDAR) has reduced the cost and difficulties in
obtaining point clouds, which makes it easier to leverage 3D point clouds for research problems and
commercial applications. However, garment reconstruction from point cloud sequences has not been
properly explored by previous works. We contribute an early attempt at this meaningful task in this
work. Our advantages against other garment reconstruction methods are listed in Tab. 1.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

