Towards Calibrated Model for Long-Tailed Visual
Recognition from Prior Perspective
Zhengzhuo Xu1⇤ , Zenghao Chai1⇤, Chun Yuan1,2†
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
xzz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zenghaochai@gmail.com,
yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Real-world data universally confronts a severe class-imbalance problem and exhibits a long-tailed distribution, i.e., most labels are associated with limited instances. The naïve models supervised by such datasets would prefer dominant
labels, encounter a serious generalization challenge and become poorly calibrated.
We propose two novel methods from the prior perspective to alleviate this dilemma.
First, we deduce a balance-oriented data augmentation named Uniform Mixup
(UniMix) to promote mixup in long-tailed scenarios, which adopts advanced mixing
factor and sampler in favor of the minority. Second, motivated by the Bayesian
theory, we figure out the Bayes Bias (Bayias), an inherent bias caused by the inconsistency of prior, and compensate it as a modification on standard cross-entropy
loss. We further prove that both the proposed methods ensure the classification
calibration theoretically and empirically. Extensive experiments verify that our
strategies contribute to a better-calibrated model and their combination achieves
state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-LT, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist 2018.

1

Introduction

Balanced and large-scaled datasets [49, 39] have promoted deep neural networks to achieve remarkable success in many visual tasks [23, 48, 21]. However, real-world data typically exhibits a
long-tailed (LT) distribution [34, 42, 25, 17], and collecting a minority category (tail) sample always
leads to more occurrences of common classes (head) [53, 26], resulting in most labels associated with
limited instances. The paucity of samples may cause insufficient feature learning on the tail classes
[64, 12, 33, 42], and such data imbalance will bias the model towards dominant labels [52, 53, 37].
Hence, the generalization of minority categories is an enormous challenge.
The intuitive approaches such as directly over-sampling the tail [9, 4, 45, 50, 5] or under-sampling the
head [18, 4, 20] will cause serious robustness problems. mixup [60] and its extensions [55, 59, 10] are
effective feature improvement methods and contribute to a well-calibrated model in balanced datasets
[54, 61], i.e., the predicted confidence indicates actual accuracy likelihood [16, 54]. However, mixup
is inadequately calibrated in an imbalanced LT scenario (Fig.1). In this paper, we raise a conception
called ⇠-Aug to analyze mixup and figure out that it tends to generate more head-head pairs, resulting
in unsatisfactory generalization of the tail. Therefore, we propose Uniform Mixup (UniMix), which
adopts a tail-favored mixing factor related to label prior and a inverse sampling strategy to encourage
more head-tail pairs occurrence for better generalization and calibration.
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

