Habitat 2.0:
Training Home Assistants to Rearrange their Habitat
Andrew Szot2 , ⇤Alex Clegg1 , Eric Undersander1 , Erik Wijmans1,2 , Yili Zhao1 , John Turner1 ,
Noah Maestre1 , Mustafa Mukadam1 , Devendra Chaplot1 , Oleksandr Maksymets1 ,
Aaron Gokaslan1 , Vladimir Vondrus, Sameer Dharur2 , Franziska Meier1 , Wojciech Galuba1 ,
Angel Chang4 , Zsolt Kira2 , Vladlen Koltun3 , Jitendra Malik1,5 , Manolis Savva4 , Dhruv Batra1,2
1
Facebook AI Research, 2 Georgia Tech, 3 Intel Research, 4 Simon Fraser University 5 UC Berkeley

Abstract
We introduce Habitat 2.0 (H2.0), a simulation platform for training virtual robots in interactive 3D
environments and complex physics-enabled scenarios. We make comprehensive contributions to all
levels of the embodied AI stack – data, simulation, and benchmark tasks. Specifically, we present:
(i) ReplicaCAD: an artist-authored, annotated, reconfigurable 3D dataset of apartments (matching
real spaces) with articulated objects (e.g. cabinets and drawers that can open/close); (ii) H2.0: a
high-performance physics-enabled 3D simulator with speeds exceeding 25,000 simulation steps
per second (850⇥ real-time) on an 8-GPU node, representing 100⇥ speed-ups over prior work;
and, (iii) Home Assistant Benchmark (HAB): a suite of common tasks for assistive robots (tidy
the house, stock groceries, set the table) that test a range of mobile manipulation capabilities.
These large-scale engineering contributions allow us to systematically compare deep reinforcement
learning (RL) at scale and classical sense-plan-act (SPA) pipelines in long-horizon structured tasks,
with an emphasis on generalization to new objects, receptacles, and layouts. We find that (1) flat
RL policies struggle on HAB compared to hierarchical ones; (2) a hierarchy with independent
skills suffers from ‘hand-off problems’, and (3) SPA pipelines are more brittle than RL policies.

Figure 1: A mobile manipulator (Fetch robot) simulated in Habitat 2.0 performing rearrangement tasks in a
ReplicaCAD apartment – (left) opening a drawer before picking up an item from it, and (right) placing an object
into the bowl after navigating to the table. Best viewed in motion at https://aihabitat.org/docs/habitat2.

1

Introduction

Consider a home assistant robot illustrated in Fig. 1 – a mobile manipulator (Fetch [1]) performing
tasks like stocking groceries into the fridge, clearing the table and putting dishes into the dishwasher,
⇤

Correspondence to: aszot3@gatech.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

