VAST: Value Function Factorization with
Variable Agent Sub-Teams

Thomy Phan1

Fabian Ritz1

Philipp Altmann1

Thomas Gabor1

Lenz Belzner2
Claudia Linnhoff-Popien1

1

2

LMU Munich
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt
thomy.phan@ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
Value function factorization (VFF) is a popular approach to cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning in order to learn local value functions from global
rewards. However, state-of-the-art VFF is limited to a handful of agents in most
domains. We hypothesize that this is due to the flat factorization scheme, where
the VFF operator becomes a performance bottleneck with an increasing number of
agents. Therefore, we propose VFF with variable agent sub-teams (VAST). VAST
approximates a factorization for sub-teams which can be defined in an arbitrary
way and vary over time, e.g., to adapt to different situations. The sub-team values
are then linearly decomposed for all sub-team members. Thus, VAST can learn on
a more focused and compact input representation of the original VFF operator. We
evaluate VAST in three multi-agent domains and show that VAST can significantly
outperform state-of-the-art VFF, when the number of agents is sufficiently large.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems can be defined as cooperative multi-agent system (MAS), where multiple
autonomous agents collaborate to achieve a common goal like fleet management [20, 21], industry
4.0 [9, 29, 43], or communication networks [26, 51]. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
seems promising to realize such cooperative MAS by learning local policies for each autonomous
agent [3, 27, 37, 40]. Multi-agent credit assignment is an important challenge, where all agents only
observe a single global reward, which makes the deduction of individual agent contributions difficult,
especially in large MAS with many agents. This can lead to poor policies, since it is unclear which
agent policy needs to adapt to what extent in order to improve global MAS behavior [6, 10, 39].
Value function factorization (VFF) via end-to-end deep learning is a popular approach to MARL in
order to address the credit assignment problem [31, 32, 36, 39, 44]. A centralized value function is
learned from global rewards and factorized into local value functions, which can be used to realize
coordinated local policies via multi-armed bandits [32, 40] or local actor-critic learning [30, 38, 45].
Despite the popularity of VFF, most approaches have been only evaluated in domains with a handful
of agents. We hypothesize that this is due to the flat factorization scheme of current VFF approaches
(Fig. 1a). With an increasing number of agents, the centralized VFF operator becomes a performance
bottleneck, where it gets difficult to provide sufficiently informative training signal for each agent.
To alleviate this performance bottleneck problem, we propose VFF with variable agent sub-teams
(VAST). Instead of directly factorizing a centralized value function for each agent, VAST approximates
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

