Multi-view Contrastive Graph Clustering

Erlin Pan, Zhao Kang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
wujisixsix6@gmail.com zkang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
With the explosive growth of information technology, multi-view graph data have
become increasingly prevalent and valuable. Most existing multi-view clustering
techniques either focus on the scenario of multiple graphs or multi-view attributes.
In this paper, we propose a generic framework to cluster multi-view attributed
graph data. Specifcally, inspired by the success of contrastive learning, we propose
multi-view contrastive graph clustering (MCGC) method to learn a consensus graph
since the original graph could be noisy or incomplete and is not directly applicable.
Our method composes of two key steps: we frst flter out the undesirable highfrequency noise while preserving the graph geometric features via graph fltering
and obtain a smooth representation of nodes; we then learn a consensus graph
regularized by graph contrastive loss. Results on several benchmark datasets
show the superiority of our method with respect to state-of-the-art approaches. In
particular, our simple approach outperforms existing deep learning-based methods.

1

Introduction

An attributed graph contains of node features and edges characterizing the pairwise relations between
nodes. It is a natural and effcient representation for many real-world data [Liu et al., 2021]. For
example, social network users have their own profles and the topological graph refects their social
relationships. Different from most classical clustering methods like K-means and hierarchical
clustering which only focus on Euclidean data, graph clustering divides unlabeled nodes of graph
into clusters. Typical graph clustering methods frst learn a good representation of graph and then
apply a classical clustering method upon the embeddings. For example, large-scale information
network embedding (LINE) [Tang et al., 2015] is a popular graph representation learning method,
which can preserve both local and global information and scale up easily to large-scale networks.
To incorporate node features and graph structure information, graph autoencoder (GAE) [Kipf
and Welling, 2016] employs a graph convolution network (GCN) encoder and achieves signifcant
performance improvement. The real-life data are often collected from various sources or obtained
from different extractors, thus are naturally represented by different features or views [Kang et al.,
2021, 2020c]. Each view could be noisy and incomplete, but important factors, such as geometry
and semantics, tend to be shared among all views. Therefore, features and graphs of different views
are complementary, which implies that it’s paramount to integrate all features and graphs of diverse
views to improve the performance of clustering task.
Numerous graph-based multi-view clustering methods have been developed to capture the consensus
information shared by different views in the literature. Graph-based multi-view clustering constructs a
graph for each view and fuses them based on a weighting mechanism [Wang et al., 2019]. Multi-view
spectral clustering network [Huang et al., 2019] learns a discriminative representation by using a
deep metric learning network. These methods are developed for feature matrix and can not handle
graph data. To directly process graph data, some representative methods have also been proposed.
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

