Reward is Enough for Convex MDPs

Tom Zahavy
DeepMind, London
tomzahavy@deepmind.com

Brendan O’Donoghue
DeepMind, London
bodonoghue@deepmind.com

Guillaume Desjardins
DeepMind, London
gdesjardins@deepmind.com

Satinder Singh
DeepMind, London
baveja@deepmind.com

Abstract
Maximising a cumulative reward function that is Markov and stationary, i.e., defined over state-action pairs and independent of time, is sufficient to capture many
kinds of goals in a Markov decision process (MDP). However, not all goals can
be captured in this manner. In this paper we study convex MDPs in which goals
are expressed as convex functions of the stationary distribution and show that
they cannot be formulated using stationary reward functions. Convex MDPs generalize the standard reinforcement learning (RL) problem formulation to a larger
framework that includes many supervised and unsupervised RL problems, such as
apprenticeship learning, constrained MDPs, and so-called ‘pure exploration’. Our
approach is to reformulate the convex MDP problem as a min-max game involving
policy and cost (negative reward) ‘players’, using Fenchel duality. We propose a
meta-algorithm for solving this problem and show that it unifies many existing
algorithms in the literature.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent learns how to map situations to actions so as to maximize
a cumulative scalar reward signal. The learner is not told which actions to take, but instead must
discover which actions lead to the most reward [64]. Mathematically, the RL problem can be written
as finding a policy whose state occupancy has the largest inner product with a reward vector [55], i.e.,
the goal of the agent is to solve
X
RL: max
r(s, a)dπ (s, a),
(1)
dπ ∈K

s,a

where dπ is the state-action stationary distribution induced by policy π and K is the set of admissible
stationary distributions (see Definition 1). A significant body of work is dedicated to solving the RL
problem efficiently in challenging domains [45, 62]. However, not all decision making problems of
interest take this form. In particular we consider the more general convex MDP problem,
Convex MDP: min f (dπ ),
(2)
dπ ∈K

where f : K → R is a convex function. Sequential decision making problems that take this form
include Apprenticeship Learning (AL), pure exploration, and constrained MDPs, among others; see
Table 1. In this paper we prove the following claim:
We can solve Eq. (2) by using any algorithm that solves Eq. (1) as a subroutine.
In other words, any algorithm that solves the standard RL problem can be used to solve the more
general convex MDP problem. More specifically, we make the following contributions.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

