Teaching via Best-Case Counterexamples
in the Learning-with-Equivalence-Queries Paradigm

Akash Kumar1,2
akk002@ucsd.edu
1

Yuxin Chen3
chenyuxin@uchicago.edu

Adish Singla1
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS),
2
UC San Diego,
3
University of Chicago

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of teaching, termed as “teaching dimension” (TD)
in the literature, for the learning-with-equivalence-queries (LwEQ) paradigm. More
concretely, we consider a learner who asks equivalence queries (i.e., “is the queried
hypothesis the target hypothesis?”), and a teacher responds either “yes” or “no”
along with a counterexample to the queried hypothesis. This learning paradigm
has been extensively studied when the learner receives worst-case or random
counterexamples; in this paper, we consider the optimal teacher who picks bestcase counterexamples to teach the target hypothesis within a hypothesis class. For
this optimal teacher, we introduce LwEQ-TD, a notion of TD capturing the teaching
complexity (i.e., the number of queries made) in this paradigm. We show that a
significant reduction in queries can be achieved with best-case counterexamples, in
contrast to worst-case or random counterexamples, for different hypothesis classes.
Furthermore, we establish new connections of LwEQ-TD to the well-studied
notions of TD in the learning-from-samples paradigm.

1

Introduction

Learning-with-queries paradigm involves a learner who asks structured queries to a teacher in order
to locate a target hypothesis. This paradigm has been extensively studied in machine learning and
formal methods research, including automata learning [1, 2, 3, 4], model checking [5], oracle-guided
synthesis (OGIS) [6], model learning [7], among others. Classical literature involves different kinds
of queries that a learner could ask [1, 8, 9], such as membership queries (i.e., “is the queried instance
consistent with the target hypothesis?”) and equivalence queries (i.e., “is the queried hypothesis
the target hypothesis?”). In this paper, we consider the learning-with-equivalence-queries (LwEQ)
paradigm where the learner is only asking equivalence queries and the teacher responds to a query
either “yes" or “no" along with a counterexample on which the current hypothesis disagrees with
the target hypothesis. LwEQ paradigm captures a variety of important problem settings, such as
counterexample-guided synthesis (CEGIS) [10], data augmentation (CEGAR) [11], and learning
regular languages from counterexamples [12]. The focus of our work is to understand the query
complexity for the LwEQ paradigm, i.e., the number of equivalence queries needed by the learner
for the exact identification of a target hypothesis [9].
The query complexity clearly depends on the learner model (i.e., the query function deciding the next
hypothesis to query), as well as the informativeness of the counterexamples provided by the teacher.
In the literature, the query complexity for the LwEQ paradigm has been extensively studied when
the learner receives worst-case or random counterexamples [1, 9, 13, 14, 15]. To show worst-case
bounds [1, 13], classical works have studied a teacher who responds with worst-case counterexamples
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

