Simple steps are all you need: Frank-Wolfe
and generalized self-concordant functions
Alejandro Carderera ∗

Mathieu Besançon †

Sebastian Pokutta ‡

Abstract
Generalized self-concordance is a key property present in the objective
function of many important learning problems. We establish the convergence
rate of a simple Frank-Wolfe variant that uses the open-loop step size strategy
𝛾𝑡 = 2/(𝑡 + 2), obtaining a O (1/𝑡) convergence rate for this class of functions
in terms of primal gap and Frank-Wolfe gap, where 𝑡 is the iteration count.
This avoids the use of second-order information or the need to estimate
local smoothness parameters of previous work. We also show improved
convergence rates for various common cases, e.g., when the feasible region
under consideration is uniformly convex or polyhedral.

1

Introduction

Constrained convex optimization is the cornerstone of many machine learning problems. We
consider such problems, formulated as:
min 𝑓 (x),
x∈ X

(1.1)

where 𝑓 : ℝ𝑛 → ℝ ∪ {+∞} is a generalized self-concordant function and X ⊆ ℝ𝑛 is a
compact convex set. When computing projections onto the feasible regions as required in,
e.g., projected gradient descent, is prohibitive, Frank-Wolfe (FW) (Frank & Wolfe, 1956)
algorithms (a.k.a. Conditional Gradients (CG) (Levitin & Polyak, 1966)) are the algorithms of
choice, relying on Linear Minimization Oracles (LMO) at each iteration to solve Problem (1.1).
The analysis of their convergence often relies on the assumption that the gradient is Lipschitzcontinuous. This assumption does not necessarily hold for generalized self-concordant
functions, an important class of functions for which the growth can be unbounded.
1.1

Related work

In the classical analysis of Newton’s method, when the Hessian of 𝑓 is assumed to be
Lipschitz continuous and the function is strongly convex, one arrives at a convergence rate
for the algorithm that depends on the Euclidean structure of ℝ𝑛 , despite the fact that the
algorithm is affine-invariant. This motivated the introduction of self-concordant functions
in Nesterov & Nemirovskii (1994), functions for which the third derivative is bounded by
the second-order derivative, with which one can obtain an affine-invariant convergence rate
for the aforementioned algorithm. More importantly, many of the barrier functions used
in interior-point methods are self-concordant, which extended the use of polynomial-time
interior-point methods to many settings of interest.
∗ Georgia Institute of Technology. E-mail: alejandro.carderera@gatech.edu

† Zuse Institute Berlin. E-mail: besancon@zib.de

‡ Zuse Institute Berlin and Technische Universität Berlin. E-mail: pokutta@math.tu-berlin.de

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

