Coordinated Proximal Policy Optimization

Zifan Wu
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
wuzf5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Deheng Ye
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
dericye@tencent.com

Chao Yu∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Junge Zhang∗
Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
jgzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Haiyin Piao
School of Electronic and Information
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
haiyinpiao@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
Hankz Hankui Zhuo
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
We present Coordinated Proximal Policy Optimization (CoPPO), an algorithm that
extends the original Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) to the multi-agent setting.
The key idea lies in the coordinated adaptation of step size during the policy update
process among multiple agents. We prove the monotonicity of policy improvement
when optimizing a theoretically-grounded joint objective, and derive a simplified
optimization objective based on a set of approximations. We then interpret that
such an objective in CoPPO can achieve dynamic credit assignment among agents,
thereby alleviating the high variance issue during the concurrent update of agent
policies. Finally, we demonstrate that CoPPO outperforms several strong baselines
and is competitive with the latest multi-agent PPO method (i.e. MAPPO) under
typical multi-agent settings, including cooperative matrix games and the StarCraft
II micromanagement tasks.

1

Introduction

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (CoMARL) shows great promise for solving
various real-world tasks, such as traffic light control (Wu et al., 2020), sensor network management (Sharma and Chauhan, 2020) and autonomous vehicle coordination (Yu et al., 2019). In such
applications, a team of agents aim to maximize a joint expected utility through a single global
reward. Since multiple agents coexist in a common environment and learn and adapt their behaviour concurrently, the arising non-stationary issue makes it difficult to design an efficient learning
method (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2017; Papoudakis et al., 2019). Recently, a number of CoMARL
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

