Invariant Causal Imitation Learning for
Generalizable Policies
Ioana Bica⇤
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

Daniel Jarrett⇤
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider learning an imitation policy on the basis of demonstrated behavior from
multiple environments, with an eye towards deployment in an unseen environment.
Since the observable features from each setting may be different, directly learning
individual policies as mappings from features to actions is prone to spurious correlations—and may not generalize well. However, the expert’s policy is often a function
of a shared latent structure underlying those observable features that is invariant
across settings. By leveraging data from multiple environments, we propose Invariant Causal Imitation Learning (ICIL), a novel technique in which we learn a feature
representation that is invariant across domains, on the basis of which we learn an
imitation policy that matches expert behavior. To cope with transition dynamics
mismatch, ICIL learns a shared representation of causal features (for all training
environments), that is independent from the specific representations of noise variables (for each of those environments). Moreover, to ensure that the learned policy
matches the observation distribution of the expert’s policy, ICIL estimates the
energy of the expert’s observations and uses a regularization term that minimizes
the imitator policy’s next state energy. Experimentally, we compare our methods
against several benchmarks in control and healthcare tasks and show its effectiveness in learning imitation policies capable of generalizing to unseen environments.

1

Introduction

Strictly batch imitation learning aims to learn a policy that directly mimics the behaviour of experts,
for which we only have access to a set of demonstrations: logged trajectories of observations and
actions following the expert’s policy [1–3]. We cannot interact online with the environment, let alone
query the expert any further, nor do we have reward signals for supervision. This setting is relevant in
real-world scenarios where live experimentation is risky or costly—such as healthcare and education.
Our aim is to learn an imitation policy in the strictly batch setting that faithfully matches the expert
behaviour, while at the same time is able to generalize to unseen environments. In healthcare, learning
a generalizable behaviour policy that could achieve expert performance in new environments is an
important goal: As a means of providing clinical decision support, it could serve as an “individualized”
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

