Monte Carlo Tree Search With Iteratively Refining
State Abstractions
Samuel Sokota
Carnegie Mellon University
ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu

Caleb Ho
Independent Researcher
caleb.yh.ho@gmail.com

Zaheen Ahmad
University of Alberta
zfahmad@ualberta.ca

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Decision-time planning is the process of constructing a transient, local policy with
the intent of using it to make the immediate decision. Monte Carlo tree search
(MCTS), which has been leveraged to great success in Go, chess, shogi, Hex, Atari,
and other settings, is perhaps the most celebrated decision-time planning algorithm.
Unfortunately, in its original form, MCTS can degenerate to one-step search in
domains with stochasticity. Progressive widening is one way to ameliorate this
issue, but we argue that it possesses undesirable properties for some settings. In
this work, we present a method, called abstraction refining, for extending MCTS
to stochastic environments which, unlike progressive widening, leverages the
geometry of the state space. We argue that leveraging the geometry of the space
can offer advantages. To support this claim, we present a series of experimental
examples in which abstraction refining outperforms progressive widening, given
equal simulation budgets.

1

Introduction

In control problems, an agent makes sequential decisions toward the end of accumulating a large
amount of reward [21]. Many reinforcement learning algorithms approach this task by computing
a policy, which, given a state, dictates the agent’s behavior; others operate under the paradigm
of decision-time planning, in which, after the agent has arrived at a state, it spends additional
computation constructing or revising its policy for the immediate decision(s). The decision-time
planning paradigm can be advantageous because it allows for an additional step of policy improvement
that is not available to agents acting according to a predetermined policy.
Of the numerous ways to perform decision-time planning, Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) is among
the most influential [6, 10, 15]. Algorithms powered by MCTS, like AlphaZero and MuZero, yield
strong performance in games with complex value function landscapes, like Go, chess, Hex, and shogi
[2, 20, 19]. MuZero even shows strong performance on Atari games, where model-free algorithms
had previously been the most performant.
Unfortunately, in its original form, MCTS can degenerate to a one-step search when the transition
function has an infinite support. Even if the support is finite but non-trivial, MCTS may be relegated
to building shallow search trees. However, despite the importance of stochasticity in real-world
problems, relatively little attention has been paid to this issue, perhaps as a result of the fact that many
popular benchmarks are deterministic or close-to-deterministic.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

