Machine versus Human Attention in Deep
Reinforcement Learning Tasks

Sihang Guo
UT Austin
sguo19@utexas.edu

Ruohan Zhang
Stanford University
zharu@stanford.edu

Bo Liu
UT Austin
bliu@cs.utexas.edu

Yifeng Zhu
UT Austin
yifeng.zhu@utexas.edu,

Dana Ballard
UT Austin
danab@utexas.edu,

Mary Hayhoe
UT Austin
hayhoe@utexas.edu,

Peter Stone
UT Austin, Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu,

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are powerful tools for solving visuomotor decision tasks. However, the trained models are often difficult to interpret,
because they are represented as end-to-end deep neural networks. In this paper, we
shed light on the inner workings of such trained models by analyzing the pixels that
they attend to during task execution, and comparing them with the pixels attended
to by humans executing the same tasks. To this end, we investigate the following
two questions that, to the best of our knowledge, have not been previously studied.
1) How similar are the visual representations learned by RL agents and humans
when performing the same task? and, 2) How do similarities and differences
in these learned representations explain RL agents’ performance on these tasks?
Specifically, we compare the saliency maps of RL agents against visual attention
models of human experts when learning to play Atari games. Further, we analyze
how hyperparameters of the deep RL algorithm affect the learned representations
and saliency maps of the trained agents. The insights provided have the potential to
inform novel algorithms for closing the performance gap between human experts
and RL agents.

1

Introduction

Researchers have devoted much effort to understanding deep neural networks (DNNs). Since DNNs
are partially inspired by the biological nervous systems, researchers have compared these neural
networks with the human brain and sensory systems by asking two typical types of questions. The
first one considers representation: How similar are the visual representations learned by DNNs
and humans when performing the same tasks? The second one concerns explainability: How do
similarities and differences in the learned representations explain DNNs’ performance on their tasks?
The first question motivates a seminal line of research that compares representations learned by DNNs
with those learned by humans. In computer vision, a linear model that uses the feature map activations
generated by a trained CNN can accurately predict neural activities in the early visual cortex,
indicating that the two systems have learned similar visual representations [19, 78, 79]. In language
learning, a similar connection is found between deep language models and cortical areas [31, 34].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

