A Faster Maximum Cardinality Matching Algorithm
with Applications in Machine Learning

Nathaniel Lahn∗
School of Computing and Information Sciences
Radford University
Radford, VA 24142
nlahn@radford.edu

Sharath Raghvendra
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech Blacksburg, VA 24061
sharathr@vt.edu

Jiacheng Ye
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech Blacksburg, VA 24061
yjc0513@vt.edu

Abstract
Maximum cardinality bipartite matching is an important graph optimization problem with several applications. For instance, maximum cardinality matching in a
δ-disc graph can be used in the computation of the bottleneck matching as well as
the ∞-Wasserstein and the Lévy-Prokhorov distances between probability distributions. For any point sets A, B ⊂ R2 , the δ-disc graph is a bipartite graph formed
by connecting every pair of points (a, b) ∈ A × B by an edge if the Euclidean
distance between them is at most δ. Using the classical Hopcroft-Karp algorithm,
a maximum-cardinality matching on any δ-disc graph can be found in Õ(n3/2 )
time. 2 In this paper, we present a simplification of a recent algorithm (Lahn and
Raghvendra, JoCG 2021) for the maximum cardinality matching problem and
describe how a maximum cardinality matching in a δ-disc graph can be computed
asymptotically faster than O(n3/2 ) time for any moderately dense point set. As
applications, we show that if A and B are point sets drawn uniformly at random
from a unit square, an exact bottleneck matching can be computed in Õ(n4/3 )
time. On the other hand, experiments suggest that the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm
seems to take roughly Θ(n3/2 ) time for this case. This translates to substantial
improvements in execution time for larger inputs.

1

Introduction

Computing a maximum cardinality matching is a fundamental graph optimization problem. With
origins in economics and logistics, matchings have found numerous applications. Computing popular
distances between distributions, such as the Wasserstein distance as well as the Lévy-Prokhorov
distance, can be reduced to a bipartite matching problem. In this paper, we consider the δ-disc graph
matching which is the following:
Given two sets A and B of n two dimensional points and a parameter δ > 0, a δ-disc graph Gδ is a
bipartite graph obtained by connecting any pair of vertices (a, b) ∈ A × B with an edge provided that
the Euclidean distance between a and b is at most δ, i.e., ka − bk ≤ δ. Let m be the number of edges
∗
2

Authors are ordered by last name. All authors contributed equally to this work.
We use Õ(·) to suppress poly-logarithmic terms in the complexity.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

