On Training Implicit Models

Zhengyang Geng1,2∗ Xin-Yu Zhang2∗ Shaojie Bai4
1

Yisen Wang2,3

Zhouchen Lin2,3,5†

Zhejiang Lab, China 2 Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of AI, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Pazhou Lab, China

Abstract
This paper focuses on training implicit models of infinite layers. Specifically,
previous works employ implicit differentiation and solve the exact gradient for
the backward propagation. However, is it necessary to compute such an exact
but expensive gradient for training? In this work, we propose a novel gradient
estimate for implicit models, named phantom gradient, that 1) forgoes the costly
computation of the exact gradient; and 2) provides an update direction empirically
preferable to the implicit model training. We theoretically analyze the condition
under which an ascent direction of the loss landscape could be found, and provide
two specific instantiations of the phantom gradient based on the damped unrolling
and Neumann series. Experiments on large-scale tasks demonstrate that these
lightweight phantom gradients significantly accelerate the backward passes in
training implicit models by roughly 1.7×, and even boost the performance over
approaches based on the exact gradient on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Conventional neural networks are typically constructed by explicitly stacking multiple linear and
non-linear operators in a feed-forward manner. Recently, the implicitly-defined models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
have attracted increasing attentions and are able to match the state-of-the-art results by explicit
models on several vision [3, 6], language [2] and graph [4] tasks. These works treat the evolution
of the intermediate hidden states as a certain form of dynamics, such as fixed-point equations
[2, 3] or ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [1, 7], which represents infinite latent states. The
forward passes of implicit models are therefore formulated as solving the underlying dynamics,
by either black-box ODE solvers [1, 7] or root-finding algorithms [2, 3]. As for the backward
passes, however, directly differentiating through the forward pass trajectories could induce a heavy
memory overhead [8, 9]. To this end, researchers have developed memory-efficient backpropagation
via implicit differentiation, such as solving a Jacobian-based linear fixed-point equation for the
backward pass of deep equilibrium models (DEQs) [2], which eventually makes the backpropagation
trajectories independent of the forward passes. This technique allows one to train implicit models
with essentially constant memory consumption, as we only need to store the final output and the layer
itself without saving any intermediate states. However, in order to estimate the exact gradient by
implicit differentiation, implicit models have to rely on expensive black-box solvers for backward
passes, e.g., ODE solvers or root-solving algorithms. These black-box solver usually makes the
gradient computation very costly in practice, even taking weeks to train state-of-the-art implicit
models on ImageNet [10] with 8 GPUs.
This work investigates fast approximate gradients for training implicit models. We found that a firstorder oracle that produces good gradient estimates is enough to efficiently and effectively train implicit
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author, zlin@pku.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

