CBP: Backpropagation with constraint on weight
precision using pseudo-Lagrange multiplier method

Guhyun Kim, Doo Seok Jeong∗
Division of Materials Science and Engineering
Hanyang University, Republic of Korea
guhyunkim01@gmail.com, dooseokj@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Backward propagation of errors (backpropagation) is a method to minimize objective functions (e.g., loss functions) of deep neural networks by identifying optimal
sets of weights and biases. Imposing constraints on weight precision is often
required to alleviate prohibitive workloads on hardware. Despite the remarkable
success of backpropagation, the algorithm itself is not capable of considering such
constraints unless additional algorithms are applied simultaneously. To address
this issue, we propose the constrained backpropagation (CBP) algorithm based on
the pseudo-Lagrange multiplier method to obtain the optimal set of weights that
satisfy a given set of constraints. The defining characteristic of the proposed CBP
algorithm is the utilization of a Lagrangian function (loss function plus constraint
function) as its objective function. We considered various types of constraints
— binary, ternary, one-bit shift, and two-bit shift weight constraints. As a posttraining method, CBP applied to AlexNet, ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and GoogLeNet
on ImageNet, which were pre-trained using the conventional backpropagation. For
most cases, the proposed algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on
ImageNet, e.g., 66.6%, 74.4%, and 64.0% top-1 accuracy for ResNet-18, ResNet50, and GoogLeNet with binary weights, respectively. This highlights CBP as a
learning algorithm to address diverse constraints with the minimal performance
loss by employing appropriate constraint functions. The code for CBP is publicly
available at https://github.com/dooseokjeong/CBP.

1

Introduction

Currently, deep learning-based methods are applied in a variety of tasks, including the classification
of static data, e.g., image recognition [1, 2]; classification of dynamic data, e.g., speech recognition [3–6]; function approximations, which require the output of precise predictions, e.g., electronic
structure predictions [7] and nonlinear circuit predictions [8]. All of the aforementioned tasks require
discriminative models. Additionally, generative models, including generative adversarial networks [9]
and variants [10–13], comprise another type of deep neural network. Despite the diversity in application domain and model type used, almost all deep learning-based methods use backpropagation as a
common learning algorithm.
Recent developments in deep learning have primarily focused on increasing the size and depth
of deep neural networks (DNNs) to improve their learning capabilities as in the case of state-ofthe-art DNNs like VGGNet [14] and ResNet [15]. Given that the memory capacity required by a
DNN is proportional to the number of parameters (weights and biases), memory usage for DNN
becomes severe. Additionally, a significant number of multiply-accumulate operations during the
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

