Understanding How Encoder-Decoder
Architectures Attend
Kyle Aitken
Department of Physics
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington, USA
kaitken17@gmail.com

Vinay V Ramasesh
Google Research, Blueshift Team
Mountain View, California, USA

Yuan Cao
Google, Inc.
Mountain View, California, USA

Niru Maheswaranathan
Google Research, Brain Team
Mountain View, California, USA

Abstract
Encoder-decoder networks with attention have proven to be a powerful way to solve
many sequence-to-sequence tasks. In these networks, attention aligns encoder and
decoder states and is often used for visualizing network behavior. However, the
mechanisms used by networks to generate appropriate attention matrices are still
mysterious. Moreover, how these mechanisms vary depending on the particular
architecture used for the encoder and decoder (recurrent, feed-forward, etc.) are also
not well understood. In this work, we investigate how encoder-decoder networks
solve different sequence-to-sequence tasks. We introduce a way of decomposing
hidden states over a sequence into temporal (independent of input) and inputdriven (independent of sequence position) components. This reveals how attention
matrices are formed: depending on the task requirements, networks rely more
heavily on either the temporal or input-driven components. These findings hold
across both recurrent and feed-forward architectures despite their differences in
forming the temporal components. Overall, our results provide new insight into the
inner workings of attention-based encoder-decoder networks.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning encoder-decoder architectures can achieve strong performance on sequenceto-sequence tasks such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2016; Vaswani et al., 2017), language modeling (Raffel et al., 2020), speech-to-text (Chan et al.,
2015; Prabhavalkar et al., 2017; Chiu et al., 2018), etc. Many of these architectures make use of
attention (Bahdanau et al., 2014), a mechanism that allows the network to focus on a specific part of
the input most relevant to the current prediction step. Attention has proven to be a critical mechanism;
indeed many modern architectures, such as the Transformer, are fully attention-based (Vaswani et al.,
2017). However, despite the success of these architectures, an understanding of how said networks
solve such tasks using attention remains largely unknown.
Attention mechanisms are attractive because they are interpretable, and often illuminate key computations required for a task. For example, consider neural machine translation—trained networks
exhibit attention matrices that align words in the encoder sequence with the appropriate corresponding position in the decoder sentence (Ghader & Monz, 2017; Ding et al., 2019). In this case, the
attention matrix already contains information about which words in the source sequence are relevant
for translating a particular word in the target sequence; that is, forming the attention matrix itself
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

