TAAC: Temporally Abstract Actor-Critic for
Continuous Control
Haonan Yu, Wei Xu, Haichao Zhang
Horizon Robotics
Cupertino, CA 95014
{haonan.yu,wei.xu,haichao.zhang}@horizon.ai

Abstract
We present temporally abstract actor-critic (TAAC), a simple but effective offpolicy RL algorithm that incorporates closed-loop temporal abstraction into the
actor-critic framework. TAAC adds a second-stage binary policy to choose between
the previous action and a new action output by an actor. Crucially, its “act-or-repeat”
decision hinges on the actually sampled action instead of the expected behavior
of the actor. This post-acting switching scheme let the overall policy make more
informed decisions. TAAC has two important features: a) persistent exploration,
and b) a new compare-through Q operator for multi-step TD backup, specially
tailored to the action repetition scenario. We demonstrate TAAC’s advantages over
several strong baselines across 14 continuous control tasks. Our surprising finding
reveals that while achieving top performance, TAAC is able to “mine” a significant
number of repeated actions with the trained policy even on continuous tasks whose
problem structures on the surface seem to repel action repetition. This suggests that
aside from encouraging persistent exploration, action repetition can find its place in
a good policy behavior. Code is available at https://github.com/hnyu/taac.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in various continuous action domains
such as locomotion and manipulation (Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016;
Schulman et al., 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Despite promising empirical
results, these widely applicable continuous RL algorithms execute a newly computed action at every
step of the finest time scale of a problem. With no decision making at higher levels, they attempt
to solve the challenging credit assignment problem over a long horizon. As a result, considerable
sample efficiency improvements have yet to be made by them in complex task structures (Riedmiller
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020b) and extremely sparse reward settings (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017; Plappert et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021).
On the other hand, it is argued that temporal abstraction (Parr and Russell, 1998; Dietterich, 1998;
Sutton et al., 1999; Precup, 2000) is one of the crucial keys to solving control problems with complex
structures. Larger steps are taken at higher levels of abstraction while lower-level actions only need
to focus on solving isolated subtasks (Dayan and Hinton, 1993; Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Bacon et al.,
2017). However, most hierarchical RL (HRL) methods are task specific and nontrivial to adapt. For
example, the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup, 2000; Bacon et al., 2017) requires
pre-defining an option space, while the feudal RL framework Vezhnevets et al. (2017); Nachum et al.
(2018); Zhang et al. (2021) requires tuning the hyperparameters of dimensionality and domain range
of the goal space. In practice, their final performance usually hinges on these choices.
Perhaps the simplest form of an option or sub-policy would be just repeating an action for a certain
number of steps, a straightforward idea that has been widely explored (Lakshminarayanan et al.,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

