Training on Test Data with Bayesian Adaptation for
Covariate Shift
Aurick Zhou, Sergey Levine
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
{aurick,svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
When faced with distribution shift at test time, deep neural networks often make
inaccurate predictions with unreliable uncertainty estimates. While improving the
robustness of neural networks is one promising approach to mitigate this issue, an
appealing alternate to robustifying networks against all possible test-time shifts is
to instead directly adapt them to unlabeled inputs from the particular distribution
shift we encounter at test time. However, this poses a challenging question: in the
standard Bayesian model for supervised learning, unlabeled inputs are conditionally
independent of model parameters when the labels are unobserved, so what can
unlabeled data tell us about the model parameters at test-time? In this paper, we
derive a Bayesian model that provides for a well-defined relationship between
unlabeled inputs under distributional shift and model parameters, and show how
approximate inference in this model can be instantiated with a simple regularized
entropy minimization procedure at test-time. We evaluate our method on a variety
of distribution shifts for image classification, including image corruptions, natural
distribution shifts, and domain adaptation settings, and show that our method
improves both accuracy and uncertainty estimation.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning methods can provide high accuracy in settings where the model is evaluated
on data from the same distribution as the training set, but accuracy often degrades severely when
there is a mismatch between the training and test distributions [Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019, Taori
et al., 2020]. In safety-critical settings, effectively deploying machine learning models requires not
only high accuracy, but also requires the model to reliably quantify uncertainty in its predictions in
order to assess risk and potentially abstain from making dangerous, unreliable predictions. Reliably
estimating uncertainty is especially important in settings with distribution shift where inaccurate
predictions are more prevalent, but the reliability of uncertainty estimates often also degrades along
with the accuracy as the shifts become more severe [Ovadia et al., 2019]. In real-world applications,
distribution mismatch at test time is often inevitable, thus necessitating methods that can robustly
handle distribution shifts, both in terms of retaining high accuracy but also in providing meaningful
uncertainty estimates.
As it can be difficult to train a single model to be robust to all potential distribution shifts we might
encounter at test time, we can instead robustify models by allowing for adaptation at test time, where
we finetune the network on unlabeled inputs from the shifted target distribution, thus allowing the
model to specialize in the particular shift it encounters. Since test-time distribution shifts often
cannot be anticipated during training time, we restrict the adaptation procedure to operate without any
further access to the original training data. Prior work on test-time adaptation [Wang et al., 2020a,
Sun et al., 2019b] focused on improving accuracy, and found that simple objectives like entropy
minimization capable of providing substantial improvements under distribution shift [Wang et al.,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

