GemNet: Universal Directional Graph Neural
Networks for Molecules
Johannes Gasteiger, Florian Becker, Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{j.gasteiger,beckerf,guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Effectively predicting molecular interactions has the potential to accelerate molecular dynamics by multiple orders of magnitude and thus revolutionize chemical
simulations. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently shown great successes
for this task, overtaking classical methods based on fixed molecular kernels. However, they still appear very limited from a theoretical perspective, since regular
GNNs cannot distinguish certain types of graphs. In this work we close this gap
between theory and practice. We show that GNNs with directed edge embeddings
and two-hop message passing are indeed universal approximators for predictions
that are invariant to translation, and equivariant to permutation and rotation. We
then leverage these insights and multiple structural improvements to propose the
geometric message passing neural network (GemNet). We demonstrate the benefits
of the proposed changes in multiple ablation studies. GemNet outperforms previous models on the COLL, MD17, and OC20 datasets by 34 %, 41 %, and 20 %,
respectively, and performs especially well on the most challenging molecules. Our
implementation is available online. 1

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown great promise for predicting the energy and other
quantum mechanical properties of molecules. They can predict these properties orders of magnitudes
faster than methods from quantum chemistry – at comparable accuracy. GNNs can thus enable the
accurate simulation of systems that are orders of magnitude larger. However, they still exhibit severe
theoretical and practical limitations. Regular GNNs are only as powerful as the 1-Weisfeiler Lehman
test of isomorphism and thus cannot distinguish between certain molecules [45, 60]. Moreover, they
require a large number of training samples to achieve good accuracy.
In this work we first resolve the questionable expressiveness of GNNs by proving sufficient conditions
for universality in the case of invariance to translations and rotations and equivariance to permutations;
and then extending this result to rotationally equivariant predictions. Simply using the full geometric
information (e.g. all pairwise atomic distances) in a layer does not ensure universal approximation.
For example, if our model uses a rotationally invariant layer we lose the relative information between
components. Such a model thus cannot distinguish between features that are rotated differently. This
issue is commonly known as the “Picasso problem”: An image model with rotationally invariant
layers cannot detect whether a person’s eyes are rotated correctly. Instead, we need a model that
preserves relative rotational information and is only invariant to global rotations. To prove universality
in the rotationally invariant case we extend a recent universality result based on point cloud models
that use representations of the rotation group SO(3) [18]. We prove that spherical representations
are actually sufficient; full SO(3) representations are not necessary. We then generalize this to
rotationally equivariant predictions by leveraging a recent result on extending invariant to equivariant
1

https://www.daml.in.tum.de/gemnet

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

