Model Adaptation: Historical Contrastive Learning
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation without Source
Data
Jiaxing Huang, Dayan Guan, Aoran Xiao, Shijian Lu∗
School of Computer Science Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{Jiaxing.Huang, Dayan.Guan, Aoran.Xiao, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation aims to align a labeled source domain and an
unlabeled target domain, but it requires to access the source data which often raises
concerns in data privacy, data portability and data transmission efficiency. We study
unsupervised model adaptation (UMA), or called Unsupervised Domain Adaptation without Source Data, an alternative setting that aims to adapt source-trained
models towards target distributions without accessing source data. To this end, we
design an innovative historical contrastive learning (HCL) technique that exploits
historical source hypothesis to make up for the absence of source data in UMA.
HCL addresses the UMA challenge from two perspectives. First, it introduces
historical contrastive instance discrimination (HCID) that learns from target samples by contrasting their embeddings which are generated by the currently adapted
model and the historical models. With the historical models, HCID encourages
UMA to learn instance-discriminative target representations while preserving the
source hypothesis. Second, it introduces historical contrastive category discrimination (HCCD) that pseudo-labels target samples to learn category-discriminative
target representations. Specifically, HCCD re-weights pseudo labels according to
their prediction consistency across the current and historical models. Extensive
experiments show that HCL outperforms and state-of-the-art methods consistently
across a variety of visual tasks and setups.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) [28, 73, 23] have achieved great success in various computer vision
tasks [8, 55, 60, 59, 28, 73, 23] but often generalize poorly to new domains due to the inter-domain
discrepancy [1]. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [78, 51, 76, 64, 66, 79, 77, 103, 102, 25, 71,
44, 26, 86] addresses the inter-domain discrepancy by aligning the source and target data distributions,
but it requires to access the source-domain data which often raises concerns in data privacy, data
portability, and data transmission efficiency.
In this work, we study unsupervised model adaptation (UMA), an alternative setting that aims to
adapt source-trained models to fit target data distribution without accessing the source-domain data.
Under the UMA setting, the only information carried forward is a portable source-trained model
which is usually much smaller than the source-domain data and can be transmitted more efficiently
[45, 42, 43, 72, 48] as illustrated in Table 1. Beyond that, the UMA setting also alleviates the concern
of data privacy and intellectual property effectively. On the other hand, the absence of the labeled
source-domain data makes domain adaptation much more challenging and susceptible to collapse.
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

