Model Selection for Bayesian Autoencoders

Ba-Hien Tran

Simone Rossi

Dimitrios Milios

EURECOM
(France)

EURECOM
(France)

EURECOM
(France)

Pietro Michiardi

Edwin V. Bonilla

Maurizio Filippone

EURECOM
(France)

CSIRO’s Data61
The Australian National University
The University of Sydney
(Australia)

EURECOM
(France)

Abstract
We develop a novel method for carrying out model selection for Bayesian autoencoders (BAEs) by means of prior hyper-parameter optimization. Inspired by the
common practice of type-II maximum likelihood optimization and its equivalence
to Kullback-Leibler divergence minimization, we propose to optimize the distributional sliced-Wasserstein distance (DSWD) between the output of the autoencoder
and the empirical data distribution. The advantages of this formulation are that we
can estimate the DSWD based on samples and handle high-dimensional problems.
We carry out posterior estimation of the BAE parameters via stochastic gradient
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and turn our BAE into a generative model by fitting a
flexible Dirichlet mixture model in the latent space. Consequently, we obtain a
powerful alternative to variational autoencoders, which are the preferred choice in
modern applications of autoencoders for representation learning with uncertainty.
We evaluate our approach qualitatively and quantitatively using a vast experimental
campaign on a number of unsupervised learning tasks and show that, in smalldata regimes where priors matter, our approach provides state-of-the-art results,
outperforming multiple competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

The problem of learning useful representations of data that facilitate the solution of downstream
tasks such as clustering, generative modeling and classification, is at the crux of the success of many
machine learning applications [see, e.g., 5, and references therein]. From a plethora of potential
solutions to this problem, unsupervised approaches based on autoencoders [10] are particularly
appealing as, by definition, they do not require label information and have proved effective in tasks
such as dimensionality reduction and information retrieval [20].
Autoencoders are neural network models composed of two parts, usually referred to as the encoder
and the decoder. The encoder maps input data to a set of lower-dimensional latent variables. The
decoder maps the latent variables back to the observations. The bottleneck introduced by the
low-dimensional latent space is what characterizes the compression and representation learning
capabilities of autoencoders. It is not surprising that these models have connections with principal
component analysis [4], factor analysis and density networks [33], and latent variable models [28].
In applications where quantification of uncertainty is a primary requirement or where data is scarce,
it is important to carry out a Bayesian treatment of these models by specifying a prior distribution
over their parameters, i.e., the weights of the encoder/decoder. However, estimating the posterior
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

