A Non-commutative Extension of Lee-Seung’s
Algorithm for Positive Semidefinite Factorizations

Yong Sheng Soh
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
10 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 119076
and
Institute of High Performance Computing
1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis, Singapore 138632
matsys@nus.edu.sg
Antonios Varvitsiotis
Engineering and Systems Design Pillar
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372
avarvits@gmail.com

Abstract
m×n
Given a data matrix X ∈ R+
with non-negative entries, a Positive Semidefinite
(PSD) factorization of X is a collection of r × r-dimensional PSD matrices {Ai }
and {Bj } satisfying the condition Xij = tr(Ai Bj ) for all i ∈ [m], j ∈ [n].
PSD factorizations are fundamentally linked to understanding the expressiveness
of semidefinite programs as well as the power and limitations of quantum resources in information theory. The PSD factorization task generalizes the Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) problem in which we seek a collection of
r-dimensional non-negative vectors {ai } and {bj } satisfying Xij = aTi bj , for all
i ∈ [m], j ∈ [n] – one can recover the latter problem by choosing matrices in the
PSD factorization to be diagonal. The most widely used algorithm for computing
NMFs of a matrix is the Multiplicative Update algorithm developed by Lee and
Seung, in which non-negativity of the updates is preserved by scaling with positive diagonal matrices. In this paper, we describe a non-commutative extension of
Lee-Seung’s algorithm, which we call the Matrix Multiplicative Update (MMU)
algorithm, for computing PSD factorizations. The MMU algorithm ensures that
updates remain PSD by congruence scaling with the matrix geometric mean of
appropriate PSD matrices, and it retains the simplicity of implementation that the
multiplicative update algorithm for NMF enjoys. Building on the MajorizationMinimization framework, we show that under our update scheme the squared loss
objective is non-increasing and fixed points correspond to critical points. The
analysis relies on Lieb’s Concavity Theorem. Beyond PSD factorizations, we
show that the MMU algorithm can be also used as a primitive to calculate blockdiagonal PSD factorizations and tensor PSD factorizations. We demonstrate the
utility of our method with experiments on real and synthetic data.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

