The Elastic Lottery Ticket Hypothesis

Xiaohan Chen1∗ Yu Cheng2 Shuohang Wang2
Jingjing Liu3 Zhangyang Wang1
1

Zhe Gan2

University of Texas at Austin 2 Microsoft Corporation 3 Tsinghua University
{xiaohan.chen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu
{yu.cheng, shuowa, zhe.gan}@microsoft.com
JJLiuiu@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) raises keen attention to identifying sparse trainable subnetworks, or winning tickets, which can be trained in isolation to achieve
similar or even better performance compared to the full models. Despite many
efforts being made, the most effective method to identify such winning tickets is
still Iterative Magnitude-based Pruning (IMP), which is computationally expensive
and has to be run thoroughly for every different network. A natural question that
comes in is: can we “transform” the winning ticket found in one network to another
with a different architecture, yielding a winning ticket for the latter at the beginning,
without re-doing the expensive IMP? Answering this question is not only practically
relevant for efficient “once-for-all” winning ticket finding, but also theoretically appealing for uncovering inherently scalable sparse patterns in networks. We conduct
extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, and propose a variety of strategies to tweak the winning tickets found from different networks of the same model
family (e.g., ResNets). Based on these results, we articulate the Elastic Lottery
Ticket Hypothesis (E-LTH): by mindfully replicating (or dropping) and re-ordering
layers for one network, its corresponding winning ticket could be stretched (or
squeezed) into a subnetwork for another deeper (or shallower) network from the
same family, whose performance is nearly the same competitive as the latter’s winning ticket directly found by IMP. We have also extensively compared E-LTH with
pruning-at-initialization and dynamic sparse training methods, as well as discussed
the generalizability of E-LTH to different model families, layer types, and across
datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/ElasticLTH.

1

Introduction

Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [13] suggests the existence of sparse subnetworks in overparameterized neural networks at their random initialization, early training stage, or pre-trained
initialization [35, 44, 5, 3, 2]. Such subnetworks, usually called winning tickets, contain much fewer
non-zero parameters compared with the original dense networks, but can achieve similar or even better
performance when trained in isolation. The discovery undermines the necessity of over-parameterized
initialization for successful training and good generalization of neural networks [46, 31]. That implies
the new possibility to train a highly compact subnetwork instead of a prohibitively large one without
compromising performance, potentially drastically reducing the training cost.
However, the current success of LTH essentially depends on Iterative Magnitude-based Pruning
(IMP), which requires repeated cycles of training networks from scratch, pruning and resetting the
remaining parameters. IMP makes it extremely expensive and sometimes unstable to find winning
∗

Work was done when the author interned at Microsoft.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

