Adversarial Examples in Multi-Layer Random ReLU
Networks
Peter L. Bartlett
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Department of Statistics
UC Berkeley

Sébastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research Redmond

Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
UC Berkeley

Abstract
We consider the phenomenon of adversarial examples in ReLU networks with
independent Gaussian parameters. For networks of constant depth and with a large
range of widths (for instance, it suffices if the width of each layer is polynomial in
that of any other layer), small perturbations of input vectors lead to large changes
of outputs. This generalizes results of Daniely and Schacham (2020) for networks
of rapidly decreasing width and of Bubeck et al (2021) for two-layer networks. Our
proof shows that adversarial examples arise in these networks because the functions
they compute are locally very similar to random linear functions. Bottleneck layers
play a key role: the minimal width up to some point in the network determines
scales and sensitivities of mappings computed up to that point. The main result is
for networks with constant depth, but we also show that some constraint on depth
is necessary for a result of this kind, because there are suitably deep networks that,
with constant probability, compute a function that is close to constant.

1

Introduction and Main Result

Since the phenomenon of adversarial examples was first observed in deep networks [SZS+ 14],
there has been considerable interest in why this extreme sensitivity to small input perturbations
arises in deep networks [GSS15, SSRD19, BLPR19, DS20, BCGdC21] and how it can be detected
and avoided [CW17a, CW17b, FCSG17, MMS+ 18, QMG+ 19]. Building on the work of Shamir
et al [SSRD19], Daniely and Schacham [DS20] prove that small perturbations (measured in the
Euclidean norm) can be found for any fixed input and most Gaussian parameters in certain ReLU
networks—those in which each layer has vanishing width relative to the previous layer—and conjectured the same result without this strong constraint on the architecture. Bubeck, Cherapanamjeri,
Gidel and Tachet des Combes [BCGdC21] prove that the same phenomenon occurs in general
two-layer ReLU networks, and give experimental evidence of its presence in deeper ReLU networks.
In this paper, we prove that adversarial examples also arise in deep ReLU networks with random
weights for a wide variety of network architectures—those with constant depth and polynomiallyrelated widths. The key fact underlying this phenomenon was already observed in [DS20]: a
high-dimensional linear function f (x) = w> x with input x 6= 0 and random parameter vector w with
a uniformly chosen direction will satisfy krf (x)k kxk
|f (x)| with high probability. This implies
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

