Grounding Representation Similarity with Statistical
Testing
Frances Ding,

Jean-Stanislas Denain, Jacob Steinhardt
University of California Berkeley
{frances, js_denain, jsteinhardt}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
To understand neural network behavior, recent works quantitatively compare different networks’ learned representations using canonical correlation analysis (CCA),
centered kernel alignment (CKA), and other dissimilarity measures. Unfortunately,
these widely used measures often disagree on fundamental observations, such
as whether deep networks differing only in random initialization learn similar
representations. These disagreements raise the question: which, if any, of these
dissimilarity measures should we believe? We provide a framework to ground
this question through a concrete test: measures should have sensitivity to changes
that affect functional behavior, and specificity against changes that do not. We
quantify this through a variety of functional behaviors including probing accuracy
and robustness to distribution shift, and examine changes such as varying random
initialization and deleting principal components. We find that current metrics exhibit different weaknesses, note that a classical baseline performs surprisingly well,
and highlight settings where all metrics appear to fail, thus providing a challenge
set for further improvement.

1

Introduction

Understanding neural networks is not only scientifically interesting, but critical for applying deep
networks in high-stakes situations. Recent work has highlighted the value of analyzing not just the
final outputs of a network, but also its intermediate representations [20, 29]. This has motivated the
development of representation similarity measures, which can provide insight into how different
training schemes, architectures, and datasets affect networks’ learned representations.
A number of similarity measures have been proposed, including centered kernel alignment (CKA)
[13], ones based on canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [24, 30], single neuron alignment [20],
vector space alignment [3, 6, 32], and others [2, 9, 16, 18, 21, 39]. Unfortunately, these different
measures tell different stories. For instance, CKA and projection weighted CCA disagree on which
layers of different networks are most similar [13]. This lack of consensus is worrying, as measures are
often designed according to different and incompatible intuitive desiderata, such as whether finding a
one-to-one assignment, or finding few-to-one mappings, between neurons is more appropriate [20].
As a community, we need well-chosen formal criteria for evaluating metrics to avoid over-reliance on
intuition and the pitfalls of too many researcher degrees of freedom [17].
In this paper we view representation dissimilarity measures as implicitly answering a classification
question–whether two representations are essentially similar or importantly different. Thus, in
analogy to statistical testing, we can evaluate them based on their sensitivity to important change and
specificity (non-responsiveness) against unimportant changes or noise.
As a warm-up, we first initially consider two intuitive criteria: first, that metrics should have specificity
against random initialization; and second, that they should be sensitive to deleting important principal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

