Drop-DTW: Aligning Common Signal Between
Sequences While Dropping Outliers

Nikita Dvornik 1,2 Isma Hadji 1 Konstantinos G. Derpanis 1 Animesh Garg 2 Allan D. Jepson 1
1
Samsung AI Centre Toronto
2
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{isma.hadji, allan.jepson}@samsung.com
{n.dvornik, k.derpanis}@partner.samsung.com
garg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of sequence-to-sequence alignment for signals containing outliers. Assuming the absence of outliers, the standard Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) algorithm efficiently computes the optimal alignment between two (generally) variable-length sequences. While DTW is robust to temporal
shifts and dilations of the signal, it fails to align sequences in a meaningful way
in the presence of outliers that can be arbitrarily interspersed in the sequences. To
address this problem, we introduce Drop-DTW, a novel algorithm that aligns the
common signal between the sequences while automatically dropping the outlier elements from the matching. The entire procedure is implemented as a single dynamic
program that is efficient and fully differentiable. In our experiments, we show that
Drop-DTW is a robust similarity measure for sequence retrieval and demonstrate
its effectiveness as a training loss on diverse applications. With Drop-DTW, we
address temporal step localization on instructional videos, representation learning from noisy videos, and cross-modal representation learning for audio-visual
retrieval and localization. In all applications, we take a weakly- or unsupervised
approach and demonstrate state-of-the-art results under these settings.

1

Introduction

The problem of sequence-to-sequence alignment is central to many computational applications. Aligning two sequences (e.g., temporal signals) entails computing the optimal pairwise correspondence
between the sequence elements while preserving their match orderings. For example, video [1] or
audio [2] synchronization are important applications of sequence alignment in the same modality,
while the alignment of video to audio [3] represents a cross-modal task. Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) [2] is a standard algorithm for recovering the optimal alignment between two variable length
sequences. It efficiently solves the alignment problem by finding all correspondences between the
two sequences, while being robust to temporal variations in the execution rate and shifts.
A major issue with DTW is that it enforces correspondences between all elements of both sequences
and thus cannot properly handle sequences containing outliers. That is, given sequences with interspersed outliers, DTW enforces matches between the outliers and clean signal, which is prohibitive
in many applications. A real-world example of sequences containing outliers is instructional videos.
These are long, untrimmed videos depicting a person performing a given activity (e.g., making a
latte) following a pre-defined set of ordered steps (e.g., a recipe). Typically, only a few frames in
the video correspond to the instruction steps, while the rest of the video frames are unrelated to the
main activity (e.g., the person talking); see Figure 1 for an illustration. In this case, matching the
outlier frames to instruction steps will not yield a meaningful alignment. Moreover, the match score
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

