Towards Sample-efficient Overparameterized
Meta-learning

Yue Sun
University of Washington
yuesun@uw.edu

Adhyyan Narang
University of Washington
adhyyan@uw.edu

Samet Oymak
University of California, Riverside
oymak@ece.ucr.edu

Halil Ibrahim Gulluk
Bogazici University
hibrahimgulluk@gmail.com
Maryam Fazel
University of Washington
mfazel@uw.edu

Abstract
An overarching goal in machine learning is to build a generalizable model with a
small number of samples. To this end, overparameterization has been the subject of
immense interest to explain the generalization ability of deep nets even when the
size of the dataset is smaller than that of the model. While prior literature focuses on
the classical supervised setting, this paper aims to demystify overparameterization
for meta-learning. Here we have a sequence of linear-regression tasks and we ask:
(1) Given earlier tasks, what is the optimal linear representation of features for
a new downstream task? and (2) How many samples do we need to build this
representation? This work shows that surprisingly, overparameterization arises as a
natural answer to these fundamental meta-learning questions. Specifically, for (1),
we first show that learning the optimal representation coincides with the problem
of designing a task-aware regularization to promote inductive bias. This inductive
bias explains how the downstream task actually benefits from overparameterization,
in contrast to prior works on few-shot learning. For (2), we develop a theory to
explain how feature covariance can implicitly help reduce the sample complexity
well below the degrees of freedom and lead to small estimation error. We then
integrate these findings to obtain an overall performance guarantee for our metalearning algorithm. Numerical experiments on real and synthetic data verify our
insights on overparameterized meta-learning.

1

Introduction

In a multitude of machine learning (ML) tasks with limited data, it is crucial to build accurate models
in a sample-efficient way. Constructing a simple yet informative representation of features is a critical
component of learning a model that generalizes well to an unseen test set. The field of meta-learning
dates back to [8, 4] and addresses this challenge by transferring insights across distinct but related
tasks. Usually, the meta-learner first (1) learns a feature-representation from previously seen tasks and
then (2) uses this representation to succeed at an unseen task. The first phase is called representation
learning and the second is called few-shot learning. Such information transfer between tasks is
the backbone of modern transfer and multitask learning and finds ubiquitous applications in image
classification [14], machine translation [6] and reinforcement learning [17].
Recent literature in ML theory has posited that overparameterization can be beneficial to generalization in traditional single-task setups for both regression [28, 38, 3, 32, 29] and classification
[31, 30] problems. Empirical literature in deep learning suggests that overparameterization is of
interest for both phases of meta-learning as well. Deep networks are stellar representation learners
despite containing many more parameters than the sample size. Additionally, overparameterization
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

