Only Train Once: A One-Shot Neural Network
Training And Pruning Framework

Tianyi Chen∗
Microsoft
tiachen@microsoft.com

Bo Ji
National University of Singapore
jibo@comp.nus.edu.sg

Tianyu Ding
Johns Hopkins University
tding1@jhu.edu

Biyi Fang
Microsoft
bif@microsoft.com

Guanyi Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
gwang93@gatech.edu

Zhihui Zhu
University of Denver
zhihui.zhu@du.edu

Luming Liang
Microsoft
lulian@microsoft.com

Yixin Shi
Microsoft
yixshi@microsoft.com

Sheng Yi
Microsoft
shengyi@microsoft.com

Xiao Tu
Microsoft
xiaotu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Structured pruning is a commonly used technique in deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) onto resource-constrained devices. However, the existing pruning
methods are usually heuristic, task-specified, and require an extra fine-tuning procedure. To overcome these limitations, we propose a framework that compresses
DNNs into slimmer architectures with competitive performances and significant
FLOPs reductions by Only-Train-Once (OTO). OTO contains two keys: (i) we
partition the parameters of DNNs into zero-invariant groups, enabling us to prune
zero groups without affecting the output; and (ii) to promote zero groups, we then
formulate a structured-sparsity optimization problem and propose a novel optimization algorithm, Half-Space Stochastic Projected Gradient (HSPG), to solve
it, which outperforms the standard proximal methods on group sparsity exploration and maintains comparable convergence. To demonstrate the effectiveness of
OTO, we train and compress full models simultaneously from scratch without finetuning for inference speedup and parameter reduction, and achieve state-of-the-art
results on VGG16 for CIFAR10, ResNet50 for CIFAR10 and Bert for SQuAD
and competitive result on ResNet50 for ImageNet. The source code is available
at https://github.com/tianyic/only_train_once.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to be effective in various real applications (51; 28).
It is widely acknowledged that large-scale DNN models not only learn faster but also outperform
their slimmer counterparts. However, such heavy models pose a great challenge to the deployment
stage due to their resource-consuming nature. In addressing this issue, many model compression
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

