Cardinality constrained submodular maximization
for random streams
Paul Liu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
paul.liu@stanford.edu
Jan Vondrák
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
jvondrak@stanford.edu

Aviad Rubinstein
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
aviad@stanford.edu
Junyao Zhao
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
junyaoz@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of maximizing submodular functions in single-pass
streaming and secretaries-with-shortlists models, both with random arrival order. For cardinality constrained monotone functions, Agrawal, Shadravan, and
Stein [ASS19] gave a single-pass (1 − 1/e − ε)-approximation algorithm using
only linear memory, but their exponential dependence on ε makes it impractical
even for ε = 0.1. We simplify both the algorithm and the analysis, obtaining an
exponential improvement in the ε-dependence (in particular, O(k/ε) memory).
Extending these techniques, we also give a simple (1/e − ε)-approximation for
non-monotone functions in O(k/ε) memory. For the monotone case, we also give
a corresponding unconditional hardness barrier of 1 − 1/e + ε for single-pass
algorithms in randomly ordered streams, even assuming unlimited computation.
Finally, we show that the algorithms are simple to implement and work well on
real world datasets.

1

Introduction

Over the past few decades, submodularity has become recognized as a useful property occurring
in a wide variety of discrete optimization problems. Submodular functions model the property of
diminishing returns, whereby the gain in a utility function decreases as the set of items considered
increases. This property occurs naturally in machine learning, information retrieval, and influence
maximization, to name a few (see [IKBA20] and the references within).
In many settings, the data is not available in a random-access model; either for external reasons
(customers arriving online) or because of the massive amount of data. When the data becomes too
big to store in memory, we look for streaming algorithms that pass (once) through the data, and
efficiently decide for each element whether to discard it or keep it in a small buffer in memory.
In this work, we consider algorithms that process elements arriving in a random order. Note that
the classical greedy algorithm which iteratively adds the best element [NWF78] cannot be used
here, and hence we must look for new algorithmic techniques. The motivation for considering
random element arrival comes from the prevalence of submodularity in big-data applications, in
which data is often logged in batches that can be modelled as random samples from an underlying

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

