Shift Invariance Can Reduce Adversarial Robustness
Vasu Singla, Songwei Ge∗
Univeristy of Maryland
{vsingla, songweig}@cs.umd.edu

Ronen Basri
Weizmann Institute of Science
ronen.basri@weizmann.ac.il

David Jacobs
Univeristy of Maryland
dwj@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Shift invariance is a critical property of CNNs that improves performance on
classification. However, we show that invariance to circular shifts can also lead to
greater sensitivity to adversarial attacks. We first characterize the margin between
classes when a shift-invariant linear classifier is used. We show that the margin
can only depend on the DC component of the signals. Then, using results about
infinitely wide networks, we show that in some simple cases, fully connected and
shift-invariant neural networks produce linear decision boundaries. Using this, we
prove that shift invariance in neural networks produces adversarial examples for the
simple case of two classes, each consisting of a single image with a black or white
dot on a gray background. This is more than a curiosity; we show empirically that
with real datasets and realistic architectures, shift invariance reduces adversarial
robustness. Finally, we describe initial experiments using synthetic data to probe
the source of this connection.

1

Introduction

In adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013) against classifiers, an adversary with knowledge of the
trained classifier makes small perturbations to a test image or even to objects in the world (Eykholt
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020b) that change the output. Such attacks threaten the deployment of deep
learning systems in many critical applications, from spam filtering to self-driving cars.
Despite a great deal of study, it remains unclear why neural networks are so susceptible to adversarial
attacks. We show that invariance to circular shifts in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) can be
one cause of this lack of robustness. All reference to shifts will refer to circular shifts.
To motivate this conclusion we study in detail a simple example. Indeed, one of our contributions is to
present perhaps the simplest possible example in which adversarial attacks can occur. Figure 1 shows
a two class classification problem in which each class consists of a single image, a white or black dot
on a gray background. We train either a fully connected (FC) network or a CNN that is designed to
be fully shift-invariant to distinguish between them. Since each class contains only a single image,
we measure adversarial robustness as the l2 distance to an adversarial example produced by a DDN
attack (Rony et al., 2019), using the training image as the starting point. The figure shows that the
CNN is much less robust than the FC network, and that the robustness of the CNN drops precipitously
with the image size.
In Sections 3 and 4 we explain this result theoretically. In Section 3 we study the effect of shift
invariance on the margin of linear classifiers, for linearly separable data. We call a linear classifier
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

