Counterfactual Maximum Likelihood
Estimation for Training Deep Networks

Xinyi Wang, Wenhu Chen, Michael Saxon, William Yang Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
xinyi_wang@ucsb.edu, wenhuchen@ucsb.edu, saxon@ucsb.edu, william@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Although deep learning models have driven state-of-the-art performance on a wide
array of tasks, they are prone to spurious correlations that should not be learned as
predictive clues. To mitigate this problem, we propose a causality-based training
framework to reduce the spurious correlations caused by observed confounders. We
give theoretical analysis on the underlying general Structural Causal Model (SCM)
and propose to perform Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) on the interventional distribution instead of the observational distribution, namely Counterfactual
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (CMLE). As the interventional distribution, in
general, is hidden from the observational data, we then derive two different upper
bounds of the expected negative log-likelihood and propose two general algorithms,
Implicit CMLE and Explicit CMLE, for causal predictions of deep learning models
using observational data. We conduct experiments on both simulated data and two
real-world tasks: Natural Language Inference (NLI) and Image Captioning. The
results show that CMLE methods outperform the regular MLE method in terms
of out-of-domain generalization performance and reducing spurious correlations,
while maintaining comparable performance on the regular evaluations.1

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been tremendously successful across a variety of tasks and domains
in recent years. However, studies have shown that deep learning models trained with traditional
supervised learning framework tend to learn spurious correlations as predictive clues [1–4]. For
example, in computer vision, deep learning models can rely on surface-level textures [1, 5] or
background environment [2, 6] instead of the object of interest in images. In natural language
processing (NLP), question-answering models are insensitive to the choice of question [7] and natural
language inference models are surprisingly accurate at predicting the logical relationship between
a pair of sentences from just one of them [3]. In image captioning, a phenomenon called object
hallucination is observed where models tend to include nonexistent objects in a caption based on
their common association with other objects that are actually present in the image [4].
Another related problem in the current associative learning framework, like maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE), is that neural networks can achieve almost perfect performance on one dataset but
dramatically fail to generalize on another because of a naturally occurring or adversarially enforced
distribution shift [8–11]. One explanation is that the model learns ‘fake’ features induced by spurious
correlations instead of invariant features that would hold in different domains for the same task [12];
this kind of invariance can be explained by the underlying causal mechanism of the task [13].
1

Our code is released at https://github.com/WANGXinyiLinda/CMLE.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

