Towards Context-Agnostic Learning
Using Synthetic Data
Charles Jin
CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
ccj@csail.mit.edu

Martin Rinard
CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
rinard@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel setting for learning, where the input domain is the image of a
map defined on the product of two sets, one of which completely determines the
labels. We derive a new risk bound for this setting that decomposes into a bias
and an error term, and exhibits a surprisingly weak dependence on the true labels.
Inspired by these results, we present an algorithm aimed at minimizing the bias
term by exploiting the ability to sample from each set independently. We apply our
setting to visual classification tasks, where our approach enables us to train classifiers on datasets that consist entirely of a single synthetic example of each class.
On several standard benchmarks for real-world image classification, we achieve
robust performance in the context-agnostic setting, with good generalization to real
world domains, whereas training directly on real world data without our techniques
yields classifiers that are brittle to perturbations of the background.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of learning to classifying images of known objects when placed in context,
given only a single synthetic example of each object; our empirical evaluation considers the tasks of
traffic sign and handwritten character recognition.
Our methods also enable us to explore the extent to which deep neural networks trained using realworld data to perform image classification can over-rely on signals from the backgrounds of images,
even when no such information is necessary for classification. Intuitively, even though contextual
clues may be required in some settings, given an input that unambiguously contains the object of
interest in the foreground, we expect a robust classifier to be invariant to the rest of the image.
We present two main contributions. First, we introduce a formal setting for our study, where the input
space is decomposed into object and context spaces, and the labels are independent of contexts when
conditioned on the objects. We introduce the goal of learning a context-agnostic classifier, i.e., a
classifier whose predictions are invariant under perturbations of the context. We derive a new risk
bound for this setting that is tight up to a factor of two but also independent of the true labels, which
holds so long as the classifier outperforms random guessing.
Second, we present a new technique for automatically generating data to train a deep neural network
for image classification. The technique works by sampling independently from the object space,
which contains the transformed views of the objects, and the context space, which is designed to
include challenging backgrounds that make the resulting images difficult to classify. The hypothesis
is that training the network to accurately classify objects against these challenging backgrounds
should produce a trained network that robustly generalizes to accurately classify objects against the
range of backgrounds that it may encounter when deployed in more natural settings.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

