Hierarchical Skills for Efficient Exploration
Jonas Gehring1,2

Gabriel Synnaeve1 Andreas Krause2
1
Facebook AI Research 2 ETH Zürich
jgehring@fb.com

Nicolas Usunier1

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, pre-trained low-level skills have the potential to greatly
facilitate exploration. However, prior knowledge of the downstream task is required
to strike the right balance between generality (fine-grained control) and specificity
(faster learning) in skill design. In previous work on continuous control, the sensitivity of methods to this trade-off has not been addressed explicitly, as locomotion
provides a suitable prior for navigation tasks, which have been of foremost interest.
In this work, we analyze this trade-off for low-level policy pre-training with a new
benchmark suite of diverse, sparse-reward tasks for bipedal robots. We alleviate the
need for prior knowledge by proposing a hierarchical skill learning framework that
acquires skills of varying complexity in an unsupervised manner. For utilization on
downstream tasks, we present a three-layered hierarchical learning algorithm to
automatically trade off between general and specific skills as required by the respective task. In our experiments, we show that our approach performs this trade-off
effectively and achieves better results than current state-of-the-art methods for endto-end hierarchical reinforcement learning and unsupervised skill discovery. Code
and videos are available at https://facebookresearch.github.io/hsd3.

1

Introduction

A promising direction for improving the sample efficiency of reinforcement learning agents in complex environments is to pre-train low-level skills that are then used to structure the exploration in
downstream tasks [23, 19, 27, 13, 30]. This has been studied in particular for the control of (simulated)
robots, where there is a natural hierarchical decomposition of the downstream tasks into low-level control of the robot’s actuators with a skill policy, and a high-level control signal that specifies a direction
or target robot configuration with coarser temporal resolution. The large body of work on unsupervised skill or option discovery in hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) for continuous control
relies, explicitly or implicitly, on prior knowledge that low-level skills should control the center of
mass of the robot [26, 17, 13, 43, 6]. This nicely fits a wide range of benchmark tasks that are variants
of navigation problems, but the benefit of such hierarchical setups outside this problem class is unclear.
The prior knowledge embedded in a pre-trained skill defines a specific trade-off between sample
efficiency and generality. Skills that severely constrain the high-level action space to elicit specific
behavior (e.g., translation of the center of mass) are likely to provide the largest gains in sample efficiency, but are unlikely to be useful on a diverse set of downstream tasks. Conversely, low-level skills
that expose many degrees of freedom are more widely applicable but less useful for guiding exploration. There is, thus, no single universally superior pre-trained skill. Depending on the downstream
task, different skills might also be useful to efficiently explore in different parts of the environment.
In this paper, we aim to acquire skills that are useful for a variety of tasks while still providing
strong exploration benefits. We propose to pre-train a hierarchy of skills of increasing complexity
which can subsequently be composed with a high-level policy. In the context of simulated robots,
each skill consists of controlling a part of the robot configuration over a short time horizon, such
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

