Fair Classification with Adversarial Perturbations
L. Elisa Celis
Yale University

Anay Mehrotra
Yale University

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
We study fair classification in the presence of an omniscient adversary that, given an
η, is allowed to choose an arbitrary η-fraction of the training samples and arbitrarily
perturb their protected attributes. The motivation comes from settings in which
protected attributes can be incorrect due to strategic misreporting, malicious actors,
or errors in imputation; and prior approaches that make stochastic or independence
assumptions on errors may not satisfy their guarantees in this adversarial setting.
Our main contribution is an optimization framework to learn fair classifiers in
this adversarial setting that comes with provable guarantees on accuracy and
fairness. Our framework works with multiple and non-binary protected attributes,
is designed for the large class of linear-fractional fairness metrics, and can also
handle perturbations besides protected attributes. We prove near-tightness of our
framework’s guarantees for natural hypothesis classes: no algorithm can have
significantly better accuracy and any algorithm with better fairness must have lower
accuracy. Empirically, we evaluate the classifiers produced by our framework for
statistical rate on real-world and synthetic datasets for a family of adversaries.

1

Introduction

It is increasingly common to deploy classifiers to assist in decision-making in applications such as
criminal recidivism [50], credit lending [21], and predictive policing [34]. Hence, it is imperative
to ensure that these classifiers are fair with respect to protected attributes such as gender and race.
Consequently, there has been extensive work on approaches for fair classification [32, 26, 28, 17, 63,
62, 48, 24, 27, 1, 13]. At a high level, a classifier f is said to be “fair” with respect to a protected
attribute Z if it has a similar “performance” with respect to a given metric on different protected
groups defined by Z. Given a fairness metric and a hypothesis class F, fair classification frameworks
consider the problem of finding a classifier f ? ∈ F that maximizes accuracy constrained to being fair
with respect to the given fairness metric (and Z) [8]. To specify fairness constraints, these approaches
need protected attributes of training data to be known.
However, protected attributes can be erroneous for various reasons; there could be uncertainties
during data collection or data cleaning process [20, 52], or the attributes could be strategically
misreported [46]. Further, protected attributes may be missing entirely, as is often the case for racial
and ethnic information in healthcare [20] or when data is scraped from the internet as with many
image datasets [22, 66, 35]. In these cases, protected attributes can be “imputed” [18, 36, 16], but this
can also introduce errors [12]; further, imputation by machine-learning-based methods is known to be
fragile to imperceptible changes in the inputs [29] and to have correlated errors across samples [49].
Perturbations in protected attributes, regardless of origin, have been shown to have adverse effects on
fair classifiers, affecting their performance on both accuracy and fairness metrics; see e.g., [16, 7].
Towards addressing this problem, several recent works have developed fair classification algorithms
for various models of errors in the protected attributes. [44] consider an extension of the “mutually
contaminated learning model” [53] where, instead of observing samples from the “true” joint
distribution, distributions of observed group-conditional distributions are stochastic mixtures of
their true counterparts. [6] consider a binary protected attribute and Bernoulli perturbations that are
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

