On the Convergence Theory of Debiased
Model-Agnostic Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Alireza Fallah
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
afallah@mit.edu

Kristian Georgiev
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
krisgrg@mit.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) methods for Reinforcement
Learning (RL) problems, where the goal is to find a policy using data from several
tasks represented by Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) that can be updated by
one step of stochastic policy gradient for the realized MDP. In particular, using
stochastic gradients in MAML update steps is crucial for RL problems since
computation of exact gradients requires access to a large number of possible
trajectories. For this formulation, we propose a variant of the MAML method,
named Stochastic Gradient Meta-Reinforcement Learning (SG-MRL), and study
its convergence properties. We derive the iteration and sample complexity of SGMRL to find an -first-order stationary point, which, to the best of our knowledge,
provides the first convergence guarantee for model-agnostic meta-reinforcement
learning algorithms. We further show how our results extend to the case where
more than one step of stochastic policy gradient method is used at test time. Finally,
we empirically compare SG-MRL and MAML in several deep RL environments.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning has recently attracted much attention as a learning to learn approach that enables quick
adaptation to new tasks using past experience and data. This is a particularly promising approach
for Reinforcement Learning (RL) where in several applications, such as robotics, a group of agents
encounter new tasks and need to learn new behaviors or policies through a few interactions with
the environment building on previous experience [1–9]. Among various forms of Meta-learning,
gradient-based Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) formulation [1] is a particularly effective
approach which, as its name suggests, can be applied to any learning problem that is trained with
gradient-based updates. In MAML, we exploit observed tasks at training time to find an initial model
that is trained in a way that rapidly adapts to a new unseen task at test time, after running a few steps
of a gradient-based update with respect to the loss of the new task.
The MAML formulation can be extended to RL problems if we represent each task as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). In this setting, we assume that we are given a set of MDPs corresponding
to the tasks that we observe during the training phase and assume that the new task at test time is
drawn from an underlying probability distribution. The goal in Model-Agnostic Meta-Reinforcement
Learning (MAMRL) is to exploit this data to come up with an initial policy that adapts to a new task
(drawn from the same distribution) at test time by taking a few stochastic policy gradient steps [1].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

