Drawing Robust Scratch Tickets: Subnetworks with
Inborn Robustness Are Found within
Randomly Initialized Networks

Yonggan Fu1 , Qixuan Yu1 , Yang Zhang2 , Shang Wu1 , Xu Ouyang1
David Cox2 , Yingyan Lin1
1 Rice University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{yf22,qy12,sw99,xo28}@rice.edu, {yang.zhang2,David.D.Cox}@ibm.com

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks,
i.e., an imperceptible perturbation to the input can mislead DNNs trained on clean
images into making erroneous predictions. To tackle this, adversarial training is
currently the most effective defense method, by augmenting the training set with
adversarial samples generated on the fly. Interestingly, we discover for the first
time that there exist subnetworks with inborn robustness, matching or surpassing the robust accuracy of the adversarially trained networks with comparable model sizes, within randomly initialized networks without any model
training, indicating that adversarial training on model weights is not indispensable
towards adversarial robustness. We name such subnetworks Robust Scratch Tickets
(RSTs), which are also by nature efficient. Distinct from the popular lottery ticket
hypothesis, neither the original dense networks nor the identified RSTs need to be
trained. To validate and understand this fascinating finding, we further conduct
extensive experiments to study the existence and properties of RSTs under different
models, datasets, sparsity patterns, and attacks, drawing insights regarding the relationship between DNNs’ robustness and their initialization/overparameterization.
Furthermore, we identify the poor adversarial transferability between RSTs of
different sparsity ratios drawn from the same randomly initialized dense network,
and propose a Random RST Switch (R2S) technique, which randomly switches
between different RSTs, as a novel defense method built on top of RSTs. We
believe our findings about RSTs have opened up a new perspective to study model
robustness and extend the lottery ticket hypothesis. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/RICE-EIC/Robust-Scratch-Ticket.

1

Introduction

There has been an enormous interest in deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) into numerous
real-world applications requiring strict security. Meanwhile, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, i.e., an imperceptible perturbation to the input can mislead DNNs trained on clean images
into making erroneous predictions. To enhance DNNs’ robustness, adversarial training augmenting
the training set with adversarial samples is commonly regarded as the most effective defense method.
Nevertheless, adversarial training is time-consuming as each stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
iteration requires multiple gradient computations to produce adversarial images. In fact, its actual
slowdown factor over standard DNN training depends on the number of gradient steps used for
adversarial example generation, which can result in a 3∼30 times longer training time [1].
In this work, we ask an intriguing question: “Can we find robust subnetworks within randomly initialized networks without any training”? This question not only has meaningful practical implication
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

