Non-Asymptotic Analysis for Two Time-scale TDC
with General Smooth Function Approximation

Yue Wang
Department of Electrical Engineering
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, USA
ywang294@buffalo.edu

Shaofeng Zou
Department of Electrical Engineering
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, USA
szou3@buffalo.edu

Yi Zhou
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
yi.zhou@utah.edu

Abstract
Temporal-difference learning with gradient correction (TDC) is a two time-scale
algorithm for policy evaluation in reinforcement learning. This algorithm was
initially proposed with linear function approximation, and was later extended to the
one with general smooth function approximation. The asymptotic convergence for
the on-policy setting with general smooth function approximation was established
in [Bhatnagar et al., 2009], however, the non-asymptotic convergence analysis
remains unsolved due to challenges in the non-linear and two-time-scale update
structure, non-convex objective function and the projection onto a time-varying
tangent plane. In this paper, we develop novel techniques to address the above challenges and explicitly characterize the non-asymptotic error bound for the general
off-policy setting
√ with i.i.d. or Markovian samples, and show that it converges as
fast as O(1/ T ) (up to a factor of O(log T )). Our approach can be applied to a
wide range of value-based reinforcement learning algorithms with general smooth
function approximation.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with a stochastic environment in order to maximize
the total reward [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Towards this goal, it is often needed to evaluate how good a
policy performs, and more specifically, to learn its value function. Temporal difference (TD) learning
algorithm is one of the most popular policy evaluation approaches. However, when applied with
function approximation approach and/or under the off-policy setting, the TD learning algorithm may
diverge [Baird, 1995, Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1997]. To address this issue, a family of gradient-based
TD (GTD) algorithms, e.g., GTD, GTD2, temporal-difference learning with gradient correction
(TDC) and Greedy-GQ, were developed for the case with linear function approximation [Maei, 2011,
Sutton et al., 2009b, Maei et al., 2010, Sutton et al., 2009a,b]. These algorithms were later extended
to the case with general smooth function approximation in [Bhatnagar et al., 2009], where asymptotic
convergence guarantee was established for the on-policy setting with i.i.d. samples.
Despite the success of the GTD methods in practice, previous theoretical studies only showed that
these algorithms converge asymptotically, and did not suggest how fast these algorithms converge
and how the accuracy of the solution depends on various parameters of the algorithms. Not until
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

