Evaluating Efficient Performance Estimators of
Neural Architectures
Xuefei Ning1]
Shuang Liang2

Changcheng Tang2

Wenshuo Li1

Huazhong Yang1†

Zixuan Zhou1
Yu Wang1‡

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University1
Novauto Technology Co. Ltd.2
]

foxdoraame@gmail.com, † yanghz@tsinghua.edu.cn, ‡ yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Conducting efficient performance estimations of neural architectures is a major
challenge in neural architecture search (NAS). To reduce the architecture training
costs in NAS, one-shot estimators (OSEs) amortize the architecture training costs
by sharing the parameters of one “supernet” between all architectures. Recently,
zero-shot estimators (ZSEs) that involve no training are proposed to further reduce
the architecture evaluation cost. Despite the high efficiency of these estimators,
the quality of such estimations has not been thoroughly studied. In this paper, we
conduct an extensive and organized assessment of OSEs and ZSEs on five NAS
benchmarks: NAS-Bench-101/201/301, and NDS ResNet/ResNeXt-A. Specifically,
we employ a set of NAS-oriented criteria to study the behavior of OSEs and ZSEs,
and reveal their biases and variances. After analyzing how and why the OSE
estimations are unsatisfying, we explore how to mitigate the correlation gap of
OSEs from three perspectives. Through our analysis, we give out suggestions for
future application and development of efficient architecture performance estimators.
Furthermore, the analysis framework proposed in our work could be utilized in
future research to give a more comprehensive understanding of newly designed
architecture performance estimators. The code is available at https://github.
com/walkerning/aw_nas [24].

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) can automatically discover architectures that outperform the handcrafted ones for various applications [48, 10, 11]. Early NAS methods [48, 30] suffer from an
extremely heavy computational burden, and can take tens of thousands of GPU hours to run. One
of the major reasons for the computational challenge of NAS is that evaluating each candidate
architecture is slow, which includes a full training and testing process. In the past years, studies [2,
27, 3, 5, 8, 45, 20, 1] have been focusing on developing more efficient performance estimators of
neural architectures.
One-shot Estimator (OSE) Traditional NAS methods [48, 30, 2] conduct a costly separate training
process to acquire the suitable parameters to evaluate each candidate architecture. To make NAS
computationally tractable, ENAS [27] proposes the parameter-sharing technique to accelerate the
architecture evaluation. Following this work, the parameter sharing technique is widely used for
architecture search in different search spaces [39, 16] or incorporated with different search strategies [19, 16, 23, 40]. We refer to the parameter-sharing estimations as the “one-shot” estimations
since it requires the training cost of one supernet.
How well the one-shot estimations are correlated with the standalone architecture performances is
essential for the efficacy of NAS methods. Despite the widespread use of OSEs, studies [43] have
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

