Word2Fun: Modelling Words as Functions for
Diachronic Word Representation

Benyou Wang1 , Emanuele Di Buccio1,2 , and Massimo Melucci1
1
Department of Information Engineering
2
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Padova, Padova, Italy
{wang,dibuccio,melo}@dei.unipd.it

Abstract
Word meaning may change over time as a reflection of changes in human society. Therefore, modeling time in word representation is necessary for some
diachronic tasks. Most existing diachronic word representation approaches train
the embeddings separately for each pre-grouped time-stamped corpus and align
these embeddings, e.g., by orthogonal projections, vector initialization, temporal
referencing, and compass. However, not only does word meaning change in a
short time, word meaning may also be subject to evolution over long timespans,
thus resulting in a unified continuous process. A recent approach called ‘DiffTime’ models semantic evolution as functions parameterized by multiple-layer
nonlinear neural networks over time. In this paper, we will carry on this line of
work by learning explicit functions over time for each word. Our approach, called
‘Word2Fun’, reduces the space complexity from O(T V D) to O(kV D) where k is
a small constant (k  T ). In particular, a specific instance based on polynomial
functions could provably approximate any function modeling word evolution with
a given negligible error thanks to the Weierstrass Approximation Theorem. The
effectiveness of the proposed approach is evaluated in diverse tasks including timeaware word clustering, temporal analogy, and semantic change detection. Code at:
https://github.com/wabyking/Word2Fun.git.

1

Introduction

Word meaning changes over time as a reflection of the changes of human society. Not only does word
meaning change in a short time, word meaning may also be subject to evolution over long timespans.
The causes of the change of word meaning may be cultural, societal, or technological [23]. Such
lexical semantic change phenomenon has been investigated for some decades [3, 23].
Modeling the change of word meaning recently relies on distributed representations of words [2, 14]
and adopting time-specific word vectors as diachronic word representation. The training is based on
diachronic text corpora, which are obtained by partitioning the corpora into bins of textual documents
labeled by time. A popular training paradigm within such an approach is known as train-and-align:
first, the embeddings are trained separately for each pre-grouped time-stamped corpus; then, the
embeddings are aligned by computing, e.g. orthogonal projections [9, 12], vector initialization [11],
temporal referencing [7], parameter regularizers [26, 20], aligned compass [4], or latent diffusion
[1]. The methods above do not model word meaning evolution as a continuous process, but consider
one-hop transformation between pair of timestamps. However, the meaning of some words may
smoothly evolve across a long-range span, according to a mixture of short and long timespans
or in general according to unknown patterns which cannot straightforwardly be represented only
considering one-hop transformations.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

