Improved Variance-Aware Confidence Sets for
Linear Bandits and Linear Mixture MDP
Zihan Zhang˚
Tsinghua University
zihan-zh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiaqi Yang˚
Tsinghua University
yangjq17@gmail.com

Simon S. Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
This paper presents new variance-aware confidence sets for linear bandits and
linear mixture Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). With the new confidence sets,
we obtain the follow regret bounds:
b
řK
• For linear bandits, we obtain an r
Oppolypdq 1 ` k“1 σk2 q data-dependent
regret bound, where d is the feature dimension, K is the number of rounds,
and σk2 is the unknown variance of the reward at the k-th round. This is the
first regret bound that only scales with the variance and the dimension but no
explicit polynomial dependency on K. When
are small, this bound
` ? variances
˘
r d K worst-case regret bound.
can be significantly smaller than the Θ
?
r
• For linear mixture MDPs, we obtain an Oppolypd,
log Hq Kq regret bound,
where d is the number of base models, K is the number of episodes, and
H is the planning horizon. This is the first regret bound that only scales
logarithmically with H in the reinforcement learning with linear function
approximation setting, thus exponentially improving existing results, and
resolving an open problem in [Zhou et al., 2020a].
We develop three technical ideas that may be of independent interest: 1) applications of the peeling technique to both the input norm and the variance magnitude, 2)
a recursion-based estimator for the variance, and 3) a new convex potential lemma
that generalizes the seminal elliptical potential lemma.

1

Introduction

In sequential decision-making problems such as bandits and reinforcement learning (RL), the agent
chooses an action based on the current state, with the goal to maximize the total reward. When the
state-action space is large, function approximation is often used for generalization. One of the most
fundamental and widely used methods is linear function approximation.
?
For (infinite-actioned) linear bandits, the minimax-optimal regret bound is r
Θpd Kq [Dani et al.,
2008, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011], where d is the feature dimension and K is the number of total
rounds played by the agent.2 However, oftentimes the worst-case analysis is overly pessimistic, and
˚
2

Equal contribution.
We follow the reinforcement learning convention to use K to denote the total number of rounds / episodes.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

