Exploiting a Zoo of Checkpoints for Unseen Tasks

Jiaji Huang
Baidu Research
Sunnyvale, CA, 94089
huangjiaji@baidu.com

Qiang Qiu
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907
qqiu@purdue.edu
Kenneth Church
Baidu Research
Sunnyvale, CA, 94089
kennethchurch@baidu.com

Abstract
There are so many models in the literature that it is difficult for practitioners to
decide which combinations are likely to be effective for a new task. This paper
attempts to address this question by capturing relationships among checkpoints
published on the web. We model the space of tasks as a Gaussian process. The
covariance can be estimated from checkpoints and unlabeled probing data. With the
Gaussian process, we can identify representative checkpoints by a maximum mutual
information criterion. This objective is submodular. A greedy method identifies
representatives that are likely to “cover” the task space. These representatives
generalize to new tasks with superior performance. Empirical evidence is provided
for applications from both computational linguistics as well as computer vision1 .

1

Introduction

There are many model checkpoints published. For example, upon acceptance of this paper, the
Huggingface repository2 includes over 18,000 checkpoints trained for dozens of tasks (The tasks
are tagged very coarsely. There will be many more if we tag in a fine-grained way). On the other
hand, novel tasks can always arise, exciting tremendous interest in meta learning or learning to
learn [1, 2, 3, 4]. This paper does not propose a new learning-to-learn method. Rather, we are
interested in the question, “Can we use the checkpoint zoo to build something that can adapt to
unseen tasks?"
To address the question, we have to understand how tasks are relevant to each other. A paraphrase of
task relevance is task transferability [5]. Intuitively, transferring to a new task is easier if we warm
start from a very relevant one. Efforts in this space originates from computer vision applications.
Earlier work like Taskonomy [5] explicitly uses performance metrics (e.g., test accuracy) of transfer
learning. Since then, multiple works have developed task descriptors to avoid running training and
evaluation as Taskonomy. A few prominent examples are Task2vec [6], Attribution Map (A-Map) [7],
and LEEP [8]. Very recently, Task2vec has also been extended to computational linguistics [9]. Each
of these methods has its own pros and cons. However, these studies mainly aim at interpreting the
performance of transfer learning [9, 10]. They mainly attack the question, “For a target task, which
source task is the most relevant?". It is different from the question we are interested in.
Understanding the relation among tasks is crucial for meta learning and transfer learning. It is known
that dissimilar tasks can impose significant challenges for these learning frameworks [11, 12]. Aware
1
2

All results can be reproduced using code at https://github.com/baidu-research/task_space
https://huggingface.co/models

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

