Snowflake: Scaling GNNs to high-dimensional
continuous control via parameter freezing
Charlie Blake⇤
University of Oxford
thecharlieblake@gmail.com

Vitaly Kurin
University of Oxford
vitaly.kurin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Maximilian Igl†
University of Oxford
maximilian.igl@gmail.com

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent research has shown that graph neural networks (GNNs) can learn policies
for locomotion control that are as effective as a typical multi-layer perceptron
(MLP), with superior transfer and multi-task performance [55, 20]. However,
results have so far been limited to training on small agents, with the performance of
GNNs deteriorating rapidly as the number of sensors and actuators grows. A key
motivation for the use of GNNs in the supervised learning setting is their applicability to large graphs, but this benefit has not yet been realised for locomotion control.
We show that poor scaling in GNNs is a result of increasingly unstable policy updates, caused by overfitting in parts of the network during training. To combat this,
we introduce S NOWFLAKE, a GNN training method for high-dimensional continuous control that freezes parameters in selected parts of the network. S NOWFLAKE
significantly boosts the performance of GNNs for locomotion control on large
agents, now matching the performance of MLPs while offering superior transfer
properties.

1

Introduction

Whereas many traditional machine learning models operate on sequential or Euclidean (grid-like)
data representations, GNNs allow for graph-structured inputs. GNNs have yielded breakthroughs
in a variety of complex domains, including drug discovery [33, 50], fraud detection [56], computer
vision [49, 43], and particle physics [18].
GNNs have also been successfully applied to reinforcement learning (RL), with promising results on
locomotion control tasks with small state and action spaces. Not only are GNN policies as effective
as MLPs on certain training tasks, but when a trained policy is transferred to another similar task,
GNNs significantly outperform MLPs [55, 20]. This is largely due to the capacity of a single GNN
to operate over arbitrary graph topologies (patterns of connectivity between nodes) and sizes without
modification. However, so far GNNs in RL have only shown competitive performance with MLPs on
lower-dimensional locomotion control tasks. For higher-dimensional tasks, one must therefore choose
between superior training task performance (MLPs) and superior transfer performance (GNNs).
This paper investigates the factors underlying poor GNN scaling and introduces a method to combat
them. We begin with an analysis of the GNN-based N ERVE N ET architecture [55], which we choose
for its strong zero-shot transfer performance. We show that optimisation updates for the GNN
⇤
†

Corresponding author. Now at Graphcore, Bristol
Now at Waymo, Oxford

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

