Variational Bayesian Optimistic Sampling

Brendan O’Donoghue
DeepMind
bodonoghue@deepmind.com

Tor Lattimore
DeepMind
lattimore@deepmind.com

Abstract
We consider online sequential decision problems where an agent must balance
exploration and exploitation. We derive a set of Bayesian ‘optimistic’ policies
which, in the stochastic multi-armed bandit case, includes the Thompson sampling policy. We provide a new analysis
√ showing that any algorithm producing
policies in the optimistic set enjoys Õ( AT ) Bayesian regret for a problem with
A actions after T rounds. We extend the regret analysis for optimistic policies
to bilinear saddle-point problems which include zero-sum matrix games and constrained bandits as special cases. In this case we show that Thompson sampling
can produce policies outside of the optimistic set and suffer linear regret in some
instances. Finding a policy inside the optimistic set amounts to solving a convex
optimization problem and we call the resulting algorithm ‘variational Bayesian optimistic sampling’ (VBOS). The procedure works for any posteriors, i.e., it does
not require the posterior to have any special properties, such as log-concavity,
unimodality, or smoothness. The variational view of the problem has many useful
properties, including the ability to tune the exploration-exploitation tradeoff, add
regularization, incorporate constraints, and linearly parameterize the policy.

1

Introduction

In this manuscript we consider online learning, in particular the multi-armed stochastic bandit problem [19] and its extension to bilinear saddle-point problems. Thompson sampling (TS) is a wellknown Bayesian algorithm to tackle this problem [37, 35]. At each iteration TS samples an action
according to the posterior probability that it is the optimal action. However, it never computes these
probabilities, instead TS samples from the posterior of each arm and then acts greedily with respect
to that sample, which is an implicit sample from the posterior probability of optimality. TS enjoys
strong theoretical guarantees [1, 35] as well as excellent practical performance [6]. Moreover, it has
an elegant information-theoretic interpretation of an agent that is making a tradeoff between information accumulation and regret [34]. That being said it does have several weaknesses. Firstly, TS
requires samples from the true posterior, which may be intractable for some problems. It is known
that TS with even small error in its posterior samples can suffer linear regret [32]. In many cases of
interest the posterior distribution is highly intractable to sample from and running MCMC chains,
one for each arm, can be wasteful and slow and still not yield precise enough samples for good performance, though recent work has attempted to improve this situation [22]. Moreover, TS is unable
to take into account other preferences, such as constraints or the presence of other agents. In particular, it was recently shown that TS can suffer linear regret in two-player zero sum games [27] and we
shall demonstrate the same phenomenon in this work empirically for constrained bandits. Finally,
when performing TS the user never has direct access to the posterior probability of optimality, only
samples from that distribution (though the distribution can be estimated by taking many samples).
In some practical applications having access to the policy is desirable, for example to ensure safety
constraints or to allocate budgets.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

