Leveraging Spatial and Temporal Correlations
in Sparsified Mean Estimation

Divyansh Jhunjhunwala
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
djhunjhu@andrew.cmu.edu

Ankur Mallick
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
amallic1@andrew.cmu.edu

Advait Gadhikar
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
agadhika@andrew.cmu.edu

Swanand Kadhe
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
swanand.kadhe@berkeley.edu

Gauri Joshi
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gaurij@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating at a central server the mean of a set of vectors
distributed across several nodes (one vector per node). When the vectors are highdimensional, the communication cost of sending entire vectors may be prohibitive,
and it may be imperative for them to use sparsification techniques. While most
existing work on sparsified mean estimation is agnostic to the characteristics of
the data vectors, in many practical applications such as federated learning, there
may be spatial correlations (similarities in the vectors sent by different nodes) or
temporal correlations (similarities in the data sent by a single node over different
iterations of the algorithm) in the data vectors. We leverage these correlations by
simply modifying the decoding method used by the server to estimate the mean. We
provide an analysis of the resulting estimation error as well as experiments for PCA,
K-Means and Logistic Regression, which show that our estimators consistently
outperform more sophisticated and expensive sparsification methods.

1

Introduction

Estimating the mean of a set of vectors collected from a distributed system of nodes is a subroutine that
is at the core of many distributed data science applications. For instance, a fusion server performing
inference may seek to estimate the mean of environmental measurements made by geographically
distributed sensor nodes. While inference may be a one-shot task, model training is often inherently
iterative in nature. For instance, model training using a federated learning framework [19, 35] is
divided into communication rounds, where in each round, the central server has to estimate the mean
of model updates or gradients sent by edge clients. Other examples of such iterative methods include
principal component analysis (PCA) using the power iteration methods and K-Means.
In most such distributed learning and optimization applications, the nodes sending the data are highly
resource-constrained and bandwidth-limited edge devices. Hence, sending high-dimensional vectors
can be prohibitively expensive and slow. A simple yet effective solution to reduce the communication
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

