Deep Self-Dissimilarities as Powerful Visual
Fingerprints

Idan Kligvasser
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
kligvasser@campus.technion.ac.il

Tamar Rott Shaham
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
stamarot@campus.technion.ac.il

Yuval Bahat
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
yuval.bahat@campus.technion.ac.il

Tomer Michaeli
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Features extracted from deep layers of classification networks are widely used as
image descriptors. Here, we exploit an unexplored property of these features: their
internal dissimilarity. While small image patches are known to have similar statistics across image scales, it turns out that the internal distribution of deep features
varies distinctively between scales. We show how this deep self dissimilarity (DSD)
property can be used as a powerful visual fingerprint. Particularly, we illustrate
that full-reference and no-reference image quality measures derived from DSD are
highly correlated with human preference. In addition, incorporating DSD as a loss
function in training of image restoration networks, leads to results that are at least
as photo-realistic as those obtained by GAN based methods, while not requiring
adversarial training.

1

Introduction

Features extracted from deep layers of classification networks are widely used as powerful image
descriptors. These features are known to capture high level semantics [44] as well as low-level textural
cues [14, 31] and are thus exploited in numerous applications, including image enhancement [24, 18,
10, 47], synthesis [52, 44, 5, 19], and editing [15, 2, 25], both in the form of per-element similarity
measures (e.g. the perceptual loss [15, 18] and LPIPS [51]) and for comparing internal image
distributions (e.g. the style loss [15], contextual loss [32], and projected distribution loss [10]).
In this paper, we propose to exploit a surprisingly dominant property of deep features: the dissimilarity
between their internal distributions at different image scales. As opposed to small patches in pixel
space, which are known to exhibit similar characteristics across scales [53, 16], here we show that
deep features tend to vary significantly for different scales of the same image. A glimpse into this
phenomenon is provided in Fig. 1 for the VGG-19 network [46]. As can be seen, the network often
outputs completely different classification results for the same image at different resolutions. We
show that this behavior is also characteristic of earlier stages within the network, and can therefore
serve as a powerful image fingerprint.
A naive approach to account for this phenomenon would be to aggregate deep feature descriptors
from multiple image scales. For example, to measure discrepancy between two images, one could
accumulate deep feature distribution distances, measured separately at different scales, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 5 (middle) for the case of two scales. However, here we propose a different
approach, which as we show, is far more powerful as a visual fingerprint. Specifically, we present
the deep self-dissimilarity (DSD) image descriptor, which captures differences between internal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

