A Theoretical Analysis of Fine-tuning with Linear
Teachers
Gal Shachaf
Blavatnik School of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Alon Brutzkus
Blavatnik School of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Amir Globerson
Blavatnik School of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Israel
and Google Research

Abstract
Fine-tuning is a common practice in deep learning, achieving excellent generalization results on downstream tasks using relatively little training data. Although
widely used in practice, it is lacking strong theoretical understanding. Here we
analyze the sample complexity of this scheme for regression with linear teachers
in several architectures. Intuitively, the success of fine-tuning depends on the
similarity between the source tasks and the target task, however measuring this
similarity is non trivial. We show that generalization is related to a measure that
considers the relation between the source task, target task and covariance structure
of the target data. In the setting of linear regression, we show that under realistic
settings a substantial sample complexity reduction is plausible when the above
measure is low. For deep linear regression, we present a novel result regarding
the inductive bias of gradient-based training when the network is initialized with
pretrained weights. Using this result we show that the similarity measure for this
setting is also affected by the depth of the network. We further present results
on shallow ReLU models, and analyze the dependence of sample complexity on
source and target tasks in this setting.

1

Introduction

In recent years fine-tuning has emerged as an effective approach to learning tasks with relatively little
labeled data. In this setting, a model is first trained on a source task where much data is available (e.g.,
masked language modeling for BERT), and then it is further tuned using gradient descent methods
on labeled data of a target task [1, 2, 3, 4]. Furthermore, it has been observed that fine-tuning can
outperform the strategy of fixing the representation learned on the source task, mainly in natural
language processing [1, 5]. Despite its empirical success, fine-tuning is poorly understood from a
theoretical perspective. One apparent conundrum is that fine-tuned models can be much larger than
the number of target training points, resulting in a heavily overparameterized model that is prone to
overfitting and poor generalization. Thus, the answer must lie in the fact that fine-tuning is performed
with gradient descent and not an arbitrary algorithm that could potentially “ignore” the source task
[6]. Here we set out to formalize this problem and understand the factors that determine whether
fine-tuning will succeed. We note that this question can be viewed as part of the general quest to
understand the implicit bias of gradient based methods [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], but in the particular
context of fine-tuning.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

