Rethinking conditional GAN training: An approach
using geometrically structured latent manifolds

Sameera Ramasinghe
The Australian National University, Data61-CSIRO

Moshiur Farazi
Data61-CSIRO

sameera.ramasinghe@anu.edu.au

Salman Khan
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI

Nick Barnes
The Australian National University

Stephen Gould
The Australian National University

Abstract
Conditional GANs (cGAN), in their rudimentary form, suffer from critical drawbacks such as the lack of diversity in generated outputs and distortion between
the latent and output manifolds. Although efforts have been made to improve
results, they can suffer from unpleasant side-effects such as the topology mismatch
between latent and output spaces. In contrast, we tackle this problem from a
geometrical perspective and propose a novel training mechanism that increases
both the diversity and the visual quality of a vanilla cGAN, by systematically
encouraging a bi-lipschitz mapping between the latent and the output manifolds.
We validate the efficacy of our solution on a baseline cGAN (i.e., Pix2Pix) which
lacks diversity, and show that by only modifying its training mechanism (i.e.,
with our proposed Pix2Pix-Geo), one can achieve more diverse and realistic
outputs on a broad set of image-to-image translation tasks. Code available at:
https://github.com/samgregoost/Rethinking-CGANs

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GAN) are a family of deep generative models that learn to model
data distribution Y from random latent inputs z ∼ Z using a stochastic generator function G : Z → Y
[1]. A seemingly natural extension from unconditional GANs to conditional GANs (cGAN) can be
achieved via conditioning both the discriminator and the generator on a conditioning signal x ∼ X .
However, such a straightforward extension can cause the models to disregard x [2, 3, 4, 5]. To
overcome this unsought behavior, a reconstruction loss is typically added to the objective function
to penalise the model when it deviates from x. This approach has been widely adapted for diverse
tasks including image-to-image translation [6, 2], style transfer [7, 8] and inpainting [9, 3, 10],
and super-resolution [11, 12, 13, 14]. However, in spite of the wide usage, naively coupling the
reconstruction and the adversarial objectives entails undesirable outcomes as discussed next.
Many conditional generation tasks are ill-posed (many possible solutions exist for a given input), and
an ideal generator should be able to capture one-to-many mappings between the input and output
domains. Note that the stochasticity of G typically depends on two factors, first the randomness of z
and second the dropout [15]. However, empirical evidence suggests the composition of reconstruction
and adversarial losses leads to a limited diversity, despite the random seed z. In fact, many prior
works have reported that the generator often tends to ignore z, and learns a deterministic mapping
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

