Baleen: Robust Multi-Hop Reasoning at Scale via
Condensed Retrieval
Omar Khattab
Stanford University

Christopher Potts
Stanford University

Matei Zaharia
Stanford University

okhattab@stanford.edu

cgpotts@stanford.edu

matei@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Multi-hop reasoning (i.e., reasoning across two or more documents) is a key
ingredient for NLP models that leverage large corpora to exhibit broad knowledge.
To retrieve evidence passages, multi-hop models must contend with a fast-growing
search space across the hops, represent complex queries that combine multiple
information needs, and resolve ambiguity about the best order in which to hop
between training passages. We tackle these problems via Baleen, a system that
improves the accuracy of multi-hop retrieval while learning robustly from weak
training signals in the many-hop setting. To tame the search space, we propose
condensed retrieval, a pipeline that summarizes the retrieved passages after each
hop into a single compact context. To model complex queries, we introduce a
focused late interaction retriever that allows different parts of the same query
representation to match disparate relevant passages. Lastly, to infer the hopping
dependencies among unordered training passages, we devise latent hop ordering, a
weak-supervision strategy in which the trained retriever itself selects the sequence
of hops. We evaluate Baleen on retrieval for two-hop question answering and
many-hop claim verification, establishing state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

In open-domain reasoning, a model is tasked with retrieving evidence from a large corpus to answer
questions, verify claims, or otherwise exhibit broad knowledge. In practice, such open-domain tasks
often further require multi-hop reasoning, where the evidence must be extracted from two or more
documents. To do this effectively, a model must learn to use partial evidence it retrieves to bridge its
way to additional documents leading to an answer. In this vein, HotPotQA [31] contains complex
questions answerable by retrieving two passages from Wikipedia, while HoVer [13] contains claims
that can only be verified (or disproven) by combining facts from up to four Wikipedia passages.
Table 1 illustrates this using the claim “The MVP of [a] game Red Flaherty umpired was elected
to the Baseball Hall of Fame” from the HoVer validation set. To verify this claim, a HoVer model
must identify facts spread across three Wikipedia pages: Red Flaherty umpired in the World Series in
1955, 1958, 1965, and 1970. The MVP of the 1965 World Series was Sandy Koufax. Koufax was
later elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame.
This three-hop claim illustrates three major challenges in multi-hop retrieval. First, multi-hop queries
encompass multiple information needs; the claim above referenced facts from three disparate passages.
Second, retrieval errors in each hop propagate to subsequent hops. This can happen if the model
directly retrieves information about the Baseball Hall of Fame, confuses Red Flaherty with, say,
Robert Flaherty, or singles out the MVP of, say, the 1958 World Series, which Flaherty also umpired.
Third, due to the dependency between hops, retrievers must learn an effective sequence of hops,
where previously-retrieved clues lead to other relevant passages. These inter-passage dependencies
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

