Tensor Programs V:
Tuning Large Neural Networks via
Zero-Shot Hyperparameter Transfer

Greg Yang∗ × Edward J. Hu∗ ×† Igor Babuschkin◦ Szymon Sidor◦ Xiaodong Liu×
David Farhi◦ Nick Ryder◦ Jakub Pachocki◦ Weizhu Chen× Jianfeng Gao×
×
◦
Microsoft Corporation
OpenAI

Abstract
Hyperparameter (HP) tuning in deep learning is an expensive process, prohibitively
so for neural networks (NNs) with billions of parameters. We show that, in the
recently discovered Maximal Update Parametrization (µP), many optimal HPs
remain stable even as model size changes. This leads to a new HP tuning paradigm
we call µTransfer: parametrize the target model in µP, tune the HP indirectly on a
smaller model, and zero-shot transfer them to the full-sized model, i.e., without
directly tuning the latter at all. We verify µTransfer on Transformer and ResNet.
For example, 1) by transferring pretraining HPs from a model of 13M parameters,
we outperform published numbers of BERT-large (350M parameters), with a total
tuning cost equivalent to pretraining BERT-large once; 2) by transferring from
40M parameters, we outperform published numbers of the 6.7B GPT-3 model, with
tuning cost only 7% of total pretraining cost. A Pytorch implementation of our
technique can be found at github.com/microsoft/mup.2

1

Introduction

7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5

Standard Practice

Our Work

Training Loss

Hyperparameter (HP) tuning is critical to deep
Width
128
learning. Poorly chosen HPs result in subpar
256
512
performance and training instability. Many pub1024
2048
lished baselines are hard to compare to one
4096
optimum stable
8192
another due to varying degrees of HP tuning.
optimum shifts
20 18 16 14 12 10
20 18 16 14 12 10
These issues are exacerbated when training exlog2LearningRate
log2LearningRate
tremely large deep learning models, since stateof-the-art networks with billions of parameters Figure 1: Training loss against learning rate on
Transformers of varying dmodel trained with Adam.
become prohibitively expensive to tune.
Conventionally and in contrast with our technique,
Recently, [45] showed that different neural net- different widths do not share the same optimal hywork parametrizations induce different infinite- perparameter; wider networks do not always perwidth limits and proposed the Maximal Update form better than narrower ones; in fact they underParametrization (abbreviated µP) (summarized perform the same-width networks in our technique
in Table 3) that enables “maximal” feature learn- even after tuning learning rate. See Sections 3
ing in the limit. Intuitively, it ensures that each and 4 for experimental setup.
layer is updated on the same order during training regardless of width.3 In contrast, while the
standard parametrization (SP) ensures activations are of unit order at initialization, it actually causes
†

Work done partly during Microsoft AI Residency Program.
Equal contribution. Order is random. Correspondence to {gregyang, edwardhu}@microsoft.com
2
See arxiv.org for the full, up-to-date version of this work.
3
i.e., the updates’ effect on activations becomes roughly independent of width in the large width limit.

∗

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

