An Exponential Improvement on the Memorization
Capacity of Deep Threshold Networks

Shashank Rajput
University of Wisconsin - Madison
rajput3@wisc.edu

Kartik Sreenivasan
University of Wisconsin - Madison
ksreenivasa2@wisc.edu

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of Wisconsin - Madison
dimitris@papail.io

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
It is well known that modern deep neural networks are powerful enough to memorize datasets even when the labels have been randomized. Recently, Vershynin
(2020) settled a long standing question by Baum (1988), proving that deep thresh√
2
old networks can memorize n points in d dimensions using e
O(e1/δ + n) neurons
√
2
e 1/δ (d + n) + n) weights, where δ is the minimum distance between the
and O(e
points. In this work, we improve the dependence on δ from exponential to almost
e 1 + √n) neurons and O(
e d + n) weights are sufficient. Our
linear, proving that O(
δ
δ
construction uses Gaussian random weights only in the first layer, while all the
subsequent layers use binary or integer weights. We also prove new lower bounds
by connecting memorization in neural networks to the purely geometric problem
of separating n points on a sphere using hyperplanes.

1

Introduction

The current paradigm of training neural networks is to train the networks until they fit the training
dataset perfectly (Zhang et al., 2017; Arpit et al., 2017). This means that the network is able to output
the exact label for every sample in the training set, a phenomenon known as interpolation. Quite
interestingly, modern deep networks have been known to be powerful enough to interpolate even
randomized labels (Zhang et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020), a phenomenon that is usually referred to
as memorization (Yun et al., 2019; Vershynin, 2020; Bubeck et al., 2020), where the networks can
interpolate any arbitrary labeling of the dataset.
Given that memorization is a common phenomenon in modern deep learning, a reasonable question
to ask is that of how big a neural network needs to be so that it can memorize a dataset of n points in
d dimensions. This question has been of interest since the 60s (Cover, 1965; Baum, 1988; Mitchison
& Durbin, 1989; Sontag, 1990; Huang et al., 1991; Sartori & Antsaklis, 1991). In particular, Baum
(1988) proved that a single hidden layer threshold network with O(max(n, d)) weights and O(dn/de)
neurons can memorize any set of n points in d dimensions, as long as they are in general position.1
Baum asked if going deeper could increase the memorization power of threshold networks,
and in
√
particular if one could reduce the number of neurons needed for memorization to O(
n).
While
for
√
ReLU activated networks, Yun et al. (2019) were able to prove that indeed only O( n) neurons were
sufficient for memorization using deeper networks, the same question remained open for threshold
networks.
The “general position” assumption of n vectors in Rd means that any collection of d of these n vectors are
linearly independent.
1

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

