MagNet: A Neural Network for Directed Graphs
Xitong Zhang1 , Yixuan He2 , Nathan Brugnone1,3 , Michael Perlmutter4 , and Matthew Hirn1,5,6
1

Michigan State University, Department of Computational Mathematics, Science & Engineering,
East Lansing, Michigan, United States
2
University of Oxford, Department of Statistics, Oxford, England, United Kingdom
3
Michigan State University, Department of Community Sustainability,
East Lansing, Michigan, United States
4
University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Mathematics,
Los Angeles, California, United States
5
Michigan State University, Department of Mathematics,
East Lansing, Michigan, United States
6
Michigan State University, Center for Quantum Computing, Science & Engineering,
East Lansing, Michigan, United States

Abstract
The prevalence of graph-based data has spurred the rapid development of graph
neural networks (GNNs) and related machine learning algorithms. Yet, despite the
many datasets naturally modeled as directed graphs, including citation, website,
and traffic networks, the vast majority of this research focuses on undirected
graphs. In this paper, we propose MagNet, a GNN for directed graphs based on a
complex Hermitian matrix known as the magnetic Laplacian. This matrix encodes
undirected geometric structure in the magnitude of its entries and directional
information in their phase. A “charge” parameter attunes spectral information to
variation among directed cycles. We apply our network to a variety of directed
graph node classification and link prediction tasks showing that MagNet performs
well on all tasks and that its performance exceeds all other methods on a majority
of such tasks. The underlying principles of MagNet are such that it can be adapted
to other GNN architectures.

1

Introduction

Endowing a collection of objects with a graph structure allows one to encode pairwise relationships
among its elements. These relations often possess a natural notion of direction. For example, the
WebKB dataset [36] contains a list of university websites with associated hyperlinks. In this context,
one website might link to a second without a reciprocal link to the first. Such datasets are naturally
modeled by directed graphs. In this paper, we introduce MagNet, a graph convolutional neural
network for directed graphs based on the magnetic Laplacian.
Most graph neural networks fall into one of two families, spectral networks or spatial networks.
Spatial methods define graph convolution as a localized averaging operation with iteratively learned
weights. Spectral networks, on the other hand, define convolution on graphs via the eigendecompositon of the (normalized) graph Laplacian. The eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian assume the role
of Fourier modes, and convolution is defined as entrywise multiplication in the Fourier basis. For a
comprehensive review of both spatial and spectral networks, we refer the reader to [46] and [44].
Many spatial graph CNNs have natural extensions to directed graphs. However, these extensions
typically only consider the outgoing neighbors of each vertex and neglect the incoming neighbors.
Therefore, they run the risk of discarding potentially important information. Consider, for example, a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

