Offline RL Without Off-Policy Evaluation

David Brandfonbrener
William F. Whitney
Rajesh Ranganath
Department of Computer Science, Center for Data Science
New York University
david.brandfonbrener@nyu.edu

Joan Bruna

Abstract
Most prior approaches to offline reinforcement learning (RL) have taken an iterative
actor-critic approach involving off-policy evaluation. In this paper we show that
simply doing one step of constrained/regularized policy improvement using an
on-policy Q estimate of the behavior policy performs surprisingly well. This onestep algorithm beats the previously reported results of iterative algorithms on a
large portion of the D4RL benchmark. The one-step baseline achieves this strong
performance while being notably simpler and more robust to hyperparameters
than previously proposed iterative algorithms. We argue that the relatively poor
performance of iterative approaches is a result of the high variance inherent in
doing off-policy evaluation and magnified by the repeated optimization of policies
against those estimates. In addition, we hypothesize that the strong performance
of the one-step algorithm is due to a combination of favorable structure in the
environment and behavior policy.

1

Introduction

An important step towards effective real-world RL is to improve sample efficiency. One avenue
towards this goal is offline RL (also known as batch RL) where we attempt to learn a new policy from
data collected by some other behavior policy without interacting with the environment. Recent work
in offline RL is well summarized by Levine et al. [2020].
In this paper, we challenge the dominant paradigm in the deep offline RL literature that primarily
relies on actor-critic style algorithms that alternate between policy evaluation and policy improvement
[Fujimoto et al., 2018a, 2019, Peng et al., 2019, Kumar et al., 2019, 2020, Wang et al., 2020b, Wu
et al., 2019, Kostrikov et al., 2021, Jaques et al., 2019, Siegel et al., 2020, Nachum et al., 2019].
All these algorithms rely heavily on off-policy evaluation to learn the critic. Instead, we find that a
simple baseline which only performs one step of policy improvement using the behavior Q function
often outperforms the more complicated iterative algorithms. Explicitly, we find that our one-step
algorithm beats prior results of iterative algorithms on most of the gym-mujoco [Brockman et al.,
2016] and Adroit [Rajeswaran et al., 2017] tasks in the the D4RL benchmark suite [Fu et al., 2020].
We then dive deeper to understand why such a simple baseline is effective. First, we examine what
goes wrong for the iterative algorithms. When these algorithms struggle, it is often due to poor
off-policy evaluation leading to inaccurate Q values. We attribute this to two causes: (1) distribution
shift between the behavior policy and the policy to be evaluated, and (2) iterative error exploitation
whereby policy optimization introduces bias and dynamic programming propagates this bias across
the state space. We show that empirically both issues exist in the benchmark tasks and that one way
to avoid these issues is to simply avoid off-policy evaluation entirely.
Finally, we recognize that while the the one-step algorithm is a strong baseline, it is not always
the best choice. In the final section we provide some guidance about when iterative algorithms can
perform better than the simple one-step baseline. Namely, when the dataset is large and behavior
policy has good coverage of the state-action space, then off-policy evaluation can succeed and iterative
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

