Neural Program Generation Modulo Static Analysis
Rohan Mukherjee
Rice University

Yeming Wen
UT Austin

Dipak Chaudhari
UT Austin

Swarat Chaudhuri
UT Austin

Thomas W. Reps
University of Wisconsin

Chris Jermaine
Rice University

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural models of source code tend to be evaluated on the generation
of individual expressions and lines of code, and commonly fail on long-horizon
tasks such as the generation of entire method bodies. We propose to address this
deficiency using weak supervision from a static program analyzer. Our neurosymbolic method allows a deep generative model to symbolically compute, using calls
to a static-analysis tool, long-distance semantic relationships in the code that it
has already generated. During training, the model observes these relationships
and learns to generate programs conditioned on them. We apply our approach to
the problem of generating entire Java methods given the remainder of the class
that contains the method. Our experiments show that the approach substantially
outperforms state-of-the-art transformers and a model that explicitly tries to learn
program semantics on this task, both in terms of producing programs free of basic
semantic errors and in terms of syntactically matching the ground truth.

1

Introduction

Neural models of source code have received much attention in the recent past [38, 9, 26, 23, 30, 36,
16, 24]. However, these models have a basic weakness: while they frequently excel at generating
individual expressions or lines of code, they do not do so well when tasked with synthesizing larger
code blocks. For example, as we show later in this paper, state-of-the-art transformer models [8, 6, 24]
can generate code with elementary semantic errors, such as uninitialized variables and type-incorrect
expressions, when asked to generate method bodies, as opposed to single lines. Even in terms of
syntactic accuracy measures, the quality of the code that transformers produce on such “long-horizon”
tasks can be far removed from the ground truth.
The root cause of these issues, we believe, is that current neural models of code treat programs as
text rather than artifacts that are constructed following a semantics. In principle, a model could
learn semantics from syntax given enough data. In practice, such learning is difficult for complex,
general-purpose languages.
In this paper, we propose to address this challenge through an alternative neurosymbolic approach.
Our main observation is that symbolic methods—specifically, static program analysis—can extract
deep semantic relationships between far-removed parts of a program. However, these relationships
are not apparent at the level of syntax, and it is difficult for even large neural networks to learn them
automatically. Driven by this observation, we use a static-analysis tool as a weak supervisor for a
deep model of code. During generation, our model invokes this static analyzer to compute a set of
semantic facts about the code generated so far. The distribution over the model’s next generation
actions is conditioned on these facts.
We concretely develop our approach by extending the classic formalism of attribute grammars [20].
Attribute grammars are like context-free grammars but allow rules to carry symbolic attributes of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

