Learning in Non-Cooperative
Configurable Markov Decision Processes
Giorgia Ramponi⇤
ETH AI Center
Zurich, Switzerland

Alberto Maria Metelli
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

gramponi@ethz.ch

albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Alessandro Concetti
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

alessandro.concetti@mail.polimi.it

marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
The Configurable Markov Decision Process framework includes two entities: a
Reinforcement Learning agent and a configurator that can modify some environmental parameters to improve the agent’s performance. This presupposes that
the two actors have identical reward functions. What if the configurator does not
have the same intentions as the agent? This paper introduces the Non-Cooperative
Configurable Markov Decision Process, a framework that allows modeling two
(possibly different) reward functions for the configurator and the agent. Then,
we consider an online learning problem, where the configurator has to find the
best among a finite set of possible configurations. We propose two learning algorithms to minimize the configurator’s expected regret, which exploit the problem’s
structure, depending on the agent’s feedback. While a naïve application of the
UCB algorithm yields a regret that grows indefinitely over time, we show that our
approach suffers only bounded regret. Furthermore, we empirically validate the
performance of our algorithm in simulated domains.

1

Introduction

The standard Reinforcement Learning [RL, 40] framework involves an agent whose objective is to
maximize the reward collected during its interaction with the environment. However, there exist
real-world scenarios in which the agent itself or an external supervisor (configurator) can partially
modify the environment. In a car racing problem, for example, it is possible to modify the car setup
to better suit the driver’s needs. Recently, the Configurable Markov Decision Processes [Conf-MDPs,
29] were introduced to model these scenarios and exploit the configuration opportunities. Solving a
Conf-MDP consists of simultaneously optimizing a set of environmental parameters and the agent’s
policy to reach the maximum expected return. In many scenarios, however, the configurator does
not know the agent’s reward, and their intentions are different, leading to new forms of interaction
between the two actors. For instance, imagine we are the owner of a supermarket, and we have to
arrange the products on the shelves. Our objective is to increase the company’s final profit; on the
other hand, a customer aims to spend the shortest time possible inside the supermarket and buy the
indispensable products only. Since we do not know the customer reward function, the only possibility
is to try different dispositions and observe the customers’ reactions. What if we knew what buyers
⇤

Work done when Giorgia Ramponi was at Politecnico di Milano.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

