Evaluating State-of-the-Art Classification Models
Against Bayes Optimality
Ryan Theisen⇤ †
University of California, Berkeley
theisen@berkeley.edu

Huan Wang⇤
Salesforce Research
huan.wang@salesforce.com

Lav R. Varshney†
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
varshney@illinois.edu

Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
cxiong@salesforce.com

Richard Socher †
you.com
rsocher@gmail.com

Abstract
Evaluating the inherent difficulty of a given data-driven classification problem is
important for establishing absolute benchmarks and evaluating progress in the field.
To this end, a natural quantity to consider is the Bayes error, which measures the
optimal classification error theoretically achievable for a given data distribution.
While generally an intractable quantity, we show that we can compute the exact
Bayes error of generative models learned using normalizing flows. Our technique
relies on a fundamental result, which states that the Bayes error is invariant under
invertible transformation. Therefore, we can compute the exact Bayes error of the
learned flow models by computing it for Gaussian base distributions, which can be
done efficiently using Holmes-Diaconis-Ross integration. Moreover, we show that
by varying the temperature of the learned flow models, we can generate synthetic
datasets that closely resemble standard benchmark datasets, but with almost any
desired Bayes error. We use our approach to conduct a thorough investigation of
state-of-the-art classification models, and find that in some — but not all — cases,
these models are capable of obtaining accuracy very near optimal. Finally, we use
our method to evaluate the intrinsic "hardness" of standard benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Benchmark datasets and leaderboards are prevalent in machine learning’s common task framework
[8]; however, this approach inherently relies on relative measures of improvement. It may therefore be insightful to be able to evaluate state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance against the optimal
performance theoretically achievable by any model [34]. For supervised classification tasks, this
optimal performance is captured by the Bayes error rate which, were it tractable, would not only give
absolute benchmarks, rather than just comparing to previous classifiers, but also insights into dataset
hardness [14, 38] and which gaps between SOTA and optimal the community may fruitfully try to
close.
Suppose we have data generated as (X, Y ) ⇠ p, where X 2 Rd , Y 2 Y = {1, . . . , K} is a label
and p is a distribution over Rd ⇥ Y. The Bayes classifier is the rule which assigns a label to an
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at Salesforce Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

