Adversarial Feature Desensitization
Pouya Bashivan1,2,∗
Mojtaba Faramarzi2

Reza Bayat2

Adam Ibrahim2

Touraj Laleh2

Kartik Ahuja2

Blake Richards1,2

Irina Rish2,∗
1
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
MILA, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
*Correspondence to: {bashivap,irina.rish}@mila.quebec
2

Abstract
Neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks – slight but
carefully constructed perturbations of the inputs which can drastically impair the
network’s performance. Many defense methods have been proposed for improving
robustness of deep networks by training them on adversarially perturbed inputs.
However, these models often remain vulnerable to new types of attacks not seen
during training, and even to slightly stronger versions of previously seen attacks.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to adversarial robustness, which builds
upon the insights from the domain adaptation field. Our method, called Adversarial
Feature Desensitization (AFD), aims at learning features that are invariant towards
adversarial perturbations of the inputs. This is achieved through a game where
we learn features that are both predictive and robust (insensitive to adversarial
attacks), i.e. cannot be used to discriminate between natural and adversarial data.
Empirical results on several benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach against a wide range of attack types and attack strengths. Our
code is available at https://github.com/BashivanLab/afd.

1

Introduction

When training a classifier, it is common to assume that the training and test samples are drawn
from the same underlying distribution. In adversarial machine learning, however, this assumption is
intentionally violated by using the classifier itself to perturb the samples from the original (natural)
data distribution towards a new distribution over which the classifier’s error rate is increased [52].
As expected, when tested on such adversarially generated input distribution, the classifier severely
underperforms. To date, various methods have been proposed to defend the neural networks against
adversarial attacks [34, 2], additive noise patterns and corruptions [24, 25, 45], and transformations
[17]. Among these methods, two of the most successful adversarial defense methods to date are
adversarial training [34], which trains the neural network with examples that are perturbed to
maximize the loss on the target model, and TRADES [57], which regularizes the classifier to push
the decision boundary away from the data. While past adversarial defence methods have successfully
improved the neural network robustness against adversarial examples, it has also been shown that
these robust networks remain susceptible to even slightly larger adversarial perturbations or other
forms of attacks [19, 46, 48].
In this paper, we propose to view the problem of adversarial robustness through the lens of domain
adaptation, and to consider distributions of natural and adversarial images as distinct input domains
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

