Proxy Convexity: A Unified Framework
for the Analysis of Neural Networks
Trained by Gradient Descent

Spencer Frei
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
University of California, Berkeley
frei@berkeley.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Although the optimization objectives for learning neural networks are highly nonconvex, gradient-based methods have been wildly successful at learning neural
networks in practice. This juxtaposition has led to a number of recent studies on
provable guarantees for neural networks trained by gradient descent. Unfortunately,
the techniques in these works are often highly specific to the particular setup in
each problem, making it difficult to generalize across different settings. To address
this drawback in the literature, we propose a unified non-convex optimization
framework for the analysis of neural network training. We introduce the notions
of proxy convexity and proxy Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) inequalities, which are
satisfied if the original objective function induces a proxy objective function that
is implicitly minimized when using gradient methods. We show that stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) on objectives satisfying proxy convexity or the proxy PL
inequality leads to efficient guarantees for proxy objective functions. We further
show that many existing guarantees for neural networks trained by gradient descent
can be unified through proxy convexity and proxy PL inequalities.

1

Introduction

Understanding the ability of gradient-based stochastic optimization algorithms to find good minima
of non-convex objective functions has become an especially important problem due to the success of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in learning deep neural networks. Although there exist non-convex
objective functions and domains for which SGD will necessarily lead to sub-optimal local minima,
it appears that for many problems of interest in deep learning, across domains as varied as natural
language and images, these worst-case situations do not arise. Indeed, a number of recent works
have developed provable guarantees for GD and SGD when used for objective functions defined
in terms of neural networks over certain distributions, despite the non-convexity of the underlying
optimization problem [5, 3, 6, 22, 14, 16]. To date, however, there has not been a framework which
could unify the variegated approaches for guarantees in these settings.
In this work, we introduce the notion of proxy convexity and demonstrate that many existing provable
guarantees for learning with neural networks trained by gradient-based optimization fall into a
problem satisfying proxy convexity. First, let us define the learning problem over a distribution D,
where the goal is to minimize the expected loss
min F (w) := Ez∼D f (w; z),

w∈W

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(1.1)

