TriBERT: Full-body Human-centric Audio-visual
Representation Learning for Visual Sound Separation

Tanzila Rahman1,3
Mengyu Yang2,3
Leonid Sigal1,3,4
1
2
University of British Columbia
University of Toronto
3
4
Vector Institute for AI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
trahman8@cs.ubc.ca, my.yang@mail.utoronto.ca, lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
The recent success of transformer models in language, such as BERT, has motivated
the use of such architectures for multi-modal feature learning and tasks. However,
most multi-modal variants (e.g., ViLBERT) have limited themselves to visuallinguistic data. Relatively few have explored its use in audio-visual modalities,
and none, to our knowledge, illustrate them in the context of granular audio-visual
detection or segmentation tasks such as sound source separation and localization.
In this work, we introduce TriBERT – a transformer-based architecture, inspired by
ViLBERT, which enables contextual feature learning across three modalities: vision,
pose, and audio, with the use of flexible co-attention. The use of pose keypoints is
inspired by recent works that illustrate that such representations can significantly
boost performance in many audio-visual scenarios where often one or more persons
are responsible for the sound explicitly (e.g., talking) or implicitly (e.g., sound
produced as a function of human manipulating an object). From a technical
perspective, as part of the TriBERT architecture, we introduce a learned visual
tokenization scheme based on spatial attention and leverage weak-supervision to
allow granular cross-modal interactions for visual and pose modalities. Further, we
supplement learning with sound-source separation loss formulated across all three
streams. We pre-train our model on the large MUSIC21 dataset and demonstrate
improved performance in audio-visual sound source separation on that dataset as
well as other datasets through fine-tuning. In addition, we show that the learned
TriBERT representations are generic and significantly improve performance on
other audio-visual tasks such as cross-modal audio-visual-pose retrieval by as much
as 66.7% in top-1 accuracy.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal audio-visual learning [57], which explores and leverages the relationship between visual
and auditory modalities, has started to emerge as an important sub-field of machine learning and
computer vision. Examples of typical tasks include: audio-visual separation and localization, where
the goal is to segment sounds produced by individual objects in an audio and/or to localize those
objects in a visual scene [15, 16, 42, 55]; and audio-visual correspondence, where the goal is often
audio-visual retrieval [23, 47, 53]. Notably, some of the most recent audio-visual methods [15]
leverage human pose keypoints, or landmarks, as an intermediate or contextual representation. This
tends to improve the overall performance of sound separation, as pose and motion are important cues
for characterising both the type of instrument being played and, potentially, over time, the rhythm of
the individual piece [15]. It can also serve as an intermediate representation when generating video
from acoustic signals [8, 44] for example.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

