One Explanation is Not Enough:
Structured Attention Graphs for Image Classification
Vivswan Shitole, Li Fuxin, Minsuk Kahng, Prasad Tadepalli, Alan Fern
Oregon State University
{shitolev, lif, minsuk.kahng, tadepall, alan.fern}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Saliency maps are popular tools for explaining the decisions of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) for image classification. Typically, for each image of
interest, a single saliency map is produced, which assigns weights to pixels based
on their importance to the classification. We argue that a single saliency map
provides an incomplete understanding since there are often many other maps that
can explain a classification equally well. In this paper, we propose to utilize a
beam search algorithm to systematically search for multiple explanations for each
image. Results show that there are indeed multiple relatively localized explanations
for many images. However, naively showing multiple explanations to users can
be overwhelming and does not reveal their common and distinct structures. We
introduce structured attention graphs (SAGs), which compactly represent sets of
attention maps for an image by visualizing how different combinations of image
regions impact the confidence of a classifier. An approach to computing a compact
and representative SAG for visualization is proposed via diverse sampling. We
conduct a user study comparing the use of SAGs to traditional saliency maps for
answering comparative counterfactual questions about image classifications. Our
results show that user accuracy is increased significantly when presented with
SAGs compared to standard saliency map baselines.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as the most successful learning
paradigm for image classification, the need for human understandable explanations of their decisions
has gained prominence. Explanations lead to a deeper user understanding and trust of the neural
network models, which is crucial for their deployment in safety-critical applications. They can also
help identify potential causes of misclassification. An important goal of explanation is for the users
to gain a mental model of the CNNs, so that the users can understand and predict the behavior of the
classifier[17] in cases that have not been seen. A better mental model would lead to appropriate trust
and better safeguards of the deep networks in the deployment process.
A popular line of research towards this goal has been to display attention maps, sometimes called
saliency maps or heatmaps. Most approaches assign weights to image regions based on the importance
of that region to the classification decision, which is then visualized to the user. This approach
implicitly assumes that a single saliency map with region-specific weights is sufficient for the human
to construct a reasonable mental model of the classification decision for the particular image.
We argue that this is not always the case. Fig. 1(d-f) show three localized attention maps highlighting
different regions. Each of these images, if given as input to the CNN, results in a very confident
prediction of the correct category. However, this information is not apparent from a single saliency
map as produced by current methods (Fig. 1(b-c)). This raises several questions: How many images
have small localized explanations (i.e., attention maps) that lead to high confidence predictions? Are
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

