Faster Non-asymptotic Convergence for Double
Q-learning

Lin Zhao
National University of Singapore
elezhli@nus.edu.sg

Huaqing Xiong
The Ohio State University
xiong.309@osu.edu

Yingbin Liang
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Double Q-learning (Hasselt, 2010) has gained significant success in practice due to
its effectiveness in overcoming the overestimation issue of Q-learning. However,
the theoretical understanding of double Q-learning is rather limited. The only
existing finite-time analysis was recently established in (Xiong et al., 2020), where
the polynomial learning rate adopted in the analysis typically yields a slower convergence rate. This paper tackles the more challenging case of a constant learning
rate, and develops new analytical tools that improve the existing convergence rate
by orders of magnitude. Specifically, we show that synchronous double
Q-learning


ln D
attains an -accurate global optimum with a time complexity of Ω̃ (1−γ)7 2 , and


L
the asynchronous algorithm achieves a time complexity of Ω̃ (1−γ)
, where
7 2
D is the cardinality of the state-action space, γ is the discount factor, and L is a
parameter related to the sampling strategy for asynchronous double Q-learning.
These results improve the existing convergence rate by the order of magnitude
in terms of its dependence on all major parameters (, 1 − γ, D, L). This paper
presents a substantial step toward the full understanding of the fast convergence of
double-Q learning.

1

Introduction

Double Q-learning, proposed in Hasselt (2010), is a widely used model-free reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithm in practice for learning an optimal policy (Zhang et al., 2018a,b; Hessel et al., 2018).
Compared to the vanilla Q-learning proposed in Watkins and Dayan (1992), double Q-learning uses
two Q-estimators with their roles randomly selected at each iteration, respectively for estimating
the maximal Q-function value and updating the Q-function. In this way, the overestimation of
the Q-function in the vanilla Q-learning can be effectively mitigated, especially when the reward
is random or prone to errors (Hasselt, 2010; Hasselt et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2020). Moreover,
double Q-learning has been shown to have the desired performance in both finite state-action space
setting (Hasselt, 2010) and infinite setting (Hasselt et al., 2016) where it successfully improved
the performance of deep Q-network (DQN), and thus inspired more variants (Zhang et al., 2017;
Abed-alguni and Ottom, 2018) subsequently.
In parallel to its empirical success in practice, the theoretical convergence properties of double
Q-learning has also been explored. Its asymptotic convergence was first established in Hasselt (2010).
The asymptotic mean-square error for double Q-learning was studied in Weng et al. (2020b) under
the assumption that the algorithm converges to a unique optimal policy. More recently, in Xiong
et al. (2020), the finite-time convergence rate has been established for double Q-learning with a
polynomial learning rate α = 1/tω , ω ∈ (0, 1). Under such a choice of the learning rate, Xiong et al.
(2020) showed that double Q-learning attains an -accurate optimal Q-function at a time complexity
1
approaching to but never reaching Ω( 12 ) at the cost of an asymptotically large exponent of 1−γ
.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

