Inverse Reinforcement Learning in a Continuous
State Space with Formal Guarantees

Gregory Dexter
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
gdexter@purdue.edu

Kevin Bello
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
kbellome@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is the problem of finding a reward function
which describes observed/known expert behavior. The IRL setting is remarkably
useful for automated control, in situations where the reward function is difficult
to specify manually or as a means to extract agent preference. In this work, we
provide a new IRL algorithm for the continuous state space setting with unknown
transition dynamics by modeling the system using a basis of orthonormal functions.
Moreover, we provide a proof of correctness and formal guarantees on the sample
and time complexity of our algorithm. Finally, we present synthetic experiments to
corroborate our theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning in the context of a Markov Decision Process (MDP) aims to produce a policy
function such that the discounted accumulated reward of an agent following the given policy is
optimal. One difficulty in applying this framework to real world problems is that for many tasks of
interest, there is no obvious reward function to maximize. For example, a car merging onto a highway
must account for many different criteria, e.g., avoiding crashing and maintaining adequate speed, and
there is not an obvious formula of these variables producing a reward which reflects expert behavior
[3]. The Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) problem consists of having as input an MDP with no
reward function along with a policy, and the goal is to find a reward function so that the MDP plus the
learned reward function is optimally solved by the given policy. Describing expert behavior in terms
of a reward function has been shown to provide a succinct, robust, and interpretable representation of
expert behavior for purposes of reinforcement learning [3]. Furthermore, this representation of agent
preference can give insight on the preferences or goals of an agent.
Despite much work over the years, there still exist major limitations in our understanding of IRL.
One major gap is the lack of algorithms for the setting of continuous state space. This setting is of
primary importance since many promising applications, such as autonomous vehicles and robotics,
occur in a continuous setting. Existing algorithms for IRL in the continuous setting generally do
not directly solve the IRL problem, but instead take a policy matching approach which leads to a
less robust description of agent preference [3]. Finally, there is a lack of formal guarantees for IRL
methods which make principled understanding of the problem difficult.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

