Uniform-PAC Bounds for Reinforcement Learning
with Linear Function Approximation

Jiafan He
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
jiafanhe19@ucla.edu

Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) with linear function approximation. Existing
algorithms for this problem only have high-probability regret and/or Probably
Approximately Correct (PAC) sample complexity guarantees, which cannot guarantee the convergence to the optimal policy. In this paper, in order to overcome
the limitation of existing algorithms, we propose a new algorithm called FLUTE,
which enjoys uniform-PAC convergence to the optimal policy with high probability.
The uniform-PAC guarantee is the strongest possible guarantee for reinforcement
learning in the literature, which can directly imply both PAC and high probability
regret bounds, making our algorithm superior to all existing algorithms with linear
function approximation. At the core of our algorithm is a novel minimax value
function estimator and a multi-level partition scheme to select the training samples
from historical observations. Both of these techniques are new and of independent
interest.

1

Introduction

Designing efficient reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for environments with large state and
action spaces is one of the main tasks in the RL community. To achieve this goal, function approximation, which uses a class of predefined functions to approximate either the value function or
transition dynamic, has been widely studied in recent years. Specifically, a series of recent works
[11, 13, 18, 24, 3, 27] have studied RL with linear function approximation with provable guarantees.
They show that with linear function approximation, one can either obtain a sublinear regret bound
against the optimal value function [13, 24, 3, 27] or a polynomial sample complexity bound [14]
(Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) bound for short) in finding a near-optimal policy [11, 18].
However, neither the regret bound or PAC bound is a perfect performance measure. As discussed in
detail by [7], these two measures fail to guarantee the convergence to the optimal policy. Therefore,
an algorithm with high probability regret and/or PAC bound guarantees do not necessarily learn the
optimal policy, and can perform badly in practice. In detail, one can face the following two situations:
• An algorithm with a sublinear regret suggests that the summation of the suboptimality gaps ∆t
(the gap between the values of the current adapted policy and optimal policy, see Definition 3.3
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

