Can multi-label classification networks know what
they don’t know?
Haoran Wang⇤
Information Networking Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
haoranwa@andrew.cmu.edu

Weitang Liu
Department of Computer Science and Eng.
University of California, San Diego
wel022@ucsd.edu

Alex Bocchieri
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
abocchieri@wisc.edu

Yixuan Li⇤
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Estimating out-of-distribution (OOD) uncertainty is a major challenge for safely
deploying machine learning models in the open-world environment. Improved
methods for OOD detection in multi-class classification have emerged, while OOD
detection methods for multi-label classification remain underexplored and use
rudimentary techniques. We propose JointEnergy, a simple and effective method,
which estimates the OOD indicator scores by aggregating label-wise energy scores
from multiple labels. We show that JointEnergy can be mathematically interpreted
from a joint likelihood perspective. Our results show consistent improvement over
previous methods that are based on the maximum-valued scores, which fail to
capture joint information from multiple labels. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on three common multi-label classification benchmarks, including MSCOCO, PASCAL-VOC, and NUS-WIDE. We show that JointEnergy can reduce
the FPR95 by up to 10.05% compared to the previous best baseline, establishing
state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Despite many breakthroughs in machine learning, formidable obstacles obstruct its deployment in the
real world, where a model can encounter unknown out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. The problem
of OOD detection has gained significant research attention lately [4, 18, 21, 25, 27, 28, 34, 30, 44].
OOD detection aims to identify test-time inputs that have no label intersection with training classes,
thus should not be predicted by the model. Previous studies have primarily focused on detecting OOD
examples in multi-class classification, where each sample is assigned to a single label. Unfortunately,
this can be unrealistic in many real-world applications where images often have multiple labels
of interest. For example, in medical imaging, multiple abnormalities may be present in a medical
scan [51].
Currently, a critical research gap exists in developing and evaluating OOD detection algorithms for
multi-label classification tasks that are more applicable to the real world. While one may expect
solutions for multi-class setting should transfer to the multi-label setting, we show that this is far
from the truth. The main challenges posed in multi-label setting stem from the need to estimate
uncertainty by jointly leveraging the information across different labels, as opposed to relying on one
⇤

Equal contribution. Work done while H.W was working at UW-Madison as an undergraduate researcher.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

