Iterative Connecting Probability Estimation for
Networks
Yichen Qin
University of Cincinnati
qinyn@ucmail.uc.edu

Linhan Yu
Renmin University of China
yulinhan47@foxmail.com

Yang Li∗
Renmin University of China
yang.li@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating the probabilities of connections between vertices in a random network
using an observed adjacency matrix is an important task for network data analysis. Many existing estimation methods are based on certain assumptions on network structure, which limit their applicability in practice. Without making strong
assumptions, we develop an iterative connecting probability estimation method
based on neighborhood averaging. Starting at a random initial point or an existing estimate, our method iteratively updates the pairwise vertex distances, the sets
of similar vertices, and connecting probabilities to improve the precision of the
estimate. We propose a two-stage neighborhood selection procedure to achieve
the trade-off between smoothness of the estimate and the ability to discover local
structure. The tuning parameters can be selected by cross-validation. We establish desirable theoretical properties for our method, and further justify its superior
performance by comparing with existing methods in simulation and real data analysis.

1

Introduction

Network analysis has been a promising research area in data science and widely applied in many
ﬁelds, including medicine, social sciences. Objects such as genes, proteins, or people are presented
as vertices in the network, and relationships between objects (e.g., protein interactions or friendships)
are presented as connections between pairs of vertices. In this paper, we focus on estimating the
connecting probability between each pair of vertices based on the observed network.
In the literature, the most fundamental assumption is the Aldous-Hoover theorem (Aldous, 1981).
Assume that the network is vertex-exchangeable, then each vertex i is associated with a latent variable ξi , and the connecting probability between any two vertices depends on a graphon function f (·)
of the corresponding latent variables.
To estimate the connecting probabilities, some researchers focus on estimating f (·) under strong
assumptions. Chan and Airoldi (2014) propose the sorting-and-smoothing (SAS) algorithm. It
ﬁrst sorts the adjacency matrix using the empirical degrees and smoothes the sorted matrix via total
variation minimization. It requires strict monotonicity of the degrees, which is difﬁcult to be satisﬁed
in practice. Since the purpose of estimating f (·) is to estimate the connecting probabilities, another
direction is to estimate the latter directly, such as stochastic block models approximation (SBA)
(Airoldi et al., 2013; Holland et al., 1983; Wang and Wong, 1987). Under the SBM, vertices can
be divided into several blocks, and the connecting probability between two vertices depends only
on the blocks they belong to. Once the vertices are clustered correctly, the connecting probabilities
can be estimated by a moment estimator. In recent years, methods based on SBM approximation
and its variation, network histograms, have been widely studied (Choi and Wolfe, 2014; Olhede
∗

Correspondence Author, Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

