Stochastic bandits with groups of similar arms

Fabien Pesquerel*
fabien.pesquerel@inria.fr

Hassan Saber
hassan.saber@inria.fr

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
We consider a variant of the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem where arms are
known to be organized into different groups having the same mean. The groups
are unknown but a lower bound q on their size is known. This situation typically
appears when each arm can be described with a list of categorical attributes, and
the (unknown) mean reward function only depends on a subset of them, the others
being redundant. In this case, q is linked naturally to the number of attributes
considered redundant, and the number of categories of each attribute. For this
structured problem of practical relevance, we first derive the asymptotic regret
lower bound and corresponding constrained optimization problem. They reveal the
achievable regret can be substantially reduced when compared to the unstructured
setup, possibly by a factor q. However, solving exactly the exact constrained
optimization problem involves a combinatorial problem. We introduce a lowerbound inspired strategy involving a computationally efficient relaxation that is
based on a sorting mechanism. We further prove it achieves a lower bound close to
the optimal one up to a controlled factor, and achieves an asymptotic regret q times
smaller than the unstructured one. We believe this shows it is a valuable strategy
for the practitioner. Last, we illustrate the performance of the considered strategy
on numerical experiments involving a large number of arms.

1

Introduction

The finite stochastic multi-armed bandit problem is a popular framework for studying sequential
decision making problems in which a learner sequentially samples from a finite set of distributions
called arms. It was first introduced in the context of medical trials [Thompson, 1933b, 1935] and later
formalized under this name by Robbins in Robbins [1952]. We refer the interested reader to Lattimore
and Szepesvári [2020] for a recent survey. This is one of the simplest theoretical framework in which
one can study the notion of exploration-exploitation tradeoff. This tension between exploration and
exploitation arises from the sequential optimization problem a learner is trying to perform while
being uncertain about the very problem it is optimizing.
Formally, a multi-armed bandit configuration is specified by a set of unknown real-valued probability
distributions ν = (νa )a∈A with means (µa )a∈A , indexed by a set of arms A. We hereafter consider a
finite A, and that all νa , a ∈ A belong to the same family of distributions F (e.g. Bernoulli, Gaussian,
etc.), that is ν ∈ F A . The bandit game proceeds as follows. At each time t ∈ N, the learner chooses
an arm at ∈ A based on the past observations and decisions, then receives and observes a sample
Xt (called the reward), conditionally independent, sampled from νat . Her goal is to maximize the
cumulative reward received over time. The mean of each arm is unknown, which makes the problem
non-trivial, hence the learner should adjust her sampling strategy based on past information obtained
from drawing different arms in order to maximize the expected sum of rewards. The maximal
expected value of a finite bandit configuration is denoted by µ? , defined as µ? = max µa . The
a∈A

performance of the strategy used by the agent is measured by the (pseudo) regret, that compares the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

