Teaching an Active Learner with
Contrastive Examples

Chaoqi Wang
University of Chicago

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS

Yuxin Chen
University of Chicago

chaoqi@uchicago.edu

adishs@mpi-sws.org

chenyuxin@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of active learning with the added twist that the learner is
assisted by a helpful teacher. We consider the following natural interaction protocol:
At each round, the learner proposes a query asking for the label of an instance xq ,
the teacher provides the requested label {xq , y q } along with explanatory information to guide the learning process. In this paper, we view this information in the
form of an additional contrastive example ({xc , y c }) where xc is picked from a set
constrained by xq (e.g., dissimilar instances with the same label). Our focus is to
design a teaching algorithm that can provide an informative sequence of contrastive
examples to the learner to speed up the learning process. We show that this leads
to a challenging sequence optimization problem where the algorithm’s choices at
a given round depend on the history of interactions. We investigate an efficient
teaching algorithm that adaptively picks these contrastive examples. We derive
strong performance guarantees for our algorithm based on two problem-dependent
parameters and further show that for specific types of active learners (e.g., a generalized binary search learner), the proposed teaching algorithm exhibits strong
approximation guarantees. Finally, we illustrate our bounds and demonstrate the
effectiveness of our teaching framework via two numerical case studies.

1

Introduction

Active learning characterizes a natural learning paradigm where a learner actively engages in the
learning process, and has demonstrated great success in both the educational domain [Prince, 2004]
and the machine learning literature [Settles, 2012]. In the context of machine learning, active learning
has traditionally been studied as the active instance labeling problem, where the goal of an active
learner is to learn a concept by selectively querying the labels of a sequence of data points [Kosaraju
et al., 1999; Dasgupta, 2004; Nowak, 2008; Balcan et al., 2006; Gonen et al., 2013; Hanneke and Yang,
2014; Yan and Zhang, 2017]. Recently, active learning has been investigated under richer interaction
protocols, including learning from feature feedback [Poulis and Dasgupta, 2017; Dasgupta and
Sabato, 2020] or from demonstrations [Chernova and Thomaz, 2014; Silver et al., 2012]. Typically,
these works assume that the rich feedback obtained from the teacher is adversarial [Dasgupta and
Sabato, 2020] or stochastic [Poulis and Dasgupta, 2017]. While these results have shown promising
improvements in sample complexity by leveraging more expressive feedback, the assumptions of an
adversarial or stochastic teacher could fall short in characterizing many real-world interactive learning
systems (e.g. automated tutoring or multi-agent learning systems) where the teacher cooperates with
the learner to achieve the learning objective [Zilles et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2018].
Motivated by real-world cooperative learning and teaching scenarios [Chen et al., 2018a; Teso and
Kersting, 2019], we consider an optimistic yet natural interaction protocol between an active learner
and a helpful teacher (see Figure 1 (c)): At each round, the learner proposes a query asking for the
label of an instance xq ; the teacher then provides the requested label {xq , y q } along with explanatory
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

