Information-constrained optimization: can adaptive
processing of gradients help?

Jayadev Acharya∗
Cornell University
acharya@cornell.edu

Clément L. Canonne†
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Prathamesh Mayekar‡
Indian Institute of Science
prathamesh@iisc.ac.in

Himanshu Tyagi§
Indian Institute of Science
htyagi@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We revisit first-order optimization under local information constraints such as local
privacy, gradient quantization, and computational constraints limiting access to
a few coordinates of the gradient. In this setting, the optimization algorithm is
not allowed to directly access the complete output of the gradient oracle, but only
gets limited information about it subject to the local information constraints. We
study the role of adaptivity in processing the gradient output to obtain this limited
information from it, and obtain tight or nearly tight bounds for both convex and
strongly convex optimization when adaptive gradient processing is allowed.

1

Introduction

Distributed optimization has emerged as a central tool in federated learning for building statistical
and machine learning models for data distributed across users. In addition, large scale optimization is
typically implemented in a distributed fashion over multiple machines or multiple cores within the
same machine. These distributed implementations fit naturally in the oracle framework of first-order
optimization (see [22]) where in each iteration a user or machine computes the gradient oracle
output. Due to practical local constraints such as communication bandwidth, privacy concerns,
or computational issues, the entire gradient cannot be directly made available to the optimization
algorithm. Instead, the gradients must be passed through a randomized mechanism which, respectively,
ensures privacy of user data (local privacy constraints); or compresses them to a small number of
bits (communication constraints); or only computes a few coordinates of the gradient (computational
constraints). Motivated by these applications, we consider first-order optimization under such local
information constraints placed on the gradient oracle.
When designing a first-order optimization algorithm under local information constraints, one not
only needs to design the optimization algorithm itself, but also the algorithm for local processing of
the gradient estimates. Many such algorithms have been proposed in recent years; see, for instance,
[12], [1], [6], [15], [29], [16], and the references therein for privacy constraints ; [28], [7], [30], [18],
∗

Supported by NSF-CCF-1846300 (CAREER), NSF-CCF-1815893.
Part of this work was done while at IBM Research, supported by a Goldstine Postdoctoral Fellowship.
‡
Supported by a Ph.D. fellowship from Wipro Ltd.
§
Supported by a grant from Robert Bosch Center for Cyber Physical Systems (RBCCPS), Indian Institute of
Science.
The full version of this paper [2] contains the proofs of all results discussed here, as well as other additional
details.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

