Relative Flatness and Generalization
Henning Petzka∗
Lund University, Sweden
henning.petzka@math.lth.se

Michael Kamp∗
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
Germany and Monash University, Australia
michael.kamp@monash.edu

Linara Adilova
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
and Fraunhofer IAIS

Cristian Sminchisescu
Lund University, Sweden
and Google Research, Switzerland

Mario Boley
Monash University, Australia

Abstract
Flatness of the loss curve is conjectured to be connected to the generalization
ability of machine learning models, in particular neural networks. While it has
been empirically observed that flatness measures consistently correlate strongly
with generalization, it is still an open theoretical problem why and under which
circumstances flatness is connected to generalization, in particular in light of
reparameterizations that change certain flatness measures but leave generalization
unchanged. We investigate the connection between flatness and generalization
by relating it to the interpolation from representative data, deriving notions of
representativeness, and feature robustness. The notions allow us to rigorously
connect flatness and generalization and to identify conditions under which the
connection holds. Moreover, they give rise to a novel, but natural relative flatness
measure that correlates strongly with generalization, simplifies to ridge regression
for ordinary least squares, and solves the reparameterization issue.

1

Introduction

Flatness of the loss curve has been identified as a potential predictor for the generalization abilities of
machine learning models [6, 10, 11]. In particular for neural networks, it has been repeatedly observed
that generalization performance correlates with measures of flatness, i.e., measures that quantify the
change in loss under perturbations of the model parameters [4, 8, 16, 21, 34, 39, 41, 44]. In fact, Jiang
et al. [14] perform a large-scale empirical study and find that flatness-based measures have a higher
correlation with generalization than alternatives like weight norms, margin-, and optimization-based
measures. It is an open problem why and under which circumstances this correlation holds, in
particular in the light of negative results on reparametrizations of ReLU neural networks [5]: these
reparameterizations change traditional measures of flatness, yet leave the model function and its
generalization unchanged, making these measures unreliable. We present a novel and rigorous
approach to understanding the connection between flatness and generalization by relating it to the
interpolation from representative samples. Using this theory we, for the first time, identify conditions
under which flatness explains generalization. At the same time, we derive a measure of relative
flatness that simplifies to ridge/Tikhonov regularization for ordinary least squares [36], and resolves
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

