Combating Noise: Semi-supervised Learning by
Region Uncertainty Quantification

Zhenyu Wang
Yali Li ∗
Ye Guo
Shengjin Wang
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{wangzy20, guo-y18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning aims to leverage a large amount of unlabeled data for
performance boosting. Existing works primarily focus on image classification.
In this paper, we delve into semi-supervised learning for object detection, where
labeled data are more labor-intensive to collect. Current methods are easily distracted by noisy regions generated by pseudo labels. To combat the noisy labeling,
we propose noise-resistant semi-supervised learning by quantifying the region
uncertainty. We first investigate the adverse effects brought by different forms of
noise associated with pseudo labels. Then we propose to quantify the uncertainty
of regions by identifying the noise-resistant properties of regions over different
strengths. By importing the region uncertainty quantification and promoting multipeak probability distribution output, we introduce uncertainty into training and
further achieve noise-resistant learning. Experiments on both PASCAL VOC and
MS COCO demonstrate the extraordinary performance of our method.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have developed significantly in the computer vision area [15, 18].
Despite this, DNNs highly rely on the fully-supervised learning with a large amount of humanannotated data, which consumes a tremendous amount of time to annotate. In comparison, unlabeled
images are much easier to access. Semi-supervised learning [4] is thus studied to address this problem.
By involving large-scale unlabeled images in training, semi-supervised learning becomes more valued
[16, 26, 40, 28] on benchmark datasets.
However, most of the existing semi-supervised learning methods focus on image classification. Object
detection, where complete annotations include category-aware tags and location-aware bounding
boxes, requires much more efforts to construct large-scale fully-annotated datasets. In this work, we
aim at semi-supervised learning for object detection [35]: an object detector is trained on a dataset
where only a small fraction of images are fully-labeled and the rest of them are unlabeled. In this
setting, easily obtained unlabeled data are utilized to improve the performance of fully-supervised
object detection. Most of the current semi-supervised learning methods in object detection are based
on pseudo labeling [19, 36]. A fully-supervised model is firstly pre-trained on completely labeled
images then performs inference on unlabeled data to generate pseudo labels. These unlabeled images
associated with pseudo labels are further combined with labeled data to learn the semi-supervised
model. This pseudo labeling scheme has been widely adopted in semi-supervised object detection
[31]. However, the performance is still limited since the noise inherently exists in pseudo labels, i.e.,
pseudo labeling based semi-supervised learning methods severely suffer from the inherent noise.
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

