Curriculum Learning for Vision-and-Language
Navigation

Jiwen Zhang1 , Zhongyu Wei1,2∗, Jianqing Fan1,3 , Jiajie Peng2
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University, China
2
Research Institute of Intelligent and Complex Systems, Fudan University, China
3
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, USA
{jwzhang16,zywei}@fudan.edu.cn, jqfan@princeton.edu, jiajiepeng@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) is a task where an agent navigates in an
embodied indoor environment under human instructions. Previous works ignore
the distribution of sample difficulty and we argue that this potentially degrade
their agent performance. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel curriculumbased training paradigm for VLN tasks that can balance human prior knowledge
and agent learning progress about training samples. We develop the principle of
curriculum design and re-arrange the benchmark Room-to-Room (R2R) dataset
to make it suitable for curriculum training. Experiments show that our method is
model-agnostic and can significantly improve the performance, the generalizability,
and the training efficiency of current state-of-the-art navigation agents without
increasing model complexity.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-Language (VLN) navigation task proposed recently by (Anderson et al., 2018) is a step
towards building smart robots. It requires the agent to perceive the environment, understand human
language instructions and finally unify the multi-modal information to make actions. Many stateof-the-art methods have been proposed. Some of them focus on the alignment between visual and
textual inputs by improving model structure (Ma et al., 2019) or proposing novel auxiliary losses
(Zhu et al., 2020) whereas others put their attention on the data augmentation (Fried et al., 2018; Tan
et al., 2019; Hong et al., 2020; Ku et al., 2020). Large scale pre-training has also been employed to
better generalize the downstream VLN tasks (Li et al., 2019; Majumdar et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2020;
Huo et al., 2021).
Despite great progress previous works have made, very few of them care about how much the agent
learns from the dataset, i.e. is the agent a good student? In computer vision, (Hlynsson et al.,
2019) tries to answer this question by measuring the data efficiency — performance as a function of
training set size — of deep learning methods. In vision-and-language navigation, (Huang et al., 2019)
develops a discriminator that can filter the low quality instruction-path pairs to boost the learning
efficiency. In this work, we focus on another aspect: can a VLN agent be further educated without
model structure change and data modification?
We observe that many works neglect the internal distribution of the sample difficulty. For example, a
navigation task within a single room should be considered easier than one that needs to travel two or
more rooms. Current training methods simply flush in the data and do not distinguish difficulty levels
among the training samples. As shown in Figure 1(a), navigation agents trained by such learning
process do not perform well on those "easy" tasks even on the previously seen environments. We
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

