Near-optimal Offline and Streaming Algorithms for
Learning Non-Linear Dynamical Systems

Prateek Jain
Google AI Research Lab,
Bengaluru, India 560016
prajain@google.com

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Department of EECS
MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139
dheeraj@mit.edu

Suhas S Kowshik
Department of EECS
MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139
suhask@mit.edu
Praneeth Netrapalli
Google AI Research Lab,
Bengaluru, India 560016
pnetrapalli@google.com

Abstract
We consider the setting of vector valued non-linear dynamical systems Xt+1 =
φ(A∗ Xt ) + ηt , where ηt is unbiased noise and φ : R → R is a known link function
that satisfies certain expansivity property. The goal is to learn A∗ from a single
trajectory X1 , · · · , XT of dependent or correlated samples. While the problem is
well-studied in the linear case, where φ is identity, with optimal error rates even for
non-mixing systems, existing results in the non-linear case hold only for mixing
systems. In this work, we improve existing results for learning nonlinear systems in
a number of ways: a) we provide the first offline algorithm that can learn non-linear
dynamical systems without the mixing assumption, b) we significantly improve
upon the sample complexity of existing results for mixing systems, c) in the much
harder one-pass, streaming setting we study a SGD with Reverse Experience Replay
(SGD − RER) method, and demonstrate that for mixing systems, it achieves the
same sample complexity as our offline algorithm, d) we justify the expansivity
assumption by showing that for the popular ReLU link function — a non-expansive
but easy to learn link function with i.i.d. samples — any method would require
exponentially many samples (with respect to dimension of Xt ) from the dynamical
system. We validate our results via simulations and demonstrate that a naive
application of SGD can be highly sub-optimal. Indeed, our work demonstrates that
for correlated data, specialized methods designed for the dependency structure in
data can significantly outperform standard SGD based methods.

1

Introduction

Non-linear dynamical systems (NLDS) are commonly used to model the data in a variety of domains
like control theory, time-series analysis, and reinforement learning (RL) [1–4]. Standard NLDS
models the data points (X0 , X1 , . . . , XT ) as:
Xt+1 = φ(A∗ Xt ) + ηt ,

(1)

where Xt ∈ Rd are the states, ηt ∈ Rd are i.i.d. noise vectors, A∗ ∈ Rd×d and φ : R → R is an
increasing function called the ‘link function’. Here, φ is supposed to act component wise over Rd .
System identification problem is a foundational problem for NLDS, i.e., given (X0 , X1 , . . . , XT )
generated from (1), the goal is to estimate A∗ accurately from a single trajectory (X0 , X1 , . . . , XT ).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

