Non-Gaussian Gaussian Processes
for Few-Shot Regression
Marcin Sendera ⇤
Jagiellonian University

Jacek Tabor
Jagiellonian University

Andrzej Bedychaj
Jagiellonian University

Tomasz Trzcinski
Jagiellonian University,
Warsaw University of Technology,
Tooploox

Aleksandra Nowak
Jagiellonian University

Massimiliano Patacchiola
University of Cambridge

Przemysław Spurek
Jagiellonian University

Maciej Zieba
Wrocław University of
Science and Technology,
Tooploox

Abstract
Gaussian Processes (GPs) have been widely used in machine learning to model
distributions over functions, with applications including multi-modal regression,
time-series prediction, and few-shot learning. GPs are particularly useful in the
last application since they rely on Normal distributions and enable closed-form
computation of the posterior probability function. Unfortunately, because the
resulting posterior is not flexible enough to capture complex distributions, GPs
assume high similarity between subsequent tasks – a requirement rarely met in
real-world conditions. In this work, we address this limitation by leveraging the
flexibility of Normalizing Flows to modulate the posterior predictive distribution
of the GP. This makes the GP posterior locally non-Gaussian, therefore we name
our method Non-Gaussian Gaussian Processes (NGGPs). We propose an invertible
ODE-based mapping that operates on each component of the random variable
vectors and shares the parameters across all of them. We empirically tested the
flexibility of NGGPs on various few-shot learning regression datasets, showing that
the mapping can incorporate context embedding information to model different
noise levels for periodic functions. As a result, our method shares the structure
of the problem between subsequent tasks, but the contextualization allows for
adaptation to dissimilarities. NGGPs outperform the competing state-of-the-art
approaches on a diversified set of benchmarks and applications.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) [33, 46] are one of the most important probabilistic methods, and they
have been widely used to model distributions over functions in a variety of applications such as
multi-modal regression [56], time-series prediction [3, 27] and meta-learning [29, 45]. Recent works
propose to use GPs in the few-shot learning scenario [4, 29, 39, 49], where the model is trained
to solve a supervised task with only a few labeled samples available. This particular application is
well-fitted to GPs since they can determine the posterior distribution in closed-form from a small set
of data samples [29].
⇤

Corresponding author: marcin.sendera@doctoral.uj.edu.pl

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

