Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning Is Feasible
for Linearly Realizable MDPs with Limited Revisiting

Gen Li
Princeton

Yuxin Chen
Princeton

Yuejie Chi
CMU

Yuantao Gu
Tsinghua

Yuting Wei
UPenn

Abstract
Low-complexity models such as linear function representation play a pivotal role in
enabling sample-efficient reinforcement learning (RL). The current paper pertains
to a scenario with value-based linear representation, which postulates linear realizability of the optimal Q-function (also called the “linear Q? problem”). While
linear realizability alone does not allow for sample-efficient solutions in general, the
presence of a large sub-optimality gap is a potential game changer, depending on
the sampling mechanism in use. Informally, sample efficiency is achievable with a
large sub-optimality gap when a generative model is available, but is unfortunately
infeasible when we turn to standard online RL settings.
We make progress towards understanding this linear Q? problem by investigating a
new sampling protocol, which draws samples in an online/exploratory fashion but
allows one to backtrack and revisit previous states. This protocol is more flexible
than the standard online RL setting, while being practically relevant and far more
restrictive than the generative model. We develop an algorithm tailored to this
setting, achieving a sample complexity that scales polynomially with the feature
dimension, the horizon, and the inverse sub-optimality gap, but not the size of the
state/action space. Our findings underscore the fundamental interplay between
sampling protocols and low-complexity function representation in RL.

1

Introduction

Emerging reinforcement learning (RL) applications necessitate the design of sample-efficient solutions
in order to accommodate the explosive growth of problem dimensionality. Given that the state/action
space could be unprecedentedly enormous, it is often infeasible to request a sample size exceeding
the fundamental limit set forth by the ambient dimension in the tabular setting (which enumerates all
combinations of state-action pairs). As a result, the quest for sample efficiency cannot be achieved in
general without exploiting proper low-complexity structures underlying the problem of interest.
1.1

Linear function approximation

Among the studies of low-complexity models for RL, linear function approximation has attracted a
flurry of recent activity, mainly due to the promise of dramatic dimension reduction in conjunction
with its mathematical tractability (see, e.g., Wen and Van Roy (2017); Yang and Wang (2019); Jin et al.
(2020); Du et al. (2020a)). Two families of linear function approximation merit particular attention,
which we single out below. Here and throughout, we concentrate on a finite-horizon Markov decision
process (MDP), and denote by S, A and H its state space, action space, and horizon, respectively.
• Model-based linear representation. Yang and Wang (2019); Jin et al. (2020); Yang and Wang
(2020) studied a scenario when both the probability transition kernel and reward function of the
MDP can be linearly parameterized. This type of MDPs is commonly referred to as linear MDPs.
Letting Ph (· | s, a) be the transition probability from state s when action a is executed at step h,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

