Does Preprocessing Help Training
Over-parameterized Neural Networks?
Zhao Song
Adobe Research
zsong@adobe.com

Shuo Yang
The University of Texas at Austin
yangshuo_ut@utexas.edu

Ruizhe Zhang
The University of Texas at Austin
ruizhe@utexas.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive performance in many areas. Designing a fast and provable method for training neural networks is a fundamental
question in machine learning.
The classical training method requires paying Ω(mnd) cost for both forward computation and backward computation, where m is the width of the neural network,
and we are given n training points in d-dimensional space. In this paper, we propose two novel preprocessing ideas to bypass this Ω(mnd) barrier:
• First, by preprocessing the initial weights of the neural networks, we can
train the neural network in e
O(m1−Θ(1/d) nd) cost per iteration.
• Second, by preprocessing the input data points, we can train the neural nete 4/5 nd) cost per iteration.
work in O(m

From the technical perspective, our result is a sophisticated combination of tools
in different fields, greedy-type convergence analysis in optimization, sparsity observation in practical work, high-dimensional geometric search in data structure,
concentration and anti-concentration in probability. Our results also provide theoretical insights for a large number of previously established fast training methods.
In addition, our classical algorithm can be generalized to the Quantum computation model. Interestingly, we can get a similar sublinear cost per iteration but
avoid preprocessing initial weights or input data points.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, deep learning has achieved dominating performance over many areas, e.g.,
computer vision [LBBH98, KSH12, SLJ+ 15, HZRS16], natural language processing [CWB+ 11,
DCLT18], game playing [SHM+ 16, SSS+ 17] and beyond. The computational resource requirement
for deep neural network training grows very quickly. Designing a fast and provable training method
for neural networks is, therefore, a fundamental and demanding challenge.
Almost all deep learning models are optimized by gradient descent (or its variants). The total training
time can be split into two components, the first one is the number of iterations and the second one
is the cost per spent per iteration. Nearly all the iterative algorithms for acceleration can be viewed
as two separate lines of research correspondingly, the first line is aiming for an algorithm that has
as small as possible number of iterations, the second line is focusing on designing as efficient as
possible data structures to improve the cost spent per iteration of the algorithm [Vai89, CLS19,
LSZ19, JLSW20, JKL+ 20, JSWZ21]. In this paper, our major focus is on the second line.
There are a number of practical works trying to use a nearest neighbor search data structure to speed
up the per-step computation of the deep neural network training [CMF+ 20, LXJ+ 20, CLP+ 21,
DMZS21]. However, none of the previous work is able to give a provable guarantee. In this paper,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

