Fine-grained Generalisation Analysis of
Inductive Matrix Completion

Antoine Ledent
TU Kaiserslautern
ledent@cs.uni-kl.de

Rodrigo Alves
TU Kaiserslautern
alves@cs.uni-kl.de

Yunwen Lei
University of Birmingham
y.lei@bham.ac.uk

Marius Kloft
TU Kaiserslautern
kloft@cs.uni-kl.de

Abstract
In this paper, we bridge the gap between the state-of-the-art theoretical results
for matrix completion with the nuclear norm and their equivalent in inductive
matrix completion: (1) In the distribution-free setting, we prove
? sample complexity
bounds improving the previously best rate of rd2 to d3{2 r logpdq, where d is
the dimension of the side information and r is the rank. (2) We introduce the
(smoothed) adjusted trace-norm minimization strategy, an inductive analogue of
the weighted trace norm, for which we show guarantees of the order Opdr logpdqq
under arbitrary sampling. In the inductive case, a similar rate was previously
achieved only under uniform sampling and for exact recovery. Both our results
align with the state of the art in the particular case of standard (non-inductive)
matrix completion, where they are known to be tight up to log terms. Experiments
further confirm that our strategy outperforms standard inductive matrix completion
on various synthetic datasets and real problems, justifying its place as an important
tool in the arsenal of methods for matrix completion using side information.

1

Introduction

Matrix completion (MC) is the machine learning problem of recovering the missing entries of a
partially observed matrix. It is the go-to approach in various application domains such as recommender
systems [1, 2] and social network analysis [3, 4, 5]. The SoftImpute algorithm [6, 7] is among the
most popular MC methods. It solves the following convex problem encouraging low-rank solutions:
min

1

ZPRmˆn 2

}PΩ pZ ´ Gq}2Fr ` λ}Z}˚ ,

(1)

where PΩ denotes the projection on the set Ω of observed entries, G is the ground truth matrix, and
} . }˚ denotes the nuclear norm (i.e., the sum of the matrix’s singular values).
Besides the incomplete matrix, additional information may be available in applications such as movie
recommendation or drug interaction prediction [8, 9, 10, 11]. For instance in movie recommendation,
one may have access to the movies’ genres, their synopsis, the gender and occupation of the users, or
a friendship network between the users. Inductive matrix completion (IMC) [11, 12, 13, 14] exploits
such side information. It assumes that the side information is summarized in matrices X P Rmˆd1
and Y P Rnˆd2 , with the row vectors representing the users and items, respectively. IMC then
optimizes the following objective function
min

1

M PRd1 ˆd2 2

}PΩ pXM Y J ´ Gq}2Fr ` λ}M }˚ .

(2)

This model has been used in many domains also beyond movie recommendation [8, 10, 15].
In this paper, we contribute to a better theoretical understanding of IMC and related methods in the
approximate recovery case. In this setting we obtain guarantees in terms of a bound on the expected
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

