Learning to Assimilate in Chaotic Dynamical Systems

Michael McCabe
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
michael.mccabe@colorado.edu

Jed Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
jed@jedbrown.org

Abstract
The accuracy of simulation-based forecasting in chaotic systems is heavily dependent on high-quality estimates of the system state at the time the forecast is
initialized. Data assimilation methods are used to infer these initial conditions by
systematically combining noisy, incomplete observations and numerical models of
system dynamics to produce effective estimation schemes. We introduce amortized
assimilation, a framework for learning to assimilate in dynamical systems from
sequences of noisy observations with no need for ground truth data. We motivate
the framework by extending powerful results from self-supervised denoising to the
dynamical systems setting through the use of differentiable simulation. Experimental results across several benchmark systems highlight the improved effectiveness
of our approach over widely-used data assimilation methods.

1

Introduction

Forecasting in the geosciences is an initial value problem of enormous practical significance. In high
value domains like numerical weather prediction [1], climate modeling [2], atmospheric chemistry
[3], seismology [4], and others [5–7], forecasts are produced by estimating the current state of the
dynamical system of interest and integrating that state forward in time using numerical models based
on the discretization of differential equations. These numerical models are derived from physical
principles and possess desirable extrapolation and convergence properties. Yet despite the efficacy of
these models and the vast amount of compute power used in generating these forecasts, obtaining
highly accurate predictions is non-trivial. Discretization introduces numerical errors and it is often
too computationally expensive to directly simulate the system of interest at the resolution necessary
to capture all relevant features.
Further complicating matters in geoscience applications is that many systems of interest are chaotic,
meaning that small errors in the initial condition estimates can lead to significant forecasting errors
over relatively small time frame [8]. This can be problematic when the initial condition for a forecast
is current state of the Earth, a large-scale actively evolving system that cannot be directly controlled.
Modern numerical weather prediction (NWP) models utilize hundreds of millions of state variables
scattered over a three-dimensional discretization of the Earth’s atmosphere [9]. To perfectly initialize
a simulation, one would need to know the true value of all of these state variables simultaneously.
This data is simply not available. In reality, what is available are noisy, partial measurements scattered
non-uniformly in time and space.
The inverse problem of estimating the true state of a dynamical system from imperfect observations
is the target of our work and of the broader field known as data assimilation. Data assimilation
techniques produce state estimates by systematically combining noisy observations with the numerical
model [10, 9]. The data assimilation problem differs from other state estimation problems in that the
numerical model acts both as an evolution equation and as a mechanism for transporting information
from regions where observations are dense to regions where observations are sparse [11]. Thus for
accurate estimates of the full system state, it is important to utilize both the model and observations.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

