You Only Look at One Sequence: Rethinking
Transformer in Vision through Object Detection

Yuxin Fang 1∗ Bencheng Liao 1∗
Jiyang Qi 1
1
2

Rui Wu 3

Xinggang Wang 1†
Jianwei Niu 3

Jiemin Fang 2,1

Wenyu Liu 1

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
Institute of AI, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
3
Horizon Robotics
{yxf, bcliao, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Can Transformer perform 2D object- and region-level recognition from a pure
sequence-to-sequence perspective with minimal knowledge about the 2D spatial
structure? To answer this question, we present You Only Look at One Sequence
(YOLOS), a series of object detection models based on the vanilla Vision Transformer with the fewest possible modifications, region priors, as well as inductive biases of the target task. We find that YOLOS pre-trained on the mid-sized
ImageNet-1k dataset only can already achieve quite competitive performance on
the challenging COCO object detection benchmark, e.g., YOLOS-Base directly
adopted from BERT-Base architecture can obtain 42.0 box AP on COCO val. We
also discuss the impacts as well as limitations of current pre-train schemes and
model scaling strategies for Transformer in vision through YOLOS. Code and
pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/hustvl/YOLOS.

1

Introduction

Transformer [58] is born to transfer. In natural language processing (NLP), the dominant approach is
to first pre-train Transformer on large, generic corpora for general language representation learning,
and then fine-tune or adapt the model on specific target tasks [18]. Recently, Vision Transformer
(ViT) 1 [21] demonstrates that canonical Transformer encoder architecture directly inherited from
NLP can perform surprisingly well on image recognition at scale using modern vision transfer learning
recipe [33]. Taking sequences of image patch embeddings as inputs, ViT can successfully transfer
pre-trained general visual representations from sufficient scale to more specific image classification
tasks with fewer data points from a pure sequence-to-sequence perspective.
Since a pre-trained Transformer can be successfully fine-tuned on sentence-level tasks [7, 19] in NLP,
as well as token-level tasks [48, 52], where models are required to produce fine-grained output at the
token-level [18]. A natural question is: Can ViT transfer to more challenging object- and region-level
target tasks in computer vision such as object detection other than image-level recognition?
ViT-FRCNN [6] is the first to use a pre-trained ViT as the backbone for a Faster R-CNN [50] object
detector. However, this design cannot get rid of the reliance on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
∗
Yuxin Fang and Bencheng Liao contributed equally. † Xinggang Wang is the corresponding author. This
work was done when Yuxin Fang was interning at Horizon Robotics mentored by Rui Wu.
1
There are various sophisticated or hybrid architectures termed as “Vision Transformer”. For disambiguation,
in this paper, “Vision Transformer” and “ViT” refer to the canonical or vanilla Vision Transformer architecture
proposed by Dosovitskiy et al. [21] unless specified.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

