Differential Privacy Over Riemannian Manifolds

Matthew Reimherr
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA
mreimherr@psu.edu

Karthik Bharath
School of Mathematical Sciences
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
Karthik.Bharath@nottingham.ac.uk

Carlos Soto
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA
cjs7363@psu.edu

Abstract
In this work we consider the problem of releasing a differentially private statistical
summary that resides on a Riemannian manifold. We present an extension of the
Laplace or K-norm mechanism that utilizes intrinsic distances and volumes on
the manifold. We also consider in detail the specific case where the summary
is the Fréchet mean of data residing on a manifold. We demonstrate that our
mechanism is rate optimal and depends only on the dimension of the manifold,
not on the dimension of any ambient space, while also showing how ignoring the
manifold structure can decrease the utility of the sanitized summary. We illustrate
our framework in two examples of particular interest in statistics: the space of
symmetric positive definite matrices, which is used for covariance matrices, and
the sphere, which can be used as a space for modeling discrete distributions.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade we have seen a tremendous push for the development and application of methods
in data privacy. This surge has been fueled by the production of large sophisticated datasets alongside
increasingly complex data gathering technologies. One theme that has emerged with the proliferation
of highly structured and dynamic data is the importance of exploiting underlying structures in the
data or models to maximize utility while controlling disclosure risks. In this paper we consider the
problem of achieving pure Differential Privacy, DP, when the statistical summary to be released takes
values on a complete Riemannian manifold.
Riemannian manifolds are used extensively in the analysis of data or parameters that are inherently
nonlinear, meaning, either addition or scalar multiplication may cause the summary to leave the
manifold, or such operations are not even well defined. Classic examples of such objects include
spatio-temporal processes, covariance matrices, projections, rotations, compositional data, densities,
and shapes. Traditional privacy approaches for handling such objects typically consist of utilizing an
ambient or embedding space that is linear so that standard DP tools can be employed. For example,
Karwa and Slavković [2016] considered the problem of releasing private degree sequences of a graph
which required them to project back onto a particular convex hull as a post-processing step. Such
an approach is a natural starting point and reasonable so long as the space doesn’t exhibit too much
curvature. However, there are several interrelated motivations for working with the manifolds directly.
First, if one employs an ambient space (known as taking an extrinsic approach), then calculations
such as the sensitivity may depend on the dimension of the ambient space, which will in turn impact
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

