Functional Regularization for Reinforcement
Learning via Learned Fourier Features
Alexander C. Li
Carnegie Mellon University
alexanderli@cmu.edu

Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University
dpathak@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a simple architecture for deep reinforcement learning by embedding
inputs into a learned Fourier basis and show that it improves the sample efficiency
of both state-based and image-based RL. We perform infinite-width analysis of our
architecture using the Neural Tangent Kernel and theoretically show that tuning the
initial variance of the Fourier basis is equivalent to functional regularization of the
learned deep network. That is, these learned Fourier features allow for adjusting
the degree to which networks underfit or overfit different frequencies in the training
data, and hence provide a controlled mechanism to improve the stability and
performance of RL optimization. Empirically, this allows us to prioritize learning
low-frequency functions and speed up learning by reducing networks’ susceptibility
to noise in the optimization process, such as during Bellman updates. Experiments
on standard state-based and image-based RL benchmarks show clear benefits of
our architecture over the baselines1 .

1

Introduction

Most popular deep reinforcement learning (RL) approaches estimate either a value or Q-value function
under the agent’s learned policy. These functions map points in the state or state-action space to
expected returns, and provide crucial information that is used for improving the policy. However,
optimizing these functions can be difficult, since there are no ground-truth labels to predict. Instead,
they are trained through bootstrapping: the networks are updated towards target values calculated with
the same networks being optimized. These updates introduce noise that accumulates over repeated
iterations of bootstrapping, which can result in highly inaccurate value or Q-value estimates [44, 46].
As a result, these RL algorithms may suffer from lower asymptotic performance or sample efficiency.
Most prior work has focused on making the estimation of target values more accurate. Some
examples include double Q-learning for unbiased target values [16, 47], or reducing the reliance
on the bootstrapped Q-values by calculating multi-step returns with TD( ) [41]. However, it is
impossible to hope that the noise in the target values estimated via bootstrapping will go to zero,
because we cannot estimate the true expectation over infinite rollouts in practical setups. Hence, we
argue that it is equally important to also regularize the function (in this case, the deep Q-network)
that is fitting these noisy target values.
Conventional regularization methods in supervised learning can be associated with drawbacks in RL.
Stochastic methods like dropout [40] introduce more noise into the process, which is tolerable when
ground-truth labels are present (in supervised learning) but counterproductive when bootstrapping. An
alternative approach is early stopping [50], which hurts sample efficiency in reinforcement learning
because a minimum number of gradient steps is required to propagate value information backwards
to early states. Finally, penalty-based methods like L1 [45] and L2 regularization [17, 22] can help in
1

Code available at https://github.com/alexlioralexli/learned-fourier-features

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

