AFEC: Active Forgetting of Negative Transfer in
Continual Learning

1

Liyuan Wang1,2,3

Mingtian Zhang4

Zhongfan Jia5

Kaisheng Ma5

Chenglong Bao6

Jun Zhu3⇤

Qian Li1,2
Yi Zhong1,2⇤

School of Life Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University.
Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences. 3 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI,
BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University. 4 AI Center, University College London.
5
IIIS, Tsinghua University. 6 Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University.
{wly19,jzf20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, mingtian.zhang.17@ucl.ac.uk
{liqian8,kaisheng,clbao,dcszj,zhongyithu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Continual learning aims to learn a sequence of tasks from dynamic data distributions. Without accessing to the old training samples, knowledge transfer from the
old tasks to each new task is difficult to determine, which might be either positive
or negative. If the old knowledge interferes with the learning of a new task, i.e.,
the forward knowledge transfer is negative, then precisely remembering the old
tasks will further aggravate the interference, thus decreasing the performance of
continual learning. By contrast, biological neural networks can actively forget
the old knowledge that conflicts with the learning of a new experience, through
regulating the learning-triggered synaptic expansion and synaptic convergence.
Inspired by the biological active forgetting, we propose to actively forget the old
knowledge that limits the learning of new tasks to benefit continual learning. Under
the framework of Bayesian continual learning, we develop a novel approach named
Active Forgetting with synaptic Expansion-Convergence (AFEC). Our method dynamically expands parameters to learn each new task and then selectively combines
them, which is formally consistent with the underlying mechanism of biological
active forgetting. We extensively evaluate AFEC on a variety of continual learning
benchmarks, including CIFAR-10 regression tasks, visual classification tasks and
Atari reinforcement tasks, where AFEC effectively improves the learning of new
tasks and achieves the state-of-the-art performance in a plug-and-play way.

1

Introduction

The ability to continually learn numerous tasks from dynamic data distributions is critical for deep
neural networks, which needs to remember the old tasks by avoiding catastrophic forgetting [18]
while effectively learn each new task by improving forward knowledge transfer [17]. Due to the
dynamic data distributions, forward knowledge transfer might be either positive or negative, and is
difficult to determine without accessing to the old training samples. If the forward knowledge transfer
is negative, i.e., learning a new task from the old knowledge is worse than learning the new task
on a randomly-initialized network [36, 17], then precisely remembering the old tasks will severely
interfere with the learning of the new task, thus decreasing the performance of continual learning.
⇤

Corresponding author: J. Zhu and Y. Zhong.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

