Improving Generalization in Meta-RL with
Imaginary Tasks from Latent Dynamics Mixture

Suyoung Lee∗
KAIST
suyoung.l@kaist.ac.kr

Sae-Young Chung
KAIST
schung@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The generalization ability of most meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) methods
is largely limited to test tasks that are sampled from the same distribution used to
sample training tasks. To overcome the limitation, we propose Latent Dynamics
Mixture (LDM) that trains a reinforcement learning agent with imaginary tasks
generated from mixtures of learned latent dynamics. By training a policy on
mixture tasks along with original training tasks, LDM allows the agent to prepare
for unseen test tasks during training and prevents the agent from overfitting the
training tasks. LDM significantly outperforms standard meta-RL methods in test
returns on the gridworld navigation and MuJoCo tasks where we strictly separate
the training task distribution and the test task distribution.

1

Introduction

Overfitting and lack of generalization ability have been raised as the most critical problems of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) [5, 8, 30, 34, 38, 47, 52]. Numbers of meta-reinforcement learning
(meta-RL) methods have proposed solutions to the problems by meta-training a policy that easily
adapts to unseen but similar tasks. Meta-RL trains an agent in multiple sample tasks to construct an
inductive bias over the shared structure across tasks. Most meta-RL works evaluate their agents on
test tasks that are sampled from the same distribution used to sample training tasks. Therefore, the
vulnerability of meta-RL to test-time distribution shift is hardly revealed [12, 26, 29, 30].
One major category of meta-RL is gradient-based meta-RL that learns an initialization of a model
such that few steps of policy gradient are sufficient to attain good performance in a new task
[9, 36, 39, 40, 55]. Most of these methods require many test-time rollouts for adaptation that may
be costly in real environments. Moreover, the networks are composed of feedforward networks that
make online adaptation within a rollout difficult.
Another major category of meta-RL is context-based meta-RL that tries to learn the tasks’ structures
by utilizing recurrent or memory-augmented models [6, 13, 23, 25, 32, 35, 49, 56]. A context-based
meta-RL agent encodes its collected experience into a context. The policy conditioned on the context
is trained to maximize the return. These methods have difficulties generalizing to unseen out-ofdistribution (OOD) tasks mainly because of two reasons. (1) The process of encoding unseen task
dynamics into a context is not well generalized. (2) Even if the unseen dynamics is well encoded, the
policy that has never been trained conditioned on the unseen context cannot interpret the context to
output optimal actions.
We propose Latent Dynamics Mixture (LDM), a novel meta-RL method that overcomes the aforementioned limitations and generalizes to strictly unseen test tasks without any additional test-time updates.
LDM is based on variational Bayes-adaptive meta-RL that meta-learns approximate inference on a
latent belief distribution over multiple reward and transition dynamics [56]. We generate imaginary
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

