Partition and Code: learning how to compress graphs

Giorgos Bouritsas∗
Imperial College London, UK
g.bouritsas@imperial.ac.uk

Andreas Loukas
EPFL, Switzerland
andreas.loukas@epfl.ch

Nikolaos Karalias
EPFL, Switzerland
nikolaos.karalias@epfl.ch

Michael M. Bronstein
Imperial College London / Twitter, UK
m.bronstein@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Can we use machine learning to compress graph data? The absence of ordering
in graphs poses a significant challenge to conventional compression algorithms,
limiting their attainable gains as well as their ability to discover relevant patterns.
On the other hand, most graph compression approaches rely on domain-dependent
handcrafted representations and cannot adapt to different underlying graph distributions. This work aims to establish the necessary principles a lossless graph
compression method should follow to approach the entropy storage lower bound.
Instead of making rigid assumptions about the graph distribution, we formulate the
compressor as a probabilistic model that can be learned from data and generalise to
unseen instances. Our “Partition and Code” framework entails three steps: first, a
partitioning algorithm decomposes the graph into subgraphs, then these are mapped
to the elements of a small dictionary on which we learn a probability distribution,
and finally, an entropy encoder translates the representation into bits. All the
components (partitioning, dictionary and distribution) are parametric and can be
trained with gradient descent. We theoretically compare the compression quality
of several graph encodings and prove, under mild conditions, that PnC achieves
compression gains that grow either linearly or quadratically with the number of
vertices. Empirically, PnC yields significant compression improvements on diverse
real-world networks.1

1

Introduction

Lossless data compression has been one of the most fundamental and long-standing problems in
computer science. It is by now well-understood that the intrinsic limits of compression are governed
by the entropy of the underlying data distribution [1]. Crucially, these limits expose an intimate
connection between compressibility and machine learning: the better one models the underlying data
distribution (from limited observations) the more bits can be saved and vice-versa [2].
The compression of ordered data such as text, images, or video, underpins the modern technology
from web protocols to video streaming. However, graph-structured data remain a notable exception.
As graph data are becoming more prevalent, it becomes increasingly important to invent practical
ways to encode them parsimoniously.
There are three main challenges one faces when attempting to compress graphs:
∗
1

This work was done while Giorgos Bouritsas was visiting Dr. Andreas Loukas at EPFL, Lausanne.
The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/gbouritsas/PnC

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

