Graphical Models in Heavy-Tailed Markets

José Vinícius de M. Cardoso, Jiaxi Ying, Daniel P. Palomar
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong SAR China
{jvdmc, jx.ying}@connect.ust.hk, palomar@ust.hk

Abstract
Heavy-tailed statistical distributions have long been considered a more realistic
statistical model for the data generating process in financial markets in comparison
to their Gaussian counterpart. Nonetheless, mathematical nuisances, including
nonconvexities, involved in estimating graphs in heavy-tailed settings pose a significant challenge to the practical design of algorithms for graph learning. In this
work, we present graph learning estimators based on the Markov random field
framework that assume a Student-t data generating process. We design scalable
numerical algorithms, via the alternating direction method of multipliers, to learn
both connected and k-component graphs along with their theoretical convergence
guarantees. The proposed methods outperform state-of-the-art benchmarks in an
extensive series of practical experiments with publicly available data from the
S&P500 index, foreign exchanges, and cryptocurrencies.

1

Introduction

Graph learning frameworks are often designed based on the assumption that the observed graph
signals are Gaussian distributed [1–9]. While such assumption for graphical models has found great
success in many practical areas, which includes brain network analysis [10], psychological networks
[11], and single-cell sequencing [12], it inherently neglects scenarios where there may exist outliers
or the underlying data is naturally heavy-tailed distributed. As a consequence, those methods often
lack robustness and may not succeed in capturing a meaningful representation of the underlying
graph [13].
Data from financial instruments are well-known examples of such scenarios where heavy-tailedness
and skewedness are present [14–19]. In addition, there has been a growing interest in methods for
estimating graphical models in financial markets, which hence demands the development of scalable
and robust learning algorithms [20].
Perhaps one of the most prominent applications, clustering financial time-series via graph techniques
has been an active research topic [20–24]. Nonetheless, current techniques rely on the assumption
that the underlying graph has a tree structure, which does bring advantages due to its hierarchical
clustering properties, but also have been shown to be unstable [25–27] and not suitable when the data
is not Gaussian distributed [28].
Motivated by practical challenging applications in finance, such as clustering of financial instruments
and network estimation, we investigate the problem of learning graph matrices whose structure follow
that of a Laplacian matrix of an undirected weighted graph for which the data generating process is
assumed to be Student-t distributed. In particular, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a novel formulation for learning undirected weighted graphs under the assumption that the data generating process is Student-t distributed. We solve the underlying
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

