Identifiability in inverse reinforcement learning

Haoyang Cao
Alan Turing Institute
hcao@turing.ac.uk

Samuel N. Cohen
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford and Alan Turing Institute
samuel.cohen@maths.ox.ac.uk

Łukasz Szpruch
School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh and Alan Turing Institute
L.Szpruch@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning attempts to reconstruct the reward function in
a Markov decision problem, using observations of agent actions. As already
observed in Russell [1998] the problem is ill-posed, and the reward function is
not identifiable, even under the presence of perfect information about optimal
behavior. We provide a resolution to this non-identifiability for problems with
entropy regularization. For a given environment, we fully characterize the reward
functions leading to a given policy and demonstrate that, given demonstrations of
actions for the same reward under two distinct discount factors, or under sufficiently
different environments, the unobserved reward can be recovered up to a constant.
We also give general necessary and sufficient conditions for reconstruction of
time-homogeneous rewards on finite horizons, and for action-independent rewards,
generalizing recent results of Kim et al. [2021] and Fu et al. [2018].

1

Introduction

Inverse reinforcement learning aims to use observations of agents’ actions to determine their reward
function. The problem has roots in the very early stages of optimal control theory; Kalman [1964]
raised the question of whether, by observation of optimal policies, one can recover coefficients of
a quadratic cost function (see also Boyd et al. [1994]). This question naturally generalizes to the
generic framework of Markov decision process and stochastic control.
In the 1970s, these questions were taken up within economics, as a way of determining utility
functions from observations. For instance, Keeney and Raiffa [1976] set out to determine a proper
ordering of all possible states which are deterministic functions of actions. In this setup, the problem
is static and the outcome of an action is immediate. Later in Sargent [1978], a dynamic version
of a utility assessment problem was studied, under the context of finding the proper wage through
observing dynamic labor demand.
As exemplified by Lucas’ critique1 , in many applications it is not enough to find some pattern of
rewards corresponding to observed policies; instead we may need to identify the specific rewards
agents face, as it is only with this information that we can make valid predictions for their actions
in a changed environment. In other words, we do not simply wish to learn a reward which allows
us to imitate agents in the current environment, but which allows us to predict their actions in other
settings.
1

The critique is best summarized by the quotation: “Given that the structure of an econometric model consists
of optimal decision rules of economic agents, and that optimal decision rules vary systematically with changes
in the structure of series relevant to the decision maker, it follows that any change in [regulatory] policy will
systematically alter the structure of econometric models.” (Lucas [1976])
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

