Explainable Semantic Space by Grounding Language
to Vision with Cross-Modal Contrastive Learning
Yizhen Zhang1,2 , Minkyu Choi1 , Kuan Han1 , and Zhongming Liu1,3
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
2
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{zhyz, cminkyu, kuanhan, zmliu}@umich.edu

Abstract
In natural language processing, most models try to learn semantic representations merely from texts. The learned representations encode the “distributional
semantics” but fail to connect to any knowledge about the physical world. In
contrast, humans learn language by grounding concepts in perception and action
and the brain encodes “grounded semantics” for cognition. Inspired by this notion
and recent work in vision-language learning, we design a two-stream model for
grounding language learning in vision. The model includes a VGG-based visual
stream and a Bert-based language stream. The two streams merge into a joint
representational space. Through cross-modal contrastive learning, the model first
learns to align visual and language representations with the MS COCO dataset.
The model further learns to retrieve visual objects with language queries through a
cross-modal attention module and to infer the visual relations between the retrieved
objects through a bilinear operator with the Visual Genome dataset. After training,
the model’s language stream is a stand-alone language model capable of embedding
concepts in a visually grounded semantic space. This semantic space manifests
principal dimensions explainable with human intuition and neurobiological knowledge. Word embeddings in this semantic space are predictive of human-defined
norms of semantic features and are segregated into perceptually distinctive clusters.
Furthermore, the visually grounded language model also enables compositional
language understanding based on visual knowledge and multimodal image search
with queries based on images, texts, or their combinations.

1

Introduction

Humans take much longer time to name a colored word when the color and the word mismatch (e.g.,
“red” shown in green) than when they match (e.g., “red” shown in red) [1]. This effect is an example
of rich psychological evidence suggesting that humans learn language by grounding meanings to
knowledge about the world [2, 3]. In contrast, most models in natural language processing (NLP)
[4–7] encode “distributional semantics” [8] learned from texts only. Put yourself as machines in a
thought experiment for the “Chinese Room Argument” [9]. Imagine that you have to learn Chinese
from scratch as your first language. All that you have is a Chinese-to-Chinese dictionary. You might
be able to relate a word to other words based on textual distributions. It is, however, impossible to
learn word meanings without any additional explanation in reference to the physical world [10].
A language model may learn concepts from texts paired with sensory data, such as images. Joint
vision-language learning has been explored for image captioning [11], visual question answering
[12], and pre-training vision models with weak supervision [13, 14]. In line with these studies, we
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

