Adjusting for Autocorrelated Errors in Neural
Networks for Time Series
Fan-Keng Sun
Department of EECS, MIT
fankeng@mit.edu

Christopher I. Lang
Department of EECS, MIT
langc@mit.edu

Duane S. Boning
Department of EECS, MIT
boning@mtl.mit.edu

Abstract
An increasing body of research focuses on using neural networks to model time
series. A common assumption in training neural networks via maximum likelihood
estimation on time series is that the errors across time steps are uncorrelated.
However, errors are actually autocorrelated in many cases due to the temporality
of the data, which makes such maximum likelihood estimations inaccurate. In
this paper, in order to adjust for autocorrelated errors, we propose to learn the
autocorrelation coefficient jointly with the model parameters. In our experiments,
we verify the effectiveness of our approach on time series forecasting. Results
across a wide range of real-world datasets with various state-of-the-art models show
that our method enhances performance in almost all cases. Based on these results,
we suggest empirical critical values to determine the severity of autocorrelated
errors. We also analyze several aspects of our method to demonstrate its advantages.
Finally, other time series tasks are also considered to validate that our method is
not restricted to only forecasting.

1

Introduction

Time series data are increasingly ubiquitous as the cost of data collection continues to decrease.
Analysts seek to model such data even when the underlying data-generating process (DGP) is
unknown, in order to perform various tasks such as time series forecasting, classification, regression,
and anomaly detection. For example, industrial internet of things (IIoT) sensors are being installed
around manufacturing equipment to collect time series data that can help to increase the efficiency of
day-to-day manufacturing operations.
During the collection and modeling of time series, there are inevitably errors. It is common to assume
that errors at different time steps are uncorrelated, especially for fitting neural networks (NNs) under
the framework of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). However, errors are actually oftentimes
autocorrelated due to the temporality of the data interacting with the three sources noted below.
The first source is the omission of influential variables. In real-world situations, determining which
variables to collect and include in the model is a complicated task. For example, temperature should
be an important variable to consider if we want to forecast household electricity consumption. But
publicly available electricity datasets, which many previous works are compared upon [37, 38, 54,
57, 64], do not include such information. Even if we were to add temperature as a variable, there
are still many other variables that might be influential. In many real-world cases, in order to have
satisfactory prediction results, it is either too complicated to decide which and how many variables
are required, or impossible to collect all the required variables. Omitting influential variables can
result in autocorrelated errors.
Secondly, measurement errors are almost unavoidable, and measurement errors in time series are
usually autocorrelated due to the temporality of the data. For example, when taking time-sampled
measurements in semiconductor fabrication equipment, sensor noise may exist due to drift, calibration
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

