Bootstrap Your Object Detector via Mixed Training

Mengde Xu1,3∗

Zheng Zhang1,3∗
Stephen Lin3
1

Fangyun Wei3∗
Han Hu3

Yutong Lin2,3∗

Yue Cao3

Xiang Bai1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
We introduce MixTraining, a new training paradigm for object detection that can
improve the performance of existing detectors for free. MixTraining enhances data
augmentation by utilizing augmentations of different strengths while excluding
the strong augmentations of certain training samples that may be detrimental to
training. In addition, it addresses localization noise and missing labels in human
annotations by incorporating pseudo boxes that can compensate for these errors.
Both of these MixTraining capabilities are made possible through bootstrapping
on the detector, which can be used to predict the difficulty of training on a strong
augmentation, as well as to generate reliable pseudo boxes thanks to the robustness
of neural networks to labeling error. MixTraining is found to bring consistent
improvements across various detectors on the COCO dataset. In particular, the
performance of Faster R-CNN [24] with a ResNet-50 [13] backbone is improved
from 41.7 mAP to 44.0 mAP, and the accuracy of Cascade-RCNN [1] with a
Swin-Small [22] backbone is raised from 50.9 mAP to 52.8 mAP.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental task of computer vision. Its goal is to locate the bounding boxes
of objects in an image as well as to classify them. Due to the complexity and diversity of the
real world, this problem remains challenging despite the considerable attention it attracts. Most
previous works focus on developing better detection frameworks [24, 34, 5, 2, 21, 23, 16] or stronger
network architectures [18, 1, 14, 28, 12, 14]. In addition, there are some that study data augmentation
strategies [10, 6, 4], label assignment [39, 17], or training losses [19, 25]. In general, the existing
works follow a standard training paradigm where the network takes training images that are augmented
by a single data augmentation strategy and the human-annotated bounding boxes are simply used as
the training targets. We refer to this approach as SiTraining. Few works explore alternative training
methods, which have been based on distillation [3, 32, 40] or dynamic adjustment of label assignment
criteria and regression loss [35].
In this work, we expand the power of an augmentation strategy and the utility of human-annotated
boxes through a new training paradigm for object detection. We observe that suitable magnitudes of
an augmentation can vary from image to image, where a strong augmentation of certain images will
enrich the training data, but may degrade the data when applied to other images, such as by altering
the object appearance to become less compatible with the object class. Based on this, we present a
mixed augmentation strategy that utilizes both strong and normal augmentations in a manner that
takes advantage of strong augmentations only on images where they are expected to be helpful.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

