Towards optimally abstaining from prediction
with OOD test examples

Adam Tauman Kalai
Microsoft Research

Varun Kanade
University of Oxford

Abstract
A common challenge across all areas of machine learning is that training data is
not distributed like test data, due to natural shifts, “blind spots,” or adversarial
examples; such test examples are referred to as out-of-distribution (OOD) test
examples. We consider a model where one may abstain from predicting, at a fixed
cost. In particular, our transductive abstention algorithm takes labeled training
examples and unlabeled test examples as input, and provides predictions with
optimal prediction loss guarantees. The loss bounds match standard generalization
bounds when test examples are i.i.d. from the training distribution, but add an
additional term that is the cost of abstaining times the statistical distance between
the train and test distribution (or the fraction of adversarial examples). For linear
regression, we give a polynomial-time algorithm based on Celis-Dennis-Tapia
optimization algorithms. For binary classification, we show how to efficiently
implement it using a proper agnostic learner (i.e., an Empirical Risk Minimizer)
for the class of interest. Our work builds on a recent abstention algorithm of
Goldwasser, Kalais, and Montasser [10] for transductive binary classification.

1

Introduction

For learning of a class of functions F of bounded complexity, statistical learning theory guarantees
low error if test examples are distributed like training examples. Thus abstention is not necessary
for standard realizable prediction. However, when the test distribution Q is not the same as the
distribution of training examples P , abstaining from prediction may be beneficial if the cost of
abstaining α is substantially less than the cost of an error. This is particularly important when
there are “blind spots” where Q(x) > P (x) = 0. Such blind spots may occur because of natural
distribution shifts, or indeed may be due to adversarial attacks. Collectively, test examples that deviate
from the training distribution are referred to as out of distribution (OOD) test examples. Such an
extreme covariate shift scenario was analyzed for binary classification in recent work by Goldwasser,
Kalais, and Montasser [10] (henceforth GKKM).
Abstaining from predicting may be useful because it is well-known to be impossible to guarantee
accuracy on test examples from arbitrary Q 6= P (abstention is unnecessary under the common
assumption that Q(x)/P (x) is upper-bounded) [7]. Whether one is classifying images or predicting
the probability of success of a medical procedure, training data may miss important regions of test
examples. As an example, Fang et al. [9] observed noticeable signs of COVID-19 in many lung scans;
any model trained on data pre-2019 would not have any such instances in its training dataset. In the
case of image classification, a classifier may be trained on publicly available data but may be also
used on people’s private images or even adversarial spam/phishing images [21]. In settings such as
medical diagnoses or content moderation, abstention may be much less costly than a misclassification.
In practice, if a model abstains from making a prediction, it could be followed up by a more elaborate
(and costly) model or direct human intervention. The extra costs of human intervention, or as may be
the case in a medical setting, a more expensive test, needs to be traded off with the potential costs of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

