A Gradient Method for Multilevel Optimization

Ryo Sato
The University of Tokyo

Mirai Tanaka
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
RIKEN

Akiko Takeda
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN

Abstract
Although application examples of multilevel optimization have already been discussed since the 1990s, the development of solution methods was almost limited
to bilevel cases due to the difficulty of the problem. In recent years, in machine
learning, Franceschi et al. have proposed a method for solving bilevel optimization problems by replacing their lower-level problems with the T steepest descent
update equations with some prechosen iteration number T . In this paper, we have
developed a gradient-based algorithm for multilevel optimization with n levels
based on their idea and proved that our reformulation asymptotically converges
to the original multilevel problem. As far as we know, this is one of the first
algorithms with some theoretical guarantee for multilevel optimization. Numerical experiments show that a trilevel hyperparameter learning model considering
data poisoning produces more stable prediction results than an existing bilevel
hyperparameter learning model in noisy data settings.

1

Introduction

Multilevel optimization When modeling real-world problems, there is often a hierarchy of decisionmakers, and decisions are taken at different levels in the hierarchy. In this work, we consider multilevel
optimization problems whose simplest form1 is the following:
min

∗
x1 ∈S1 ⊆Rd1 ,x∗
2 ,...,xn

f1 (x1 , x∗2 , . . . , x∗n ) s.t.
x∗2 =

argmin
∗
x2 ∈Rd2 ,x∗
3 ,...,xn

..

f2 (x1 , x2 , x∗3 , . . . , x∗n ) s.t.
(1)

.
x∗n = argmin fn (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ),
xn ∈Rdn

where di is positive integers, xi ∈ Rdi is the decision variable at the ith level, and fi : Rdi → R is
the objective function of the ith level for i = 1, . . . , n. In the formulation, an optimization problem
contains another optimization problem as a constraint. The framework can be used to formulate
problems in which decisions are made in sequence and earlier decisions influence later decisions. An
optimization problem in which this structure is n-fold is called an n-level optimization problem or a
multilevel optimization problem especially when n ≥ 3.
Existing study on bilevel optimization Especially, when n = 2 in (1), it is called a bilevel
optimization problem. Bilevel optimization or multilevel optimization has been a well-known
problem in the field of optimization since the 1980s or 1990s respectively (see the survey paper
[24] for the research at that time), and their solution methods have been studied mainly on bilevel
1

This assumes that lower-level problems have unique optimal solutions x∗2 , . . . , x∗n for the simplicity.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

