Exploring Cross-Video and Cross-Modality Signals
for Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing

Yan-Bo Lin1,2 Hung-Yu Tseng3 Hsin-Ying Lee4 Yen-Yu Lin1 Ming-Hsuan Yang3,5,6
1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 UNC Chapel Hill 3 UC Merced
4
Snap Research 5 Google Research 6 Yonsei University
yblin@unc.edu htseng6@ucmerced.edu hlee5@snap.com
lin@cs.nctu.edu.tw mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
The audio-visual video parsing task aims to temporally parse a video into audio or
visual event categories. However, it is labor-intensive to temporally annotate audio
and visual events and thus hampers the learning of a parsing model. To this end, we
propose to explore additional cross-video and cross-modality supervisory signals
to facilitate weakly-supervised audio-visual video parsing. The proposed method
exploits both the common and diverse event semantics across videos to identify
audio or visual events. In addition, our method explores event co-occurrence across
audio, visual, and audio-visual streams. We leverage the explored cross-modality
co-occurrence to localize segments of target events while excluding irrelevant
ones. The discovered supervisory signals across different videos and modalities
can greatly facilitate the training with only video-level annotations. Quantitative
and qualitative results demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably
against existing methods on weakly-supervised audio-visual video parsing.

1

Introduction

Humans perceive multisensory signals via seeing, hearing, touching, etc., and obtain multimodal
information while exploring the surrounding environments. Visual and audio signals, the most
common modalities, motivate researchers to jointly comprehend audio-visual events (e.g., see people
singing and hear their sounds) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Events visible in images while hearable in
audio are referred to as audio-visual events. However, learning-based models tend to recognize a
particular audio-visual event by using the data from the dominant modality with richer information
and overlook clues from either audio only or visual only events which still contribute to holistic
video understanding. Therefore, the resultant models can generalize well on audio-visual events only
instead of comprehensively understanding all kinds of video events. To address this issue, we target
at audio-visual video parsing [4, 6] where predictions for audio, visual, and audio-visual events with
temporal boundaries are all required but separately evaluated.
The time-consuming and labor-intensive annotation process poses a major challenge for the audiovisual video parsing task. To address this issue, Tian et al. [4] handle this task in a weakly-supervised
manner given only video-level labels, which indicate events of presence without temporal boundaries and detailed modalities. They develop an audio-visual co-attention mechanism to assemble
discriminative multimodal representations and use multiple instance learning to aggregate frame-level
predictions into video-level ones. However, video-level labels alone cannot identify which modality
events are from. Wu et al. [6] then propose to perform label refinement by swapping the audio
and visual tracks of different videos to estimate and remove irrelevant event categories for each
modality. They further adopt temporal contrastive learning to align audio and visual representations
from the same frame. However, the contrastive learning is based on the assumption that audio and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

