Heavy Ball Neural Ordinary Differential Equations

Hedi Xia∗
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles

Vai Suliafu ∗
Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Hangjie Ji, Tan M. Nguyen, Andrea L. Bertozzi, and Stanley J. Osher
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bao Wang †
Department of Mathematics
Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Abstract
We propose heavy ball neural ordinary differential equations (HBNODEs), leveraging the continuous limit of the classical momentum accelerated gradient descent,
to improve neural ODEs (NODEs) training and inference. HBNODEs have two
properties that imply practical advantages over NODEs: (i) The adjoint state of an
HBNODE also satisfies an HBNODE, accelerating both forward and backward
ODE solvers, thus significantly reducing the number of function evaluations (NFEs)
and improving the utility of the trained models. (ii) The spectrum of HBNODEs
is well structured, enabling effective learning of long-term dependencies from
complex sequential data. We verify the advantages of HBNODEs over NODEs
on benchmark tasks, including image classification, learning complex dynamics,
and sequential modeling. Our method requires remarkably fewer forward and
backward NFEs, is more accurate, and learns long-term dependencies more effectively than the other ODE-based neural network models. Code is available at
https://github.com/hedixia/HeavyBallNODE.

1

Introduction

Neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) are a family of continuous-depth machine learning
(ML) models whose forward and backward propagations rely on solving an ODE and its adjoint
equation [4]. NODEs model the dynamics of hidden features h(t) ∈ RN using an ODE, which is
parametrized by a neural network f (h(t), t, θ) ∈ RN with learnable parameters θ, i.e.,
dh(t)
= f (h(t), t, θ).
dt

(1)

Starting from the input h(t0 ), NODEs obtain the output h(T ) by solving (1) for t0 ≤
t ≤ T with the initial value h(t0 ), using a black-box numerical ODE solver. The
number of function evaluations (NFEs) that the black-box ODE solver requires in a single forward pass is an analogue for the continuous-depth models [4] to the depth of
networks in ResNets [16]. The loss between NODE prediction h(T ) and the ground
truth is denoted by L(h(T )); we update parameters θ using the following gradient
∗
†

Co-first author
Please correspond to: wangbaonj@gmail.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

