A Domain-Shrinking based Bayesian Optimization
Algorithm with Order-Optimal Regret Performance

Sudeep Salgia∗ , Sattar Vakili† , Qing Zhao∗
∗
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
{ss3827,qz16}@cornell.edu
†
MediaTek Research, UK
sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com

Abstract
We consider sequential optimization of an unknown function in a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space. We propose a Gaussian process-based algorithm and establish
its order-optimal regret performance (up to a poly-logarithmic factor). This is the
first GP-based algorithm with an order-optimal regret guarantee. The proposed
algorithm is rooted in the methodology of domain shrinking realized through
a sequence of tree-based region pruning and refining to concentrate queries in
increasingly smaller high-performing regions of the function domain. The search
for high-performing regions is localized and guided by an iterative estimation of
the optimal function value to ensure both learning efficiency and computational
efficiency. Compared with the prevailing GP-UCB family of algorithms, the
proposed algorithm reduces computational complexity by a factor of O(T 2d−1 )
(where T is the time horizon and d the dimension of the function domain).

1

Introduction

Consider a black-box optimization problem with an unknown objective function f : X → R, where
X ⊂ Rd is a convex and compact set. The learner can access the function only through a noisy oracle,
which, when queried with a point x ∈ X , returns a noisy function value at that point. The learning
objective is to approach the maximizer x∗ of the function through a sequence of query points {xt }Tt=1
chosen sequentially in time. The learning efficiency is measured by cumulative regret given by
R(T ) =

T
X

[f (x∗ ) − f (xt )] .

(1)

t=1

This cumulative regret measure dictates the online nature of the problem: every query point during
the learning process carries loss, not just the end point xT after learning concludes. The classical
exploration-exploitation tradeoff in online learning hence ensues.
1.1

Gaussian Process Models

The above problem is ill-posed unless certain structure of the unknown objective function f is
assumed to make learning x∗ feasible. One such structural assumption is the convexity of f , which
leads to the class of stochastic convex optimization problems. Another class of black-box optimization
problems that is gaining interest in recent years is kernel-based learning where f is assumed to live in
a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) associated with a positive-definite kernel. An effective
approach to kernel-based black-box optimization is Bayesian optimization that adopts a fictitious
prior on the unknown function f . In other words, while f is deterministic, it is viewed internally by
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

