AC/DC: Alternating Compressed/DeCompressed
Training of Deep Neural Networks

Alexandra Peste ∗
IST Austria

Eugenia Iofinova
IST Austria

Adrian Vladu
CNRS & IRIF

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic

Abstract
The increasing computational requirements of deep neural networks (DNNs) have
led to significant interest in obtaining DNN models that are sparse, yet accurate.
Recent work has investigated the even harder case of sparse training, where the
DNN weights are, for as much as possible, already sparse to reduce computational
costs during training. Existing sparse training methods are often empirical and
can have lower accuracy relative to the dense baseline. In this paper, we present a
general approach called Alternating Compressed/DeCompressed (AC/DC) training
of DNNs, demonstrate convergence for a variant of the algorithm, and show
that AC/DC outperforms existing sparse training methods in accuracy at similar
computational budgets; at high sparsity levels, AC/DC even outperforms existing
methods that rely on accurate pre-trained dense models. An important property of
AC/DC is that it allows co-training of dense and sparse models, yielding accurate
sparse–dense model pairs at the end of the training process. This is useful in
practice, where compressed variants may be desirable for deployment in resourceconstrained settings without re-doing the entire training flow, and also provides us
with insights into the accuracy gap between dense and compressed models. The
code is available at: https://github.com/IST-DASLab/ACDC.

1

Introduction

The tremendous progress made by deep neural networks in solving diverse tasks has driven significant
research and industry interest in deploying efficient versions of these models. To this end, entire families of model compression methods have been developed, such as pruning [29] and quantization [22],
which are now accompanied by hardware and software support [55, 8, 11, 43, 23].
Neural network pruning, which is the focus of this paper, is the compression method with arguably
the longest history [38]. The basic goal of pruning is to obtain neural networks for which many
connections are removed by being set to zero, while maintaining the network’s accuracy. A myriad
pruning methods have been proposed—please see [29] for an in-depth survey—and it is currently
understood that many popular networks can be compressed by more than an order of magnitude, in
terms of their number of connections, without significant accuracy loss.
Many accurate pruning methods require a fully-accurate, dense variant of the model, from which
weights are subsequently removed. A shortcoming of this approach is the fact that the memory and
computational savings due to compression are only available for the inference, post-training phase,
and not during training itself. This distinction becomes important especially for large-scale modern
models, which can have millions or even billions of parameters, and for which fully-dense training
can have high computational and even non-trivial environmental costs [53].
One approach to address this issue is sparse training, which essentially aims to remove connections
from the neural network as early as possible during training, while still matching, or at least approximating, the accuracy of the fully-dense model. For example, the RigL technique [16] randomly
∗

Correspondence to: Alexandra Peste <alexandra.peste@ist.ac.at>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

