Learning Policies with Zero or Bounded Constraint
Violation for Constrained MDPs
Tao Liu∗
Texas A&M University
tliu@tamu.edu

Ruida Zhou∗
Texas A&M University
ruida@tamu.edu

P. R. Kumar
Texas A&M University
prk@tamu.edu

Dileep Kalathil
Texas A&M University
dileep.kalathil@tamu.edu
Chao Tian
Texas A&M University
chao.tian@tamu.edu

Abstract
We address the issue of safety in reinforcement learning. We pose the problem
in an episodic framework of a constrained Markov decision process.
√ Existing
Õ(
results have shown
that
it
is
possible
to
achieve
a
reward
regret
of
K) while
√
allowing an Õ( K) constraint violation in K episodes. A critical question that
arises is whether it is possible to keep the constraint violation even smaller. We
show that when a strictly safe policy is known, then one can confine the system to
zero constraint violation
with arbitrarily high probability while keeping the reward
√
regret of order Õ( K). The algorithm which does so employs the principle of
optimistic pessimism in the face of uncertainty to achieve safe exploration. When
no strictly safe policy is known, though one is known to exist, then it is possible to
restrict the system to bounded constraint violation with arbitrarily high probability.
This is shown to be realized by a primal-dual algorithm with an optimistic primal
estimate and a pessimistic dual update.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) addresses the problem of learning an optimal control policy that
maximizes the expected cumulative reward while interacting with an unknown environment [25].
Standard RL algorithms typically focus only on maximizing a single objective. However, in many
real-world applications, the control policy learned by an RL algorithm has to additionally satisfy
stringent safety constraints [9, 4]. For example, an autonomous vehicle may need to reach its
destination in the minimum possible time without violating safety constraints such as crossing the
middle of the road. The Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) [2, 12] formalism, where one
seeks to maximize a reward while satisfying safety constraints, is a standard approach for modeling
the necessary safety criteria of a control problem via constraints on cumulative costs.
Several policy-gradient-based algorithms have been proposed to solve CMDPs. Lagrangian-based
methods [26, 24, 21, 16] formulate the CMDP problem as a saddle-point problem and optimize
it via primal-dual methods, while Constrained Policy Optimization [1, 29] (inspired by the trust
region policy optimization [23]) computes new dual variables from scratch at each update to maintain
constraints during learning. Although these algorithms provide ways to learn an optimal policy,
performance guarantees about reward regret, safety violation or sample complexity are rare.
One class of RL algorithms for which performance guarantees are available follow
√ the principle
of Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU) [8, 10, 22], and provide an Õ( K) guarantee
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

