Uniform Convergence of Interpolators: Gaussian
Width, Norm Bounds and Benign Overfitting
Frederic Koehler⇤
Lijia Zhou⇤
Danica J. Sutherland
Nathan Srebro
MIT
University of Chicago
UBC and Amii
TTI-Chicago
fkoehler@mit.edu
zlj@uchicago.edu
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca
nati@ttic.edu
Collaboration on the Theoretical Foundations of Deep Learning (deepfoundations.ai)

Abstract
We consider interpolation learning in high-dimensional linear regression with
Gaussian data, and prove a generic uniform convergence guarantee on the generalization error of interpolators in an arbitrary hypothesis class in terms of the class’s
Gaussian width. Applying the generic bound to Euclidean norm balls recovers the
consistency result of Bartlett et al. (2020) for minimum-norm interpolators, and
confirms a prediction of Zhou et al. (2020) for near-minimal-norm interpolators
in the special case of Gaussian data. We demonstrate the generality of the bound
by applying it to the simplex, obtaining a novel consistency result for minimum
`1 -norm interpolators (basis pursuit). Our results show how norm-based generalization bounds can explain and be used to analyze benign overfitting, at least in
some settings.

1

Introduction

The traditional understanding of machine learning suggests that models with zero training error tend
to overfit, and explicit regularization is often necessary to achieve good generalization. Given the
empirical success of deep learning models with zero training error (Neyshabur et al. 2015; Zhang
et al. 2017) and the (re-)discovery of the “double descent” phenomenon (Belkin et al. 2019), however,
it has become clear that the textbook U-shaped learning curve is only part of a larger picture: it is
possible for an overparameterized model with zero training loss to achieve low population error in
a noisy setting. In an effort to understand how interpolation learning occurs, there has been much
recent study of the testbed problem of linear regression with Gaussian features (e.g. Hastie et al.
2019; Bartlett et al. 2020; Belkin et al. 2020; Ju et al. 2020; Muthukumar et al. 2020; Negrea et al.
2020; Tsigler and Bartlett 2020; Zhou et al. 2020). Significant progress has been made in this setting,
including nearly-matching necessary and sufficient conditions for consistency of the minimal `2 norm
interpolator (Bartlett et al. 2020).
Despite the fundamental role of uniform convergence in statistical learning theory, most of this line
of work has used other techniques to analyze the particular minimal-norm interpolator.1 Instead of
directly analyzing the population error of a learning algorithm, a uniform convergence-type argument
would control the worst-case generalization gap over a class of predictors containing the typical
outputs of a learning rule. Typically, this is done because for many algorithms – unlike the minimal
Euclidean norm interpolator – it is difficult to exactly characterize the learned predictor, but we
may be able to say e.g. that its norm is not too large. Since uniform convergence does not tightly
depend on a specific algorithm, the resulting analysis can highlight the key properties that lead to
good generalization: it can give bounds not only for, say, the minimal-norm interpolator, but also
⇤

These authors contributed equally.
Negrea et al. (2020) argue that Bartlett et al. (2020)’s proof technique is fundamentally based on uniform convergence of a surrogate predictor; Yang et al. (2021) study a closely related setting with a uniform
convergence-type argument, but do not establish consistency. We discuss both papers in more detail in Section 4.
1

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

