Combinatorial Optimization for Panoptic
Segmentation: A Fully Differentiable Approach

Ahmed Abbas

Paul Swoboda
MPI for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
We propose a fully differentiable architecture for simultaneous semantic and instance segmentation (a.k.a. panoptic segmentation) consisting of a convolutional
neural network and an asymmetric multiway cut problem solver. The latter solves
a combinatorial optimization problem that elegantly incorporates semantic and
boundary predictions to produce a panoptic labeling. Our formulation allows to
directly maximize a smooth surrogate of the panoptic quality metric by backpropagating the gradient through the optimization problem. Experimental evaluation
shows improvement by backpropagating through the optimization problem w.r.t.
comparable approaches on Cityscapes and COCO datasets. Overall, our approach
of combinatorial optimization for panoptic segmentation (COPS) shows the utility
of using optimization in tandem with deep learning in a challenging large scale
real-world problem and showcases benefits and insights into training such an
architecture.

1

Introduction

Panoptic segmentation is the task of simultaneously segmenting different semantic classes and
instances of the same class [37]. Panoptic segmentation is challenging since neural networks (NN)
may produce conflicting predictions (i.e. boundaries separating instances that are not closed contours,
instance voting schemes with multiple maxima per instance etc.). Therefore most approaches combine
NNs with a post-processing step to compute a final panoptic segmentation that resolves the conflicting
evidence produced by NNs. In general, joint training of NNs with post-processing algorithms is an
active research area. In our work we propose a fully differentiable approach for panoptic segmentation,
our post-processing being a combinatorial optimization problem.
In this work we pursue the bottom-up approach building segmentations directly from pixels and
combine CNNs with the asymmetric multiway cut problem (AMWC) [42]. The latter is an elegant
combinatorial optimization problem that combines semantic and affinity predictions and directly
produces a panoptic labeling. We train CNN and AMWC jointly so that the supervisory signal for
training the CNN is influenced by the computations of the combinatorial optimization stage. The
loss we propose to use for this training differs from common lower-level CNN losses and is a smooth
surrogate closely corresponding to the final panoptic quality metric [37]. We show in this work how
our conceptual contributions, i.e. using AMWC as a differentiable module and training on surrogate
panoptic quality loss can be made to work together and yield performance improvements.
The general idea of combining optimization and neural networks and train them jointly has recently
enjoyed resurgent interest. The fundamental problem for the specific task of combinatorial optimization is that the output of combinatorial problem is 0–1 valued, hence the loss landscape becomes
piecewise constant and simply differentiating through a solver is not possible anymore. Several
methods have been proposed to address this problem [10, 24, 26, 31, 56, 64]. To our knowledge our
work is the first to utilize the perturbation techniques [24, 64] on a large-scale setting with scalable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

