Stochastic Online Linear Regression: the Forward
Algorithm to Replace Ridge

Reda Ouhamma
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000
reda.ouhamma@univ-lille.fr
Odalric. Maillard
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000
Vianney. Perchet
Criteo, ENSAE, ENS PARIS-SACLAY

Abstract
We consider the problem of online linear regression in the stochastic setting. We
derive high probability regret bounds for online ridge regression and the forward
algorithm. This enables us to compare online regression algorithms more accurately
and eliminate assumptions of bounded observations and predictions. Our study
advocates for the use of the forward algorithm in lieu of ridge due to its enhanced
bounds and robustness to the regularization parameter. Moreover, we explain how
to integrate it in algorithms involving linear function approximation to remove a
boundedness assumption without deteriorating theoretical bounds. We showcase
this modification in linear bandit settings where it yields improved regret bounds.
Last, we provide numerical experiments to illustrate our results and endorse our
intuitions.

1

Introduction and preliminaries

The forward regression algorithm, popularized in [24, 3], shows competitive performance bounds
in the challenging setup of online regression with adversarial bounded observations. We revisit the
analysis of this strategy in the practically relevant alternative situation of stochastic linear regression
with sub-Gaussian noise, hence possibly unbounded observations. When compared to the classical
ridge regression strategy - its natural competitor - the existing analysis in the adversarial bounded
case suggests the forward algorithm has higher performances. It is then natural to ask whether
this conclusion holds for the stochastic setup. However, we show that in the stochastic setup, the
existing adversarial analysis does not seem sufficient to draw conclusions, as it does not capture some
important phenomena, such as the concentration of the parameter estimate around the regression
parameter. It may further lead the practitioner to use an improper tuning of the regularization
parameter. In order to overcome these issues, we revisit the analysis of the forward algorithm in the
case of unbounded sub-Gaussian linear regression and provide a high probability regret bound on
the performance of the forward and ridge regression strategies. Owing to this refined analysis, we
show that the forward algorithm is superior in this scenario as well, but for different reasons than
what is suggested by the adversarial analysis. We discuss the implications of this result in a practical
application: stochastic linear bandits, both from theoretical and experimental perspectives.
Setup: In the classical setting of online regression with the square loss, an environment initially
chooses a sequence of feature vectors {xt }t ∈ Rd together with corresponding observations {yt }t ∈
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

