Regularization in ResNet with Stochastic Depth

Fadhel Ayed∗
Huawei Technologies
France

Soufiane Hayou∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
United Kingdom

Abstract
Regularization plays a major role in modern deep learning. From classic techniques
such as L1 , L2 penalties to other noise-based methods such as Dropout, regularization often yields better generalization properties by avoiding overfitting. Recently,
Stochastic Depth (SD) has emerged as an alternative regularization technique for
residual neural networks (ResNets) and has proven to boost the performance of
ResNet on many tasks [Huang et al., 2016]. Despite the recent success of SD, little
is known about this technique from a theoretical perspective. This paper provides
a hybrid analysis combining perturbation analysis and signal propagation to shed
light on different regularization effects of SD. Our analysis allows us to derive
principled guidelines for choosing the survival rates used for training with SD.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Depth (SD) is a well-established regularization method that was first introduced by Huang
et al. [2016]. It is similar in principle to Dropout [Hinton et al., 2012, Srivastava et al., 2014] and
DropConnect [Wan et al., 2013]. It belongs to the family of noise-based regularization techniques,
which includes other methods such as noise injection in data [Webb, 1994, Bishop, 1995] and noise
injection throughout the network [Camuto et al., 2020]. While Dropout, resp. DropConnect consists
of removing some neurons, resp. weights, at each iteration, SD randomly drops full layers, and
only updates the weights of the resulting subnetwork at each training iteration. As a result of this
mechanism, SD can be exclusively used with residual neural networks (ResNets).
There exists a stream of papers in the literature on the regularization effect of Dropout for linear
models [Wager et al., 2013, Mianjy and Arora, 2019, Helmbold and Long, 2015, Cavazza et al., 2017].
Recent work by Wei et al. [2020] extended this analysis to deep neural networks using second-order
perturbation analysis. It disentangled the explicit regularization of Dropout on the loss function
and the implicit regularization on the gradient. Similarly, Camuto et al. [2020] studied the explicit
regularization effect induced by adding Gaussian Noise to the activations and empirically illustrated
the benefits of this regularization scheme. However, to the best of our knowledge, no analytical study
of SD exists in the literature. This paper aims to fill this gap by studying the regularization effect of
SD from an analytical point of view; this allows us to derive principled guidelines on the choice of
the survival probabilities for network layers. Concretely, our contributions are four-fold:
• We show that SD acts as an explicit regularizer on the loss function by penalizing a notion
of information discrepancy between keeping and removing certain layers.
• We prove that the uniform mode, defined as the choice of constant survival probabilities, is
related to maximum regularization using SD.
• We study the large depth behaviour of SD and show that in this limit, SD mimics Gaussian
Noise Injection by implicitly adding data-adaptive Gaussian noise to the pre-activations.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: <soufiane.hayou@yahoo.fr; fadhel.ayed@huawei.com>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

