Validation Free and Replication Robust
Volume-based Data Valuation
Xinyi Xu†§∗, Zhaoxuan Wu‡¶∗, Chuan Sheng Foo§ , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low†
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore‡
Integrative Sciences and Engineering Programme, NUSGS, Republic of Singapore¶
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Republic of Singapore§
{xuxinyi,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg†
wu.zhaoxuan@u.nus.edu‡¶
foo_chuan_sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg§

Abstract
Data valuation arises as a non-trivial challenge in real-world use cases such as
collaborative machine learning, federated learning, trusted data sharing, data marketplaces. The value of data is often associated with the learning performance (e.g.,
validation accuracy) of a model trained on the data, which introduces a close coupling between data valuation and validation. However, a validation set may not
be available in practice and it can be challenging for the data providers to reach
an agreement on the choice of the validation set. Another practical issue is that of
data replication: Given the value of some data points, a dishonest data provider
may replicate these data points to exploit the valuation for a larger reward/payment.
We observe that the diversity of the data points is an inherent property of a dataset
that is independent of validation. We formalize diversity via the volume of the data
matrix (i.e., determinant of its left Gram), which allows us to establish a formal connection between the diversity of data and learning performance without requiring
validation. Furthermore, we propose a robust volume measure with a theoretical
guarantee on the replication robustness by following the intuition that copying the
same data points does not increase the diversity of data. We perform extensive
experiments to demonstrate its consistency in valuation and practical advantages
over existing baselines and show that our method is model- and task-agnostic and
can be flexibly adapted to handle various neural networks.

1

Introduction

Data is increasingly recognized as a valuable resource [19], so we need a principled measure of its
worth. A suitable data valuation has wide-ranging applications such as fairly compensating clinical
trial researchers for their collected data [12, 16, 25], fostering collaborative machine learning and
federated learning among industrial organizations [35, 36, 39], encouraging trusted data sharing and
building data marketplaces [7, 30, 32, 37], among others.
A popular viewpoint is that the value of data should correlate with the learning performance of a model
trained on the data [14, 18], which enforces a close coupling between data valuation and validation.
However, a validation set may not always be available in practice [35]. Also, as different choices
of the validation set can lead to different data valuations, it is challenging for the data providers to
agree on the choice of such a validation set [35]. Since valuation is coupled with validation, if the
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

