Adaptive Data Augmentation on Temporal Graphs

Yiwei Wang1 Yujun Cai2 Yuxuan Liang1 Henghui Ding3
Changhu Wang3 Siddharth Bhatia1 Bryan Hooi1
1
National University of Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University
3
ByteDance
wangyw_seu@foxmail.com, {yujun001,ding0093}@e.ntu.edu.sg,
yuxliang@outlook.com, changhu.wang@gmail.com,
{siddharth,bhooi}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Temporal Graph Networks (TGNs) are powerful on modeling temporal graph data
based on their increased complexity. Higher complexity carries with it a higher
risk of overfitting, which makes TGNs capture random noise instead of essential
semantic information. To address this issue, our idea is to transform the temporal
graphs using data augmentation (DA) with adaptive magnitudes, so as to effectively
augment the input features and preserve the essential semantic information. Based
on this idea, we present the MeTA (Memory Tower Augmentation) module: a
multi-level module that processes the augmented graphs of different magnitudes on
separate levels, and performs message passing across levels to provide adaptively
augmented inputs for every prediction. MeTA can be flexibly applied to the training
of popular TGNs to improve their effectiveness without increasing their time
complexity. To complement MeTA, we propose three DA strategies to realistically
model noise by modifying both the temporal and topological features. Empirical
results on standard datasets show that MeTA yields significant gains for the popular
TGN models on edge prediction and node classification in an efficient manner.

1

Introduction

Many real-world graphs are not static but evolving, where every edge (or interaction) has a timestamp
to denote its occurrence time. These graphs are called temporal (or dynamic) graphs [39]. Recently,
temporal graph networks (TGNs) [25, 39, 16] have been proposed to support learning on temporal
graphs. Advanced TGNs utilize an RNN based memory module to represent a node’s history as a
compact state (see Fig. 1), which is used to predict the node’s activities [28]. TGNs are capable of
making predictions from complex graph topology and temporal information , thanks to their advanced
representational power. However, the increased representational capacity comes with higher model
complexity, which can induce over-fitting and weaken their generalization ability. In particular, a
trained TGN may capture random noise instead of semantic information, which is not desired [41].
To combat over-fitting, data augmentation (DA) has been demonstrated to be effective [23]. Nevertheless, DA for the temporal graphs remains under-explored, of which the main challenges lie
in highly irregular dynamic topology. DA applies transformations to input features so as to model
realistic noise for enriching the input data. The magnitudes of the transformations, known as DA
magnitudes, are controlled by hyper-parameters, which is positively related to the difference between
the input features before and after DA [5]. Existing work on image and text data devises adaptive DA
methods, which apply higher DA magnitudes to the less informative parts of input features, in order
to effectively augment the input features while preserving the essential semantic information [38].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

