Instance-Dependent Partial Label Learning

Ning Xu, Congyu Qiao, Xin Geng∗, and Min-Ling Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, Ministry of Education, China
{xning, qiaocy, xgeng, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Partial label learning (PLL) is a typical weakly supervised learning problem, where
each training example is associated with a set of candidate labels among which
only one is true. Most existing PLL approaches assume that the incorrect labels
in each training example are randomly picked as the candidate labels. However,
this assumption is not realistic since the candidate labels are always instancedependent. In this paper, we consider instance-dependent PLL and assume that
each example is associated with a latent label distribution constituted by the
real number of each label, representing the degree to each label describing the
feature. The incorrect label with a high degree is more likely to be annotated
as the candidate label. Therefore, the latent label distribution is the essential
labeling information in partially labeled examples and worth being leveraged for
predictive model training. Motivated by this consideration, we propose a novel
PLL method that recovers the label distribution as a label enhancement (LE)
process and trains the predictive model iteratively in every epoch. Specifically,
we assume the true posterior density of the latent label distribution takes on the
variational approximate Dirichlet density parameterized by an inference model.
Then the evidence lower bound is deduced for optimizing the inference model
and the label distributions generated from the variational posterior are utilized for
training the predictive model. Experiments on benchmark and real-world datasets
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Source code is available at
https://github.com/palm-ml/valen.

1

Introduction

Partial label learning (PLL) deals with the problem where each training example is associated with
a set of candidate labels, among which only one label is valid [7, 5, 37]. Due to the difficulty in
collecting exactly labeled data in many real-world scenarios, PLL leverages inexact supervision
instead of exact labels. The need to learn from the inexact supervision leads to a wide range of
applications for PLL techniques, such as web mining [25], multimedia content analysis [38, 4],
ecoinformatics [24, 31], etc.
To accomplish the task of learning from partial label data, many approaches have been proposed.
Identification-based PLL approaches [17, 28, 24, 5, 37] regard the ground-truth label as a latent
variable and try to identify it. Average-based approaches [15, 7, 40] treat all the candidate labels
equally and average the modeling outputs as the prediction. For confidence-based approaches
[8, 34, 42], the confidence of each label is estimated instead of identifying the ground-truth label.
These approaches always adopt the randomly picked candidate labels to corrupt benchmark data
into partially labeled version despite having no explicit generation process of candidate label sets.
To depict the instance-independent generation process of candidate label sets, Feng [9] proposes a
statistical model and deduces a risk-consistent method and a classifier-consistent method. Under the
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

