Neural Analysis and Synthesis: Reconstructing
Speech from Self-Supervised Representations
Hyeong-Seok Choi1,4
Jie Hwan Lee4

Juheon Lee1,4
Hoon Heo4

Wansoo Kim1,4

Kyogu Lee1,2,3,4

1

MARG, Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University 2 GSAI 3 AIIS
4
Supertone Inc.
{kekepa15, juheon2, wansookim, kglee}@snu.ac.kr, {wiswisbus, hoon}@supertone.ai

Abstract
We present a neural analysis and synthesis (NANSY) framework that can manipulate voice, pitch, and speed of an arbitrary speech signal. Most of the previous
works have focused on using information bottleneck to disentangle analysis features for controllable synthesis, which usually results in poor reconstruction quality.
We address this issue by proposing a novel training strategy based on information
perturbation. The idea is to perturb information in the original input signal (e.g.,
formant, pitch, and frequency response), thereby letting synthesis networks selectively take essential attributes to reconstruct the input signal. Because NANSY
does not need any bottleneck structures, it enjoys both high reconstruction quality
and controllability. Furthermore, NANSY does not require any labels associated
with speech data such as text and speaker information, but rather uses a new set of
analysis features, i.e., wav2vec feature and newly proposed pitch feature, Yingram,
which allows for fully self-supervised training. Taking advantage of fully selfsupervised training, NANSY can be easily extended to a multilingual setting by
simply training it with a multilingual dataset. The experiments show that NANSY
can achieve significant improvement in performance in several applications such
as zero-shot voice conversion, pitch shift, and time-scale modification 1 .

1

Introduction

Analyzing and synthesizing an arbitrary speech signal is inarguably a significant research topic that
has been studied for decades. Traditionally, this has been studied in the digital signal processing
(DSP) field using fundamental methods such as sinusoidal modeling or linear predictive coding
(LPC), and it is the analysis and synthesis framework that lies at the heart of those fundamental
methods [26, 3]. These traditional methods, however, are limited in terms of controllability because
the decomposed representations are still low-level representations. It is obvious that the closer we
decompose a signal into high-level/interpretable representations, the more we gain access to the
controllability. Given this consideration, we aim to design a neural analysis and synthesis (NANSY)
framework by decomposing a speech signal into analysis features that represent pronunciation, timbre,
pitch, and energy. The decomposed representations can be manipulated and re-synthesized, enabling
users to manipulate speech signals in various ways.
It is worth noting that many similar ideas have been recently proposed in the context of voice
conversion applications. We categorize the previous works in two ways, i.e., 1. Text-based approach,
1

audio samples: https://tinyurl.com/eytw7hmb

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

