LLC: Accurate, Multi-purpose Learnt
Low-dimensional Binary Codes

Aditya Kusupati† ,
Matthew Wallingford , Vivek Ramanujan† , Raghav Somani† , Jae Sung Park† , Krishna Pillutla† ,
Prateek Jain‡ , Sham Kakade† and Ali Farhadi†
†
University of Washington, ‡ Google Research India
{kusupati,mcw244,ramanv,raghavs,jspark96,pillutla,sham,ali}@cs.washington.edu,
prajain@google.com
†

Abstract
Learning binary representations of instances and classes is a classical problem
with several high potential applications. In modern settings, the compression of
high-dimensional neural representations to low-dimensional binary codes is a challenging task and often require large bit-codes to be accurate. In this work, we
propose a novel method for Learning Low-dimensional binary Codes (LLC) for
instances as well as classes. Our method does not require any side-information, like
annotated attributes or label meta-data, and learns extremely low-dimensional binary codes (≈ 20 bits for ImageNet-1K). The learnt codes are super-efficient while
still ensuring nearly optimal classification accuracy for ResNet50 on ImageNet-1K.
We demonstrate that the learnt codes capture intrinsically important features in the
data, by discovering an intuitive taxonomy over classes. We further quantitatively
measure the quality of our codes by applying it to the efficient image retrieval as
well as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection problems. For ImageNet-100 retrieval
problem, our learnt binary codes outperform 16 bit HashNet using only 10 bits and
also are as accurate as 10 dimensional real representations. Finally, our learnt binary codes can perform OOD detection, out-of-the-box, as accurately as a baseline
that needs ≈ 3000 samples to tune its threshold, while we require none. Code is
open-sourced at https://github.com/RAIVNLab/LLC.

1

Introduction

Embedding data in low-dimensional binary space is a long-standing machine learning problem [56].
The problem has received a lot of interest in the computer vision (CV) domain, where the goal is to
find binary codes that capture the key semantics of the image, like, objects present in the image or
interpretable attributes. Section 2 covers the literature on learning binary codes and their applications.
In addition to learning semantically meaningful representations of the instances, low-dimensional
binary codes allow efficiency in a variety of large-scale machine learning (ML) applications. Lowdimensional codes are crucial in extreme classification with millions of classes [8, 30, 15] and also
critical in efficient large-scale retrieval settings [38, 16, 59].
Compressing information into binary codes is challenging due to its highly non-smooth nature while
requiring the preservation of relevant information in an instance/class. This might explain the lack
of good classification accuracy for existing classification-based embedding techniques [28, 13]. To
address that, traditional methods often relied on side-information like attributes to construct class
codes and then use that to learn the instance codes [18, 1].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

