Deep Marching Tetrahedra: a Hybrid Representation
for High-Resolution 3D Shape Synthesis

Tianchang Shen 1,2,3

Jun Gao1,2,3

Ming-Yu Liu 1
NVIDIA1

Kangxue Yin 1

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

University of Toronto2

Vector Institute3

{frshen, jung, kangxuey, mingyul, sfidler}@nvidia.com

Abstract
We introduce DMT ET, a deep 3D conditional generative model that can synthesize
high-resolution 3D shapes using simple user guides such as coarse voxels. It
marries the merits of implicit and explicit 3D representations by leveraging a novel
hybrid 3D representation. Compared to the current implicit approaches, which are
trained to regress the signed distance values, DMT ET directly optimizes for the
reconstructed surface, which enables us to synthesize finer geometric details with
fewer artifacts. Unlike deep 3D generative models that directly generate explicit
representations such as meshes, our model can synthesize shapes with arbitrary
topology. The core of DMT ET includes a deformable tetrahedral grid that encodes
a discretized signed distance function and a differentiable marching tetrahedra
layer that converts the implicit signed distance representation to the explicit surface
mesh representation. This combination allows joint optimization of the surface
geometry and topology as well as generation of the hierarchy of subdivisions using
reconstruction and adversarial losses defined explicitly on the surface mesh. Our
approach significantly outperforms existing work on conditional shape synthesis
from coarse voxel inputs, trained on a dataset of complex 3D animal shapes. Project
page: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/DMTet/.

1

Introduction

Fields such as simulation, architecture, gaming, and film rely on high-quality 3D content with rich
geometric details and complex topology. However, creating such content requires tremendous expert
human effort. It takes a significant amount of development time to create each individual 3D asset. In
contrast, creating rough 3D shapes with simple building blocks like voxels has been widely adopted.
For example, Minecraft has been used by hundreds of millions of users for creating 3D content. Most
of them are non-experts. Developing A.I. tools that enable regular people to upscale coarse, voxelized
objects into high resolution, beautiful 3D shapes would bring us one step closer to democratizing
high-quality 3D content creation. Similar tools can be envisioned for turning 3D scans of objects
recorded by modern phones into high-quality forms. Our work aspires to create such capabilities.
A powerful 3D representation is a critical component of a learning-based 3D content creation
framework. A good 3D representation for high-quality reconstruction and synthesis should capture
local geometric details and represent objects with arbitrary topology while also being memory and
computationally efficient for fast inference in interactive applications.
Recently, neural implicit representations [8, 39, 42, 51], which use a neural network to implicitly
represent a shape via a signed distance field (SDF) or an occupancy field (OF), have emerged as
an effective 3D representation. Neural implicits have the benefit of representing complex geometry
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

