A Universal Law of Robustness via Isoperimetry

Sébastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research
sebubeck@microsoft.com

Mark Sellke
Stanford University
msellke@stanford.edu

Abstract
Classically, data interpolation with a parametrized model class is possible as long
as the number of parameters is larger than the number of equations to be satisfied. A puzzling phenomenon in deep learning is that models are trained with
many more parameters than what this classical theory would suggest. We propose
a theoretical explanation for this phenomenon. We prove that for a broad class
of data distributions and model classes, overparametrization is necessary if one
wants to interpolate the data smoothly. Namely we show that smooth interpolation
requires d times more parameters than mere interpolation, where d is the ambient data dimension. We prove this universal law of robustness for any smoothly
parametrized function class with polynomial size weights, and any covariate distribution verifying isoperimetry (or a mixture thereof). In the case of two-layer
neural networks and Gaussian covariates, this law was conjectured in prior work
by Bubeck, Li and Nagaraj. We also give an interpretation of our result as an
improved generalization bound for model classes consisting of smooth functions.

1

Introduction

Solving n equations generically requires only n unknowns1 . However, the revolutionary deep learning methodology revolves around highly overparametrized models, with many more than n parameters to learn from n training data points. We propose an explanation for this enigmatic phenomenon,
showing in great generality that finding a smooth function to fit d-dimensional data requires at least
nd parameters. In other words, overparametrization by a factor of d is necessary for smooth interpolation, suggesting that perhaps the large size of the models used in deep learning is a necessity
rather than a weakness of the framework. Another way to phrase the result is as a tradeoff between
the size of a model (as measured by the number of parameters) and its “robustness” (as measured
by its Lipschitz constant): either one has a small model (with n parameters) which must then be
non-robust, or one has a robust model (constant Lipschitz) but then it must be very large (with nd
parameters). Such a tradeoff was conjectured for the specific case of two-layer neural networks
and Gaussian data in [BLN21]. Our result shows that in fact it is a universal phenomenon, which
applies to essentially any parametrized function class (including in particular deep neural networks)
as well as a much broader class of data distributions. As in [BLN21] we obtain an entire tradeoff
curve between size and robustness: our universal law of robustness states that, for any function class
smoothly parametrized by p parameters, and for any d-dimensional dataset satisfying mild regularity
conditions, any function in thisq
class that fits the data below the noise level must have its (Euclidean)
Lipschitz constant larger than nd
p .
Theorem 1 (Informal version of Theorem 3). Let F be a class of functions from Rd → R and let
(xi , yi )ni=1 be i.i.d. input-output pairs in Rd × [−1, 1]. Assume that:
1. F admits a Lipschitz parametrization by p real parameters, each of size at most poly(n, d).
1

As in, for instance, the inverse function theorem in analysis or Bézout’s theorem in algebraic geometry.
See also [YSJ19, BELM20] for versions of this claim with neural networks.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

