Gradient Descent on Two-layer Nets:
Margin Maximization and Simplicity Bias

Kaifeng Lyu∗ †
Princeton University
klyu@cs.princeton.edu

Zhiyuan Li∗
Princeton University
zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu

Runzhe Wang∗ †
Princeton University
runzhew@princeton.edu

Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University
arora@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
The generalization mystery of overparametrized deep nets has motivated efforts
to understand how gradient descent (GD) converges to low-loss solutions that
generalize well. Real-life neural networks are initialized from small random values
and trained with cross-entropy loss for classification (unlike the "lazy" or "NTK"
regime of training where analysis was more successful), and a recent sequence of
results (Lyu and Li, 2020; Chizat and Bach, 2020; Ji and Telgarsky, 2020a) provide
theoretical evidence that GD may converge to the "max-margin" solution with zero
loss, which presumably generalizes well. However, the global optimality of margin
is proved only in some settings where neural nets are infinitely or exponentially
wide. The current paper is able to establish this global optimality for two-layer
Leaky ReLU nets trained with gradient flow on linearly separable and symmetric
data, regardless of the width. The analysis also gives some theoretical justification
for recent empirical findings (Kalimeris et al., 2019) on the so-called simplicity
bias of GD towards linear or other "simple" classes of solutions, especially early in
training. On the pessimistic side, the paper suggests that such results are fragile.
A simple data manipulation can make gradient flow converge to a linear classifier
with suboptimal margin.

1

Introduction

One major mystery in deep learning is why deep neural networks generalize despite overparameterization (Zhang et al., 2017). To tackle this issue, many recent works turn to study the implicit bias
of gradient descent (GD) — what kind of theoretical characterization can we give for the low-loss
solution found by GD?
The seminal works by Soudry et al. (2018a,b) revealed an interesting connection between GD and
margin maximization: for linear logistic regression on linearly separable data, there can be multiple
linear classifiers that perfectly fit the data, but GD with any initialization always converges to the maxmargin (hard-margin SVM) solution, even when there is no explicit regularization. Thus the solution
found by GD has the same margin-based generalization bounds as hard-margin SVM. Subsequent
works on linear models have extended this theoretical understanding of GD to SGD (Nacson et al.,
2019b), other gradient-based methods (Gunasekar et al., 2018a), other loss functions with certain
poly-exponential tails (Nacson et al., 2019a), linearly non-separable data (Ji and Telgarsky, 2018,
2019b), deep linear nets (Ji and Telgarsky, 2019a; Gunasekar et al., 2018b).
∗
†

Equal contribution
Most of the work is done when Kaifeng Lyu and Runzhe Wang were at Tsinghua University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

