Off-Policy Risk Assessment in Contextual Bandits

Liu Leqi
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
leqil@cs.cmu.edu

Audrey Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
audreyh5@illinois.edu
Zachary C. Lipton
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zlipton@cmu.edu

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
kamyar@purdue.edu

Abstract
Even when unable to run experiments, practitioners can evaluate prospective policies, using previously logged data. However, while the bandits literature has
adopted a diverse set of objectives, most research on off-policy evaluation to date
focuses on the expected reward. In this paper, we introduce Lipschitz risk functionals, a broad class of objectives that subsumes conditional value-at-risk (CVaR),
variance, mean-variance, many distorted risks, and CPT risks, among others. We
propose Off-Policy Risk Assessment (OPRA), a framework that first estimates a target policy’s CDF and then generates plugin estimates for any collection of Lipschitz
risks, providing finite sample guarantees that hold simultaneously over the entire
class. We instantiate OPRA with both importance sampling and doubly robust estimators. Our primary theoretical contributions are (i) the first uniform concentration
inequalities for both CDF estimators in contextual bandits and (ii)√
error bounds on
our Lipschitz risk estimates, which all converge at a rate of O(1/ n).

1

Introduction

Many practical tasks, including medical treatment [50] and content recommendation [31] are commonly modeled within the contextual bandits framework. In the online setting, an agent observes
a context at each step and chooses among the available actions. The agent then receives a contextdependent reward corresponding to the action taken, but cannot observe the rewards corresponding
to alternative actions. In a healthcare setting, the observed context might be a vector capturing
vital signs, lab tests, and other available data, while the action space might consist of the available
treatments. The reward to optimize could be a measure of patient health or treatment response.
While contextual bandits research has traditionally focused on the expected reward, stakeholders
often care about other risk functionals (parameters of the reward distribution) that express real-world
desiderata or have desirable statistical properties. For example, investors assess mutual funds via
the Sharpe ratio, which normalizes returns by their variance [44]. Related works in reinforcement
learning (RL) have sought to estimate the variance of returns [41, 48] and to optimize the mean
return under variance constraints [33]. In safety-critical and financial applications, researchers often
measure the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), which captures the expected return among the lower
α quantile of outcomes [40, 28]. In an emerging line of RL works, researchers have explored other
risk functionals, including cumulative prospect weighting [22], distortion risk measures [13], and
exponential utility functions [16].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

