Shapley Residuals: Quantifying the limits of the
Shapley value for explanations
I. Elizabeth Kumar
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
iekumar@brown.edu

Carlos Scheidegger
Department of Computer Science
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
cscheid@cs.arizona.edu

Suresh Venkatasubramanian
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
suresh@brown.edu

Sorelle A. Friedler
Computer Science Dept.
Haverford College
Haverford, PA 19041
sorelle@cs.haverford.edu

Abstract
Popular feature importance techniques compute additive approximations to nonlinear models by first defining a cooperative game describing the value of different
subsets of the model’s features, then calculating the resulting game’s Shapley
values to attribute credit additively between the features. However, the specific
modeling settings in which the Shapley values are a poor approximation for the
true game have not been well-described. In this paper we utilize an interpretation
of Shapley values as the result of an orthogonal projection between vector spaces
to calculate a residual representing the kernel component of that projection. We
provide an algorithm for computing these residuals, characterize different modeling
settings based on the value of the residuals, and demonstrate that they capture information about model predictions that Shapley values cannot. Shapley residuals can
thus act as a warning to practitioners against overestimating the degree to which
Shapley-value-based explanations give them insight into a model.

1

Introduction

There have been many recent efforts to quantify the importance of features to a model [19, 4, 1, 15,
12, 13]. Many of these determine the importance through estimating the Shapley value of a game
designed to assign importance to sets of features [4, 12, 5, 13, 14, 25]. These Shapley-value-based
feature importance methods are used widely in practice [2].
At the same time, there have been increasing concerns that these game theoretic values may not
completely capture human or technical notions of feature importance [10, 21, 24]. A particularly
salient issue is that users have misconceptions about what Shapley values represent and what actionable information can be gleaned from them [8]. Non-linear complex models, and models built
on correlated features, do not have Shapley values that can be interpreted as the effect of a direct
intervention [10], e.g., so that increasing a variable value changes the model outcome in a predictable
way. The goal of this work is to quantify the extent of these concerns and provide a theoretical
foundation for understanding the limits of Shapley values.
In this work, we introduce Shapley Residuals, vector-valued objects that capture a specific type of
quantitative information lost by Shapley values. Shapley residuals can be associated with individual
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

