AutoBalance: Optimized Loss Functions for
Imbalanced Data
Mingchen Li
Xuechen Zhang
University of California, Riverside
{mli176,xzhan394}@ucr.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis
University of British Columbia
cthrampo@ece.ubc.edu.ca

Jiasi Chen
University of California, Riverside
jiasi@cs.ucr.edu

Samet Oymak
University of California, Riverside
oymak@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
Imbalanced datasets are commonplace in modern machine learning problems. The
presence of under-represented classes or groups with sensitive attributes results in
concerns about generalization and fairness. Such concerns are further exacerbated
by the fact that large capacity deep nets can perfectly fit the training data and appear
to achieve perfect accuracy and fairness during training, but perform poorly during
test. To address these challenges, we propose AutoBalance, a bi-level optimization
framework that automatically designs a training loss function to optimize a blend
of accuracy and fairness-seeking objectives. Specifically, a lower-level problem
trains the model weights, and an upper-level problem tunes the loss function by
monitoring and optimizing the desired objective over the validation data. Our
loss design enables personalized treatment for classes/groups by employing a
parametric cross-entropy loss and individualized data augmentation schemes. We
evaluate the benefits and performance of our approach for the application scenarios
of imbalanced and group-sensitive classification. Extensive empirical evaluations
demonstrate the benefits of AutoBalance over state-of-the-art approaches. Our
experimental findings are complemented with theoretical insights on loss function
design and the benefits of train-validation split. All code is available open-source.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning, large datasets, and the evolution of computing power have led to unprecedented success in computer vision, and natural language processing [15, 39, 62]. This success is
partially driven by the availability of high-quality datasets, built by carefully collecting a sufficient
number of samples for each class. In practice, real-world datasets are frequently imbalanced and
exhibit long-tailed behavior, necessitating a careful treatment of the minorities [20, 53, 23]. Indeed,
modern classification tasks can involve thousands of classes, so it is perhaps intuitive that some
classes should be over/under-represented compared to others. Besides class imbalance, minorities can
also appear at the feature-level; for instance, the specific values of the features of an example can vary
depending on that example’s membership in certain sensitive or protected groups, e.g. race, gender,
disabilities (see also Figure 1a). In scenarios where imbalances are induced by heterogeneous client
datasets (e.g., in the context of federated learning), addressing these imbalances can help ensure that a
machine learning model works well for all clients, rather than just those that generate the majority of
the training data. This rich set of applications motivate the careful treatment of imbalanced datasets.
In the imbalanced classification literature, the recurring theme is maximizing a fairness-seeking
objective, such as balanced accuracy. Unlike standard accuracy, which can be dominated by the
majorities, a fairness-seeking objective seeks to promote examples from minorities, and downweigh
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

