A Kernel-based Test of Independence for
Cluster-correlated Data
Hongjiao Liu
Department of Biostatistics
University of Washington
liuhj@uw.edu

Anna M. Plantinga
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Williams College
amp9@williams.edu

Yunhua Xiang
Department of Biostatistics
University of Washington
xiangyh@uw.edu

Michael C. Wu
Public Health Sciences Division
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
mcwu@fredhutch.org

Abstract
The Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) is a powerful kernel-based
statistic for assessing the generalized dependence between two multivariate variables. However, independence testing based on the HSIC is not directly possible
for cluster-correlated data. Such a correlation pattern among the observations arises
in many practical situations, e.g., family-based and longitudinal data, and requires
proper accommodation. Therefore, we propose a novel HSIC-based independence
test to evaluate the dependence between two multivariate variables based on clustercorrelated data. Using the previously proposed empirical HSIC as our test statistic,
we derive its asymptotic distribution under the null hypothesis of independence
between the two variables but in the presence of sample correlation. Based on both
simulation studies and real data analysis, we show that, with clustered data, our
approach effectively controls type I error and has a higher statistical power than
competing methods.

1

Introduction

We are often interested in studying the dependence between two multivariate variables. For example,
in genetic studies, we may want to assess the association between multiple genetic variants within
a gene and a group of traits that likely share a common genetic mechanism [1, 2]. In microbiome
studies, we may wish to investigate the association between the overall composition of human
microbiota, including hundreds of microbial taxa, and multiple host metabolites from a particular
metabolic pathway [3, 4]. Such multivariate analyses aggregate information across variables and
are often more powerful than univariate analyses. Meanwhile, correlated observations arise in many
practical situations. Family-based designs are common in genetic studies [5], where multiple family
members are recruited together into the study. Longitudinal data are common in epidemiological
studies [6], where variables of interest are measured on the subjects repeatedly over time. Such study
designs introduce clustered dependence among the observations and require proper accommodation.
In this work, we aim to develop an approach for assessing the dependence between two multivariate
variables, based on cluster-correlated data.
A variety of parametric and semi-parametric methods has been proposed to study the association
between one or multiple exposure variables and a multivariate longitudinal (or other cluster-correlated)
outcome. These methods often extend upon existing tools for univariate longitudinal data. For
example, many studies stack the multivariate outcome into a single response vector and then apply the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

