Qimera: Data-free Quantization with Synthetic
Boundary Supporting Samples

Kanghyun Choi1

Deokki Hong2

Noseong Park1,2

Youngsok Kim1,2

Jinho Lee1,2∗

1

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University
{kanghyun.choi, dk.hong, noseong, youngsok, leejinho}@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Model quantization is known as a promising method to compress deep neural
networks, especially for inferences on lightweight mobile or edge devices. However, model quantization usually requires access to the original training data to
maintain the accuracy of the full-precision models, which is often infeasible in
real-world scenarios for security and privacy issues. A popular approach to perform
quantization without access to the original data is to use synthetically generated
samples, based on batch-normalization statistics or adversarial learning. However,
the drawback of such approaches is that they primarily rely on random noise input
to the generator to attain diversity of the synthetic samples. We find that this is often
insufficient to capture the distribution of the original data, especially around the decision boundaries. To this end, we propose Qimera, a method that uses superposed
latent embeddings to generate synthetic boundary supporting samples. For the
superposed embeddings to better reflect the original distribution, we also propose
using an additional disentanglement mapping layer and extracting information
from the full-precision model. The experimental results show that Qimera achieves
state-of-the-art performances for various settings on data-free quantization. Code
is available at https://github.com/iamkanghyunchoi/qimera.

1

Introduction

Among many neural network compression methodologies, quantization is considered a promising
direction because it can be easily supported by accelerator hardwares [1] than pruning [2] and is more
lightweight than knowledge distillation [3]. However, quantization generally requires some form of
adjustment (e.g., fine-tuning) using the original training data [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] to restore the accuracy
drop due to the quantization errors. Unfortunately, access to the original training data is not always
possible, especially for deployment in the field, for many reasons such as privacy and security. For
example, the data could be medical images of patients, photos of confidential products, or pictures of
military assets.
Therefore, data-free quantization is a natural direction to achieve a highly accurate quantized model
without accessing any training data. Among many excellent prior studies [9, 10, 11, 12], generative
methods [13, 14, 15] have recently been drawing much attention due to their superior performance.
Generative methods successfully generate synthetic samples that resemble the distribution of the
original dataset and achieve high accuracy using information from the pretrained full-precision
network, such as batch-normalization statistics [15, 13] or intermediate features [14].
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

