Decentralized Learning in Online Queuing Systems

Flore Sentenac∗
CREST, ENSAE Paris, Palaiseau, France
flore.sentenac@gmail.com

Etienne Boursier∗
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay, France
etienne.boursier1@gmail.com

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE Paris, Palaiseau, France
CRITEO AI Lab, Paris, France
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
Motivated by packet routing in computer networks and resource allocation in radio
networks, online queuing systems are composed of queues receiving packets at
different rates. Repeatedly, they send packets to servers, each of them treating only
at most one packet at a time. In the centralized case, the number of accumulated
packets remains bounded (i.e., the system is stable) as long as the ratio between
service rates and arrival rates is larger than 1. In the decentralized case, individual
no-regret strategies ensures stability when this ratio is larger than 2. Yet, myopically
minimizing regret disregards the long term effects due to the carryover of packets to
further rounds. On the other hand, minimizing long term costs leads to stable Nash
e
equilibria as soon as the ratio exceeds e−1
. Stability with decentralized learning
strategies with a ratio below 2 was a major remaining question. We first argue that
for ratios up to 2, cooperation is required for stability of learning strategies, as
selfish minimization of policy regret, a patient notion of regret, might indeed still
be unstable in this case. We therefore consider cooperative queues and propose
the first learning decentralized algorithm guaranteeing stability of the system as
long as the ratio of rates is larger than 1, thus reaching performances comparable
to centralized strategies.

1

Introduction

Inefficient decisions in repeated games can stem from both strategic and learning considerations.
First, strategic agents selfishly maximize their own individual reward at others’ expense. The price
of anarchy [Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou, 1999] measures this inefficiency as the social welfare
ratio between the best possible situation and the worst Nash equilibrium. Although reaching the
best collective outcome might be illusory for selfish agents, considering the worst Nash equilibrium
might be too pessimistic. In games with external factors, more complex interactions intervene and
might lead the agents to the best equilibrium. Instead, the price of stability [Schulz and Moses, 2003]
measures the inefficiency by the social welfare ratio between the best possible situation and the best
Nash equilibrium.
Second, the agents also have to learn their environment, by repeatedly experimenting different
outcomes. Learning equilibria in repeated games is at the core of many problems in computer science
and economics [Fudenberg et al., 1998, Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]. The interaction between
multiple agents can indeed interfere in the learning process, potentially converging to no or bad
equilibria. It is yet known that in repeated games, if all agents follow no internal regret strategies,
their actions converge in average to the set of correlated equilibria [Hart and Mas-Colell, 2000, Blum
and Monsour, 2007, Perchet, 2014].
∗

Equal contributions
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

