Rectangular Flows for Manifold Learning
Anthony L. Caterini⇤
University of Oxford & Layer 6 AI
anthony@layer6.ai
Geoff Pleiss
Columbia University
gmp2162@columbia.edu

Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem⇤
Layer 6 AI
gabriel@layer6.ai
John P. Cunningham
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Normalizing flows are invertible neural networks with tractable change-of-volume
terms, which allow optimization of their parameters to be efficiently performed via
maximum likelihood. However, data of interest are typically assumed to live in
some (often unknown) low-dimensional manifold embedded in a high-dimensional
ambient space. The result is a modelling mismatch since – by construction – the
invertibility requirement implies high-dimensional support of the learned distribution. Injective flows, mappings from low- to high-dimensional spaces, aim
to fix this discrepancy by learning distributions on manifolds, but the resulting
volume-change term becomes more challenging to evaluate. Current approaches
either avoid computing this term entirely using various heuristics, or assume the
manifold is known beforehand and therefore are not widely applicable. Instead, we
propose two methods to tractably calculate the gradient of this term with respect to
the parameters of the model, relying on careful use of automatic differentiation and
techniques from numerical linear algebra. Both approaches perform end-to-end
nonlinear manifold learning and density estimation for data projected onto this
manifold. We study the trade-offs between our proposed methods, empirically
verify that we outperform approaches ignoring the volume-change term by more
accurately learning manifolds and the corresponding distributions on them, and
show promising results on out-of-distribution detection. Our code is available at
https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/rectangular-flows.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Normalizing Flows (NFs) have become a staple of generative modelling, being
widely used for density estimation [14, 15, 45, 28, 16], variational inference [52, 30], maximum
entropy modelling [37], and more [46, 31]. In density estimation, we typically have access to a set
of points living in some high-dimensional space RD . NFs model the corresponding data-generating
distribution as the pushforward of a simple distribution on RD – often a Gaussian – through a smooth
bijective mapping. Clever construction of these bijections allows for tractable density evaluation and
thus maximum likelihood estimation of the parameters. However, as an immediate consequence of
this choice, the learned distribution has support homeomorphic to RD ; in particular, the resulting
distribution is supported on a set of dimension D. This is not a realistic assumption in practice –
especially for density estimation – as it directly contradicts the manifold hypothesis [6] which states
that high-dimensional data lives on a lower-dimensional manifold embedded in ambient space.
⇤

Authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

