Unsupervised Noise Adaptive Speech Enhancement
by Discriminator-Constrained Optimal Transport

Hsin-Yi Lin
The Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES)
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309, USA
NOAA Physical Sciences Laboratory, Boulder, CO, 80305, USA
hylin@colorado.edu
Huan-Hsin Tseng
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
htseng@citi.sinica.edu.tw
Xugang Lu
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Japan
xugang.lu@nict.go.jp
Yu Tsao
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
yu.tsao@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents a novel discriminator-constrained optimal transport network
(DOTN) that performs unsupervised domain adaptation for speech enhancement
(SE), which is an essential regression task in speech processing. The DOTN aims
to estimate clean references of noisy speech in a target domain, by exploiting the
knowledge available from the source domain. The domain shift between training
and testing data has been reported to be an obstacle to learning problems in diverse
fields. Although rich literature exists on unsupervised domain adaptation for classification, the methods proposed, especially in regressions, remain scarce and often
depend on additional information regarding the input data. The proposed DOTN
approach tactically fuses the optimal transport (OT) theory from mathematical
analysis with generative adversarial frameworks, to help evaluate continuous labels
in the target domain. The experimental results on two SE tasks demonstrate that by
extending the classical OT formulation, our proposed DOTN outperforms previous
adversarial domain adaptation frameworks in a purely unsupervised manner.

1

Introduction

The goal of speech enhancement (SE) is to convert low-quality speech signals to ones with improved
quality and intelligibility. SE serves as an important regression task in the speech-processing field and
has been widely used for a pre-processor in speech-related applications, such as speech coding [1],
automatic speech recognition (ASR) [2], speaker recognition [3], and assistive hearing devices [4, 5].
Recent advances in machine learning have made significant progress to the SE technology. Generally,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

