Learning to Synthesize Programs as Interpretable
and Generalizable Policies
Dweep Trivedi∗ †

Jesse Zhang∗ 1
Shao-Hua Sun1
1
University of Southern California

Joseph J. Lim‡ 1

{dtrivedi, jessez, shaohuas, limjj}@usc.edu

Abstract
Recently, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods have achieved impressive
performance on tasks in a variety of domains. However, neural network policies
produced with DRL methods are not human-interpretable and often have difficulty generalizing to novel scenarios. To address these issues, prior works explore
learning programmatic policies that are more interpretable and structured for generalization. Yet, these works either employ limited policy representations (e.g.
decision trees, state machines, or predefined program templates) or require stronger
supervision (e.g. input/output state pairs or expert demonstrations). We present a
framework that instead learns to synthesize a program, which details the procedure
to solve a task in a flexible and expressive manner, solely from reward signals.
To alleviate the difficulty of learning to compose programs to induce the desired
agent behavior from scratch, we propose to first learn a program embedding space
that continuously parameterizes diverse behaviors in an unsupervised manner and
then search over the learned program embedding space to yield a program that
maximizes the return for a given task. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed framework not only learns to reliably synthesize task-solving programs
but also outperforms DRL and program synthesis baselines while producing interpretable and more generalizable policies. We also justify the necessity of the
proposed two-stage learning scheme as well as analyze various methods for learning
the program embedding. Website at https://clvrai.com/leaps.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods have demonstrated encouraging performance
on a variety of domains such as outperforming humans in complex games [1–4] or controlling
robots [5–11]. Despite the recent progress in the field, acquiring complex skills through trial and
error still remains challenging and these neural network policies often have difficulty generalizing to
novel scenarios. Moreover, such policies are not interpretable to humans and therefore are difficult to
debug when these challenges arise.
To address these issues, a growing body of work aims to learn programmatic policies that are
structured in more interpretable and generalizable representations such as decision trees [12], statemachines [13], and programs described by domain-specific programming languages [14, 15]. Yet,
the programmatic representations employed in these works are often limited in expressiveness due
to constraints on the policy spaces. For example, decision tree policies are incapable of naïvely
generating repetitive behaviors, state machine policies used in [13] are computationally complex to
∗

Contributed equally.
Work partially done as a visiting scholar at USC.
‡
AI Advisor at NAVER AI Lab.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

