Towards Scalable Unpaired Virtual Try-On via
Patch-Routed Spatially-Adaptive GAN

Zhenyu Xie1 , Zaiyu Huang1 , Fuwei Zhao1 , Haoye Dong2
Michael Kampffmeyer3 , Xiaodan Liang1,4∗
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Huya Inc
3
UiT The Arctic University of Norway, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{xiezhy6,huangzy225,zhaofw}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, donghaoye@huya.com
michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on is one of the most promising applications of humancentric image generation due to its tremendous real-world potential. Yet, as most
try-on approaches fit in-shop garments onto a target person, they require the laborious and restrictive construction of a paired training dataset, severely limiting their
scalability. While a few recent works attempt to transfer garments directly from one
person to another, alleviating the need to collect paired datasets, their performance
is impacted by the lack of paired (supervised) information. In particular, disentangling style and spatial information of the garment becomes a challenge, which
existing methods either address by requiring auxiliary data or extensive online optimization procedures, thereby still inhibiting their scalability. To achieve a scalable
virtual try-on system that can transfer arbitrary garments between a source and
a target person in an unsupervised manner, we thus propose a texture-preserving
end-to-end network, the PAtch-routed SpaTially-Adaptive GAN (PASTA-GAN),
that facilitates real-world unpaired virtual try-on. Specifically, to disentangle the
style and spatial information of each garment, PASTA-GAN consists of an innovative patch-routed disentanglement module for successfully retaining garment
texture and shape characteristics. Guided by the source person keypoints, the
patch-routed disentanglement module first decouples garments into normalized
patches, thus eliminating the inherent spatial information of the garment, and then
reconstructs the normalized patches to the warped garment complying with the
target person pose. Given the warped garment, PASTA-GAN further introduces
novel spatially-adaptive residual blocks that guide the generator to synthesize
more realistic garment details. Extensive comparisons with paired and unpaired
approaches demonstrate the superiority of PASTA-GAN, highlighting its ability to
generate high-quality try-on images when faced with a large variety of garments
(e.g. vests, shirts, pants), taking a crucial step towards real-world scalable try-on.

1

Introduction

Image-based virtual try-on, the process of computationally transferring a garment onto a particular
person in a query image, is one of the most promising applications of human-centric image generation
with the potential to revolutionize shopping experiences and reduce purchase returns. However, to
fully exploit its potential, scalable solutions are required that can leverage easily accessible training
data, handle arbitrary garments, and provide efficient inference results. Unfortunately, to date, most
existing methods [35, 38, 12, 7, 37, 9, 10, 4, 36, 39] rely on paired training data, i.e., a person image
∗

Xiaodan Liang is the corresponding author. Our code will be available at PASTA-GAN.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

