The Adaptive Doubly Robust Estimator
and a Paradox Concerning Logging Policy

Masahiro Kato∗
CyberAgent, Inc.

Kenichiro McAlinn
Temple University

Shota Yasui
CyberAgent, Inc.

Abstract
The doubly robust (DR) estimator, which consists of two nuisance parameters, the
conditional mean outcome and the logging policy (the probability of choosing an
action), is crucial in causal inference. This paper proposes a DR estimator for
dependent samples obtained from adaptive experiments. To obtain an asymptotically normal semiparametric estimator from dependent samples with non-Donsker
nuisance estimators, we propose adaptive-fitting as a variant of sample-splitting.
We also report an empirical paradox that our proposed DR estimator tends to
show better performances compared to other estimators utilizing the true logging
policy. While a similar phenomenon is known for estimators with i.i.d. samples,
traditional explanations based on asymptotic efficiency cannot elucidate our case
with dependent samples. We confirm this hypothesis through simulation studies.

1

Introduction

Adaptive experiments, including efficient treatment effect estimation (van der Laan, 2008; Hahn et al.,
2011), treatment regimes (Zhang et al., 2012a; Zhao et al., 2012), and multi-armed bandit (MAB)
problems (Gittins, 1989; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), are widely accepted and used in real-world
applications, for example, in social experiments (Hahn et al., 2011), online advertisement (Zhang
et al., 2012b), clinical trials (Chow & Chang, 2011; Villar, 2018), website optimization (White, 2012),
and recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010). In those various applications, there is a significant
interest in off-line counterfactual inference using samples obtained from past trials generated by a
logging policy (the probability of choosing an action: Li et al., 2010, 2011). Among several off-line
evaluation criteria, this paper focuses on off-policy value estimation (OPVE: Li et al., 2015). The
goal of OPVE is to estimate the expected value of the weighted outcome, which includes average
treatment effect (ATE) estimation as a special case (Hirano et al., 2003; Bang & Robins, 2005).
In OPVE, when the true logging policy is known, there are mainly three types of estimators: inverse
probability weighting (IPW: Horvitz & Thompson, 1952), direct method (DM), and augmented IPW
(AIPW Bang & Robins, 2005) estimators. IPW-type estimators refer to a sample average of the
outcomes weighted by the true logging policy. DM-type estimators refer to a sample average of an
estimated conditional outcome. AIPW-type estimators consist of two components: the IPW part
and the DM part. More details are given in Section 3. In addition, when the true logging policy
is unknown, we call IPW-type and AIPW-type estimators that use the estimated logging policy
EIPW-type and DR-type estimators, respectively. In particular, and the focus of this paper, DR-type
estimators are crucial in OPVE, since in most applications of interest the true logging policy is either
unknown, difficult, or costly to obtain, making IPW and AIPW-type estimators often infeasible.
While existing OPVE methods typically assume that the samples are independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.: Hirano et al., 2003; Dudík et al., 2011), adaptive experiments usually allow logging
policies to be updated based on past observations, under which the generated samples are non-i.i.d.
∗

masahiro_kato@cyberagent.co.jp

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

