Adaptive Conformal Inference
Under Distribution Shift
Isaac Gibbs
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
igibbs@stanford.edu

Emmanuel J. Candès
Department of Statistics
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
candes@stanford.edu

Abstract
We develop methods for forming prediction sets in an online setting where the data
generating distribution is allowed to vary over time in an unknown fashion. Our
framework builds on ideas from conformal inference to provide a general wrapper
that can be combined with any black box method that produces point predictions of
the unseen label or estimated quantiles of its distribution. While previous conformal
inference methods rely on the assumption that the data points are exchangeable, our
adaptive approach provably achieves the desired coverage frequency over long-time
intervals irrespective of the true data generating process. We accomplish this by
modelling the distribution shift as a learning problem in a single parameter whose
optimal value is varying over time and must be continuously re-estimated. We test
our method, adaptive conformal inference, on two real world datasets and find that
its predictions are robust to visible and significant distribution shifts.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being employed in high stakes decision making processes. For instance, deep neural networks are currently being used in self-driving cars to detect
nearby objects [2] and parole decisions are being made with the assistance of complex models that
combine over a hundred features [1]. As the popularity of black box methods and the cost of making
wrong decisions grow it is crucial that we develop tools to quantify the uncertainty of their predictions.
In this paper we develop methods for constructing prediction sets that are guaranteed to contain the
target label with high probability. We focus specifically on an online learning setting in which we
observe covariate-response pairs {(Xt , Yt )}t2N ✓ Rd ⇥ R in a sequential fashion. At each time step
t 2 N we are tasked with using the previously observed data {(Xr , Yr )}1rt 1 along with the new
covariates, Xt , to form a prediction set Ĉt for Yt . Then, given a target coverage level ↵ 2 (0, 1) our
generic goal is to guarantee that Yt belongs to Ĉt at least 100(1 ↵)% of the time.
Perhaps the most powerful and flexible tools for solving this problem come from conformal inference
[see e.g. 34, 16, 32, 22, 31, 15, 3] . This framework provides a generic methodology for transforming
the outputs of any black box prediction algorithm into a prediction set. The generality of this approach
has facilitated the development of a large suite of conformal methods, each specialized to a specific
prediction problem of interest [e.g. 30, 11, 23, 8, 24, 21]. With only minor exceptions all of these
algorithms share the same common guarantee that if the training and test data are exchangeable, then
the prediction set has valid marginal coverage P(Yt 2 Ĉt ) = 1 ↵.

While exchangeability is a common assumption, there are many real-world applications in which
we do not expect the marginal distribution of (Xt , Yt ) to be stationary. For example, in finance
and economics market behaviour can shift drastically in response to new legislation or major world
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

