Deep Extended Hazard Models for Survival Analysis

Qixian Zhong
Department of Statistics and Data Science
School of Economics and Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics (WISE)
Xiamen University
qxzhong@xmu.edu.cn
Jonas Mueller
Amazon Web Services
jonasmue@amazon.com
Jane-Ling Wang
Department of Statistics
UC Davis
janelwang@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Unlike standard prediction tasks, survival analysis requires modeling right censored data, which must be treated with care. While deep neural networks excel in
traditional supervised learning, it remains unclear how to best utilize these models
in survival analysis. A key question asks which data-generating assumptions of
traditional survival models should be retained and which should be made more
flexible via the function-approximating capabilities of neural networks. Rather
than estimating the survival function targeted by most existing methods, we introduce a Deep Extended Hazard (DeepEH) model to provide a flexible and general
framework for deep survival analysis. The extended hazard model includes the conventional Cox proportional hazards and accelerated failure time models as special
cases, so DeepEH subsumes the popular Deep Cox proportional hazard (DeepSurv)
and Deep Accelerated Failure Time (DeepAFT) models. We additionally provide
theoretical support for the proposed DeepEH model by establishing consistency
and convergence rate of the survival function estimator, which underscore the
attractive feature that deep learning is able to detect low-dimensional structure of
data in high-dimensional space. Numerical experiments also provide evidence that
the proposed methods outperform existing statistical and deep learning approaches
to survival analysis.

1

Introduction

Across areas such as biomedical science and reliability engineering, survival data analysis is critically
used to study the time until certain events occur (e.g. patient death in clinical applications, component
failure in industrial applications). A key issue stems from the fact that many occurrence-times fail
to be recorded due to natural data censoring. For example, a patient may relocate and drop out of a
longitudinal clinical study, leading to the loss of follow-up observations for the remaining period of
the study. For such right censored data, we only know that the true event time is greater than the last
available observation time for this individual (but not by how much), and thus standard regression
approaches are not applicable to most survival data. A naive approach that removes all censored
individuals from the data would induce bias, as these tend to be individuals with longer event times.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

