GRIN: Generative Relation and Intention Network
for Multi-agent Trajectory Prediction

Longyuan Li1∗ Jian Yao2* Li K. Wenliang3* Tong He4† Tianjun Xiao4
Junchi Yan1† David Wipf4 Zheng Zhang4
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Fudan University
3
Gatsby Unit, University College London
4
Amazon Web Services
{jeffli, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, kevinli@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk
{htong, tianjux, daviwipf, zhaz}@amazon.com

Abstract
Learning the distribution of future trajectories conditioned on the past is a crucial
problem for understanding multi-agent systems. This is challenging because
humans make decisions based on complex social relations and personal intents,
resulting in highly complex uncertainties over trajectories. To address this problem,
we propose a conditional deep generative model that combines advances in graph
neural networks. The prior and recognition model encodes two types of latent
codes for each agent: an inter-agent latent code to represent social relations and
an intra-agent latent code to represent agent intentions. The decoder is carefully
devised to leverage the codes in a disentangled way to predict multi-modal future
trajectory distribution. Specifically, a graph attention network built upon inter-agent
latent code is used to learn continuous pair-wise relations, and an agent’s motion
is controlled by its latent intents and its observations of all other agents. Through
experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets, we show that our model
outperforms previous work in multiple performance metrics. We also show that
our model generates realistic multi-modal trajectories.

1

Introduction

Generative trajectory forecasting requires learning the distribution of future trajectories conditioned on
the past. It can provide an important foundation of path planning and tracking in many domains [28, 1].
In a highly interactive multi-agent environment, such as team sports, each individual takes actions
based on its intentions, relations with, and observation of other agents [7]. For example, an attacking
basketball player acts based on his/her strategy along with observations of teammates and the
defending team. Similarly, an experienced driver identifies potential dangers from observed actions
and motions of other drivers, thereby planning ahead of time [27]. Notably, in many such real-world
examples, intentions, relations, and interactions are all dynamic, hidden, and stochastic, leading to
highly variable future trajectories.
We argue that to model uncertainty correctly we should account for factors that arise from both
individual and social (i.e. relation) perspectives, and do so explicitly. That is to say, individual
decision/intention and social relation/observation are inductive biases that should be explicitly
∗
†

Work completed during internship at AWS Shanghai AI Labs.
Correspondence authors are Junchi Yan and Tong He.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

