MobTCast: Leveraging Auxiliary Trajectory
Forecasting for Human Mobility Prediction

Hao Xue
School of Computing Technologies
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
hao.xue@rmit.edu.au

Flora D. Salim
School of Computing Technologies
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
flora.salim@rmit.edu.au

Yongli Ren
School of Computing Technologies
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
yongli.ren@rmit.edu.au

Nuria Oliver
ELLIS Unit Alicante Foundation
Alicante, Spain
nuria@alum.mit.edu

Abstract
Human mobility prediction is a core functionality in many location-based services
and applications. However, due to the sparsity of mobility data, it is not an easy
task to predict future POIs (place-of-interests) that are going to be visited. In this
paper, we propose MobTCast, a Transformer-based context-aware network for
mobility prediction. Specifically, we explore the influence of four types of context
in mobility prediction: temporal, semantic, social, and geographical contexts. We
first design a base mobility feature extractor using the Transformer architecture,
which takes both the history POI sequence and the semantic information as input.
It handles both the temporal and semantic contexts. Based on the base extractor
and the social connections of a user, we employ a self-attention module to model
the influence of the social context. Furthermore, unlike existing methods, we
introduce a location prediction branch in MobTCast as an auxiliary task to model
the geographical context and predict the next location. Intuitively, the geographical
distance between the location of the predicted POI and the predicted location from
the auxiliary branch should be as close as possible. To reflect this relation, we
design a consistency loss to further improve the POI prediction performance. In
our experimental results, MobTCast outperforms other state-of-the-art next POI
prediction methods. Our approach illustrates the value of including different types
of context in next POI prediction.

1

Introduction

Human mobility prediction plays an important role in a wide range of applications, including
personalised advertisement, traffic modelling, and predicting the spread of pandemics [14, 17]. For
example, targeted advertisements, such as store information and coupons can be delivered precisely
by predicting the future POIs that users might visit. It could also be valuable in the context of
pandemics, to support contact tracing and crowd management.
Unlike other densely acquired trajectory sequence data (such as trajectories extracted from videos [1,
20] and GPS trajectories [21, 29]), trajectory data for the next POI prediction task is typically in the
form of check-in sequences and collected from popular Location Based Social Networks (LBSNs),
such as Foursquare. As the visited POI information is recorded only when a user chooses to check-in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

