Foundations of Symbolic Languages
for Model Interpretability

Marcelo Arenas1,4 , Daniel Baez3 , Pablo Barceló2,4 , Jorge Pérez3,4 , Bernardo Subercaseaux4,5
Department of Computer Science, PUC-Chile
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering, PUC-Chile
3
Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile
4
Millennium Institute for Foundational Research on Data, Chile
5
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
1

2

[marenas, pbarcelo]@ing.puc.cl, jperez@dcc.uchile.cl, bsuberca@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Several queries and scores have been proposed to explain individual predictions
made by ML models. Examples include queries based on “anchors”, which are
parts of an instance that are sufficient to justify its classification, and “featureperturbation” scores such as SHAP. Given the need for flexible, reliable, and easy-toapply interpretability methods for ML models, we foresee the need for developing
declarative languages to naturally specify different explainability queries. We
do this in a principled way by rooting such a language in a logic called FOIL,
that allows for expressing many simple but important explainability queries, and
might serve as a core for more expressive interpretability languages. We study the
computational complexity of FOIL queries over classes of ML models often deemed
to be easily interpretable: decision trees and more general decision diagrams. Since
the number of possible inputs for an ML model is exponential in its dimension,
tractability of the FOIL evaluation problem is delicate, but can be achieved by either
restricting the structure of the models, or the fragment of FOIL being evaluated.
We also present a prototype implementation of FOIL wrapped in a high-level
declarative language, and perform experiments showing that such a language can
be used in practice.

1

Introduction

Context. The degree of interpretability of a machine learning (ML) model seems to be intimately
related with the ability to “answer questions” about it. Those questions can either be global (behavior
of the model as a whole) or local (behavior regarding certain instances/features). Concrete examples of
such questions can be found in the recent literature, including, e.g., queries based on “anchors”, which
are parts of an instance that are sufficient to justify its classification [4, 13, 16, 32], and numerical
scores that measure the impact of the different features of an instance on its result [24, 31, 36].
It is by now clear that ML interpretability admits no silver-bullet [18], and that in many cases a
combination of different queries may be the most effective way to understand a model’s behavior.
Also, model interpretability takes different flavors depending on the application domain one deals
with. This naturally brings to the picture the need for general-purpose specification languages that
can provide flexibility and expressiveness to practitioners specifying interpretability queries. An
even more advanced requirement for these languages is to be relatively easy to use in practice. This
tackles the growing need for bringing interpretability methods closer to users with different levels of
expertise.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

