Periodic Activation Functions Induce Stationarity

Lassi Meronen
Aalto University / Saab Finland Oy
Espoo, Finland
lassi.meronen@aalto.fi

Martin Trapp
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
martin.trapp@aalto.fi

Arno Solin
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
arno.solin@aalto.fi

Abstract
Neural network models are known to reinforce hidden data biases, making them
unreliable and difficult to interpret. We seek to build models that ‘know what
they do not know’ by introducing inductive biases in the function space. We
show that periodic activation functions in Bayesian neural networks establish a
connection between the prior on the network weights and translation-invariant,
stationary Gaussian process priors. Furthermore, we show that this link goes beyond
sinusoidal (Fourier) activations by also covering triangular wave and periodic ReLU
activation functions. In a series of experiments, we show that periodic activation
functions obtain comparable performance for in-domain data and capture sensitivity
to perturbed inputs in deep neural networks for out-of-domain detection.

1

Introduction

Deep feedforward neural networks [46, 16] are an integral part of contemporary artificial intelligence
and machine learning systems for visual and auditory perception, medicine, and general data analysis
and decision making. However, when these methods have been adopted into real-world use, concerns
related to robustness (with respect to data that has not been seen during training), fairness (hidden
biases in data being reinforced by the model), and interpretability (why the model acts as it does)
have taken a central role. The knowledge gathered by contemporary neural networks has even been
characterised as never truly reliable [31]. These issues relate to the sensitivity of the trained model to
perturbed inputs being fed through it—or the lack thereof.
This motivates Bayesian deep learning, where the interests are two-fold: encoding prior knowledge
into models and performing probabilistic inference under the specified model. We focus on the former.
Probabilistic approaches to specifying assumptions about the function space of deep neural networks
have gained increasing attention in the machine learning community, comprising, among others,
work analysing their posterior distribution [57, 1], discussing pathologies arising in uncertainty
quantification [9], and calls for better Bayesian priors (e.g., [42, 50, 37, 10]).
In this paper, we focus on stationary models, which act as a proxy for capturing sensitivity. Stationarity
indicates translation-invariance, meaning that the joint probability distribution does not change when
the inputs are shifted. This seemingly naive assumption has strong consequences in the sense that it
induces conservative behaviour across the input domain, both in-distribution and outside the observed
data. The resulting model is mean-reverting outside the training data (reversion to the prior), directly
leading to higher uncertainty for out-of-distribution (OOD) samples (see Fig. 1 for examples). These
features (together with some direct computational benefits) have made stationary models/priors the
standard approach in kernel methods [4, 20], spatial statistics [5], and Gaussian process (GP) models
[44], where the kernel is often chosen to induce stationarity.
Neural networks are parametric models, which typically fall into the class of non-stationary models.
Non-stationarity increases flexibility and is often a sought-after property—especially if the interest
is solely in optimizing for accuracy on in-domain test data. In fact, all standard neural network
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

