Continuous Doubly Constrained Batch
Reinforcement Learning

Rasool Fakoor1 , Jonas Mueller1 , Kavosh Asadi1 , Pratik Chaudhari1,2 , Alexander J. Smola1
1
Amazon Web Services, 2 University of Pennsylvania
fakoor@amazon.com

Abstract
Reliant on too many experiments to learn good actions, current Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms have limited applicability in real-world settings, which
can be too expensive to allow exploration. We propose an algorithm for batch RL,
where effective policies are learned using only a fixed offline dataset instead of
online interactions with the environment. The limited data in batch RL produces
inherent uncertainty in value estimates of states/actions that were insufficiently
represented in the training data. This leads to particularly severe extrapolation
when our candidate policies diverge from one that generated the data. We propose
to mitigate this issue via two straightforward penalties: a policy-constraint to
reduce this divergence and a value-constraint that discourages overly optimistic
estimates. Over a comprehensive set of 32 continuous-action batch RL benchmarks,
our approach compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods, regardless of how the
offline data were collected.

1

Introduction

Deep RL algorithms have demonstrated impressive performance in simulable digital environments like video games [41, 54, 55]. In these
settings, the agent can execute different policies
and observe their performance. Barring a few examples [37], advancements have not translated
quite as well to real-world environments, where
it is typically infeasible to experience millions
of environmental interactions [11]. Moreover,
in presence of an acceptable heuristic, it is inappropriate to deploy an agent that learns from
scratch hoping that it may eventually outperform
the heuristic after sufficient experimentation.

Figure 1: Batch RL with CDC vs. No CDC. Left: Standard actor-critic overestimates Q-values whereas CDC
estimates are well controlled. Right: Wild overestimation leads to worse-performing policies whereas CDC
performs well.

The setting of batch or offline RL instead offers a more pertinent framework to learn performant
policies for real-world applications [34, 57]. Batch RL is widely applicable because this setting does
not require that: a proposed policy be tested through real environment interactions, or that data be
collected under a particular policy. Instead, the agent only has access to a fixed dataset D collected
through actions taken according to some unknown behavior policy πb . The main challenge in this
setting is that data may only span a small subset of the possible state-action pairs. Worst yet, the
agent cannot observe the effects of novel out-of-distribution (OOD) state-action combinations that,
by definition, are not present in D.
A key challenge stems from the inherent uncertainty when learning from limited data [28, 36]. Failure
to account for this can lead to wild extrapolation [17, 29] and over/under-estimation bias in value
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

