Calibrating Predictions to Decisions: A Novel
Approach to Multi-Class Calibration

Shengjia Zhao
Stanford University
sjzhao@stanford.edu

Michael P. Kim
UC Berkeley
mpkim@berkeley.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Roshni Sahoo
Stanford University
rsahoo@stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@stanford.edu

Abstract
When facing uncertainty, decision-makers want predictions they can trust. A machine learning provider can convey confidence to decision-makers by guaranteeing
their predictions are distribution calibrated — amongst the inputs that receive a
predicted class probabilities vector q, the actual distribution over classes is q. For
multi-class prediction problems, however, achieving distribution calibration tends
to be infeasible, requiring sample complexity exponential in the number of classes
C. In this work, we introduce a new notion—decision calibration—that requires
the predicted distribution and true distribution to be “indistinguishable” to a set
of downstream decision-makers. When all possible decision makers are under
consideration, decision calibration is the same as distribution calibration. However,
when we only consider decision makers choosing between a bounded number of
actions (e.g. polynomial in C), our main result shows that decisions calibration
becomes feasible — we design a recalibration algorithm that requires sample complexity polynomial in the number of actions and the number of classes. We validate
our recalibration algorithm empirically: compared to existing methods, decision
calibration improves decision-making on skin lesion and ImageNet classification
with modern neural network predictors.

1

Introduction

Machine learning predictions are increasingly employed by downstream decision makers who have
little or no visibility on how the models were designed and trained. In high-stakes settings, such as
healthcare applications, decision makers want predictions they can trust. For example in healthcare,
suppose a machine learning service offers a supervised learning model to healthcare providers that
claims to predict the probability of various skin diseases, given an image of a lesion. Each healthcare
provider want assurance that the model’s predictions lead to beneficial decisions, according to their
own loss functions. As a result, the healthcare providers may reasonably worry that the model was
trained using a loss function different than their own. This mismatch is often inevitable because the
ML service may provide the same prediction model to many healthcare providers, which may have
different treatment options available and loss functions. Even the same healthcare provider could
have different loss functions throughout time, due to changes in treatment availability.
If predicted probabilities perfectly equal the true probability of the event, this issue of trust would
not arise because they would lead to optimal decision making regardless of the loss function or
task considered by downstream decision makers. In practice, however, predicted probabilities are
never perfect. To address this, the healthcare providers may insist that the prediction function be
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

