Intrinsic Dimension, Persistent Homology and
Generalization in Neural Networks
Tolga Birdal
Stanford University
tbirdal@stanford.edu
Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University
guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Aaron Lou
Stanford University
aaronlou@stanford.edu
Umut Şimşekli
INRIA & ENS – PSL Research University
umut.simsekli@inria.fr

Abstract
Disobeying the classical wisdom of statistical learning theory, modern deep neural
networks generalize well even though they typically contain millions of parameters.
Recently, it has been shown that the trajectories of iterative optimization algorithms
can possess fractal structures, and their generalization error can be formally linked
to the complexity of such fractals. This complexity is measured by the fractal’s
intrinsic dimension, a quantity usually much smaller than the number of parameters
in the network. Even though this perspective provides an explanation for why
overparametrized networks would not overfit, computing the intrinsic dimension
(e.g., for monitoring generalization during training) is a notoriously difficult task,
where existing methods typically fail even in moderate ambient dimensions. In this
study, we consider this problem from the lens of topological data analysis (TDA)
and develop a generic computational tool that is built on rigorous mathematical
foundations. By making a novel connection between learning theory and TDA, we
first illustrate that the generalization error can be equivalently bounded in terms of
a notion called the ’persistent homology dimension’ (PHD), where, compared with
prior work, our approach does not require any additional geometrical or statistical
assumptions on the training dynamics. Then, by utilizing recently established
theoretical results and TDA tools, we develop an efficient algorithm to estimate
PHD in the scale of modern deep neural networks and further provide visualization
tools to help understand generalization in deep learning. Our experiments show
that the proposed approach can efficiently compute a network’s intrinsic dimension
in a variety of settings, which is predictive of the generalization error.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the de facto machine learning tool
and have revolutionized a variety of fields such as natural language processing [DCLT18], image
perception [KSH12, RBH+ 21], geometry processing [QSMG17, ZBL+ 20] and 3D vision [DBI18,
GLW+ 21]. Despite their widespread use, little is known about their theoretical properties. Even
now the top-performing DNNs are designed by trial-and-error, a pesky, burdensome process for the
average practitioner [EMH+ 19]. Furthermore, even if a top-performing architecture is found, it is
difficult to provide performance guarantees on a large class of real-world datasets.
This lack of theoretical understanding has motivated a plethora of work focusing on explaining
what, how, and why a neural network learns. To answer many of these questions, one naturally
examines the generalization error, a measure quantifying the differing performance on train and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

