Parameter Prediction for Unseen Deep Architectures

Boris Knyazev1,2∗ Michal Drozdzal4,†
1

3

University of Guelph
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Graham W. Taylor1,2,3,†
2
4

Adriana Romero-Soriano4,5,†

Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Facebook AI Research 5 McGill University
†
equal advising

https://github.com/facebookresearch/ppuda

Abstract
Deep learning has been successful in automating the design of features in machine
learning pipelines. However, the algorithms optimizing neural network parameters
remain largely hand-designed and computationally inefficient. We study if we can
use deep learning to directly predict these parameters by exploiting the past knowledge of training other networks. We introduce a large-scale dataset of diverse computational graphs of neural architectures – D EEP N ETS -1M– and use it to explore
parameter prediction on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. By leveraging advances in graph
neural networks, we propose a hypernetwork that can predict performant parameters
in a single forward pass taking a fraction of a second, even on a CPU. The proposed
model achieves surprisingly good performance on unseen and diverse networks. For
example, it is able to predict all 24 million parameters of a ResNet-50 achieving a
60% accuracy on CIFAR-10. On ImageNet, top-5 accuracy of some of our networks
approaches 50%. Our task along with the model and results can potentially lead to
a new, more computationally efficient paradigm of training networks. Our model
also learns a strong representation of neural architectures enabling their analysis.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of training deep neural networks on large annotated datasets, such as
ImageNet [1]. This problem can be formalized as finding optimal parameters for a given neural
network a, parameterized by w, w.r.t. a loss function L on the dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 of inputs
xi and targets yi :
XN
arg min
L(f (xi ; a, w), yi ),
(1)
w

i=1

where f (xi ; a, w) represents a forward pass. Equation 1 is usually minimized by iterative
optimization algorithms – e.g. SGD [2] and Adam [3] – that converge to performant parameters
wp of the architecture a. Despite the progress in improving the training speed and convergence [4–7],
obtaining wp remains a bottleneck in large-scale machine learning pipelines. For example, training
a ResNet-50 [8] on ImageNet can take many GPU hours [9]. With the ever growing size of networks [10] and necessity of training the networks repeatedly (e.g. for hyperparameter or architecture
search), the classical process of obtaining wp is becoming computationally unsustainable [11–13].
A new parameter prediction task. When optimizing the parameters for a new architecture a,
typical optimizers disregard past experience gained by optimizing other nets. However, leveraging
this past experience can be the key to reduce the reliance on iterative optimization and, hence the
high computational demands. To progress in that direction, we propose a new task where iterative
optimization is replaced with a single forward pass of a hypernetwork [14] HD . To tackle the task,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
∗

Part of the work was done while interning at Facebook AI Research.

