Nonparametric estimation of continuous DPPs
with kernel methods
Michaël Fanuel and Rémi Bardenet
Université de Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
{michael.fanuel, remi.bardenet}@univ-lille.fr

Abstract
Determinantal Point Process (DPPs) are statistical models for repulsive point
patterns. Both sampling and inference are tractable for DPPs, a rare feature among
models with negative dependence that explains their popularity in machine learning
and spatial statistics. Parametric and nonparametric inference methods have been
proposed in the finite case, i.e. when the point patterns live in a finite ground set.
In the continuous case, only parametric methods have been investigated, while
nonparametric maximum likelihood for DPPs – an optimization problem over
trace-class operators – has remained an open question. In this paper, we show that
a restricted version of this maximum likelihood (MLE) problem falls within the
scope of a recent representer theorem for nonnegative functions in an RKHS. This
leads to a finite-dimensional problem, with strong statistical ties to the original
MLE. Moreover, we propose, analyze, and demonstrate a fixed point algorithm
to solve this finite-dimensional problem. Finally, we also provide a controlled
estimate of the correlation kernel of the DPP, thus providing more interpretability.

1

Introduction

Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are a tractable family of models for repulsive point patterns,
where interaction between points is parametrized by a positive semi-definite kernel. They were
introduced by Macchi [1975] in the context of fermionic optics, and have gained a lot of interest
since the 2000s, in particular in probability [Hough et al., 2006], spatial statistics [Lavancier et al.,
2014], and machine learning [Kulesza and Taskar, 2012]. In machine learning at large, DPPs have
been used essentially for two purposes: as statistical models for diverse subsets of items, like in
recommendation systems [Gartrell et al., 2019], and as subsampling tools, like in experimental design
[Derezinski et al., 2020], column subset selection [Belhadji et al., 2020b], or Monte Carlo integration
[Gautier et al., 2019; Belhadji et al., 2019]. In this paper, we are concerned with DPPs used as
statistical models for repulsion, and more specifically with inference for continuous DPPs.
DPP models in Machine Learning (ML) have so far mostly been finite DPPs: they are distributions
over subsets of a (large) finite ground set, like subsets of sentences from a large corpus of documents
[Kulesza and Taskar, 2012]. Since Affandi et al. [2014], a lot of effort has been put into designing
efficient inference procedures for finite DPPs. In particular, the fixed point algorithm of Mariet
and Sra [2015] allows for nonparametric inference of a finite DPP kernel, thus learning the features
used for modelling diversity from the data. DPP models on infinite ground sets, say Rd , while
mathematically and algorithmically very similar to finite DPPs, have been less popular in ML than in
spatial statistics. It is thus natural that work on inference for continuous DPPs has happened mostly
in the latter community; see e.g. the seminal paper [Lavancier et al., 2014]. Inference for continuous
DPPs has however focused on the parametric setting, where a handful of interpretable parameters are
learned. Relatedly, spatial statisticians typically learn the correlation kernel of a DPP, which is more
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

