ASSANet: An Anisotropic Separable Set Abstraction
for Efficient Point Cloud Representation Learning

Guocheng Qian

Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud

Guohao Li

Ali Thabet

Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{guocheng.qian, hasanabedalkader.hammoud, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa
https://github.com/guochengqian/ASSANet

Abstract
Access to 3D point cloud representations has been widely facilitated by LiDAR
sensors embedded in various mobile devices. This has led to an emerging need
for fast and accurate point cloud processing techniques. In this paper, we revisit
and dive deeper into PointNet++, one of the most influential yet under-explored
networks, and develop faster and more accurate variants of the model. We first
present a novel Separable Set Abstraction (SA) module that disentangles the
vanilla SA module used in PointNet++ into two separate learning stages: (1)
learning channel correlation and (2) learning spatial correlation. The Separable SA
module is significantly faster than the vanilla version, yet it achieves comparable
performance. We then introduce a new Anisotropic Reduction function into our
Separable SA module and propose an Anisotropic Separable SA (ASSA) module
that substantially increases the network’s accuracy. We later replace the vanilla
SA modules in PointNet++ with the proposed ASSA module, and denote the
modified network as ASSANet. Extensive experiments on point cloud classification,
semantic segmentation, and part segmentation show that ASSANet outperforms
PointNet++ and other methods, achieving much higher accuracy and faster speeds.
In particular, ASSANet outperforms PointNet++ by 7.4 mIoU on S3DIS Area 5,
while maintaining 1.6× faster inference speed on a single NVIDIA 2080Ti GPU.
Our scaled ASSANet variant achieves 66.8 mIoU and outperforms KPConv, while
being more than 54× faster.

1

Introduction

Among the various 3D object representations, point clouds have been surging in popularity, becoming
one of the most fundamental 3D representations. This popularity stems from the increased availability
of 3D sensors, like LiDAR, which produce point clouds as their raw output. The growing presence
of point cloud data has been accompanied by the development of many 3D deep learning methods
[28, 41, 19, 38, 22]. Even though these methods achieve impressive performance, they are generally
computationally expensive (Figure 1). With the integration of LiDAR sensors into hardware-limited
devices, such as mobile devices and AR headsets, interest in efficient models for point cloud
processing has grown significantly. Given the limited computational power of mobile devices and
embedded systems, the design of mobile-friendly point cloud-based algorithms should not only focus
on providing good accuracy, but also on maintaining high computational efficiency.
When processing point cloud data, one can always opt to convert the data into representations that are
more accessible to deep learning frameworks. Popular options are multi-view methods [34, 5, 42]
and voxel-based methods [6, 47]. Converting to these representations generally requires additional
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

