Improved Regularization and Robustness for
Fine-tuning in Neural Networks
Dongyue Li
Northeastern University
li.dongyu@northeastern.edu

Hongyang R. Zhang
Northeastern University
ho.zhang@northeastern.edu

Abstract
A widely used algorithm for transfer learning is fine-tuning, where a pre-trained
model is fine-tuned on a target task with a small amount of labeled data. When the
capacity of the pre-trained model is much larger than the size of the target data set,
fine-tuning is prone to overfitting and “memorizing” the training labels. Hence, an
important question is to regularize fine-tuning and ensure its robustness to noise.
To address this question, we begin by analyzing the generalization properties of
fine-tuning. We present a PAC-Bayes generalization bound that depends on the
distance traveled in each layer during fine-tuning and the noise stability of the
fine-tuned model. We empirically measure these quantities. Based on the analysis,
we propose regularized self-labeling—the interpolation between regularization
and self-labeling methods, including (i) layer-wise regularization to constrain the
distance traveled in each layer; (ii) self label-correction and label-reweighting
to correct mislabeled data points (that the model is confident) and reweight less
confident data points. We validate our approach on an extensive collection of image
and text data sets using multiple pre-trained model architectures. Our approach
improves baseline methods by 1.76% (on average) for seven image classification
tasks and 0.75% for a few-shot classification task. When the target data set includes
noisy labels, our approach outperforms baseline methods by 3.56% on average in
two noisy settings.

1

Introduction

Learning from limited labeled data is a fundamental problem in many real-world applications (Ratner
et al., 2016, 2017). A common approach to address this problem is fine-tuning a large model that has
been pre-trained on publicly available labeled data (He et al., 2019). Since fine-tuning is typically
applied to a target task with limited labels, this algorithm is prone to overfitting or “memorization”
issues (Tan et al., 2018). These issues worsen when the target task contains noisy labels (Zhang et al.,
2016). In this paper, we analyze regularization methods for fine-tuning from both theoretical and
empirical perspectives. Based on the analysis, we propose a regularized self-labeling approach that
improves the generalization and robustness properties of fine-tuning.
Previous works (Li et al., 2018a,b) have proposed regularization methods to constrain the distance
between a fine-tuned model and the pre-trained model in the Euclidean norm. Li et al. (2020) provides
extensive study to show that the performance of fine-tuning and the benefit of adding regularization
depend on the hyperparameter choices. Salman et al. (2020) empirically find that performing
adversarial training during the pre-training phase helps learn pre-trained models that transfer better to
downstream tasks. The work of Gouk et al. (2021) generalizes the above ideas to various norm choices
and finds that projected gradient descent methods perform well for implementing distance-based
regularization. Additionally, they derive generalization bounds for fine-tuning using Rademacher
complexity. These works focus on settings where there is no label noise in the target data set. When
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

