Robust Predictable Control
Benjamin Eysenbach1 2
Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google Brain,
beysenba@cs.cmu.edu

Sergey Levine2 3
3
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Many of the challenges facing today’s reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, such
as robustness, generalization, transfer, and computational efficiency, are closely
related to compression. Prior work has convincingly argued why minimizing
information is useful in the supervised learning setting, but standard RL algorithms
lack an explicit mechanism for compression. The RL setting is unique because
(1) its sequential nature allows an agent to use past information to avoid looking
at future observations and (2) the agent can optimize its behavior to prefer states
where decision making requires few bits. We take advantage of these properties to
propose a method (RPC) for learning simple policies. This method brings together
ideas from information bottlenecks, model-based RL, and bits-back coding into
a simple and theoretically-justified algorithm. Our method jointly optimizes a
latent-space model and policy to be self-consistent, such that the policy avoids
states where the model is inaccurate. We demonstrate that our method achieves
much tighter compression than prior methods, yielding up to 5× higher reward
than a standard information bottleneck. As a result of this compression, the policies
learned by our method are robust and generalize well to new tasks.1

1

Introduction

Many areas of reinforcement learning (RL) research focus on specialized problems, such as learning
invariant representations, improving robustness to adversarial attacks, improving generalization, or
building better world models. These problems are often symptoms of a deeper underlying problem:
autonomous agents use too many bits from their environment. For the purpose of decision making,
most information about the world is irrelevant. For example, a lane keeping feature on a car may
take as input high-resolution camera input (millions of bits), but only needs to extract a few bits of
information about the relative orientation of the car in the lane. Agents that rely on more bits of
information run the risk of overfitting to the training task.
Agents that use few bits of information enjoy a number of appealing properties. These agents can
better cope with high-dimensional sensory inputs (e.g., dozens of cameras on a self-driving car)
and will be forced to learn representations that are more broadly applicable. Agents that throw
away most information will be agnostic to idiosyncrasies in observations, providing robustness to
missing or corrupted observations and allowing for transfer to different scenarios. For example, if an
agent ignores 99.9% of bits, then corrupting a random bit is unlikely to change the agent’s behavior.
Moreover, an agent that minimizes bits will prefer states where the dynamics are easy to predict,
meaning that the agent’s resulting behavior will be easier to model. Thus, compression not only
changes an agent’s representation, but also changes its behavior: an agent that can only use a limited
number of bits will avoid risky behaviors that require more bits to execute (see Fig. 3a).
The generalization and robustness of a machine learning model is directly related to the complexity
of that model. Indeed, standard techniques for reducing complexity, such as the information bottleneck [1, 43], can be directly applied to the RL setting [14, 21, 31, 42]. While these approaches make
1

Project site with videos and code: https://ben-eysenbach.github.io/rpc

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

