SEAL: Self-supervised Embodied Active Learning
using Exploration and 3D Consistency
Devendra Singh Chaplot1⇤, Murtaza Dalal2 , Saurabh Gupta3 ,
Jitendra Malik1,4 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov2 ,
1
Facebook AI Research, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 UIUC, 4 UC Berkeley
Project Webpage: https://devendrachaplot.github.io/projects/seal

Abstract
In this paper, we explore how we can build upon the data and models of Internet
images and use them to adapt to robot vision without requiring any extra labels. We
present a framework called Self-supervised Embodied Active Learning (SEAL). It
utilizes perception models trained on internet images to learn an active exploration
policy. The observations gathered by this exploration policy are labelled using 3D
consistency and used to improve the perception model. We build and utilize 3D
semantic maps to learn both action and perception in a completely self-supervised
manner. The semantic map is used to compute an intrinsic motivation reward
for training the exploration policy and for labelling the agent observations using
spatio-temporal 3D consistency and label propagation. We demonstrate that the
SEAL framework can be used to close the action-perception loop: it improves
object detection and instance segmentation performance of a pretrained perception
model by just moving around in training environments and the improved perception
model can be used to improve Object Goal Navigation.

1

Introduction

Even though computer vision started out as a field to aid embodied agents (robots) [21], in current
times it has evolved into Internet computer vision, where the focus is on training models for and
from Internet data. Fueled by the successes of supervised learning, today’s models can successfully
classify, detect and segment out objects in Internet images reasonably well [19]. This raises a natural
question: would we need to restart from scratch and gather similarly large-scale labeled datasets to
get computer vision to work for embodied agents, or can we somehow bootstrap off the progress
made in Internet computer vision?
Internet data comprises of sparse and unrelated snapshots of the world, carefully chosen by humans.
On the one hand, this simplifies the problem as models only need to reason about a small and
well-chosen subset of possible views of the world. On the other, this makes learning hard. The dog in
image_0032 in the ImageNet dataset, is different from the dog in image_0033, and there is no way
to understand how the dog in image_0032 will look like from another view. In contrast, an active
agent, embodied in a 3D environment, experiences views of a 3D consistent world. Spatio-temporal
continuity in views of the underlying 3D world can allow better inference at test time, and label
efficient learning at train time. These effects are further amplified, as the agent can actively choose the
views it experiences to maximize learning. Thus, in contrast to Internet computer vision, embodiment
opens up the possibility of deriving supervision from spatio-temporal continuity and interaction.
Such self-supervision for physical tasks (e.g. collisions, graspability) can be done through the use
of appropriate sensors [17, 36]. How to do so for semantic tasks, such as segmenting and detecting
objects is less clear, and is the focus of our work in this paper. We build off models from Internet
computer vision and show how their performance can be improved through self-supervised interaction.
⇤

Correspondence: dchaplot@fb.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

