Searching Parameterized AP Loss
for Object Detection

Chenxin Tao1†∗ , Zizhang Li2†∗ , Xizhou Zhu3∗ , Gao Huang1 , Yong Liu2 , Jifeng Dai3,4‡
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 SenseTime Research,
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
tcx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zzli@zju.edu.cn,
{zhuwalter, daijifeng}@sensetime.com
gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Loss functions play an important role in training deep-network-based object detectors. The most widely used evaluation metric for object detection is Average
Precision (AP), which captures the performance of localization and classification
sub-tasks simultaneously. However, due to the non-differentiable nature of the AP
metric, traditional object detectors adopt separate differentiable losses for the two
sub-tasks. Such a mis-alignment issue may well lead to performance degradation.
To address this, existing works seek to design surrogate losses for the AP metric
manually, which requires expertise and may still be sub-optimal. In this paper, we
propose Parameterized AP Loss, where parameterized functions are introduced to
substitute the non-differentiable components in the AP calculation. Different AP
approximations are thus represented by a family of parameterized functions in a unified formula. Automatic parameter search algorithm is then employed to search for
the optimal parameters. Extensive experiments on the COCO benchmark with three
different object detectors (i.e., RetinaNet, Faster R-CNN, and Deformable DETR)
demonstrate that the proposed Parameterized AP Loss consistently outperforms
existing handcrafted losses. Code shall be released.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed the significant success of deep neural networks in object detection, in
which loss functions play an indispensable role in training networks. To evaluate the object detection
methods, the Average Precision (AP) metric is usually used, which captures the performance of
localization and classification simultaneously. However, as in most object detectors [26], the training
of localization and classification sub-tasks are driven by two separate losses (see Figure 1). For
example, the L1/smooth-L1 [11] or GIoU [38] losses are usually employed for localization, while the
cross-entropy or Focal [25] losses are usually used for classification. Such a mis-alignment between
network training and evaluation may well lead to performance degradation.
To mitigate this mis-alignment issue, a straight-forward solution is to approximate the AP metric
in network training. Because the AP metric is non-differentiable, many works [3, 5, 13, 40, 35]
have explored hand-crafted losses based on the mathematical formula of the AP metric. [3] replaces
the non-differentiable parts in the AP metric with hand-crafted differentiable approximations. The
loss gradient is obtained by taking derivation with respect to the hand-crafted function. However,
as both [5] and our experiments show, such a hand-crafted AP approximated loss produces lower
∗
Equal contribution. † This work is done when Chenxin Tao and Zizhang Li are interns at SenseTime
Research. ‡ Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

