Deep Learning with Label Differential Privacy
Badih Ghazi
Google Research
badihghazi@goog e.com

Noah Golowich⇤
EECS, MIT
nzg@mit.edu

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
pasin@goog e.com

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
ravi.k53@gmai .com

Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research
chiyuan@goog e.com

Abstract
The Randomized Response (RR) algorithm [96] is a classical technique to improve
robustness in survey aggregation, and has been widely adopted in applications
with differential privacy guarantees. We propose a novel algorithm, Randomized
Response with Prior (RRWithPrior), which can provide more accurate results
while maintaining the same level of privacy guaranteed by RR. We then apply
RRWithPrior to learn neural networks with label differential privacy (Labe DP),
and show that when only the label needs to be protected, the model performance can
be significantly improved over the previous state-of-the-art private baselines. Moreover, we study different ways to obtain priors, which when used with RRWithPrior
can additionally improve the model performance, further reducing the accuracy
gap between private and non-private models. We complement the empirical results
with theoretical analysis showing that Labe DP is provably easier than protecting
both the inputs and labels.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of machine learning in recent years has increased the concerns about the
privacy of individuals whose data is used during the model training. Differential privacy (DP) [34, 33]
has emerged as a popular privacy notion that has been the basis of several practical deployments in
industry [35, 82, 43, 9, 29] and the U.S. Census [3].
A classical algorithm—that predates DP and was initially designed to eliminate evasive answer biases
in survey aggregation—is Randomized Response (RR) [96]: when the input is an element from a finite
alphabet, the output is equal to the input with a certain probability, and is a uniform random other
element from the alphabet with the remaining probability. This simple algorithm is shown to satisfy
the strong notion of local DP [38, 58], whereby the response of each user is protected, in contrast
with the so-called central DP setting where a curator has access to the raw user data, and only the
output of the curator is required to be DP. We note that schemes building on RR have been studied in
several previous works on DP estimation (e.g., [30, 57]), and have been deployed in practice [82].
Meanwhile, the large error incurred by RR (e.g., [17]) has stimulated significant research aiming to
improve its accuracy, mostly by relaxing to weaker privacy models (e.g., [36, 24, 4]). In this work,
we use a different approach and seek to improve RR by leveraging available prior information. (A
recent work of Liu et al. [63] also used priors to improve accuracy, but in the context of the DP
multiplicative weights algorithm, which applies in the central DP setting.) The prior information
can consist of domain-specific knowledge, (models trained on) publicly available data, or historical
⇤

Part of this work was done while at Google Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

