A Bayesian-Symbolic Approach to
Reasoning and Learning in Intuitive Physics

Kai Xu
University of Edinburgh
contact@xuk.ai
Dan Gutfreund
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
dgutfre@us.ibm.com

Akash Srivastava
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
akash.srivastava@ibm.com

Felix A. Sosa
Harvard University
fsosa@fas.harvard.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jbt@mit.edu

Tomer Ullman
Harvard University
tomerullman@gmail.com

Charles Sutton
University of Edinburgh & Google AI
c.sutton@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Humans can reason about intuitive physics in fully or partially observed environments even after being exposed to a very limited set of observations. This
sample-efficient intuitive physical reasoning is considered a core domain of human
common sense knowledge. One hypothesis to explain this remarkable capacity,
posits that humans quickly learn approximations to the laws of physics that govern
the dynamics of the environment. In this paper, we propose a Bayesian-symbolic
framework (BSP) for physical reasoning and learning that is close to human-level
sample-efficiency and accuracy. In BSP, the environment is represented by a topdown generative model of entities, which are assumed to interact with each other
under unknown force laws over their latent and observed properties. BSP models
each of these entities as random variables, and uses Bayesian inference to estimate
their unknown properties. For learning the unknown forces, BSP leverages symbolic regression on a novel grammar of Newtonian physics in a bilevel optimization
setup. These inference and regression steps are performed in an iterative manner
using expectation-maximization, allowing BSP to simultaneously learn force laws
while maintaining uncertainty over entity properties. We show that BSP is more
sample-efficient compared to neural alternatives on controlled synthetic datasets,
demonstrate BSP’s applicability to real-world common sense scenes and study
BSP’s performance on tasks previously used to study human physical reasoning.1

1

Introduction

Imagine a ball rolling down a ramp. If asked to predict the trajectory of the ball, most of us will find
it fairly easy to make a reasonable prediction. Not only that, simply by observing a single trajectory
people can make reasonable guesses about the material and weight of the ball and the ramp. It is
astonishing that while the exact answers to any of these prediction and reasoning tasks requires an
in-depth knowledge of Newtonian mechanics and solving of some intricate equations, yet an average
human can perform such tasks without any formal training in physics. Studies suggest that from
early age humans come to understand physical interactions with very limited supervision, and can
1

Source code as well as training and testing data can be accessed at https://bsp.xuk.ai/.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

