Natural continual learning: success is a journey, not
(just) a destination

Ta-Chu Kao1*

Kristopher T. Jensen1*
Alberto Bernacchia3

Gido M. van de Ven1,2

Guillaume Hennequin1

1. Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
2. Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine
3. MediaTek Research, Cambridge
{tck29, ktj21}@cam.ac.uk ven@bcm.edu
alberto.bernacchia@mtkresearch.com gjeh2@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Biological agents are known to learn many different tasks over the course of their
lives, and to be able to revisit previous tasks and behaviors with little to no loss
in performance. In contrast, artificial agents are prone to ‘catastrophic forgetting’ whereby performance on previous tasks deteriorates rapidly as new ones
are acquired. This shortcoming has recently been addressed using methods that
encourage parameters to stay close to those used for previous tasks. This can be
done by (i) using specific parameter regularizers that map out suitable destinations
in parameter space, or (ii) guiding the optimization journey by projecting gradients
into subspaces that do not interfere with previous tasks. However, these methods often exhibit subpar performance in both feedforward and recurrent neural networks,
with recurrent networks being of interest to the study of neural dynamics supporting
biological continual learning. In this work, we propose Natural Continual Learning
(NCL), a new method that unifies weight regularization and projected gradient
descent. NCL uses Bayesian weight regularization to encourage good performance
on all tasks at convergence and combines this with gradient projection using the
prior precision, which prevents catastrophic forgetting during optimization. Our
method outperforms both standard weight regularization techniques and projection
based approaches when applied to continual learning problems in feedforward and
recurrent networks. Finally, the trained networks evolve task-specific dynamics that
are strongly preserved as new tasks are learned, similar to experimental findings in
biological circuits.

1

Introduction

Catastrophic forgetting is a common feature of machine learning algorithms where training on a new
task often leads to poor performance on previously learned tasks. This is in contrast to biological
agents which are capable of learning many different behaviors over the course of their lives with
little to no interference across tasks. The study of continual learning in biological networks may
therefore help inspire novel approaches in machine learning, while the development and study of
continual learning algorithms in artificial agents can help us better understand how this challenge is
overcome in the biological domain. This is particularly true for more challenging continual learning
settings where task identity is not provided at test time, and for continual learning in recurrent neural
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

