Analytic Study of Families of Spurious Minima
in Two-Layer ReLU Neural Networks:
A Tale of Symmetry II
Yossi Arjevani
The Hebrew University
yossi.arjevani@gmail.com

Michael Field
UC Santa Barbara
mikefield@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the optimization problem associated with fitting two-layer ReLU neural
networks with respect to the squared loss, where labels are generated by a target
network. We make use of the rich symmetry structure to develop a novel set of
tools for studying families of spurious minima. In contrast to existing approaches
which operate in limiting regimes, our technique directly addresses the nonconvex
loss landscape for a finite number of inputs d and neurons k, and provides analytic,
rather than heuristic, information. In particular, we derive analytic estimates for
the loss at different minima, and prove that modulo O(d−1/2 )-terms the Hessian
spectrum concentrates near small positive constants, with the exception of Θ(d)
eigenvalues which grow linearly with d. We further show that the Hessian spectrum
at global and spurious minima coincide to O(d−1/2 )-order, thus challenging our
ability to argue about statistical generalization through local curvature. Lastly, our
technique provides the exact fractional dimensionality at which families of critical
points turn from saddles into spurious minima. This makes possible the study of
the creation and the annihilation of spurious minima using powerful tools from
equivariant bifurcation theory.
One of the outstanding conundrums of deep learning concerns the ability of simple gradient-based
methods to successfully train neural networks despite the nonconvexity of the associated optimization
problems. Indeed, generic nonconvex optimization landscapes can exhibit wide and flat basins of
attraction around poor local minima which may lead to a complete failure of such methods. The
nature by which nonconvex problems associated with neural networks deviate from generic ones is
currently not well-understood. In particular, much of the dynamics of gradient-based methods follows
from the curvature of the loss landscape around local minima. It is therefore vital to study the local
geometry of spurious (i.e., non-global local) and global minima in order to understand the mysterious
mechanism which drives gradient-based methods towards minima of high quality. However, already
establishing the very existence of spurious minima seems to be beyond reach of existing analytic
tools; let alone rigorously arguing about their height, curvature and structure—the aim of this work.
In this paper, we focus on two-layer ReLU neural networks of the form
k
X
i=1

αi ϕ(hwi , xi), W ∈ M (k, d), α ∈ Rk ,

(1)

where ϕ(z) = max{0, z} is the ReLU activation function acting entry-wise, M (k, d) denotes the
space of k ×d matrices and wi denotes the ith row of W . We are primarily interested in characterizing
various optimization-related obstructions for local search method, independently of the expressive
power of two-layer ReLU networks. Thus, data is understood to be fully realizable. Concretely, we
assume that there are d inputs which are drawn from the standard multivariate Gaussian distribution
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

