Convergence and Alignment of Gradient Descent with
Random Backpropagation Weights

Ganlin Song∗

Ruitu Xu∗

John Lafferty∗†

∗

Department of Statistics and Data Science
†
Wu Tsai Institute
Yale University
{ganlin.song, ruitu.xu, john.lafferty}@yale.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent with backpropagation is the workhorse of artificial
neural networks. It has long been recognized that backpropagation fails to be a
biologically plausible algorithm. Fundamentally, it is a non-local procedure—
updating one neuron’s synaptic weights requires knowledge of synaptic weights
or receptive fields of downstream neurons. This limits the use of artificial neural networks as a tool for understanding the biological principles of information
processing in the brain. Lillicrap et al. (2016) propose a more biologically plausible “feedback alignment” algorithm that uses random and fixed backpropagation
weights, and show promising simulations. In this paper we study the mathematical properties of the feedback alignment procedure by analyzing convergence and
alignment for two-layer networks under squared error loss. In the overparameterized setting, we prove that the error converges to zero exponentially fast, and also
that regularization is necessary in order for the parameters to become aligned with
the random backpropagation weights. Simulations are given that are consistent
with this analysis and suggest further generalizations. These results contribute
to our understanding of how biologically plausible algorithms might carry out
weight learning in a manner different from Hebbian learning, with performance
that is comparable with the full non-local backpropagation algorithm.

1

Introduction

The roots of artificial neural networks draw inspiration from networks of biological neurons (Rumelhart et al., 1986a; Elman et al., 1996; Medler, 1998). Grounded in simple abstractions of membrane
potentials and firing, neural networks are increasingly being employed as a computational tool for
better understanding the biological principles of information processing in the brain; examples include Yildirim et al. (2019) and Yamins & DiCarlo (2016). Even when full biological fidelity is not
required, it can be useful to better align the computational abstraction with neuroscience principles.
Stochastic gradient descent has been a workhorse of artificial neural networks. Conveniently, calculation of gradients can be carried out using the backpropagation algorithm, where reverse mode
automatic differentiation provides a powerful way of computing the derivatives for general architectures (Rumelhart et al., 1986b). Yet it has long been recognized that backpropagation fails to
be a biologically plausible algorithm. Fundamentally, it is a non-local procedure—updating the
weight between a presynaptic and postsynaptic neuron requires knowledge of the weights between
the postsynaptic neuron and other neurons. No known biological mechanism exists for propagating
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

