Representation Costs of Linear Neural Networks:
Analysis and Design

Zhen Dai
Committee on Computational and Applied Mathematics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
zhen9@uchicago.edu

Mina Karzand
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
mkarzand@ucdavis.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
For different parameterizations (mappings from parameters to predictors), we study
the regularization cost in predictor space induced by l2 regularization on the parameters (weights). We focus on linear neural networks as parameterizations of linear
predictors. We identify the representation cost of certain sparse linear ConvNets
and residual networks. In order to get a better understanding of how the architecture and parameterization affect the representation cost, we also study the reverse
problem, identifying which regularizers on linear predictors (e.g., lp quasi-norms,
group quasi-norms, the k-support-norm, elastic net) can be the representation cost
induced by simple l2 regularization, and designing the parameterizations that do
so.

1

Introduction

In a class of parameterized models, penalizing the l2 norm of the parameters induces regularization
on function space which can be interpreted as a complexity measure on the class of learned functions.
In this paper, we study how different parameterizations induce different complexity measures.
We consider parameterized mappings f : X × Rp −→ Rm , from input x ∈ X and parameters
w ∈ Rp to predictions f (x; w). We denote the predictor implemented with parameters w by
F (w) : X −→ Rm defined as F (w)(x) := f (x; w). Then image(F ) is the set of functions from X
to Rm which can be obtained from this class of parameterized models. We will use F to denote a set
of functions from X to Rm .
The l2 regularization on parameters, either explicitly or implicitly, is a common phenomenon. As an
example, in deep learning, explicit l2 regularization on parameters (a.k.a. weight decay) improves
generalization ([20, 37]). Implicit regularization of l2 norm of parameters appears when we use
gradient descent (GD) to train the model ([2, 35, 33, 19, 23, 32, 14, 25, 9, 18]). In particular, GD on
homogeneous neural networks with logistic loss implicitly regularizes l2 norm on weights [23, 32].
The representation cost ([15, 31, 27]) of a function g in image(F ) under the parametrization F is
2

RF (g) = min{∥w∥2 : F (w) = g}.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(1)

