Editing a Classifier by Rewriting Its Prediction Rules

Shibani Santurkar∗
MIT
shibani@mit.edu

Dimitris Tsipras∗
MIT
tsipras@mit.edu

Mahalaxmi Elango
MIT
melango@mit.edu

David Bau
MIT
davidbau@mit.edu

Antonio Torralba
MIT
torralba@mit.edu

Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
madry@mit.edu

Abstract
We present a methodology for modifying the behavior of a classifier by directly
rewriting its prediction rules.1 Our approach requires virtually no additional data
collection and can be applied to a variety of settings, including adapting a model
to new environments, and modifying it to ignore spurious features.

1

Introduction

At the core of machine learning is the ability to automatically discover prediction rules from raw
data. However, there is mounting evidence that not all of these rules are reliable [Torralba and
Efros, 2011, Beery et al., 2018, Shetty et al., 2019, Agarwal et al., 2020, Xiao et al., 2020, Bissoto
et al., 2020, Geirhos et al., 2020]. In particular, some rules could be based on biases in the training
data: e.g., learning to associate cows with grass since they are typically depicted on pastures [Beery
et al., 2018]. While such prediction rules may be useful in some scenarios, they will be irrelevant or
misleading in others. This raises the question:
How can we most effectively modify the way in which a given model makes its predictions?
The canonical approach for performing such post hoc modifications is to intervene at the data level.
For example, by gathering additional data that better reflects the real world (e.g., images of cows on
the beach) and then using it to further train the model. Unfortunately, collecting such data can be
challenging: how do we get cows to pose for us in a variety of environments? Furthermore, data
collection is ultimately a very indirect way of specifying the intended model behavior. After all,
even when data has been carefully curated to reflect a given real-world task, models still end up
learning unintended prediction rules from it [Ponce et al., 2006, Torralba and Efros, 2011, Tsipras
et al., 2020, Beyer et al., 2020].
Our contributions
The goal of our work is to develop a toolkit that enables users to directly modify the prediction rules
learned by an (image) classifier, as opposed to doing so implicitly via the data. Concretely:
Editing prediction rules. We build on the recent work of Bau et al. [2020a] to develop a method
for modifying a classifier’s prediction rules with essentially no additional data collection (Section
2). At a high level, our method enables the user to modify the weight of a layer so that the latent
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Our code is available at https://github.com/MadryLab/EditingClassifiers.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

