MCUNetV2: Memory-Efficient Patch-based
Inference for Tiny Deep Learning

Ji Lin1

Wei-Ming Chen1 Han Cai1 Chuang Gan2
1
MIT 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
https://mcunet.mit.edu

Song Han1

Abstract
Tiny deep learning on microcontroller units (MCUs) is challenging due to the
limited memory size. We find that the memory bottleneck is due to the imbalanced
memory distribution in convolutional neural network (CNN) designs: the first
several blocks have an order of magnitude larger memory usage than the rest of
the network. To alleviate this issue, we propose a generic patch-by-patch inference
scheduling, which operates only on a small spatial region of the feature map and
significantly cuts down the peak memory. However, naive implementation brings
overlapping patches and computation overhead. We further propose receptive field
redistribution to shift the receptive field and FLOPs to the later stage and reduce
the computation overhead. Manually redistributing the receptive field is difficult.
We automate the process with neural architecture search to jointly optimize the
neural architecture and inference scheduling, leading to MCUNetV2. Patch-based
inference effectively reduces the peak memory usage of existing networks by
4-8×. Co-designed with neural networks, MCUNetV2 sets a record ImageNet
accuracy on MCU (71.8%), and achieves >90% accuracy on the visual wake words
dataset under only 32kB SRAM. MCUNetV2 also unblocks object detection on
tiny devices, achieving 16.9% higher mAP on Pascal VOC compared to the stateof-the-art result. Our study largely addressed the memory bottleneck in tinyML
and paved the way for various vision applications beyond image classification.

1

Introduction

IoT devices based on tiny hardware like microcontroller units (MCUs) are ubiquitous nowadays.
Deploying deep learning models on such tiny hardware will enable us to democratize artificial
intelligence. However, tiny deep learning is fundamentally different from mobile deep learning due to
the tight memory budget [27]: a common MCU usually has an SRAM smaller than 512kB, which is
too small for deploying most off-the-shelf deep learning networks. Even for more powerful hardware
like Raspberry Pi 4, fitting inference into the L2 cache (1MB) can significantly improve energy
efficiency. These pose new challenges to efficient AI inference with a small peak memory usage.
Existing work employs pruning [16, 18, 19, 32, 31], quantization [16, 54, 53, 37, 46, 9, 39], and
neural architecture search [6, 44, 47, 5] for efficient deep learning. However, these methods focus on
reducing the number of parameters and FLOPs, but not the memory bottleneck. The tight memory
budget limits the feature map/activation size, restricting us to use a small model capacity or a small
input image size. Actually, the input resolutions used in existing tinyML work are usually small
(< 2242 ) [27], which might be acceptable for image classification (e.g., ImageNet [11], VWW [10]),
but not for dense prediction tasks like objection detection: as in Figure 2, the performance of object
detection degrades much faster with input resolution than image classification. Such a restriction
hinders the application of tiny deep learning on many real-life tasks (e.g., person detection).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

