Smooth Bilevel Programming
for Sparse Regularization

Clarice Poon∗,

Gabriel Peyré†

Abstract
Iteratively reweighted least square (IRLS) is a popular approach to solve sparsityenforcing regression problems in machine learning. State of the art approaches
are more efficient but typically rely on specific coordinate pruning schemes. In
this work, we show how a surprisingly simple re-parametrization of IRLS, coupled
with a bilevel resolution (instead of an alternating scheme) is able to achieve
top performances on a wide range of sparsity (such as Lasso, group Lasso and
trace norm regularizations), regularization strength (including hard constraints),
and design matrices (ranging from correlated designs to differential operators).
Similarly to IRLS, our method only involves linear systems resolutions, but in sharp
contrast, corresponds to the minimization of a smooth function. Despite being
non-convex, we show that there are no spurious minima and that saddle points are
“ridable”, so that there always exists a descent direction. We thus advocate for the
use of a BFGS quasi-Newton solver, which makes our approach simple, robust
and efficient. We perform a numerical benchmark of the convergence speed of
our algorithm against state of the art solvers for Lasso, group Lasso, trace norm
and linearly constrained problems. These results highlight the versatility of our
approach, removing the need to use different solvers depending on the specificity
of the ML problem under study.

1

Introduction

Regularized empirical risk minimization is a workhorse of supervised learning, and for a linear model,
it reads
1
min R(β) + L(Xβ, y)
(Pλ )
β∈Rn
λ
where X ∈ Rm×n is the design matrix (n being the number of samples and m the number of features),
L : Rm × Rm → [0, ∞) is the loss function, and R : Rn → [0, ∞) the regularizer. Here λ ⩾ 0 is
the regularisation parameter which is typically tuned by cross-validation, and in the limit case λ = 0,
(P0 ) is a constraint problem minβ R(β) under the constraint L(Xβ, y) = 0.
In this work, we focus our attention to sparsity enforcing penalties, which induce some form of
structure on the solution of (Pλ ), the most celebrated examples (reviewed in Section 2) being the
Lasso, group-Lasso and trace norm regularizers. All these regularizers, and much more (as detailed
in Section), can be conveniently re-written as an infimum of quadratic functions. While Section 2
reviews more general formulations, this so-called “quadratic variational form” is especially simple in
the case of block-separable functionals (such as Lasso and group-Lasso), where one has
1 X ||βg ||22
1
R(β) = min
+ h(η),
(1)
k
ηg
2
η∈R+ 2
g∈G

∗

Department of mathematical sciences, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK cmshp20@bath.ac.uk
CNRS and DMA, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL University, 45 rue d’Ulm, F-75230 PARIS cedex 05,
FRANCE, gabriel.peyre@ens.fr
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

