Embedding Principle of Loss Landscape of Deep
Neural Networks

1

Yaoyu Zhang1,2∗, Zhongwang Zhang1 †, Tao Luo1 , Zhi-Qin John Xu1‡
School of Mathematical Sciences, Institute of Natural Sciences, MOE-LSC and
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology
{zhyy.sjtu, 0123zzw666, luotao41, xuzhiqin}@sjtu.edu.cn.

Abstract
Understanding the structure of loss landscape of deep neural networks (DNNs)
is obviously important. In this work, we prove an embedding principle that the
loss landscape of a DNN “contains” all the critical points of all the narrower
DNNs. More precisely, we propose a critical embedding such that any critical
point, e.g., local or global minima, of a narrower DNN can be embedded to a critical
point/affine subspace of the target DNN with higher degeneracy and preserving
the DNN output function. Note that, given any training data, differentiable loss
function and differentiable activation function, this embedding structure of critical
points holds. This general structure of DNNs is starkly different from other
nonconvex problems such as protein-folding. Empirically, we find that a wide
DNN is often attracted by highly-degenerate critical points that are embedded
from narrow DNNs. The embedding principle provides a new perspective to study
the general easy optimization of wide DNNs and unravels a potential implicit
low-complexity regularization during the training. Overall, our work provides a
skeleton for the study of loss landscape of DNNs and its implication, by which a
more exact and comprehensive understanding can be anticipated in the near future.

1

Introduction

Understanding the loss landscape of DNNs is essential for a theory of deep learning. An important
problem is to quantify exactly how the loss landscape looks like (E et al., 2020). This problem is
difficult since the loss landscape is so complicated that it can almost be any pattern (Skorokhodov
and Burtsev, 2019). Moreover, its high dimensionality and the dependence on data, model and loss
make it very difficult to obtain a general understanding through empirical study. Therefore, though it
has been extensively studied over the years, it remains an open problem to provide a clear picture
about the organization of its critical points and their properties.
In this work, we make a step towards this goal through proposing a very general embedding operation
of network parameters from narrow to wide DNNs, by which we prove an embedding principle for
fully-connected DNNs stated intuitively as follows:
Embedding principle: the loss landscape of any network “contains” all critical points of all narrower
networks.
∗

Corresponding author: zhyy.sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn.
Part of this work is done when ZZ was an undergraduate student of Zhiyuan Honors Program at Shanghai
Jiao Tong University.
‡
Corresponding author: xuzhiqin@sjtu.edu.cn.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

