Progressive Feature Interaction Search for Deep
Sparse Network

Chen Gao1 , Yinfeng Li1 , Quanming Yao1,2 , Depeng Jin1 , and Yong Li1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
4Paradigm Inc.
liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Deep sparse networks (DSNs), of which the crux is exploring the high-order feature
interactions, have become the state-of-the-art on the prediction task with highsparsity features. However, these models suffer from low computation efficiency,
including large model size and slow model inference, which largely limits these
models’ application value. In this work, we approach this problem with neural
architecture search by automatically searching the critical component in DSNs,
the feature-interaction layer. We propose a distilled search space to cover the
desired architectures with fewer parameters. We then develop a progressive search
algorithm for efficient search on the space and well capture the order-priority
property in sparse prediction tasks. Experiments on three real-world benchmark
datasets show promising results of PROFIT in both accuracy and efficiency. Further
studies validate the feasibility of our designed search space and search algorithm.

1

Introduction

The deep sparse network (DSN) [9, 4] is a special type of deep networks, which targets learning
from sparse and categorical features. Such a learning problem frequently appears in many industrial
applications. Take the click-through rate (CTR) prediction as an example, features such as user id, user
age, item id, and item category, are usually sparse and high-multidimensional [4]. In advertisement
recommendation [27], there are sparse features such as category, brand, etc. In fraud detection [23],
there are sparse features such as income level, region, etc.
A general DSN framework (see Figure 1) consists of
three layers. First, the embedding layer transforms the
raw sparse features into dense embeddings. Then the
feature-interaction layer can construct cross-features of
raw features’ embeddings via feature-interaction operation. The cross-features are further fed into the output
layer to calculate the prediction score. To achieve high
prediction accuracy, researchers found that the crux of
the deep sparse networks is to design complex feature- Figure 1: Illustration of deep sparse netinteraction layers [9, 31, 5, 18, 25].
works and feature-interaction layer.
For example, in Figure 1, the second-order cross-feature, AB, is constructed by two raw features,
A and B, via feature interaction. DeepFM [9] feed the two-order cross-features into multi-layer
perceptions for implicitly generating high-order cross-features. Further advances replace the MLP in
DeepFM with more complex neural networks, including deep cross network in xDeepFM [18], outer
product network in PNN [25], self-attention network in AutoInt [31], and logarithmic transformation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

