On the Provable Generalization of Recurrent Neural
Networks
Lifu Wang
Beijing Jiaotong University
Lifu_Wang@bjtu.edu.cn

Bo Shen∗
Beijing Jiaotong University
bshen@bjtu.edu.cn

Bo Hu
Beijing Jiaotong University
hubo2018@bjtu.edu.cn

Xing Cao
Beijing Jiaotong University
caoxing@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is a fundamental structure in deep learning.
Recently, some works study the training process of over-parameterized neural
networks, and show that over-parameterized networks can learn functions in some
notable concept classes with a provable generalization error bound. In this paper,
we analyze the training and generalization for RNNs with random initialization,
and provide the following improvements over recent works:
(1) For a RNN with input sequence x = (X1 , X2 , ..., XL ), previous works study
to learn functions that are summation of f (βlT Xl ) and require normalized
conditions that ||Xl || ≤ ϵ with some very small ϵ depending on the complexity
of f . In this paper, using detailed analysis about the neural tangent kernel
matrix, we prove a generalization error bound to learn such functions without
normalized conditions and show that some notable concept classes are learnable with the numbers of iterations and samples scaling almost-polynomially
in the input length L.
(2) Moreover, we prove a novel result to learn N-variables functions of input
sequence with the form f (β T [Xl1 , ..., XlN ]), which do not belong to the
“additive” concept class, i,e., the summation of function f (Xl ). And we
show that when either N or l0 = max(l1 , .., lN ) − min(l1 , .., lN ) is small,
f (β T [Xl1 , ..., XlN ]) will be learnable with the number iterations and samples
scaling almost-polynomially in the input length L.

1

Introduction

In Deep Learning, the recurrent neural network (RNN) is well-known as one of the most popular
models to model sequential data and is widely used in practice for tasks in natural language processing
(NLP). One of the characters of RNN is that it performs the same operation for all the input of the
sequence.
Consider a input sequence x = (X1 , X2 , ..., XL ). A RNN with the form
hl (x) = ϕ(W hl−1 + AXl ),
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(1)

