Online Multi-Armed Bandits with Adaptive Inference

Maria Dimakopoulou
Netflix
mdimakopoulou@netflix.com

Zhimei Ren
University of Chicago
zmren@statistics.uchicago.edu

Zhengyuan Zhou
NYU Stern School of Business
zzhou@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
During online decision making in multi-armed bandits, one needs to conduct
inference on the true mean reward of each arm based on data collected so far
at each step. However, since the arms are adaptively selected–thereby yielding
non-i.i.d. data–conducting inference accurately is not straightforward. In particular,
sample averaging, which is used in the family of UCB and Thompson sampling
(TS) algorithms, does not provide a good choice as it suffers from bias and a lack
of good statistical properties (e.g. asymptotic normality). Our thesis in this paper
is that more sophisticated inference schemes that take into account the adaptive
nature of the sequentially collected data can unlock further performance gains,
even though both UCB and TS type algorithms are optimal in the worst case.
In particular, we propose a variant of TS-style algorithms–which we call doubly
adaptive TS–that leverages recent advances in causal inference and adaptively
reweights the terms of a doubly robust estimator on the true mean reward of each
arm. Through 20 synthetic domain experiments and a semi-synthetic experiment
based on data from an A/B test ran at Netflix, we demonstrate that using an adaptive
inferential scheme (while still retaining the exploration efficacy of TS) provides
clear benefits in online decision making: the proposed DATS algorithm has superior
empirical performance to existing baselines (UCB and TS) in terms of regret and
sample complexity in identifying the best arm. In addition, we also provide a
finite-time regret bound of doubly adaptive TS that matches (up to log factors)
those of UCB and TS algorithms, thereby establishing that its improved practical
benefits do not come at the expense of worst-case suboptimality.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandits [Robbins, 1952, Berry and Fristedt, 1985, Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012, Sutton and Barto, 2018, Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020] is the simplest and most wellestablished model for sequential decision making, where a decision maker needs to adaptively select
an arm at each time from a set of arms with unknown (but fixed) mean rewards, in the hope of
maximizing the total accumulated expected returns over a certain time horizon. The existing literature
has studied this problem extensively, mainly focusing on developing algorithms that deal with the
exploration-exploitation trade-off, yielding at least two broad classes of algorithms that provide
optimal (sometimes up to log factors) regret guarantees in the worst case.
The first is upper confidence bound (UCB) based algorithms [Lai and Robbins, 1985, Agrawal, 1995,
Auer et al., 2002, Auer, 2002, Garivier and Moulines, 2011, Garivier and Cappé, 2011, Carpentier
et al., 2011]. Reflecting “optimism in face of uncertainty”, UCB algorithms compute confidence
bounds of the estimated mean, construct the index for each arm by adding the confidence bound to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

