Risk Bounds and Calibration for a Smart
Predict-then-Optimize Method

Heyuan Liu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
heyuan_liu@berkeley.edu

Paul Grigas
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
pgrigas@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The predict-then-optimize framework is fundamental in practical stochastic
decision-making problems: first predict unknown parameters of an optimization
model, then solve the problem using the predicted values. A natural loss function
in this setting is defined by measuring the decision error induced by the predicted
parameters, which was named the Smart Predict-then-Optimize (SPO) loss by
Elmachtoub and Grigas [2021]. Since the SPO loss is typically nonconvex and possibly discontinuous, Elmachtoub and Grigas [2021] introduced a convex surrogate,
called the SPO+ loss, that importantly accounts for the underlying structure of the
optimization model. In this paper, we greatly expand upon the consistency results
for the SPO+ loss provided by Elmachtoub and Grigas [2021]. We develop risk
bounds and uniform calibration results for the SPO+ loss relative to the SPO loss,
which provide a quantitative way to transfer the excess surrogate risk to excess
true risk. By combining our risk bounds with generalization bounds, we show that
the empirical minimizer of the SPO+ loss achieves low excess true risk with high
probability. We first demonstrate these results in the case when the feasible region
of the underlying optimization problem is a polyhedron, and then we show that the
results can be strengthened substantially when the feasible region is a level set of a
strongly convex function. We perform experiments to empirically demonstrate the
strength of the SPO+ surrogate, as compared to standard `1 and squared `2 prediction error losses, on portfolio allocation and cost-sensitive multi-class classification
problems.

1

Introduction

The predict-then-optimize framework, where one predicts the unknown parameters of an optimization
model and then plugs in the predictions before solving, is prevalent in applications of machine learning.
Some typical examples include predicting future asset returns in portfolio allocation problems and
predicting the travel time on each edge of a network in navigation problems. In most cases, there are
many contextual features available, such as time of day, weather information, financial and business
news headlines, and many others, that can be leveraged to predict the unknown parameters and
reduce uncertainty in the decision making problem. Ultimately, the goal is to produce a high quality
prediction model that leads to a good decisions when implemented, such as a position that leads to a
large return or a route that induces a small realized travel time. There has been a fair amount of recent
work examining this paradigm and other closely related problems in data-driven decision making,
such as the works of Bertsimas and Kallus [2020], Donti et al. [2017], Elmachtoub and Grigas [2021],
Kao et al. [2009], Estes and Richard [2019], Ho and Hanasusanto [2019], Notz and Pibernik [2019],
Kotary et al. [2021], the references therein, and others.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

