Pruning Randomly Initialized Neural Networks
with Iterative Randomization
Daiki Chijiwa†∗

Shin’ya Yamaguchi†

Kenji Umakoshi‡
†

Yasutoshi Ida†

Tomohiro Inoue‡

NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
‡
NTT Social Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation

Abstract
Pruning the weights of randomly initialized neural networks plays an important
role in the context of lottery ticket hypothesis. Ramanujan et al. [23] empirically
showed that only pruning the weights can achieve remarkable performance instead
of optimizing the weight values. However, to achieve the same level of performance
as the weight optimization, the pruning approach requires more parameters in the
networks before pruning and thus more memory space. To overcome this parameter
inefficiency, we introduce a novel framework to prune randomly initialized neural
networks with iteratively randomizing weight values (IteRand). Theoretically,
we prove an approximation theorem in our framework, which indicates that the
randomizing operations are provably effective to reduce the required number
of the parameters. We also empirically demonstrate the parameter efficiency
in multiple experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. The code is available at
https://github.com/dchiji-ntt/iterand.

1

Introduction

The lottery ticket hypothesis, which was originally proposed by Frankle and Carbin [5], has been
an important topic in the research of deep neural networks (DNNs). The hypothesis claims that an
over-parameterized DNN has a sparse subnetwork (called a winning ticket) that can achieve almost
the same accuracy as the fully-trained entire network when trained independently. If the hypothesis
holds for a given network, then we can reduce the computational cost by using the sparse subnetwork
instead of the entire network while maintaining the accuracy [14, 19]. In addition to the practical
benefit, the hypothesis also suggests that the over-parametrization of DNNs is no longer necessary
and their subnetworks alone are sufficient to achieve full accuracy.
Ramanujan et al. [23] went one step further. They proposed and empirically demonstrated a conjecture
related to the above hypothesis, called the strong lottery ticket hypothesis, which informally states
that there exists a subnetwork in a randomly initialized neural network such that it already achieves
almost the same accuracy as a fully trained network, without any optimization of the weights of
the network. A remarkable consequence of this hypothesis is that neural networks could be trained
by solving a discrete optimization problem. That is, we may train a randomly initialized neural
network by finding an optimal subnetwork (which we call weight-pruning optimization), instead of
optimizing the network weights continuously (which we call weight-optimization) with stochastic
gradient descent (SGD).
However, the weight-pruning optimization requires a problematic amount of parameters in the random
network before pruning. Pensia et al. [22] theoretically showed that the required network width for
the weight-pruning optimization needs to be logarithmically wider than the weight-optimization at
∗

Corresponding author: daiki.chijiwa.mk@hco.ntt.co.jp

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

