Re-ranking for image retrieval and transductive
few-shot classification
Xi Shen1 , Yang Xiao2 , Shell Xu Hu3 , Othman Sbai4 , and Mathieu Aubry5
1, 2, 4, 5

LIGM (UMR 8049), École des Ponts ParisTech
3
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge

Abstract
In the problems of image retrieval and few-shot classification, the mainstream
approaches focus on learning a better feature representation. However, directly
tackling the distance or similarity measure between images could also be efficient.
To this end, we revisit the idea of re-ranking the top-k retrieved images in the
context of image retrieval (e.g., the k-reciprocal nearest neighbors [48, 75]) and
generalize this idea to transductive few-shot learning.
We propose to meta-learn the re-ranking updates such that the similarity graph converges towards the target similairty graph induced by the image labels. Specifically,
the re-ranking module takes as input an initial similarity graph between the query
image and the contextual images using a pre-trained feature extractor, and predicts
an improved similarity graph by leveraging the structure among the involved images. We show that our re-ranking approach can be applied to unseen images and
can further boost existing approaches for both image retrieval and few-shot learning problems. Our approach operates either independently or in conjunction with
classical re-ranking approaches, yielding clear and consistent improvements on
image retrieval (CUB, Cars, SOP, rOxford5K, rParis6K) and transductive few-shot
classification (Mini-ImageNet, tiered-ImageNet and CIFAR-FS) benchmarks. Our
code is available at https://imagine.enpc.fr/~shenx/SSR/.

1

Introduction

Learning deep image features that generalize beyond the training classes they have been trained
on has been a clear success [63]. Using these strong features, recent works have shown that high
performances can be obtained simply by computing nearest neighbors, in particular for image
retrieval [1, 16, 50, 11, 30, 63] and few-shot image classification [71, 6]. In this paper we highlight
that, even with these strong features, results can be further improved by a large margin through
re-ranking images based on the similarity graph between neighbors. To this end, we present a graph
based deep architecture for re-ranking neighborhood images via a learning approach.
Our method can be seen as revisiting and complementing classical approaches to re-ranking with
deep learning techniques. These approaches can be broadly classified into query expansion that
compute a new query feature based on the top retrieved neighbors [9, 8, 2, 16, 50], and k-reciprocal
re-ranking that compute a new distance between images based on the Jaccard distance between
confident neighbors [48, 75]. The approach we propose is related to both approaches. Since on one
side, we focus successively on the neighbors of each sample, and on the other side, we update features
to compute new similarities. This is achieved by designing a neural network architecture that can
update the similarity graph by successively focusing on different subgraphs (as visualized in Figure
1) and updating features based on synthetic gradients [24, 21]. Our architecture for updating the
similarity graph, referred to as Subgraph Similarity Refiner (SSR), operates on the adjacency matrices
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

