There Is No Turning Back:
A Self-Supervised Approach for
Reversibility-Aware Reinforcement Learning

Nathan Grinsztajn∗
Inria, Scool Team
CRIStAL, CNRS, Université de Lille
nathan.grinsztajn@inria.fr
Olivier Pietquin
Google Research, Brain Team

Johan Ferret∗
Google Research, Brain Team
Inria, Scool Team
CRIStAL, CNRS, Université de Lille
Philippe Preux
Inria, Scool Team
CRIStAL, CNRS, Université de Lille

Matthieu Geist
Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
We propose to learn to distinguish reversible from irreversible actions for better
informed decision-making in Reinforcement Learning (RL). From theoretical
considerations, we show that approximate reversibility can be learned through a
simple surrogate task: ranking randomly sampled trajectory events in chronological
order. Intuitively, pairs of events that are always observed in the same order are
likely to be separated by an irreversible sequence of actions. Conveniently, learning
the temporal order of events can be done in a fully self-supervised way, which we
use to estimate the reversibility of actions from experience, without any priors. We
propose two different strategies that incorporate reversibility in RL agents, one
strategy for exploration (RAE) and one strategy for control (RAC). We demonstrate
the potential of reversibility-aware agents in several environments, including the
challenging Sokoban game. In synthetic tasks, we show that we can learn control
policies that never fail and reduce to zero the side-effects of interactions, even
without access to the reward function.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of estimating if and how easily actions can be reversed in the Reinforcement
Learning (RL) context. Irreversible outcomes are often not to be taken lightly when making decisions.
As humans, we spend more time evaluating the outcomes of our actions when we know they are
irreversible [29]. As such, irreversibility can be positive (i.e. takes risk away for good) or negative (i.e.
leads to later regret). Also, decision-makers are more likely to anticipate regret for hard-to-reverse
decisions [50]. All in all, irreversibility seems to be a good prior to exploit for more principled
decision-making. In this work, we explore the option of using irreversibility to guide decision-making
and confirm the following assertion: by estimating and factoring reversibility in the action selection
process, safer behaviors emerge in environments with intrinsic risk factors. In addition to this, we
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

