Causal Influence Detection
for Improving Efficiency in Reinforcement Learning

Maximilian Seitzer
Bernhard Schölkopf
Georg Martius
MPI for Intelligent Systems
MPI for Intelligent Systems
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
Tübingen, Germany
Tübingen, Germany
maximilian.seitzer@tue.mpg.de
bs@tue.mpg.de
georg.martius@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning (RL) environments consist of independent entities
that interact sparsely. In such environments, RL agents have only limited influence
over other entities in any particular situation. Our idea in this work is that learning
can be efficiently guided by knowing when and what the agent can influence with
its actions. To achieve this, we introduce a measure of situation-dependent causal
influence based on conditional mutual information and show that it can reliably
detect states of influence. We then propose several ways to integrate this measure
into RL algorithms to improve exploration and off-policy learning. All modified
algorithms show strong increases in data efficiency on robotic manipulation tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising route towards versatile and dexterous artificial agents.
Learning from interactions can lead to robust control strategies that can cope with all the intricacies
of the real world that are hard to engineer correctly. Still, many relevant tasks such as object
manipulation pose significant challenges for RL. Although impressive results have been achieved
using simulation-to-real transfer [1] or heavy physical parallelization [2], training requires countless
hours of interaction. Improving sample efficiency is thus a key concern in RL. In this paper, we
approach this issue from a causal inference perspective.
When is an agent in control of its environment? An agent can only influence the environment by its
actions. This seemingly trivial observation has the underappreciated aspect that the causal influence
of actions is situation dependent. Consider the simple scenario of a robotic arm in front of an object
on a table. Clearly, the object can only be moved when contact between the robot and object is made.
Generally, there are situations where immediate causal influence is possible, while in others, none is.
In this work, we formalize this situation-dependent nature of control and show how it can be exploited
to improve the sample efficiency of RL agents. To this end, we derive a measure that captures the
causal influence of actions on the environment and devise a practical method to compute it.
Knowing when the agent has control over an object of interest is important both from a learning and
an exploration perspective. The learning algorithm should pay particular attention to these situations
because (i) the robot is initially rarely in control of the object of interest, making training inefficient,
(ii) physical contacts are hard to model, thus require more effort to learn and (iii) these states are
enabling manipulation towards further goals. But for learning to take place, the algorithm first needs
data that contains these relevant states. Thus, the agent has to take its causal influence into account
already during exploration.
We propose several ways in which our measure of causal influence can be integrated into RL
algorithms to address both the exploration, and the learning side. For exploration, agents can be
rewarded with a bonus for visiting states of causal influence. We show that such a bonus leads the
agent to quickly discover useful behavior even in the absence of task-specific rewards. Moreover,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

