Container: Context Aggregation Network

Peng Gao1,2 , Jiasen Lu4 , Hongsheng Li2 , Roozbeh Mottaghi3,4 , Aniruddha Kembhavi3,4
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, CUHK
3
University of Washington 4 PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are ubiquitous in computer vision, with a
myriad of effective and efficient variations. Recently, Transformers – originally
introduced in natural language processing – have been increasingly adopted in
computer vision. While early adopters continue to employ CNN backbones, the latest networks are end-to-end CNN-free Transformer solutions. A recent surprising
finding shows that a simple MLP based solution without any traditional convolutional or Transformer components can produce effective visual representations.
While CNNs, Transformers and MLP-Mixers may be considered as completely
disparate architectures, we provide a unified view showing that they are in fact
special cases of a more general method to aggregate spatial context in a neural
network stack. We present the C ONTAINER (CONText AggregatIon NEtwoRk), a
general-purpose building block for multi-head context aggregation that can exploit
long-range interactions a la Transformers while still exploiting the inductive bias
of the local convolution operation leading to faster convergence speeds, often
seen in CNNs. Our C ONTAINER architecture achieves 82.7 % Top-1 accuracy on
ImageNet using 22M parameters, +2.8 improvement compared with DeiT-Small,
and can converge to 79.9 % Top-1 accuracy in just 200 epochs. In contrast to
Transformer-based methods that do not scale well to downstream tasks that rely on
larger input image resolutions, our efficient network, named C ONTAINER -L IGHT,
can be employed in object detection and instance segmentation networks such as
DETR, RetinaNet and Mask-RCNN to obtain an impressive detection mAP of 38.9,
43.8, 45.1 and mask mAP of 41.3, providing large improvements of 6.6, 7.3, 6.9
and 6.6 pts respectively, compared to a ResNet-50 backbone with a comparable
compute and parameter size. Our method also achieves promising results on selfsupervised learning compared to DeiT on the DINO framework. Code is released
at https://github.com/allenai/container.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the de facto standard for extracting visual
representations, and have proven remarkably effective at numerous downstream tasks such as object
detection [37], instance segmentation [22] and image captioning [1]. Similarly, in natural language
processing, Transformers rule the roost [13, 43, 42, 4]. Their effectiveness at capturing short and long
range information have led to state-of-the-art results across tasks such as question answering [45]
and language understanding [58].
In computer vision, Transformers were initially employed as long range information aggregators
across space (e.g., in object detection [5]) and time (e.g., in video understanding [61]), but these
methods continued to use CNNs [34] to obtain raw visual representations. More recently however,
CNN-free visual backbones employing Transformer modules [54, 14] have shown impressive performance on image classification benchmarks such as ImageNet [33]. The race to dethrone CNNs
has now begun to expand beyond Transformers – a recent unexpected result shows that a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) exclusive network [52] can be just as effective at image classification.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

