On the Second-order Convergence Properties of
Random Search Methods
Aurelien Lucchi∗

Antonio Orvieto

Adamos Solomou

Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Abstract
We study the theoretical convergence properties of random-search methods when
optimizing non-convex objective functions without having access to derivatives.
We prove that standard random-search methods that do not rely on second-order
information converge to a second-order stationary point. However, they suffer
from an exponential complexity in terms of the input dimension of the problem.
In order to address this issue, we propose a novel variant of random search that
exploits negative curvature by only relying on function evaluations. We prove
that this approach converges to a second-order stationary point at a much faster
rate than vanilla methods: namely, the complexity in terms of the number of
function evaluations is only linear in the problem dimension. We test our algorithm
empirically and find good agreements with our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

We consider solving the non-convex optimization problem minx∈Rd f (x), where f (·) is differentiable
but its derivatives are not directly accessible, or can only be approximated at a high computational
cost. This setting recently gained attention in machine learning, in areas such as black-box adversarial
attacks [11], reinforcement learning [51], meta-learning [7], online learning [9], and conditional
optimization [57].
We focus our attention on a popular class of derivative-free methods known as random direct-search
methods of directional type 1 . These methods optimize f (·) by evaluating the objective function over
a number of (fixed or randomized) directions, to ensure descent using a sufficiently small stepsize.
Direct-search algorithms date to the 1960’s, including e.g. [44, 46]. More recent variants include
deterministic direct search [15], random direct search (e.g. [54], or the Stochastic Three Points (STP)
method [6]), which randomly sample a direction and accept a step in this direction if it decreases the
function f (·). As discussed in [40], direct-search methods have remained popular over the years for a
number of reasons, including their good performance and known global convergence guarantees [54],
as well as their straightforward implementation that makes them suitable for many problems. We
refer the reader to [40, 15] for a survey.
In machine learning, objective functions of interest are often non-convex, which poses additional
challenges due to the presence of saddle points and potentially suboptimal local minima [33].
Instead of aiming for a global minimizer, one often seeks a second-order stationary point (SOSP):
i.e. a solution where the gradient vanishes and the Hessian is positive definite. Indeed, as shown
by [14, 36, 22, 21], many machine learning problems have no spurious local minimizers, yet have
many saddle points which yield suboptimal solutions and are often hard to escape from [19]. While
convergence to SOSPs and saddle escape times have been extensively studied in the context of
∗
1

Alphabetical ordering, all authors contributed equally.
In this manuscript, we will use the terms “random direct-search” and “random search” interchangeably.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

