SUPER-ADAM: Faster and Universal Framework of
Adaptive Gradients

Feihu Huang, Junyi Li, Heng Huang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
huangfeihu2018@gmail.com, junyili.ai@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Adaptive gradient methods have shown excellent performances for solving many
machine learning problems. Although multiple adaptive gradient methods were
recently studied, they mainly focus on either empirical or theoretical aspects and
also only work for specific problems by using some specific adaptive learning
rates. Thus, it is desired to design a universal framework for practical algorithms
of adaptive gradients with theoretical guarantee to solve general problems. To fill
this gap, we propose a faster and universal framework of adaptive gradients (i.e.,
SUPER-ADAM) by introducing a universal adaptive matrix that includes most
existing adaptive gradient forms. Moreover, our framework can flexibly integrate
the momentum and variance reduced techniques. In particular, our novel framework
provides the convergence analysis support for adaptive gradient methods under the
nonconvex setting. In theoretical analysis, we prove that our SUPER-ADAM algorithm can achieve the best known gradient (i.e., stochastic first-order oracle (SFO))
complexity of Õ(−3 ) for finding an -stationary point of nonconvex optimization,
which matches the lower bound for stochastic smooth nonconvex optimization.
In numerical experiments, we employ various deep learning tasks to validate that
our algorithm consistently outperforms the existing adaptive algorithms. Code is
available at https://github.com/LIJUNYI95/SuperAdam

1

Introduction

In the paper, we consider solving the following stochastic optimization problem:
min f (x) := Eξ∼D [f (x; ξ)],

x∈X

(1)

where f (x) denotes a smooth and possibly nonconvex loss function, and ξ is a random example
variable following an unknown data distribution D. Here X = Rd or X ⊂ Rd is a compact and
convex set. The problem (1) frequently appears in many machine learning applications such as the
expectation loss minimization. Recently, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [14] is commonly
used to solve the problem (1) such as Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) training [18, 20], due to only
requiring a mini-batch samples or even one sample at each iteration. Adaptive gradient methods
are one of the most important variants of SGD, which use adaptive learning rates and possibly
incorporate momentum techniques, so they generally require less parameter tuning and enjoy faster
convergence rate than SGD. Meanwhile, compared to SGD, adaptive gradient methods escape saddle
points faster [31]. Thus, recently adaptive gradient methods have been widely developed and studied.
For example, the first adaptive gradient method i.e., Adagrad has been proposed in [12], which
significantly outperforms the vanilla SGD under the sparse gradient setting. Subsequently, some
variants of Adagrad e.g., SC-Adagra [28] and SAdagrad [9] have been proposed for (strongly) convex
optimization. Unfortunately, Adagrad has been found that it does not be well competent to the dense
gradient setting and the nonconvex setting. To address this drawback, some other efficient variants of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

