Formalizing Generalization and Adversarial
Robustness of Neural Networks to
Weight Perturbations

Yu-Lin Tsai
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
uriah1001@gmail.com∗

Chia-Yi Hsu
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
chiayihsu8315@gmail.com

Chia-Mu Yu
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
chiamuyu@gmail.com

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract
Studying the sensitivity of weight perturbation in neural networks and its impacts
on model performance, including generalization and robustness, is an active research topic due to its implications on a wide range of machine learning tasks such
as model compression, generalization gap assessment, and adversarial attacks. In
this paper, we provide the first integral study and analysis for feed-forward neural
networks in terms of the robustness in pairwise class margin and its generalization
behavior under weight perturbation. We further design a new theory-driven loss
function for training generalizable and robust neural networks against weight perturbations. Empirical experiments are conducted to validate our theoretical analysis.
Our results offer fundamental insights for characterizing the generalization and
robustness of neural networks against weight perturbations.

1

Introduction

Neural network is currently the state-of-the-art machine learning model in a variety of tasks, including
computer vision, natural language processing, and game-playing, to name a few. In particular, feedforward neural networks consists of layers of trainable model weights and activation functions with
the premise of learning informative data representations and the complex mapping between data
samples and the associated labels. Albeit attaining superior performance, the need for studying the
sensitivity of neural networks to weight perturbations is also intensifying owing to several practical
motivations. For instance, in model compression, the robustness to weight quantization is crucial for
designing energy-efficient hardware accelerator [20] and for reducing memory storage while retaining
model performance [9, 26]. The notion of weight perturbation sensitivity is also used as a property to
reflect the generalization gap at local minima [10, 15]. In adversarial robustness and security, weight
sensitivity can be leveraged as a vulnerability for fault injection and causing erroneous prediction
[11, 32]. However, while weight sensitivity plays an important role in many machine learning tasks
and problem setups, theoretical characterization of its impacts on generalization and robustness of
neural networks remains elusive.
This paper bridges this gap by developing a novel theoretical framework for understanding the
generalization gap (through Rademacher complexity) and the robustness (through classification
margin) of neural networks against norm-bounded weight perturbations. Specifically, we consider
1

Work partly done in TCFSH

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

