Multi-Objective SPIBB: Seldonian Offline Policy
Improvement with Safety Constraints in Finite MDPs

Harsh Satija
McGill University, Mila
harsh.satija@mail.mcgill.ca
Joelle Pineau
McGill University, Mila, Facebook AI Research
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
pthomas@cs.umass.edu
Romain Laroche
Microsoft Research
romain.laroche@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the problem of Safe Policy Improvement (SPI) under constraints in the
offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) setting. We consider the scenario where: (i)
we have a dataset collected under a known baseline policy, (ii) multiple reward
signals are received from the environment inducing as many objectives to optimize.
We present an SPI formulation for this RL setting that takes into account the preferences of the algorithm’s user for handling the trade-offs for different reward signals
while ensuring that the new policy performs at least as well as the baseline policy
along each individual objective. We build on traditional SPI algorithms and propose
a novel method based on Safe Policy Iteration with Baseline Bootstrapping (SPIBB,
Laroche et al., 2019) that provides high probability guarantees on the performance
of the agent in the true environment. We show the effectiveness of our method on a
synthetic grid-world safety task as well as in a real-world critical care context to
learn a policy for the administration of IV fluids and vasopressors to treat sepsis.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) as a paradigm for sequential decision-making (Sutton, 1988) has shown
tremendous success in a variety of simulated domains (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI,
2018). However, there are still quite a few challenges between the traditional RL research and
real-world tasks. Most of these challenges stem from assumptions that are rarely satisfied in practice
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019), or the inability of the algorithm’s user to specify the desired behavior of
the agent without being a domain expert (Thomas et al., 2019). We focus on the real-world application
point of view and posit the following requirements:
• Multiple reward functions: Traditional RL methods assume a single scalar reward is present in
the environment. However, most real-world tasks, have multiple (possibly conflicting) objectives or
constraints that need to be taken into consideration together, such as the signals related to the safety
(physical well-being of the agent or the environment), budget utilization (energy or maintenance
costs), etc.
• Stakeholder control of the trade-off: The ML practitioners should have the ability to control the
different trade-offs the agent is making and choose the one they consider best for the task at hand.
• Offline setting: In many real-world domains (e.g., healthcare, finance or autonomous vehicles),
there is an abundance of data, collected under a sub-optimal policy, but training the agent directly
via interactions with the environment is expensive and risky. We assume that we only have access
to a dataset of past trajectories that can be used for training (Lange et al., 2012).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

