SketchGen: Generating Constrained CAD Sketches

Wamiq Reyaz Para1
Tom Kelly3
1

Shariq Farooq Bhat 1

Niloy Mitra2,4

Leonidas Guibas5

KAUST 2 Adobe Research
University College London

4

Paul Guerrero2
Peter Wonka1

3
5

University of Leeds
Stanford University

Abstract
Computer-aided design (CAD) is the most widely used modeling approach for
technical design. The typical starting point in these designs is 2D sketches which
can later be extruded and combined to obtain complex three-dimensional assemblies. Such sketches are typically composed of parametric primitives, such as
points, lines, and circular arcs, augmented with geometric constraints linking the
primitives, such as coincidence, parallelism, or orthogonality. Sketches can be
represented as graphs, with the primitives as nodes and the constraints as edges.
Training a model to automatically generate CAD sketches can enable several novel
workflows, but is challenging due to the complexity of the graphs and the heterogeneity of the primitives and constraints. In particular, each type of primitive and
constraint may require a record of different size and parameter types. We propose
SketchGen as a generative model based on a transformer architecture to address
the heterogeneity problem by carefully designing a sequential language for the
primitives and constraints that allows distinguishing between different primitive
or constraint types and their parameters, while encouraging our model to re-use
information across related parameters, encoding shared structure. A particular
highlight of our work is the ability to produce primitives linked via constraints that
enables the final output to be further regularized via a constraint solver. We evaluate
our model by demonstrating constraint prediction for given sets of primitives and
full sketch generation from scratch, showing that our approach significantly out
performs the state-of-the-art in CAD sketch generation.

1

Introduction

Computer Aided Design (CAD) tools are popular for modeling in industrial design and engineering.
The employed representations are popular due to their compactness, precision, simplicity, and the
fact that they are directly ‘understood’ by many fabrication procedures.
CAD models are essentially a collection of primitives (e.g., lines, arcs) that are held together by a
set of relations (e.g., collinear, parallel, tangent). Complex shapes are then formed by a sequence
of CAD operations, forming a base shape in 2D that is subsequently lifted to 3D using extrusion
operations. Thus, at the core, most CAD models are coplanar constrained sketches, i.e., a sequence of
planar curves linked by constraints. For example, CAD models in some of the largest open-sourced
datasets like Fusion360 [37] and SketchGraphs [27] are thus structured, or sketches drawn in algebraic
systems like Cinderella [1]. Such sequences are not only useful for shape creation, but also facilitate
easy editing and design exploration, as relations are preserved when individual elements are edited.
CAD representations are heterogeneous. First, different instructions have their unique sets of parameters, with different parameter counts, data types, and semantics. Second, constraint specifications
involve links (i.e., pointers) to existing primitives or parts of primitives. Further, the same final shape
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

