Interpretable agent communication from scratch
(with a generic visual processor emerging on the side)

Roberto Dessì
Facebook AI Research
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
rdessi@fb.com

Eugene Kharitonov
Facebook AI Research
kharitonov@fb.com

Marco Baroni
Facebook AI Research
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
ICREA
mbaroni@fb.com

Abstract
As deep networks begin to be deployed as autonomous agents, the issue of how
they can communicate with each other becomes important. Here, we train two
deep nets from scratch to perform large-scale referent identification through unsupervised emergent communication. We show that the partially interpretable
emergent protocol allows the nets to successfully communicate even about object
classes they did not see at training time. The visual representations induced as
a by-product of our training regime, moreover, when re-used as generic visual
features, show comparable quality to a recent self-supervised learning model. Our
results provide concrete evidence of the viability of (interpretable) emergent deep
net communication in a more realistic scenario than previously considered, as
well as establishing an intriguing link between this field and self-supervised visual
learning. 1

1

Introduction

As deep networks become more effective at solving specialized tasks, there has been interest in letting
them develop a language-like communication protocol so that they can flexibly interact to address
joint tasks [1]. One line of work within this tradition has focused on what is arguably the most basic
function of language, namely to point out, or refer to, objects through discrete symbols. Such ability
would for example allow deep-net-controlled agents, such as self-driving cars, to inform each other
about the presence and nature of potentially dangerous objects, besides being a basic requirement to
support more advanced capabilities (e.g., denoting relations between objects).
While discreteness is not a necessary prerequisite for agent communication [2, 3], practical and ethical
problems might arise if communication is incomprehensible to humans. A discrete code analogous
to language is certainly easier to decode for us, helping us to understand the agents’ decisions, and
ultimately contributing to the larger goal of explainable AI [4].
In this paper, we study emergent discrete referential communication between two deep network
agents that are trained from scratch on the task. We observe that the referential discrimination task
played by the networks is closely related to pretext contrastive objectives used in self-supervised
visual representation learning [5–8]. We exploit this insight to develop a robust end-to-end variant of a
communication game. Our experiments confirm that, in our setup: i) the nets develop a set of discrete
symbols allowing them to successfully discriminate objects in natural images, including novel ones
that were not shown during training; ii) these symbols denote partially interpretable categories, so
that their emergence can be seen as a first step towards fully unsupervised image annotation; iii) the
visual representations induced as a by-product can be used as high-quality general-purpose features,
1

Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/EGG/tree/master/egg/zoo/emcom_as_ssl.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

