Adaptive First-Order Methods Revisited:
Convex Optimization without Lipschitz Requirements

Kimon Antonakopoulos
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG 38000 Grenoble, France & Criteo AI Lab
kimon.antonakopoulos@inria.fr panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
We propose a new family of adaptive first-order methods for a class of convex minimization problems that may fail to be Lipschitz continuous or smooth. Specifically,
motivated by a recent flurry of activity on non-Lipschitz (NoLips) optimization, we
consider problems that are continuous or smooth relative to a reference Bregman
function – as opposed to a global, ambient norm (Euclidean or otherwise). These
conditions encompass a wide range of problems with singular objectives that cannot be treated with standard first-order methods for Lipschitz continuous/smooth
problems – such as Fisher markets, Poisson tomography problems, D-optimal
design, and the like. In this setting, the application of existing order-optimal adaptive methods – like U NIX G RAD or ACCELE G RAD – is not possible, especially in
the presence of randomness and uncertainty. The proposed method – which we
call adaptive mirror descent (A DA M IR) – aims to close this gap by concurrently
achieving min-max optimal rates in problems that are relatively continuous or
smooth, including stochastic ones.

1

Introduction

Owing to their wide applicability and flexibility, first-order methods continue to occupy the forefront
of research in learning theory and continuous optimization. Their analysis typically revolves around
two basic regularity conditions for the problem at hand: (i) Lipschitz continuity of the problem’s
objective, and / or (ii) Lipschitz continuity of its gradient (also referred to as Lipschitz smoothness).
Depending on which of√
these conditions holds, the lower bounds for first-order methods with perfect
gradient input are Θ(1/ T ) and Θ(1/T 2 ) after T gradient queries, and they are achieved by gradient
descent and Nesterov’s fast gradient algorithm respectively [36, 37, 48]. By contrast, if the optimizer
only has access to stochastic gradients (as is often
√ the case in machine learning and distributed
control), the corresponding lower bound is Θ(1/ T ) for both classes [14, 34, 37].
This disparity in convergence rates has led to a surge of interest in adaptive methods that can
seamlessly interpolate between these different regimes. Two state-of-the-art methods of this type
are the ACCELE G RAD and U NIX G RAD algorithms
of Levy et al. [26] and Kavis et al. [24]: both
√
algorithms concurrently achieve an O(1/ T ) value
√ convergence rate in non-smooth problems, an
O(1/T 2 ) rate in smooth problems, and an O(1/ T ) average rate if run with bounded, unbiased
stochastic gradients (the smoothness does not affect the rate in this case). In this regard, U NIX G RAD
and ACCELE G RAD both achieve a “best of all worlds” guarantee which makes them ideal as off-theshelf solutions for applications where the problem class is not known in advance – e.g., as in online
traffic routing, game theory, etc.
At the same time, there have been considerable efforts in the literature to account for problems that do
not adhere to these Lipschitz regularity requirements – such as Fisher markets, quantum tomography,
D-design, Poisson deconvolution / inverse problems, and many other examples [7, 10, 11, 28, 29, 45].
The reason that the Lipschitz framework fails in this case is that, even when the problem’s domain
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

