Online Selective Classification with Limited Feedback
Aditya Gangrade
Boston University
gangrade@bu.edu

Anil Kag
Boston University
anilkag@bu.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Venkatesh Saligrama
Boston University
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
Motivated by applications to resource-limited and safety-critical domains, we
study selective classification in the online learning model, wherein a predictor may
abstain from classifying an instance. For example, this may model an adaptive
decision to invoke more resources on this instance. Two salient aspects of the
setting we consider are that the data may be non-realisable, due to which abstention
may be a valid long-term action, and that feedback is only received when the
learner abstains, which models the fact that reliable labels are only available when
the resource intensive processing is invoked.
Within this framework, we explore strategies that make few mistakes, while not
abstaining too many times more than the best-in-hindsight error-free classifier
from a given class. That is, the one that makes no mistakes, while abstaining
the fewest number of times. We construct simple versioning-based schemes for
any µ ∈ (0, 1], that make most T µ mistakes while incurring Õ(T 1−µ ) excess
abstention against adaptive adversaries. We further show that this dependence on
T is tight, and provide illustrative experiments on realistic datasets.

1

Introduction

Consider a low-power or battery-limited edge device, such as a sensor or a smart-speaker that receives
a stream of classification requests. Due to the resource limitations, such a device cannot implement
modern models that are needed for accurate decisions. Instead the device has access (e.g. via an
internet connection) to an accurate but resource-intensive model implemented on a cloud server, and
may send queries to the cloud server in order to retain accuracy. Of course, this incurs costs such as
latency and battery drain due to communication. The ideal operation of such a device should thus be
to learn a rule that classifies ‘easy’ instances locally, while sending harder ones to the cloud, thus
maintaining accuracy whilst minimising the net resource consumption [Xu+14; NS17].
Selective classification [Cho57; Cho70] is a classical paradigm of relevance to such settings. The
setup allows a predictor to abstain from classifying some instances (without incurring a mistake). This
abstention models adaptive decisions to invoke more resource-intensive methods on subtle cases, like
in the above example. The solution concept is relevant widely - for instance, it is relevant to adaptively
recommending further (and costly) tests rather than offering a diagnosis in a medical scenario, or to
recommending a human review instead of an alarm-or-not decision in security contexts. Two aspects
of such settings are of particular interest to us. Firstly, the cheaper methods are typically not sufficient
to realise the true labels, due to which abstention may be a long-term necessity. Secondly, a-priori
reliable labels can only be obtained by invoking the resource intensive option, and thus feedback on
whether a non-abstaining decision was correct is unavailable.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

