On Plasticity, Invariance, and Mutually Frozen
Weights in Sequential Task Learning
Julian Zilly
ETH Zürich
jzilly@ethz.ch

Alessandro Achille
Caltech
aachille@caltech.edu

Andrea Censi
ETH Zürich
acensi@ethz.ch

Emilio Frazzoli
ETH Zürich
efrazzoli@ethz.ch

Abstract
Plastic neural networks have the ability to adapt to new tasks. However, in a
continual learning setting, the configuration of parameters learned in previous tasks
can severely reduce the adaptability to future tasks. In particular, we show that,
when using weight decay, weights in successive layers of a deep network may
become “mutually frozen”. This has a double effect: on the one hand, it makes
the network updates more invariant to nuisance factors, providing a useful bias for
future tasks. On the other hand, it can prevent the network from learning new tasks
that require significantly different features. In this context, we find that the local
input sensitivity of a deep model is correlated with its ability to adapt, thus leading
to an intriguing trade-off between adaptability and invariance when training a deep
model more than once. We then show that a simple intervention that “resets” the
mutually frozen connections can improve transfer learning on a variety of visual
classification tasks. The efficacy of “resetting” itself depends on the size of the
target dataset and the difference of the pre-training and target domains, allowing us
to achieve state-of-the-art results on some datasets.

1

Introduction

Lifelong learning [1, 2] holds both the promise of benefitting from past experiences and the challenge
of having to continually adapt to new problem settings. The characteristics of this intriguing
sequential learning problem make it a balancing act between retaining knowledge and adapting to
new experiences referred to as the stability-plasticity dilemma [3]. Similar to a coach or teacher,
we want to understand when a sequence of tasks helps or hinders further learning. Clearly, some
pre-training tasks are highly beneficial [4–7] while others can hurt performance [8, 9].
The existing literature on pre-training and curriculum learning sheds some light on the desired
characteristics of sequential learning. In some cases, following a sequence of learning tasks can
lead to better results than simply training on the target task from scratch [10]. Work by Achille and
Soatto [8] contrasts this picture by highlighting that neural networks can suffer from pre-training on
some tasks. In an extreme case, when learning data is corrupted for a sufficiently long period, even
switching back to clean data does not allow the neural network to recover its original performance.
Contribution: We formalize the basic ingredients of sequential task learning, introduce mutually
frozen weights and establish a connection between plasticity and invariance of deep networks. To
understand mutually frozen weights, we investigate their weight update dynamics, show that such
frozen weights are different from regular sparse weights that are not connected to other sparse weights
and that frozen weights can lead to a decrease in performance when retraining on a new task. Based
on this analysis, we show that applying an intervention which “resets” frozen weights can improve
retraining performance on a number of tasks as long as sufficiently many samples are available for
retraining and even achieve state-of-the-art results on FashionMNIST image classification.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

