Robust and Decomposable Average Precision
for Image Retrieval

Elias Ramzi1,2
elias.ramzi@cnam.fr

Nicolas Thome1
nicolas.thome@cnam.fr

Clément Rambour1
clement.rambour@cnam.fr

Nicolas Audebert1
nicolas.audebert@cnam.fr

Xavier Bitot2
xavier.bitot@coexya.eu
1

CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France
2
Coexya, Paris, France

Abstract
In image retrieval, standard evaluation metrics rely on score ranking, e.g. average precision (AP). In this paper, we introduce a method for robust and decomposable average precision (ROADMAP) addressing two major challenges for
end-to-end training of deep neural networks with AP: non-differentiability and
non-decomposability. Firstly, we propose a new differentiable approximation of
the rank function, which provides an upper bound of the AP loss and ensures robust
training. Secondly, we design a simple yet effective loss function to reduce the decomposability gap between the AP in the whole training set and its averaged batch
approximation, for which we provide theoretical guarantees. Extensive experiments
conducted on three image retrieval datasets show that ROADMAP outperforms
several recent AP approximation methods and highlight the importance of our two
contributions. Finally, using ROADMAP for training deep models yields very
good performances, outperforming state-of-the-art results on the three datasets.
Code and instructions to reproduce our results will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/elias-ramzi/ROADMAP.

1

Introduction

The task of ‘query by example’ is a major prediction problem, which consists in learning a similarity
function able to properly rank all the instances in a retrieval set according to their relevance to the
query, such that relevant items have the largest similarity. In computer vision, it drives several major
applications, e.g. content-based image retrieval, face recognition or person re-identification.
Such tasks are usually evaluated with rank-based metrics, e.g. Recall@k, Normalized Discounted
Cumulative Gain (NDCG), and Average Precision (AP). AP is also the de facto metric used in several
vision tasks implying a large imbalance between positive and negative samples, e.g. object detection.
In this paper, we address the problem of direct AP training with stochastic gradient-based optimization,
e.g. using deep neural networks, which poses two major challenges.
Firstly, the AP loss LAP = 1 − AP is not differentiable and is thus not directly amenable to gradientbased optimization. There has been a rich literature for providing smooth and upper bound surrogate
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

