Multiple Descent: Design Your Own Generalization
Curve
Lin Chen
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
University of California, Berkeley
CA 94720
lin.chen@berkeley.edu
Mikhail Belkin
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
CA 92093
mbelkin@ucsd.edu

Yifei Min
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
CT 06511
yifei.min@yale.edu
Amin Karbasi
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Yale University
CT 06511
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
This paper explores the generalization loss of linear regression in variably parameterized families of models, both under-parameterized and over-parameterized.
We show that the generalization curve can have an arbitrary number of peaks,
and moreover, locations of those peaks can be explicitly controlled. Our results
highlight the fact that both classical U-shaped generalization curve and the recently
observed double descent curve are not intrinsic properties of the model family.
Instead, their emergence is due to the interaction between the properties of the data
and the inductive biases of learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

The main goal of machine learning methods is to provide an accurate out-of-sample prediction,
known as generalization. For a fixed family of models, a common way to select a model from this
family is through empirical risk minimization, i.e., algorithmically selecting models that minimize
the risk on the training dataset. Given a variably parameterized family of models, the statistical
learning theory aims to identify the dependence between model complexity and model performance.
The empirical risk usually decreases monotonically as the model complexity increases, and achieves
its minimum when the model is rich enough to interpolate the training data, resulting in zero (or
near-zero) training error. In contrast, the behaviour of the test error as a function of model complexity
is far more complicated. Indeed, in this paper we show how to construct a model family for which
the generalization curve can be fully controlled (away from the interpolation threshold) in both
under-parameterized and over-parameterized regimes. Classical statistical learning theory supports a
U-shaped curve of generalization versus model complexity [31, 33]. Under such a framework, the best
model is found at the bottom of the U-shaped curve, which corresponds to appropriately balancing
under-fitting and over-fitting the training data. From the view of the bias-variance trade-off, a higher
model complexity increases the variance while decreasing the bias. A model with an appropriate
level of complexity achieves a relatively low bias while still keeping the variance under control. On
the other hand, a model that interpolates the training data is deemed to over-fit and tends to worsen
the generalization performance due to the soaring variance.
Although classical statistical theory suggests a pattern of behavior for the generalization curve up
to the interpolation threshold, it does not describe what happens beyond the interpolation threshold,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

