Reinforcement Learning Enhanced Explainer for
Graph Neural Networks

Caihua Shan1 , Yifei Shen2 , Yao Zhang3 , Xiang Li4 , Dongsheng Li1
1
Microsoft Research Asia
{caihua.shan,dongsheng.li}@microsoft.com
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yshenaw@connect.ust.hk
3
Fudan University
yaozhang@fudan.edu.cn
4
East China Normal University
xiangli@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently emerged as revolutionary technologies for machine learning tasks on graphs. In GNNs, the graph structure is generally
incorporated with node representation via the message passing scheme, making the
explanation much more challenging. Given a trained GNN model, a GNN explainer
aims to identify a most influential subgraph to interpret the prediction of an instance
(e.g., a node or a graph), which is essentially a combinatorial optimization problem over graph. The existing works solve this problem by continuous relaxation
or search-based heuristics. But they suffer from key issues such as violation of
message passing and hand-crafted heuristics, leading to inferior interpretability. To
address these issues, we propose a RL-enhanced GNN explainer, RG-Explainer,
which consists of three main components: starting point selection, iterative graph
generation and stopping criteria learning. RG-Explainer could construct a connected explanatory subgraph by sequentially adding nodes from the boundary of
the current generated graph, which is consistent with the message passing scheme.
Further, we design an effective seed locator to select the starting point, and learn
stopping criteria to generate superior explanations. Extensive experiments on both
synthetic and real datasets show that RG-Explainer outperforms state-of-the-art
GNN explainers. Moreover, RG-Explainer can be applied in the inductive setting,
demonstrating its better generalization ability.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) extend neural network models on ubiquitous graph data via utilizing
the message passing scheme to incorporate graph structures with node features. They have achieved
state-of-the-art performance not only in classic machine learning tasks on graphs, e.g., node classification [10, 28], link prediction [38], and graph classification [33], but also in reasoning tasks, e.g.,
intuitive physics [4], mathematical reasoning [24], and IQ tests [3]. Similar to most deep learning
methods, one major limitation of GNNs is the lack of the interpretability for the predicted results; a
post-hoc analysis is usually needed to explain the results.
To enhance the interpretability of GNNs, a line of works [34, 17, 30, 37, 31] focused on developing
GNN explainers. The goal of GNN explainers is to identify a most influential subgraph structure to
interpret the predicted label of an instance (e.g., a node or a graph). It can be generally formulated as
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

