Neural Ensemble Search
for Uncertainty Estimation and Dataset Shift

Sheheryar Zaidi1∗ Arber Zela2∗
Thomas Elsken3,2
1
2,3
Chris Holmes
Frank Hutter
Yee Whye Teh1
1

University of Oxford, 2 University of Freiburg, 3 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
{szaidi, cholmes, y.w.teh}@stats.ox.ac.uk,
{zelaa, fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de, thomas.elsken@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Ensembles of neural networks achieve superior performance compared to standalone networks in terms of accuracy, uncertainty calibration and robustness to
dataset shift. Deep ensembles, a state-of-the-art method for uncertainty estimation,
only ensemble random initializations of a fixed architecture. Instead, we propose
two methods for automatically constructing ensembles with varying architectures,
which implicitly trade-off individual architectures’ strengths against the ensemble’s
diversity and exploit architectural variation as a source of diversity. On a variety
of classification tasks and modern architecture search spaces, we show that the
resulting ensembles outperform deep ensembles not only in terms of accuracy but
also uncertainty calibration and robustness to dataset shift. Our further analysis and
ablation studies provide evidence of higher ensemble diversity due to architectural
variation, resulting in ensembles that can outperform deep ensembles, even when
having weaker average base learners. To foster reproducibility, our code is available:
https://github.com/automl/nes

1

Introduction

Some applications of deep learning rely only on point estimate predictions made by a neural network.
However, many critical applications also require reliable predictive uncertainty estimates and robustness under the presence of dataset shift, that is, when the observed data distribution at deployment
differs from the training data distribution. Examples include medical imaging [15] and self-driving
cars [5]. Unfortunately, several studies have shown that neural networks are not always robust to
dataset shift [46, 26], nor do they exhibit calibrated predictive uncertainty, resulting in incorrect
predictions made with high confidence [21].
Deep ensembles [33] achieve state-of-the-art results for predictive uncertainty calibration and robustness to dataset shift. Notably, they have been shown to outperform various approximate Bayesian
neural networks [33, 46, 22]. Deep ensembles are constructed by training a fixed architecture multiple times with different random initializations. Due to the multi-modal loss landscape [18, 54],
randomization by different initializations induces diversity among the base learners to yield a model
with better uncertainty estimates than any of the individual base learners (i.e. ensemble members).
Our work focuses on automatically selecting varying base learner architectures in the ensemble,
exploiting architectural variation as a beneficial source of diversity missing in deep ensembles
due to their fixed architecture. Such architecture selection during ensemble construction allows a
more “ensemble-aware” choice of architectures and is based on data rather than manual biases. As
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

