Brick-by-Brick: Combinatorial Construction
with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Hyunsoo Chung∗ 1 Jungtaek Kim∗ 1 Boris Knyazev23 Jinhwi Lee14
Graham W. Taylor23 Jaesik Park1 Minsu Cho1
1

POSTECH

2

University of Guelph 3 Vector Institute
{hschung2,jtkim}@postech.ac.kr

4

POSCO

Abstract
Discovering a solution in a combinatorial space is prevalent in many real-world
problems but it is also challenging due to diverse complex constraints and the
vast number of possible combinations. To address such a problem, we introduce
a novel formulation, combinatorial construction, which requires a building agent
to assemble unit primitives (i.e., LEGO bricks) sequentially – every connection
between two bricks must follow a fixed rule, while no bricks mutually overlap.
To construct a target object, we provide incomplete knowledge about the desired
target (i.e., 2D images) instead of exact and explicit volumetric information to the
agent. This problem requires a comprehensive understanding of partial information
and long-term planning to append a brick sequentially, which leads us to employ
reinforcement learning. The approach has to consider a variable-sized action space
where a large number of invalid actions, which would cause overlap between bricks,
exist. To resolve these issues, our model, dubbed Brick-by-Brick, adopts an action
validity prediction network that efficiently filters invalid actions for an actor-critic
network. We demonstrate that the proposed method successfully learns to construct
an unseen object conditioned on a single image or multiple views of a target object.

1

Introduction

A combinatorial space, typically characterized by discrete variables and their combinations, often
induces interesting yet challenging problems such as traveling salesperson and minimum spanning
tree [20, 6]. The main challenges lie in the vast number of possible combinations as well as
complex constraints imposed on them. In a similar spirit, we suggest a novel problem formulation,
combinatorial construction, that focuses on the real-world construction procedure. Given only
incomplete target information (i.e., 2D images or multiple views of a target object) [25, 12], an
agent sequentially assembles unit primitives (i.e., LEGO bricks). The proposed formulation is
combinatorial since it engages repetitive placement of primitives, which leads to a large number of
available solutions. Distinct property of our proposed formulation, however, is that the agent must
build the solution incrementally by adding on to the partial solution. Specifically, a brick, which is
a unit primitive of the object of interest, is placed on a discrete space by connecting to one of the
previously assembled bricks. In addition, every connection between two bricks must follow a fixed
rule while no bricks mutually overlap. Each assembly (i.e., action) executed by the agent is, thus,
modeled as selecting one of the feasible connections to place a new brick.
The problem we introduce closely depicts how humans understand an object and adapt the acquired
knowledge to a downstream task. Humans naturally analyze a 3D object by picturing its part-by-part
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

