PDE-GCN: Novel Architectures for Graph Neural
Networks Motivated by Partial Differential Equations

Moshe Eliasof
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
eliasof@post.bgu.ac.il

Eldad Haber
Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
ehaber@eoas.ubc.ca

Eran Treister
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
erant@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Graph neural networks are increasingly becoming the go-to approach in various
fields such as computer vision, computational biology and chemistry, where data
are naturally explained by graphs. However, unlike traditional convolutional neural
networks, deep graph networks do not necessarily yield better performance than
shallow graph networks. This behavior usually stems from the over-smoothing
phenomenon. In this work, we propose a family of architectures to control this
behavior by design. Our networks are motivated by numerical methods for solving
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) on manifolds, and as such, their behavior can
be explained by similar analysis. Moreover, as we demonstrate using an extensive
set of experiments, our PDE-motivated networks can generalize and be effective
for various types of problems from different fields. Our architectures obtain better
or on par with the current state-of-the-art results for problems that are typically
approached using different architectures.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [1, 2, 3] have drawn the attention of researchers and practitioners in a variety of domains and applications, ranging from computer vision
and graphics [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] to computational biology [9, 10, 11], recommendation systems [12] and
social network analysis [13, 14]. However, GCNs still suffer from two main problems. First, they are
usually shallow as opposed to the concept of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15, 16]
due to the over-smoothing phenomenon [17, 18, 19], where the node feature vectors become almost
identical, such that they are indistinguishable, which yields non-optimal performance. Furthermore,
GCNs are typically customized to a specific domain and application. That is, as we demonstrate in
Sec. 4.1, a successful point-cloud classification network [5] can perform poorly on a citation graph
node-classification problem [19], and vice-versa. Furthermore, because many GCNs lack theoretical
guarantees, it is difficult to reason about their success on one problem and lack on others. These
observations motivate us to develop a profound understanding of graph networks and their dynamics.
To this end, we suggest a novel, universal approach to the design of GCN architectures. Our inspiration
stems from the similarities and equivalence between Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) and deep
networks explored in [20, 21, 22]. Furthermore, as GCNs can be thought of as a generalization of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

