Fractal Structure and Generalization Properties of
Stochastic Optimization Algorithms
Alexander Camuto1 , George Deligiannidis1 , Murat A. Erdogdu2 ,
Mert Gürbüzbalaban3B , Umut Şimşekli4B , Lingjiong Zhu5
1: University of Oxford & Alan Turing Institute 2: University of Toronto & Vector Institute
3: Rutgers Business School 4: INRIA & École Normale Supérieure - PSL Research University
5: Florida State University
The authors are in alphabetical order.
B: Corresponding authors

Abstract
Understanding generalization in deep learning has been one of the major challenges in statistical learning theory over the last decade. While recent work has
illustrated that the dataset and the training algorithm must be taken into account in
order to obtain meaningful generalization bounds, it is still theoretically not clear
which properties of the data and the algorithm determine the generalization performance. In this study, we approach this problem from a dynamical systems theory
perspective and represent stochastic optimization algorithms as random iterated
function systems (IFS). Well studied in the dynamical systems literature, under
mild assumptions, such IFSs can be shown to be ergodic with an invariant measure
that is often supported on sets with a fractal structure. As our main contribution,
we prove that the generalization error of a stochastic optimization algorithm can
be bounded based on the ‘complexity’ of the fractal structure that underlies its
invariant measure. Then, by leveraging results from dynamical systems theory,
we show that the generalization error can be explicitly linked to the choice of the
algorithm (e.g., stochastic gradient descent – SGD), algorithm hyperparameters
(e.g., step-size, batch-size), and the geometry of the problem (e.g., Hessian of the
loss). We further specialize our results to specific problems (e.g., linear/logistic
regression, one hidden-layered neural networks) and algorithms (e.g., SGD and
preconditioned variants), and obtain analytical estimates for our bound. For modern
neural networks, we develop an efficient algorithm to compute the developed bound
and support our theory with various experiments on neural networks.

1

Introduction

In statistical learning, many problems can be naturally formulated as a risk minimization problem
n
o
minw2Rd R(w) := Ez⇠⇡ [`(w, z)] ,
(1)

where z 2 Z denotes a data sample coming from an unknown distribution ⇡, and ` : Rd ⇥ Z ! R+
is the composition of a loss and a function from the hypothesis class parameterized by w 2 Rd . Since
the distribution ⇡ is unknown, one needs to rely on empirical risk minimization as a surrogate to (1),
n
o
Xn
minw2Rd R̂(w, Sn ) := (1/n)
`(w, zi ) ,
(2)
i=1

where Sn := {z1 , . . . , zn } denotes a training set of n points that are independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) and sampled from ⇡, and model training often amounts to using an optimization
algorithm to solve the above problem.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

