Novel Visual Category Discovery with Dual Ranking
Statistics and Mutual Knowledge Distillation

Bingchen Zhao1
1

Tongji University

2

Kai Han2,3,4∗

The University of Hong Kong
zhaobc.gm@gmail.com

3

Google Research

4

University of Bristol

kaihanx@hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of novel visual category discovery, i.e., grouping unlabelled images from new classes into different semantic partitions by leveraging a labelled dataset that contains images from other different but relevant
categories. This is a more realistic and challenging setting than conventional
semi-supervised learning. We propose a two-branch learning framework for this
problem, with one branch focusing on local part-level information and the other
branch focusing on overall characteristics. To transfer knowledge from labelled
data to unlabelled data, we propose using dual ranking statistics on both branches
to generate pseudo labels for training on the unlabelled data. We further introduce
a mutual knowledge distillation method to allow information exchange and encourage agreement between the two branches for discovering new categories, allowing
our model to enjoy the benefits of global and local features. We comprehensively
evaluate our method on public benchmarks for generic object classification, as well
as the more challenging benchmarks for fine-grained visual recognition, achieving
state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Superior performance on many problems has been achieved by recent machine learning models,
especially the ones based on deep learning. While the success comes at the cost of large-scale human
annotation, which is prohibitively expensive in practice. For example, modern convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) can surpass human-level recognition performance on ImageNet after training with
over one million labelled images [22]. On the one hand, it is not possible to annotate all possible
classes in the real world, as there are way more classes than the 1, 000 classes in ImageNet and new
classes keep growing over time. On the other hand, annotating specific data, such as the medical data,
may require specific expertise, which renders the large-scale annotation extremely difficult, if not
impossible. Therefore, it is desired to enable the machine learning systems to deal with unlabelled
data automatically.
Recently, the problem of novel category discovery was formalized in [20, 18], which aims at
discovering new visual categories on unlabelled data by transferring knowledge from labelled data.
The labelled data is assumed to contain similar but different categories to those in the unlabelled data.
This problem is similar to semi-supervised learning in the sense that both labelled and unlabelled data
are used to learn the model. While novel category discovery is much harder because semi-supervised
learning assumes that every class contains labelled instances, while for novel category discovery
there are no labels available for the new classes in the unlabelled data. This setting is also relevant to
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

