Learning Disentangled Behavior Embeddings

Changhao Shi∗
University of California, San Diego
cshi@ucsd.edu
Sivan Schwartz∗, Shahar Levy, Shay Achvat, Maisan Abboud, Amir Ghanayim
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{sivan.s,shahar86,shay.achvat,maisanabboud,amir.gh122}@campus.technion.ac.il
Jackie Schiller
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
jackie@technion.ac.il

Gal Mishne
University of California, San Diego
gmishne@ucsd.edu

Abstract
To understand the relationship between behavior and neural activity, experiments
in neuroscience often include an animal performing a repeated behavior such as a
motor task. Recent progress in computer vision and deep learning has shown great
potential in the automated analysis of behavior by leveraging large and high-quality
video datasets. In this paper, we design Disentangled Behavior Embedding (DBE)
to learn robust behavioral embeddings from unlabeled, multi-view, high-resolution
behavioral videos across different animals and multiple sessions. We further
combine DBE with a stochastic temporal model to propose Variational Disentangled
Behavior Embedding (VDBE), an end-to-end approach that learns meaningful
discrete behavior representations and generates interpretable behavioral videos.
Our models learn consistent behavior representations by explicitly disentangling
the dynamic behavioral factors (pose) from time-invariant, non-behavioral nuisance
factors (context) in a deep autoencoder, and exploit the temporal structures of pose
dynamics. Compared to competing approaches, DBE and VDBE enjoy superior
performance on downstream tasks such as fine-grained behavioral motif generation
and behavior decoding.

1

Introduction

Understanding the relationship between animal behavior and neural activity is a long-standing goal in
neuroscience. To this end, recent advances in deep learning and computer vision has led to significant
progress in the essential task of automatic analysis of high-resolution behavioral videos.
To extract behavioral information from rich video recordings, two avenues of research relying
on deep learning have been proposed: landmark-based pose estimation methods [22, 26, 32] and
autoencoder-based dimensionality reduction methods [2]. Pose estimation methods characterize
animal behavior with the trajectories of body-part landmarks. Such methods train deep neural
networks to predict manually labeled landmarks from raw video frames, then use the trained models
to generate trajectories for new videos. While these methods have been highly successful in behavior
analysis, they 1) require manual labeling which is often expensive; 2) heavily rely on the manual
selection of the landmarks, which may differ across human annotators; and 3) struggle with subtle
behavior that is hard to track, such as facial movements.
∗

Equal contributions

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

