Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning for
Linearly-Parameterized MDPs with a
Generative Model
Bingyan Wang∗
Princeton University
bingyanw@princeton.edu

Yuling Yan∗
Princeton University
yulingy@princeton.edu

Jianqing Fan
Princeton University
jqfan@princeton.edu

Abstract
The curse of dimensionality is a widely known issue in reinforcement learning (RL).
In the tabular setting where the state space S and the action space A are both finite,
to obtain a nearly optimal policy with sampling access to a generative model, the
minimax-optimal sample complexity scales linearly with |S| × |A|, which can be
prohibitively large when S or A is large. This paper considers a Markov decision
process (MDP) that admits a set of state-action features, which can linearly express
(or approximate) its probability transition kernel. We show that a model-based
approach (resp. Q-learning) provably learns an ε-optimal policy (resp. Q-function)
K
with high probability as soon as the sample size exceeds the order of (1−γ)
3 ε2
K
(resp. (1−γ)4 ε2 ), up to some logarithmic factor. Here K is the feature dimension
and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor of the MDP. The results is applicable to the
tabular MDPs by taking the coordinate basis with K = |S| × |A|. Both sample
complexity bounds are provably tight, and our result for the model-based approach
matches the minimax lower bound. Our results show that for arbitrarily large-scale
MDP, both the model-based approach and Q-learning are sample-efficient when K
is relatively small, and hence the title of this paper.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the problem of learning and decision making in a Markov
decision process (MDP). Recent years have seen exciting progress in applications of RL in real world
decision-making problems such as AlphaGo [46, 47] and autonomous driving [33]. Specifically,
the goal of RL is to search for an optimal policy that maximizes the cumulative reward, based on
sequential noisy data. There are two popular approaches to RL: model-based and model-free ones.
• The model-based approaches start with formulating an empirical MDP by learning the probability
transition model from the collected data samples, and then estimating the optimal policy / value
function based on the empirical MDP.
• The model-free approaches (e.g. Q-learning) learn the optimal policy or the optimal (action-)value
function from samples. As its name suggests, model-free approaches do not attempt to learn the
model explicitly.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

