MixSeq: Connecting Macroscopic Time Series
Forecasting with Microscopic Time Series Data

Zhibo Zhu∗
Ant Group
gavin.zzb@antgroup.com
Ge Jin
Ant Group
elvis.jg@antgroup.com

Ziqi Liu∗
Ant Group
ziqiliu@antgroup.com

Zhiqiang Zhang
Ant Group
lingyao.zzq@antgroup.com

Jun Zhou†
Ant Group
jun.zhoujun@antgroup.com

Lei Chen
Ant Group
qingli.cl@antgroup.com

Jianyong Zhou
Ant Group
neil.zjy@antgroup.com

Abstract
Time series forecasting is widely used in business intelligence, e.g., forecast stock
market price, sales, and help the analysis of data trend. Most time series of interest
are macroscopic time series that are aggregated from microscopic data. However,
instead of directly modeling the macroscopic time series, rare literature studied the
forecasting of macroscopic time series by leveraging data on the microscopic level.
In this paper, we assume that the microscopic time series follow some unknown
mixture probabilistic distributions. We theoretically show that as we identify the
ground truth latent mixture components, the estimation of time series from each
component could be improved because of lower variance, thus benefitting the
estimation of macroscopic time series as well. Inspired by the power of Seq2seq
and its variants on the modeling of time series data, we propose Mixture of Seq2seq
(MixSeq), an end2end mixture model to cluster microscopic time series, where all
the components come from a family of Seq2seq models parameterized by different
parameters. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world data show the
superiority of our approach.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has proven to be important to help people manage resources and make
decisions [20]. For example, probabilistic forecasting of product demand and supply in retails [9],
or the forecasting of loans [1] in a financial institution can help people do inventory or financing
planning to maximize the profit. Most time series of interest are macroscopic time series, e.g., the
sales of an online retail platform, the loans of a financial institution, or the number of infections
caused by some pandemic diseases in a state, that are comprised of microscopic time series, e.g., the
sales of a merchant in the online retail, the loans from a customer given the financial institution, or
the number of infections in a certain region. That is, the observed macroscopic time series are just
the aggregation or sum of microscopic time series.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

