Dealing With Misspecification In Fixed-Confidence
Linear Top-m Identification

Clémence Réda
Université de Paris, NeuroDiderot, Inserm, F-75019 Paris, France
clemence.reda@inria.fr
Andrea Tirinzoni
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
andrea.tirinzoni@inria.fr
Rémy Degenne
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
remy.degenne@inria.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of the identification of m arms with largest means under a
fixed error rate δ (fixed-confidence Top-m identification), for misspecified linear
bandit models. This problem is motivated by practical applications, especially
in medicine and recommendation systems, where linear models are popular due
to their simplicity and the existence of efficient algorithms, but in which data
inevitably deviates from linearity. In this work, we first derive a tractable lower
bound on the sample complexity of any δ-correct algorithm for the general Top-m
identification problem. We show that knowing the scale of the deviation from
linearity is necessary to exploit the structure of the problem. We then describe the
first algorithm for this setting, which is both practical and adapts to the amount
of misspecification. We derive an upper bound to its sample complexity which
confirms this adaptivity and that matches the lower bound when δ → 0. Finally, we
evaluate our algorithm on both synthetic and real-world data, showing competitive
performance with respect to existing baselines.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a popular framework to model sequential decision making problems.
At each round t > 0, a learner chooses an arm kt among a finite set of K ∈ N possible options,
and it receives a random reward Xtkt ∈ R drawn from a distribution ν kt with unknown mean µkt .
Among the many problem settings studied in this context, we focus on pure exploration, where the
learner aims at maximizing the information gain for answering a given query about the arms [5]. In
particular, we are interested in finding a subset of m ≥ 1 arms with largest expected reward, which is
known as the Top-m identification problem [22]. This generalizes the widely-studied best-arm (i.e.,
Top-1) identification problem [16]. This problem has several important applications, including online
recommendation and drug repurposing [31, 35]. Two objectives are typically studied. On the one
hand, in the fixed-budget setting [2], the learner is given a finite amount of samples and must return
a subset of m best arms while minimizing the probability of error in identification. On the other
hand, in the fixed-confidence setting [16], the learner aims at minimizing the sample complexity for
returning a subset of m best arms with a fixed maximum error rate δ ∈ (0, 1), defined as the number
of samples collected before the algorithm stops. This paper focuses on the latter.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

