Wasserstein Flow Meets Replicator Dynamics:
A Mean-Field Analysis of Representation
Learning in Actor-Critic

Yufeng Zhang†
Northwestern University
yufengzhang2023@u.northwestern.edu
Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
zy6@princeton.edu

Siyu Chen†
Tsinghua University
chensy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
Actor-critic (AC) algorithms, empowered by neural networks, have had significant empirical success in recent years. However, most of the existing theoretical
support for AC algorithms focuses on the case of linear function approximations,
or linearized neural networks, where the feature representation is fixed throughout training. Such a limitation fails to capture the key aspect of representation
learning in neural AC, which is pivotal in practical problems. In this work, we
take a mean-field perspective on the evolution and convergence of feature-based
neural AC. Specifically, we consider a version of AC where the actor and critic are
represented by overparameterized two-layer neural networks and are updated with
two-timescale learning rates. The critic is updated by temporal-difference (TD)
learning with a larger stepsize while the actor is updated via proximal policy optimization (PPO) with a smaller stepsize. In the continuous-time and infinite-width
limiting regime, when the timescales are properly separated, we prove that neural
AC finds the globally optimal policy at a sublinear rate. Additionally, we prove that
the feature representation induced by the critic network is allowed to evolve within
a neighborhood of the initial one.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) [56], an agent aims to learn the optimal policy that maximizes the
expected total reward by interacting with the environment. Policy-based RL algorithms achieve such a
goal by directly optimizing the expected total reward as a function of the policy, which often involves
two components: policy evaluation and policy improvement. Specifically, policy evaluation refers
to estimating the value function of the current policy, which characterizes the performance of the
current policy and reveals the updating direction for finding a better policy, which is known as policy
improvement. Algorithms with these two ingredients are also called actor-critic (AC) methods [36],
where the actor and the critic refer to the policy and its corresponding value function, respectively.
†

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

