Self-Supervised Learning of Event-Based
Optical Flow with Spiking Neural Networks

Jesse J. Hagenaars∗
j.j.hagenaars@tudelft.nl

Federico Paredes-Vallés∗
f.paredesvalles@tudelft.nl

Guido C. H. E. de Croon
g.c.h.e.decroon@tudelft.nl
Micro Air Vehicle Laboratory
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

Abstract
The field of neuromorphic computing promises extremely low-power and lowlatency sensing and processing. Challenges in transferring learning algorithms
from traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs) to spiking neural networks
(SNNs) have so far prevented their application to large-scale, complex regression
tasks. Furthermore, realizing a truly asynchronous and fully neuromorphic pipeline
that maximally attains the abovementioned benefits involves rethinking the way in
which this pipeline takes in and accumulates information. In the case of perception,
spikes would be passed as-is and one-by-one between an event camera and an
SNN, meaning all temporal integration of information must happen inside the
network. In this article, we tackle these two problems. We focus on the complex
task of learning to estimate optical flow from event-based camera inputs in a
self-supervised manner, and modify the state-of-the-art ANN training pipeline to
encode minimal temporal information in its inputs. Moreover, we reformulate the
self-supervised loss function for event-based optical flow to improve its convexity.
We perform experiments with various types of recurrent ANNs and SNNs using
the proposed pipeline. Concerning SNNs, we investigate the effects of elements
such as parameter initialization and optimization, surrogate gradient shape, and
adaptive neuronal mechanisms. We find that initialization and surrogate gradient
width play a crucial part in enabling learning with sparse inputs, while the inclusion
of adaptivity and learnable neuronal parameters can improve performance. We
show that the performance of the proposed ANNs and SNNs are on par with that
of the current state-of-the-art ANNs trained in a self-supervised manner.

1

Introduction

Neuromorphic hardware promises highly energy-efficient and low-latency sensing and processing
thanks to its sparse and asynchronous nature. Event cameras capture brightness changes at microsecond resolution [17], while neuromorphic processors have demonstrated orders of magnitude lower
energy consumption and latency compared to von Neumann architectures [11, 29]. To realize the full
potential of such neuromorphic pipelines, we have to move towards an event-based communication
and processing paradigm, where single events are passed as-is between the event-based sensor/camera
and the neuromorphic processor running a spiking neural network (SNN), without processing or
∗

Equal contribution, with alphabetical ordering.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

