Dynamic population-based meta-learning
for multi-agent communication
with natural language
Abhinav Gupta⇤
MILA
abhinavg@nyu.edu

Marc Lanctot
DeepMind
lanctot@deepmind.com

Angeliki Lazaridou
DeepMind
angeliki@deepmind.com

Abstract
In this work, our goal is to train agents that can coordinate with seen, unseen as well
as human partners in a multi-agent communication environment involving natural
language. Previous work using a single set of agents has shown great progress in
generalizing to known partners, however it struggles when coordinating with unfamiliar agents. To mitigate that, recent work explored the use of population-based
approaches, where multiple agents interact with each other with the goal of learning
more generic protocols. These methods, while able to result in good coordination
between unseen partners, still only achieve so in cases of simple languages, thus
failing to adapt to human partners using natural language. We attribute this to the
use of static populations and instead propose a dynamic population-based metalearning approach that builds such a population in an iterative manner. We perform
a holistic evaluation of our method on two different referential games, and show
that our agents outperform all prior work when communicating with seen partners
and humans. Furthermore, we analyze the natural language generation skills of our
agents, where we find that our agents also outperform strong baselines. Finally,
we test the robustness of our agents when communicating with out-of-population
agents and carefully test the importance of each component of our method through
ablation studies.

1

Introduction

Humans excel at large-group coordination, with natural language playing a key role in their problem
solving ability [49, 8]. Inspired by these findings, in this work our goal is to endow artificial agents
with communication skills in natural language, which can in turn allow them to coordinate effectively
in three key situations when playing referential games (i) with agents they have been paired with
during their training (ii) with new agents they have not been paired with before and (iii) with humans.
Our starting point is recent work in the emergent communication literature, which proposes to learn
protocols “from scratch”, allowing like these agents that have been trained together (and for a large
number of iterations) to form conventions [47, 24, 12, 19]. While such communication approaches
result in agents achieving higher rewards at test time when paired with their training partners
[21, 14, 23], there is growing evidence that these agents do not acquire communication skills with
general properties [31, 1, 3, 18] but rather learn to form communication protocols that are based
solely on idiosyncratic conventions.
Interestingly, these type of communication pathologies are also observed in natural languages,
where they are linked to the size of a linguistic community [42, 54, 50, 35], i.e. the smaller the
⇤

Work partially done during an internship at DeepMind.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

