Efficiently Learning One Hidden Layer Neural
Networks From Queries
Sitan Chen∗
sitanc@mit.edu
MIT

Adam R. Klivans†
klivans@cs.utexas.edu
UT Austin

Raghu Meka‡
raghum@cs.ucla.edu
UCLA

Abstract
Model extraction attacks have renewed interest in the classic problem of learning
neural networks from queries. This work gives the first polynomial-time algorithm for learning one hidden layer neural networks provided black-box access to
the network. Formally, we show that if F is an arbitrary one hidden layer neural
network with ReLU activations, there is an algorithm with query complexity and
running time that is polynomial in all parameters that outputs a network F 0 achieving low square loss relative to F with respect to the Gaussian measure. While a
number of works in the security literature have proposed and empirically demonstrated the effectiveness of certain algorithms for this problem, ours is the first
with fully polynomial-time guarantees of efficiency for worst-case networks (in
particular our algorithm succeeds in the overparameterized setting).

1

Introduction

The problem of learning neural networks given random labeled examples continues to be a fundamental algorithmic challenge in machine learning theory. There has been a resurgence of interest in
developing algorithms for learning one hidden layer neural networks, namely functions of the form
Pk
F (x) = i=1 si σ(hwi , xi − bi ) where wi ∈ Rd , si ∈ {±1}, bi ∈ R are the unknown parameters.
Here we consider the ubiquitous setting where σ is the ReLU activation, the input distribution on x
is Gaussian, and the goal is to output a ReLU network F 0 with E[(F (x) − F 0 (x))2 ] ≤ .
Despite much recent work on this problem [JSA15, ZSJ+ 17, GKM18, GLM18, GKLW18,
ZYWG19, BJW19, DKKZ20, CKM20, LMZ20], obtaining a polynomial-time algorithm remains
open. All known works take additional assumptions on the unknown weights and coefficients
or do not run in polynomial-time in all the important parameters. In fact, there are a number
of lower bounds, both for restricted models of computation like correlational statistical queries
[GGJ+ 20, DKKZ20] as well as under various average-case assumptions [DV20, DV21], that suggest
that a truly polynomial-time algorithm may be impossible to achieve.
In this work, we strengthen the learner by allowing it query access to the unknown network. That
is, the learner may select an input x of its choosing and receive the output value of the unknown
network F (x). Our main result is the first polynomial-time algorithm for learning one hidden layer
ReLU networks with respect to Gaussian inputs when the learner is given query access:
Pk
Theorem 1.1. Let F (x) = i=1 si σ(hwi , xi−bi ) with kwi k2 ≤ R, si ∈ {±1}, and bi ≤ B. Given
black-box access to F , there exists a (randomized) algorithm that will output with probability at least
∗

This work was supported in part by an NSF CAREER Award CCF-1453261 and NSF Large CCF-1565235.
Supported by NSF awards AF-1909204, AF-1717896, and the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML).
‡
Supported by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1553605.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

