Online Matching in Sparse Random Graphs:
Non-Asymptotic Performances of Greedy Algorithm
Nathan Noiry
Télécom Paris, Palaiseau, France
noirynathan@gmail.com

Flore Sentenac
CREST, ENSAE Paris, Palaiseau, France
flore.sentenac@ensae.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE Paris, Palaiseau, France
CRITEO AI Lab, Paris, France
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
Motivated by sequential budgeted allocation problems, we investigate online matching problems where connections between vertices are not i.i.d., but they have fixed
degree distributions – the so-called configuration model. We estimate the competitive ratio of the simplest algorithm, GREEDY, by approximating some relevant
stochastic discrete processes by their continuous counterparts, which are solutions
of an explicit system of partial differential equations. This technique gives precise
bounds on the estimation errors, with arbitrarily high probability as the problem
size increases. In particular, it allows the formal comparison between different
configuration models. We also prove that, quite surprisingly, GREEDYcan have
better performance guarantees than RANKING, another celebrated algorithm for
online matching that usually outperforms the former.

1

Introduction

Finding matchings in bipartite graphs (U [V, E), where E ⇢ U ⇥V is a set of edges, is a long-standing
problem with different motivations and approaches [Godsil, 1981, Zdeborová and Mézard, 2006,
Lovász and Plummer, 2009, Bordenave et al., 2013]. If U is seen as a set of resources and V as
demands, the objective is to allocate as many resources to demands (an allocation - or a matching between u and v is admissible if (u, v) 2 E) with the constraint that a resource is allocated to only
one demand and vice-versa.
Motivated particularly by practical applications to Internet advertising, the online variant of this
problem is receiving increasing attention (we refer to the excellent survey [Mehta, 2012] for more
applications, specific settings, results and techniques). In this case, the set of vertices U is present at
the beginning and the graph unveils sequentially: vertices v 2 V are observed sequentially, one after
the other, along with the edges they belong to. An online algorithm must decide, right after observing
vk and its associated set of edges Ek := {(u, vk ) 2 E} to match it to some other vertex u 2 U , at
the conditions that (u, vk ) 2 Ek and u 2 U has not been matched yet. The performance of an online
algorithm is evaluated by its competitive ratio, which is the ratio between the size of the matching it
has created and the highest possible matching in hindsight [Feldman et al., 2009].
This theoretical setting is particularly well suited for online advertising: U is the set of campaigns/ads
that an advertiser can run and users v1 , v2 , . . . , vT arrive sequentially [Mehta, 2012, Manshadi et al.,
2012]. Some of them are eligible for a large subset of campaigns, others are not (usually based
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

