An Empirical Investigation of Domain Generalization
with Empirical Risk Minimizers

Ramakrishna Vedantam
FAIR, New York
ramav@fb.com

∗

David Lopez-Paz
FAIR, Paris
dlp@fb.com

∗

David J. Schwab
ITS, CUNY Grad Center
FAIR, New York
davidjschwab@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent work demonstrates that deep neural networks trained using Empirical Risk
Minimization (ERM) can generalize under distribution shift, outperforming specialized training algorithms for domain generalization. The goal of this paper
is to further understand this phenomenon. In particular, we study the extent to
which the seminal domain adaptation theory of Ben-David et al. (2007) explains
the performance of ERMs. Perhaps surprisingly, we find that this theory does not
provide a tight explanation of the out-of-domain generalization observed across
a large number of ERM models trained on three popular domain generalization
datasets. This motivates us to investigate other possible measures—that, however,
lack theory—which could explain generalization in this setting. Our investigation
reveals that measures relating to the Fisher information, predictive entropy, and
maximum mean discrepancy are good predictors of the out-of-distribution generalization of ERM models. We hope that our work helps galvanize the community
towards building a better understanding of when deep networks trained with ERM
generalize out-of-distribution.

1

Introduction

Conventional wisdom in domain generalization was recently upturned by the work of Gulrajani
& Lopez-Paz (2020) on the DomainBed benchmark. In their work, the authors use careful model
selection and evaluation to show that models trained using empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1999)
are able to achieve near state-of-the-art performance on a variety of popular benchmarks, surpassing
the performance of most algorithms specialized for domain generalization (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Yan et al., 2020; Li et al., 2017a).
In a parallel research effort, there has been an increased interest in understanding when deep neural
networks trained using empirical risk minimization generalize well in-domain (Jiang et al., 2019;
Neyshabur et al., 2017; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Bartlett et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2018; Daniely
& Granot, 2019). However, understanding when empirical risk minimizers are able to generalize
out-of-distribution remains poorly understood. Answering this question would help us characterize
the failure modes of domain generalization algorithms, and to develop specialized baselines that
would allow us to break through the dominance of empirical risk minimization.
We argue that the out-of-distribution generalization performance of a classifier depends mainly on
two factors. On the one hand, we expect good out-of-distribution generalization only for classifiers
able to achieve good in-distribution generalization (also called source-domain validation accuracy).
On the other hand, we expect out-of-distribution generalization to degrade as the discrepancy between
the distributions of training and testing data increases, relative to the function family of interest. This
reveals an interplay between the properties of the neural network, the used training data, and the
Both D.L.P and D.J.S. contributed to the work equally
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
∗

