GENESIS-V2: Inferring Unordered Object
Representations without Iterative Refinement

Martin Engelcke∗, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner
Applied AI Lab, University of Oxford, UK
{martin, oiwi, ingmar}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Advances in unsupervised learning of object-representations have culminated in the
development of a broad range of methods for unsupervised object segmentation and
interpretable object-centric scene generation. These methods, however, are limited
to simulated and real-world datasets with limited visual complexity. Moreover,
object representations are often inferred using RNNs which do not scale well to
large images or iterative refinement which avoids imposing an unnatural ordering
on objects in an image but requires the a priori initialisation of a fixed number of
object representations. In contrast to established paradigms, this work proposes
an embedding-based approach in which embeddings of pixels are clustered in a
differentiable fashion using a stochastic stick-breaking process. Similar to iterative
refinement, this clustering procedure also leads to randomly ordered object representations, but without the need of initialising a fixed number of clusters a priori.
This is used to develop a new model, GENESIS - V 2, which can infer a variable
number of object representations without using RNNs or iterative refinement. We
show that GENESIS - V 2 performs strongly in comparison to recent baselines in
terms of unsupervised image segmentation and object-centric scene generation on
established synthetic datasets as well as more complex real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Reasoning about discrete objects in an environment is foundational to how agents perceive their
surroundings and act in it. For example, autonomous vehicles need to identify and respond to other
road users (e.g. [1, 2]) and robotic manipulation tasks involve grasping and pushing individual objects
(e.g. [3]). While supervised methods can identify selected objects (e.g. [4, 5]), it is intractable to
manually collect labels for every possible object category. Furthermore, we often desire the ability
to predict, or imagine, how a collection of objects might behave (e.g. [6]). A range of works have
thus explored unsupervised segmentation and object-centric generation in recent years (e.g. [7–36]).
These models are often formulated as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [37, 38] which allow the joint
learning of inference and generation networks to identify objects in images and to generate scenes in
an object-centric fashion (e.g. [15, 17, 28]).
Moreover, such models require a differentiable mechanism for separating objects in an image. While
some works use spatial transformer networks (STNs) [39] to process crops that contain objects (e.g. [7–
15]), others directly predict pixel-wise instance segmentation masks (e.g. [16–27]). The latter avoids
the use of fixed-size sampling grids which are ill-suited for objects of varying size. Instead, object
representations are inferred either by iteratively refining a set of randomly initialised representations
(e.g. [19–24]) or by using a recurrent neural networks (RNN) (e.g. [16–18]). One particularly
interesting model of the latter category is GENESIS [17] can perform both scene segmentation and
generation by capturing relationships between objects with an autoregressive prior.
∗

Now affiliated with Google DeepMind.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

