Parameter Inference
with Bifurcation Diagrams

Gregory Szep
King’s College London
London, WC2R 2LS, UK
gregory.szep@kcl.ac.uk

Attila Csikász-Nagy
Pázmány Péter Catholic University
Budapest, 1083, Hungary
csikasznagy@gmail.com

Neil Dalchau
Microsoft Research Cambridge
Cambridge, CB1 2FB, UK
ndalchau@gmail.com

Abstract
Estimation of parameters in differential equation models can be achieved by applying learning algorithms to quantitative time-series data. However, sometimes it is
only possible to measure qualitative changes of a system in response to a controlled
condition. In dynamical systems theory, such change points are known as bifurcations and lie on a function of the controlled condition called the bifurcation diagram.
In this work, we propose a gradient-based approach for inferring the parameters
of differential equations that produce a user-specified bifurcation diagram. The
cost function contains an error term that is minimal when the model bifurcations
match the specified targets and a bifurcation measure which has gradients that push
optimisers towards bifurcating parameter regimes. The gradients can be computed
without the need to differentiate through the operations of the solver that was used
to compute the diagram. We demonstrate parameter inference with minimal models
which explore the space of saddle-node and pitchfork diagrams and the genetic
toggle switch from synthetic biology. Furthermore, the cost landscape allows us to
organise models in terms of topological and geometric equivalence.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems [1] arise in biology and engineering in settings when the model is not fully known
and the desire is to match model behaviour to a given set of observations. This helps systematically
guide both model and experimental design. While we would like to understand the quantitative
details of a system, often only qualitative changes in response to varying experimental conditions
can be robustly measured across independent studies [2, 3]. For example, several studies are likely
to agree that the human immune system activates above a threshold concentration of a pathogen
and deactivates at a lower threshold concentration, but may disagree on the exact quantities of the
thresholds or the magnitudes of the immune response. Bifurcation theory provides us a framework
for studying these transitions in a manner that is independent of quantitative details [4]. The emerging
picture suggests that identification of the qualitative behaviour – the bifurcation diagram – should
precede any attempt at inferring other properties of a system [5].
Inferring the parameters of a model directly from a bifurcation diagram is difficult because it is
not obvious how multiple parameters in concert control the existence and position of a bifurcation.
It could even be impossible for the model to bifurcate in the manner desired. For models with a
sufficiently small number of parameters, finding specific bifurcation diagrams is typically done by
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

