Time-series Generation by Contrastive Imitation

Daniel Jarrett
University of Cambridge, UK
daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk

Ioana Bica
University of Oxford, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of California, Los Angeles
University of Cambridge, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider learning a generative model for time-series data. The sequential setting
poses a unique challenge: Not only should the generator capture the conditional dynamics of (stepwise) transitions, but its open-loop rollouts should also preserve the
joint distribution of (multi-step) trajectories. On one hand, autoregressive models
trained by MLE allow learning and computing explicit transition distributions, but
suffer from compounding error during rollouts. On the other hand, adversarial models based on GAN training alleviate such exposure bias, but transitions are implicit
and hard to assess. In this work, we study a generative framework that seeks to combine the strengths of both: Motivated by a moment-matching objective to mitigate
compounding error, we optimize a local (but forward-looking) transition policy,
where the reinforcement signal is provided by a global (but stepwise-decomposable)
energy model trained by contrastive estimation. At training, the two components are
learned cooperatively, avoiding the instabilities typical of adversarial objectives. At
inference, the learned policy serves as the generator for iterative sampling, and the
learned energy serves as a trajectory-level measure for evaluating sample quality.
By expressly training a policy to imitate sequential behavior of time-series features
in a dataset, this approach embodies “generation by imitation”. Theoretically, we
illustrate the correctness of this formulation and the consistency of the algorithm.
Empirically, we evaluate its ability to generate predictively useful samples from realworld datasets, verifying that it performs at the standard of existing benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Time-series data are ubiquitous in diverse machine learning applications, such as financial, industrial,
and healthcare settings. At the same time, lack of public access to data is a recurring obstacle to the
development and reproducibility of research in domains where datasets are proprietary [1]. Generating
synthetic—but realistic—time-series data is a promising solution [2], and has received increasing
attention in recent years, driven by advances in deep learning and generative adversarial networks [3,4].
Owing to the fact that time-series features are generated sequentially, generative modeling in the
temporal setting faces a two-pronged challenge: First, a good generator should accurately capture the
conditional dynamics of stepwise transitions p(xt |x1 , ..., xt−1 ); this is important, as the faithfulness
of any conceivable downstream time-series analysis depends on the learned correlations across both
temporal and feature dimensions. Second, however, the recursive rollouts of the generator should
also respect the joint distribution of multi-step trajectories p(x1 , ..., xT ); this is equally important, as
synthetic trajectories that inadvertently wander beyond the support of original data are useless at best.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

