Curriculum Offline Imitating Learning

Minghuan Liu1∗ Hanye Zhao1∗ Zhengyu Yang1 Jian Shen1
Weinan Zhang1† Li Zhao2 Tie-Yan Liu2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Microsoft Research
{minghuanliu, fineartz, zyyang, rockyshen, wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{lizo,tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) tasks require the agent to learn from a precollected dataset with no further interactions with the environment. Despite the
potential to surpass the behavioral policies, RL-based methods are generally impractical due to the training instability and bootstrapping the extrapolation errors,
which always require careful hyperparameter tuning via online evaluation. In
contrast, offline imitation learning (IL) has no such issues since it learns the policy
directly without estimating the value function by bootstrapping. However, IL
is usually limited in the capability of the behavioral policy and tends to learn a
mediocre behavior from the dataset collected by the mixture of policies. In this
paper, we aim to take advantage of IL but mitigate such a drawback. Observing that
behavior cloning is able to imitate neighboring policies with less data, we propose
Curriculum Offline Imitation Learning (COIL), which utilizes an experience picking strategy for imitating from adaptive neighboring policies with a higher return,
and improves the current policy along curriculum stages. On continuous control
benchmarks, we compare COIL against both imitation-based and RL-based methods, showing that it not only avoids just learning a mediocre behavior on mixed
datasets but is also even competitive with state-of-the-art offline RL methods.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL), or batch RL, aims to learn a well-behaved policy from arbitrary
datasets without interacting with the environment. This setting is generally a more practical paradigm
than online RL since it is expensive or dangerous to interact with the environment in most real-world
applications. Typically, two main kinds of offline datasets are considered in previous offline RL
works [5, 18]: one contains transitions sampled by a single behavioral policy; the other includes a
buffer collected by a mixture of policies.
Two main approaches have been deeply investigated for Offline RL. First, RL-based methods,
in particular, Q-learning and policy gradient-based algorithms [13, 7, 12], have the potential to
outperform the behavioral policy. However, they always suffer from serious bootstrapping errors and
training instability. This shortcoming makes such algorithms impractical to be utilized since too many
hyperparameters need to be tuned to achieve a good performance, and it is hard to evaluate a suitable
model in an offline manner, as revealed in [18]. In contrast, offline imitation learning [1, 17, 2],
specifically, behavior cloning (BC), can always stably learn to perform as the behavioral policy, which
may be helpful under single-behavior datasets. However, BC may fail in learning a good behavior
under a diverse dataset containing a mixture of policies (both goods and bads).
Quantity-quality dilemma on mixed dataset. As a supervised learning technique, BC is not easy to
fulfill a desired result, especially on a mixed dataset. Specifically, it requires both quantity and quality
∗

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. Codes are available at https://github.com/apexrl/COIL.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

