Learning in Multi-Stage Decentralized Matching
Markets
Xiaowu Dai
UC Berkeley
xwdai@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Matching markets are often organized in a multi-stage and decentralized manner.
Moreover, participants in real-world matching markets often have uncertain preferences. This article develops a framework for learning optimal strategies in such
settings, based on a nonparametric statistical approach and variational analysis. We
propose an efficient algorithm, built upon concepts of “lower uncertainty bound”
and “calibrated decentralized matching,” for maximizing the participants’ expected
payoff. We show that there exists a welfare-versus-fairness trade-off that is characterized by the uncertainty level of acceptance. Participants will strategically act in
favor of a low uncertainty level to reduce competition and increase expected payoff.
We prove that participants can be better off with multi-stage matching compared
to single-stage matching. We demonstrate aspects of the theoretical predictions
through simulations and an experiment using real data from college admissions.

1

Introduction

Two-sided matching markets have played an important role in microeconomics for several decades
[34]. Matching markets are used to allocate indivisible “goods” to multiple decision-making agents
based on mutual compatibility as assessed via sets of preferences. Such a market does not clear
through prices. For example, a student applicant cannot simply demand the college she prefers but
must also be chosen by the college. Matching markets are often organized in a decentralized way.
Each agent makes their decision independently of others’ decisions, and each agent can have multiple
stages of interactions with the other side of the market. College admissions with waiting lists and
academic job markets are notable examples. We refer to such markets as multi-stage decentralized
matching markets.
Uncertain preference is ubiquitous in multi-stage decentralized matching markets. For instance,
colleges competing for students lack information on students’ preferences. An admitted student
may receive offers from other colleges. She needs to accept one or reject all offers within a short
period during each stage of early, regular, and waiting-list admissions [5]. This admission process
provides little opportunity for colleges to learn students’ preferences, which are uncertain due to
competition among colleges and variability in the relative popularity of colleges over time. Such
uncertain preferences pose a challenge for colleges in their attempt to formulate an optimal admission
strategy. Consequently, colleges may end up enrolling too many or too few students relative to their
capacity or having enrolled students overly far from the attainable optimum in quality.
This paper addresses the following two research questions: (i) Given the uncertain preferences on
one side of the market (e.g., students), how can agents (e.g., colleges) learn an optimal strategy that
maximizes expected payoffs based on historical data? (ii) What are the fundamental implications
of multi-stage decentralized matching on the welfare and fairness for both sides of the market? We
study these two questions using nonparametric statistical methodology and variational analysis.
We propose a new algorithm for maximizing agents’ expected payoffs that is based on learning
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

