Learning Stochastic Majority Votes by
Minimizing a PAC-Bayes Generalization Bound

Valentina Zantedeschi123
Paul Viallard4
Emilie Morvant4
Rémi Emonet4
4
5
Amaury Habrard
Pascal Germain
Benjamin Guedj123
1
Inria, Lille - Nord Europe research centre, France 2 The Inria London Programme, France and UK
3
University College London, Department of Computer Science, Centre for Artificial Intelligence, UK
4
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School,
Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, Saint-Etienne, France
5
Département d’informatique et de génie logiciel, Université Laval, Québec, Canada

Abstract
We investigate a stochastic counterpart of majority votes over finite ensembles of
classifiers, and study its generalization properties. While our approach holds for
arbitrary distributions, we instantiate it with Dirichlet distributions: this allows
for a closed-form and differentiable expression for the expected risk, which then
turns the generalization bound into a tractable training objective. The resulting
stochastic majority vote learning algorithm achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and
benefits from (non-vacuous) tight generalization bounds, in a series of numerical
experiments when compared to competing algorithms which also minimize PACBayes objectives – both with uninformed (data-independent) and informed (datadependent) priors.

1

Introduction

By combining the outcomes of several predictors, ensemble methods [Dietterich, 2000] have been
shown to provide models that are more accurate and more robust than each predictor taken singularly.
The key to their success lies in harnessing the diversity of the set of predictors [Kuncheva, 2004].
Among ensemble methods, weighted Majority Votes (MV) classifiers assign a score to each base
classifier (a.k.a. voter) and output the most common prediction, given by the weighted majority. When
voters have known probabilities of making an error and make independent predictions, the optimal
weighting is given by the so-called Naive Bayes rule [Berend and Kontorovich, 2015]. However, in
most situations these assumptions are not satisfied, giving rise to the need for techniques that estimate
the optimal combination of voter predictions from the data.
Among them, PAC-Bayesian based methods are well-grounded approaches for optimizing the
voter weighting. Indeed, PAC-Bayes theory (introduced by Shawe-Taylor and Williamson, 1997,
McAllester, 1999 – we refer to Guedj, 2019 for a recent survey and references therein) provides not
only bounds on the true error of a MV through Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) generalization
bounds (see e.g. Catoni [2007], Seeger [2002], Maurer [2004], Langford and Shawe-Taylor [2002],
Germain et al. [2015]), but is also suited to derive theoretically grounded learning algorithms (see
e.g. Germain et al. [2009], Roy et al. [2011], Parrado-Hernández et al. [2012], Alquier et al. [2016]).
Contrary to the most classical PAC bounds [Valiant, 1984], as VC-dimension [Vapnik, 2000] or
Rademacher-based bounds [Mohri et al., 2012], PAC-Bayesian guarantees do not stand for all hypotheses (i.e. are not expressed as a worst-case analysis) but stand in expectation over the hypothesis
set. They involve a hypothesis space (formed by the base predictors), a prior distribution on it (i.e. an
a priori weighting) and a posterior distribution (i.e. an a posteriori weighting) evaluated on a learning
sample. The prior brings some prior knowledge on the combination of predictors, and the posterior
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

