Low-Fidelity Video Encoder Optimization for
Temporal Action Localization

Mengmeng Xu1,2∗
mengmeng.xu@kaust.edu.sa

Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa1
PerezRua.JM@gmail.com

Bernard Ghanem2
bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa
1

Xiatian Zhu1
xiatian.zhu@samsung.com

Brais Martinez1
brais.a@samsung.com

Samsung AI Centre Cambridge, UK 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Most existing temporal action localization (TAL) methods rely on a transfer learning pipeline, first optimizing a video encoder on a large action classification dataset
(i.e., source domain), followed by freezing the encoder and training a TAL head
on the action localization dataset (i.e., target domain). This results in a task discrepancy problem for the video encoder – trained for action classification, but used
for TAL. Intuitively, joint optimization with both the video encoder and TAL head
is an obvious solution to this discrepancy. However, this is not operable for TAL
subject to the GPU memory constraints, due to the prohibitive computational cost
in processing long untrimmed videos. In this paper, we resolve this challenge by
introducing a novel low-fidelity (LoFi) video encoder optimization method. Instead
of always using the full training configurations in TAL learning, we propose to
reduce the mini-batch composition in terms of temporal, spatial or spatio-temporal
resolution so that jointly optimizing the video encoder and TAL head becomes operable under the same memory conditions of a mid-range hardware budget. Crucially,
this enables the gradients to flow backwards through the video encoder conditioned
on a TAL supervision loss, favourably solving the task discrepancy problem and
providing more effective feature representations. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed LoFi optimization approach can significantly enhance the performance of existing TAL methods. Encouragingly, even with a lightweight ResNet18
based video encoder in a single RGB stream, our method surpasses two-stream
(RGB + optical flow) ResNet50 based alternatives, often by a good margin. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/saic-fi/lofi_action_localization .

1

Introduction

Video analysis has become an increasingly important area of research, encompassing multiple relevant
problems such as action recognition [8, 13], temporal action localization [68, 7, 12, 22, 59, 60, 55, 67,
15], video grounding[36, 65, 64, 66, 49, 16, 24], and video question answering [25, 31]. Among those,
temporal action localization (TAL) [68, 22] is a fundamental task, as natural videos are not temporally
trimmed. Given an untrimmed video, TAL aims to identify the start and end points of all action
instances and recognize their category labels simultaneously. A typical TAL model is based on deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) composed of two modules: a video encoder and a TAL head.
The video encoder is often shared across different TAL methods (e.g., G-TAD [60], BC-GNN [3])
∗

Work done during an internship at Samsung AI Centre.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

