Entropic Desired Dynamics for Intrinsic Control

Steven Hansen∗
DeepMind

Guillaume Desjardins
DeepMind

Nicolas Heess
DeepMind

Kate Baumli
DeepMind

Simon Osindero
DeepMind

David Warde-Farley
DeepMind
Volodymyr Mnih
DeepMind

Abstract
An agent might be said, informally, to have mastery of its environment when it
has maximised the effective number of states it can reliably reach. In practice,
this often means maximizing the number of latent codes that can be discriminated
from future states under some short time horizon (e.g. [15]). By situating these
latent codes in a globally consistent coordinate system, we show that agents can
reliably reach more states in the long term while still optimizing a local objective. A
simple instantiation of this idea, Entropic Desired Dynamics for Intrinsic ConTrol
(EDDICT), assumes fixed additive latent dynamics, which results in tractable
learning and an interpretable latent space. Compared to prior methods, EDDICT’s
globally consistent codes allow it to be far more exploratory, as demonstrated
by improved state coverage and increased unsupervised performance on hard
exploration games such as Montezuma’s Revenge.

1

Introduction

Endowing reinforcement learning agents with the ability to learn effectively from unsupervised
interaction with the environment, i.e. without access to an extrinsic reward signal, has the potential
to make reinforcement learning practical in settings where the tasks the agent will face are initially
unknown or where task feedback is expensive. The natural question is: what should the agent learn
in the absence of extrinsic rewards? One appealing guiding principle is maximizing the number of
states the agent can reach and to which it can reliably return.
Intrinsic control methods have shown promise in this direction. By maximizing the mutual information
between a latent code z and future states reached by a policy conditioned on this code, intrinsic
control methods learn to map latent codes to behaviors from which the code can be inferred. One
major limitation of such approaches is that the latent codes z are usually sampled from a fixed prior
distribution p(z). Using a fixed prior means that such approaches are unable to learn codes that
correspond to states that cannot be reached in the time horizon T , since any code can be sampled in
any state. Simply increasing the time horizon T does not solve the problem since it leads to a sparser
learning signal. Learning a state-dependent prior has proven to be difficult and has been shown to
lead to fewer learned codes/goal states [15]. This inability to learn how to reach distant states limits
the usefulness of such intrinsic control approaches.
We propose to sidestep this limitation by replacing the fixed code distribution p(z) with a fixed
dynamics model over codes p(zt |zt−1 ). Our algorithm, Entropic Desired Dynamics for Intrinsic
ConTrol (EDDICT), learns to map sequences of latent codes sampled from this dynamics model to
behaviors for which the state transition dynamics in the environment match the latent code dynamics.
EDDICT learns to map each zt to a state that is reachable from the state corresponding to zt−1 ,
∗

Correspondence to stevenhansen@deepmind.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

