Node Dependent Local Smoothing for Scalable
Graph Learning

Wentao Zhang1 , Mingyu Yang1 , Zeang Sheng1 , Yang Li1
Wen Ouyang2 , Yangyu Tao2 , Zhi Yang1,3 , Bin Cui1,3,4
1
School of CS, Peking University 2 Tencent Inc.
3
Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies, Peking University
4
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao), China
1
{wentao.zhang, ymyu, shengzeang18, liyang.cs, yangzhi, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn
2
{gdpouyang, brucetao}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recent works reveal that feature or label smoothing lies at the core of Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs). Concretely, they show feature smoothing combined
with simple linear regression achieves comparable performance with the carefully
designed GNNs, and a simple MLP model with label smoothing of its prediction
can outperform the vanilla GCN. Though an interesting finding, smoothing has not
been well understood, especially regarding how to control the extent of smoothness.
Intuitively, too small or too large smoothing iterations may cause under-smoothing
or over-smoothing and can lead to sub-optimal performance. Moreover, the extent
of smoothness is node-specific, depending on its degree and local structure. To
this end, we propose a novel algorithm called node-dependent local smoothing
(NDLS), which aims to control the smoothness of every node by setting a nodespecific smoothing iteration. Specifically, NDLS computes influence scores based
on the adjacency matrix and selects the iteration number by setting a threshold
on the scores. Once selected, the iteration number can be applied to both feature
smoothing and label smoothing. Experimental results demonstrate that NDLS
enjoys high accuracy – state-of-the-art performance on node classifications tasks,
flexibility – can be incorporated with any models, scalability and efficiency – can
support large scale graphs with fast training.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received a surge of interest with the state-of-theart performance on many graph-based tasks [2, 36, 9, 34, 28, 29]. Recent works have found that the
success of GNNs can be mainly attributed to smoothing, either at feature or label level. For example,
SGC [27] shows using smoothed features as input to a simple linear regression model achieves
comparable performance with lots of carefully designed and complex GNNs. At the smoothing
stage, features of neighbor nodes are aggregated and combined with the current node’s feature to
form smoothed features. This process is often iterated multiple times. The smoothing is based on
the assumption that labels of nodes that are close to each other are highly correlated, therefore, the
features of nodes nearby should help predict the current node’s label.
One crucial and interesting parameter of neighborhood feature aggregation is the number of smoothing
iterations k, which controls how much information is being gathered. Intuitively, an aggregation
process of k iterations (or layers) enables a node to leverage information from nodes that are k-hop
away [22, 33]. The choice of k is closely related to the structural properties of graphs and has a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

