TransMIL: Transformer based Correlated Multiple
Instance Learning for Whole Slide
Image Classiﬁcation
Zhuchen Shao∗,1 , Hao Bian∗,1 , Yang Chen∗,1 , Yifeng Wang2 , Jian Zhang3 , Xiangyang Ji4
Yongbing Zhang†,2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Multiple instance learning (MIL) is a powerful tool to solve the weakly supervised classiﬁcation in whole slide image (WSI) based pathology diagnosis. However, the current MIL methods are usually based on independent and identical
distribution hypothesis, thus neglect the correlation among different instances.
To address this problem, we proposed a new framework, called correlated MIL,
and provided a proof for convergence. Based on this framework, we devised
a Transformer based MIL (TransMIL), which explored both morphological and
spatial information. The proposed TransMIL can effectively deal with unbalanced/balanced and binary/multiple classiﬁcation with great visualization and interpretability. We conducted various experiments for three different computational
pathology problems and achieved better performance and faster convergence compared with state-of-the-art methods. The test AUC for the binary tumor classiﬁcation can be up to 93.09% over CAMELYON16 dataset. And the AUC over
the cancer subtypes classiﬁcation can be up to 96.03% and 98.82% over TCGANSCLC dataset and TCGA-RCC dataset, respectively. Implementation is available at: https://github.com/szc19990412/TransMIL.

1

Introduction

The advent of whole slide image (WSI) scanners, which convert the tissue on the biopsy slide into a
gigapixel image fully preserving the original tissue structure [1], provides a good opportunity for the
application of deep learning in the ﬁeld of digital pathology [2, 3, 4]. However, the deep learning
based biopsy diagnosis in WSI has to face a great challenges due to the huge size and the lack
of pixel-level annotations[5]. To address this problem, multiple instance learning (MIL) is usually
adopted to take diagnosis analysis as a weakly supervised learning problem.
In deep learning based MIL, one straightforward idea is to perform pooling operation [6, 7] on
instance feature embeddings extracted by CNN. Ilse et al. [8] proposed an attention based aggregation operator, giving each instance additional contribution information through trainable attention
weights. In addition, Li et al. [9] introduced non-local attention into the MIL problem. By calculating the similarity between the highest-score instance and the others, each instance is given different
∗
†

Contributed equally: {shaozc0412,h2495067728,sky374263410}@gmail.com.
Corresponding author: ybzhang08@hit.edu.cn.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

