Robust Implicit Networks
via Non-Euclidean Contractions
Saber Jafarpour1,∗ , Alexander Davydov1,∗ , Anton V. Proskurnikov2,3 , and Francesco Bullo1
1

Center for Control, Dynamical Systems and Computation, University of California,
Santa Barbara, 93106-5070, USA, {saber, davydov, bullo}@ucsb.edu.
2
Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy;
3
Institute for Problems in Mechanical Engineering, Russian Academy of Sciences,
St. Petersburg, Russia, anton.p.1982@ieee.org

Abstract
Implicit neural networks, a.k.a., deep equilibrium networks, are a class of implicitdepth learning models where function evaluation is performed by solving a fixed
point equation. They generalize classic feedforward models and are equivalent
to infinite-depth weight-tied feedforward networks. While implicit models show
improved accuracy and significant reduction in memory consumption, they can
suffer from ill-posedness and convergence instability.
This paper provides a new framework, which we call Non-Euclidean Monotone
Operator Network (NEMON), to design well-posed and robust implicit neural
networks based upon contraction theory for the non-Euclidean norm `∞ . Our
framework includes (i) a novel condition for well-posedness based on one-sided
Lipschitz constants, (ii) an average iteration for computing fixed-points, and (iii)
explicit estimates on input-output Lipschitz constants. Additionally, we design
a training problem with the well-posedness condition and the average iteration
as constraints and, to achieve robust models, with the input-output Lipschitz
constant as a regularizer. Our `∞ well-posedness condition leads to a larger
polytopic training search space than existing conditions and our average iteration
enjoys accelerated convergence. Finally, we evaluate our framework in image
classification through the MNIST and the CIFAR-10 datasets. Our numerical
results demonstrate improved accuracy and robustness of the implicit models with
smaller input-output Lipschitz bounds. Code is available at https://github.
com/davydovalexander/Non-Euclidean_Mon_Op_Net.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural networks are infinite-depth learning models with layers defined implicitly through a
fixed-point equation. Examples of implicit neural networks include deep equilibrium models [Bai
et al., 2019] and implicit deep learning models [El Ghaoui et al., 2021]. Implicit networks can be
considered as generalizations of feedforward neural networks with input-injected weight tying, i.e.,
training parameters are transferable between layers. Indeed, in implicit networks, function evaluation
is executed by solving a fixed-point equation and backpropagation is implemented by computing
gradients using implicit differentiation. Due to these unique features, implicit models enjoy more
flexibility and improved memory efficiency compared to traditional neural networks. At the same
time, implicit networks can suffer from instability in their training due to the nonlinear nature of their
fixed-point equations and can show brittle input-output behaviors due to their model flexibility.
∗

These authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

