Pseudo-Spherical Contrastive Divergence

Lantao Yu
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
lantaoyu@cs.stanford.edu

Jiaming Song
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
tsong@cs.stanford.edu

Yang Song
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Energy-based models (EBMs) offer flexible distribution parametrization. However, due to the intractable partition function, they are typically trained via contrastive divergence for maximum likelihood estimation. In this paper, we propose
pseudo-spherical contrastive divergence (PS-CD) to generalize maximum likelihood learning of EBMs. PS-CD is derived from the maximization of a family
of strictly proper homogeneous scoring rules, which avoids the computation of
the intractable partition function and provides a generalized family of learning
objectives that include contrastive divergence as a special case. Moreover, PS-CD
allows us to flexibly choose various learning objectives to train EBMs without
additional computational cost or variational minimax optimization. Theoretical
analysis on the proposed method and extensive experiments on both synthetic data
and commonly used image datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and modeling
flexibility of PS-CD, as well as its robustness to data contamination, thus showing
its superiority over maximum likelihood and f -EBMs.

1

Introduction

Energy-based models (EBMs) provide a unified framework for generative and discriminative learning
by capturing dependencies between random variables with an energy function. Due to the absence
of the normalization constraint, EBMs offer much more flexibility in distribution parametrization
and architecture design compared to properly normalized probabilistic models such as autoregressive
models [53, 23], flow-based models [14, 15, 46] and sum-product networks [72]. Recently, deep
EBMs have achieved considerable success in realistic image generation [17, 66, 12, 30], molecular
modeling [90] and model-based planning [16], thanks to modern deep neural networks [54, 49, 35]
for parametrizing expressive energy functions and improved Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
techniques [62, 75, 40, 17, 66] for efficiently sampling from EBMs.
Training EBMs consists of finding an energy function that assigns low energies to correct configurations of variables and high energies to incorrect ones [55], where a central concept is the loss
functional that is used to measure the quality of the energy function and is minimized during training.
The flexibility of EBMs does not come for free: it makes the design of loss functionals particularly
challenging, as it usually involves the partition function that is generally intractable to compute. As a
result, EBMs are typically trained via CD [37], which belongs to the “analysis by synthesis” scheme
[31] and performs a sampling-based estimation of the gradient of KL between data distribution and
energy-based distribution. Since different loss functionals will induce different solutions in practice
(when the model is mis-specified and data is finite) and KL may not provide the right inductive
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

