Adaptive Machine Unlearning
Varun Gupta1 , Christopher Jung1 , Seth Neel2 ,
Aaron Roth1 , Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi1 , and Chris Waites3
1

University of Pennsylvania
2
Harvard University
3
Stanford University

Abstract
Data deletion algorithms aim to remove the influence of deleted data points from
trained models at a cheaper computational cost than fully retraining those models.
However, for sequences of deletions, most prior work in the non-convex setting
gives valid guarantees only for sequences that are chosen independently of the
models that are published. If people choose to delete their data as a function
of the published models (because they don’t like what the models reveal about
them, for example), then the update sequence is adaptive. In this paper, we
give a general reduction from deletion guarantees against adaptive sequences to
deletion guarantees against non-adaptive sequences, using differential privacy and
its connection to max information. Combined with ideas from prior work which
give guarantees for non-adaptive deletion sequences, this leads to extremely flexible
algorithms able to handle arbitrary model classes and training methodologies,
giving strong provable deletion guarantees for adaptive deletion sequences. We
show in theory how prior work for non-convex models fails against adaptive
deletion sequences, and use this intuition to design a practical attack against the
SISA algorithm of Bourtoule et al. [2021] on CIFAR-10, MNIST, Fashion-MNIST.

1

Introduction

Businesses like Facebook and Google depend on training sophisticated models on user data.
Increasingly—in part because of regulations like the European Union’s General Data Protection Act
and the California Consumer Privacy Act—these organizations are receiving requests to delete the
data of particular users. But what should that mean? It is straightforward to delete a customer’s data
from a database and stop using it to train future models. But what about models that have already
been trained using an individual’s data? These are not necessarily safe; it is known that individual
training data can be exfiltrated from models trained in standard ways via model inversion attacks
[Shokri et al., 2017, Veale et al., 2018, Fredrikson et al., 2015]. Regulators are still grappling with
when a trained model should be considered to contain personal data of individuals in the training set
and the potential legal implications. In 2020 draft guidance, the U.K.’s Information Commissioner’s
Office addressed how to comply with data deletion requests as they pertain to ML models:
If the request is for rectification or erasure of the data, this may not be possible
without re-training the model...or deleting the model altogether [ICO, 2020].
Fully retraining the model every time a deletion request is received can be prohibitive in terms of
both time and money—especially for large models and frequent deletion requests. The problem of
data deletion (also known as machine unlearning) is to find an algorithmic middle ground between
the compliant but impractical baseline of retraining, and the potentially illegal standard of doing
nothing. We iteratively update models as deletion requests come in, with the twin goals of having
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

