NxMTransformer: Semi-Structured Sparsification for
Natural Language Understanding via ADMM
Connor Holmes
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
cholmes@mines.edu

Minjia Zhang
Microsoft
Bellevue, WA 98004
minjiaz@microsoft.com

Yuxiong He
Microsoft
Bellevue WA, 98004
yuxhe@microsoft.com

Bo Wu
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
bwu@mines.edu

Abstract
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has recently achieved great success by using
huge pre-trained Transformer networks. However, these models often contain
hundreds of millions or even billions of parameters, bringing challenges to online
deployment due to latency constraints. Recently, hardware manufacturers have
introduced dedicated hardware for NxM sparsity to provide the flexibility of unstructured pruning with the runtime efficiency of structured approaches. NxM
sparsity permits arbitrarily selecting M parameters to retain from a contiguous
group of N in the dense representation. However, due to the extremely high complexity of pre-trained models, the standard sparse fine-tuning techniques often
fail to generalize well on downstream tasks, which have limited data resources.
To address such an issue in a principled manner, we introduce a new learning
framework, called NxMTransformer, to induce NxM semi-structured sparsity on
pretrained language models for natural language understanding to obtain better
performance. In particular, we propose to formulate the NxM sparsity as a constrained optimization problem and use Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
(ADMM) to optimize the downstream tasks while taking the underlying hardware
constraints into consideration. ADMM decomposes the NxM sparsification problem into two sub-problems that can be solved sequentially, generating sparsified
Transformer networks that achieve high accuracy while being able to effectively
execute on newly released hardware. We apply our approach to a wide range of
NLP tasks, and our proposed method is able to achieve 1.7 points higher accuracy
in GLUE score than current best practices. Moreover, we perform detailed analysis
on our approach and shed light on how ADMM affects fine-tuning accuracy for
downstream tasks. Finally, we illustrate how NxMTransformer achieves additional
performance improvement with knowledge distillation based methods.

1

Introduction

Large-scale Transformer networks have achieved remarkable success for a wide variety of natural
language tasks, including natural language inferencing, sentiment analysis, question answering,
and others. The state-of-the-art of these NLP models employs a transfer learning paradigm which
contains two stages: a semi-supervised pre-training stage that trains a masked language modeling on
massive web text, followed by a fine-tuning stage where the pre-trained model is adapted to specific
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

