DNN-based Topology Optimisation:
Spatial Invariance and Neural Tangent Kernel

Benjamin Dupuis
Chair of Statistical Field Theory
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
benjamin.dupuis@epfl.ch

Arthur Jacot
Chair of Statistical Field Theory
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
arthur.jacot@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the Solid Isotropic Material Penalisation (SIMP) method with a density
field generated by a fully-connected neural network, taking the coordinates as
inputs. In the large width limit, we show that the use of DNNs leads to a filtering
effect similar to traditional filtering techniques for SIMP, with a filter described
by the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). This filter is however not invariant under
translation, leading to visual artifacts and non-optimal shapes. We propose two
embeddings of the input coordinates, which lead to (approximate) spatial invariance
of the NTK and of the filter. We empirically confirm our theoretical observations
and study how the filter size is affected by the architecture of the network. Our
solution can easily be applied to any other coordinates-based generation method.

1

Introduction

Topology optimisation [4], also known as structural optimisation, is a method to find optimal shapes
subject to some constraints. It has been widely studied in the field of computational mechanics. Here
we are interested in the particular case of the Solid Isotropic Material Penalisation (SIMP) method
[18, 1], which is a very common method in this field.
Recently some authors have used Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to perform topology optimisation.
We can differentiate two different approaches in the use of DNNs with SIMP. The first approach
consists in generating with the classical algorithms a dataset of optimised shapes and train a DNN
on this dataset to produce new optimal shapes [3, 31]. Variations of this approach use Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) [21, 28] to effectively reproduce classical topology optimisation.
In the second approach, the density is generated pointwise by a DNN, which is trained with gradient
descent to optimise the density field with respect to the physical constraints, as proposed in [11]
to use the power of deep models without giving up exact physics. We focus on the approach of
[7, 6] where the density field is generated by a Fully-Connected Neural Network (FCNN) taking the
coordinates of a grid as inputs. Surprisingly, [7] observes that the DNN-generated density fields do
not feature checkerboard artifacts, which are common in vanilla SIMP. A traditional method to avoid
checkerboard patterns is to add a filter [29, 5], but it is not needed for DNN-generated density fields.
In this paper, we analyse theoretically how the use of a DNN to generate the density field affects the
learning. Our main theoretical tool is the Neural Tangent kernel (NTK) introduced in [13] to describe
the dynamics of wide neural networks [13, 2, 17, 12].
While this paper focuses on linear elasticity and SIMP, our analysis can extended to other physical
problems such as heat transfer [19], or any model where an image is generated by a DNN taking the
pixel coordinates as inputs (like in [20]).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

