Model-Based Episodic Memory Induces Dynamic
Hybrid Controls
Hung Le, Thommen Karimpanal George, Majid Abdolshah, Truyen Tran, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
thai.le@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Episodic control enables sample efficiency in reinforcement learning by recalling
past experiences from an episodic memory. We propose a new model-based
episodic memory of trajectories addressing current limitations of episodic control.
Our memory estimates trajectory values, guiding the agent towards good policies.
Built upon the memory, we construct a complementary learning model via a
dynamic hybrid control unifying model-based, episodic and habitual learning into
a single architecture. Experiments demonstrate that our model allows significantly
faster and better learning than other strong reinforcement learning agents across a
variety of environments including stochastic and non-Markovian settings.

1

Introduction

Episodic memory or “mental time travel” [6] allows recreation of past experiences. In reinforcement
learning (RL), episodic control (EC) uses this memory to control behavior, and complements forward
model and simpler, habitual (cached) control methods. The use of episodic memory1 is shown to be
very useful in early stages of RL [29, 4] and backed up by cognitive evidence [42, 41]. Using only
one or few instances of past experiences to make decisions, EC agents avoid complicated planning
computations, exploiting experiences faster than the other two control methods. In hybrid control
systems, EC demonstrates excellent performance and better sample efficiency [36, 30].
Early works on episodic control use tabular episodic memory storing a raw trajectory as a sequence
of states, actions and rewards over consecutive time steps. To select a policy, the methods iterate
through all stored sequences and are thus only suitable for small-scale problems [29, 9]. Other
episodic memories store individual state-action pairs, acting as the state-action value table in tabular
RL, and can generalize to novel states using nearest neighbor approximations [4, 36]. Recent works
[35, 16, 30, 46] leverage both episodic and habitual learning by combining state-action episodic
memories with Q-learning augmented with parametric value functions like Deep Q-Network (DQN;
[34]). The combination of the “fast” non-parametric episodic and “slow” parametric value facilitates
Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) – a theory posits that the brain relies on both slow learning
of distributed representations (neocortex) and fast learning of pattern-separated representations
(hippocampus) [31].
Existing episodic RL methods suffer from 3 issues: (a) near-deterministic assumption [4] which is
vulnerable to noisy, stochastic or partially observable environments causing ambiguous observations;
(b) sample-inefficiency due to storing state-action-value which demands experiencing all actions
to make reliable decisions and inadequate memory writings that prevent fast and accurate value
propagation inside the memory [4, 36]; and finally, (c) assuming fixed combination between episodic
and parametric values [30, 16] that makes episodic contribution weight unchanged for different
observations and requires manual tuning of the weight. We tackle these open issues by designing
1

The episodic memory in this setting is an across-lifetime memory, persisting throughout training.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

