NeurWIN: Neural Whittle Index Network For
Restless Bandits Via Deep RL

Khaled Nakhleh1 , Santosh Ganji1 , Ping-Chun Hsieh2 , I-Hong Hou1 , Srinivas Shakkottai1
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
{khaled.jamal, sant1, ihou, sshakkot}@tamu.edu
2

Department of Computer Science
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
pinghsieh@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Whittle index policy is a powerful tool to obtain asymptotically optimal solutions
for the notoriously intractable problem of restless bandits. However, finding the
Whittle indices remains a difficult problem for many practical restless bandits with
convoluted transition kernels. This paper proposes NeurWIN, a neural Whittle
index network that seeks to learn the Whittle indices for any restless bandits by
leveraging mathematical properties of the Whittle indices. We show that a neural
network that produces the Whittle index is also one that produces the optimal
control for a set of Markov decision problems. This property motivates using
deep reinforcement learning for the training of NeurWIN. We demonstrate the
utility of NeurWIN by evaluating its performance for three recently studied restless
bandit problems. Our experiment results show that the performance of NeurWIN
is significantly better than other RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many sequential decision problems can be modeled as multi-armed bandit problems. A bandit
problem models each potential decision as an arm. In each round, we play M arms out of a total
of N arms by choosing the corresponding decisions. We then receive a reward from the played
arms. The goal is to maximize the expected long-term total discounted reward. Consider, for
example, displaying advertisements on an online platform with the goal to maximize the long-term
discounted click-through rates. This can be modeled as a bandit problem where each arm is a piece of
advertisement and we choose which advertisements to be displayed every time a particular user visits
the platform. It should be noted that the reward, i.e., click-through rate, of an arm is not stationary, but
depends on our actions in the past. For example, a user that just clicked on a particular advertisement
may be much less likely to click on the same advertisement in the near future. Such a problem is a
classic case of the restless bandit problem, where the reward distribution of an arm depends on its
state, which changes over time based on our past actions.
The restless bandit problem is notoriously intractable [20]. Most recent efforts, such as recovering
bandits [21], rotting bandits [23], and Brownian bandits [24], only study some special instances of
the restless bandit problem. The fundamental challenge of the restless bandit problem lies in the
explosion of state space, as the state of the entire system is the Cartesian product of the states of
individual arms. A powerful tool traditionally used to solve the RMABs’ decision-making problem
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

