Topological Attention for Time Series Forecasting

Sebastian Zeng
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg
sebastian.zeng@plus.ac.at

Florian Graf
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg
florian.graf@plus.ac.at

Christoph Hofer
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg
chofer@cosy.sbg.ac.at

Roland Kwitt
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg
roland.kwitt@plus.ac.at

Abstract
The problem of (point) forecasting univariate time series is considered. Most
approaches, ranging from traditional statistical methods to recent learning-based
techniques with neural networks, directly operate on raw time series observations.
As an extension, we study whether local topological properties, as captured via
persistent homology, can serve as a reliable signal that provides complementary
information for learning to forecast. To this end, we propose topological attention,
which allows attending to local topological features within a time horizon of
historical data. Our approach easily integrates into existing end-to-end trainable
forecasting models, such as N-BEATS, and, in combination with the latter, exhibits
state-of-the-art performance on the large-scale M4 benchmark dataset of 100,000
diverse time series from different domains. Ablation experiments, as well as a
comparison to a broad range of forecasting methods in a setting where only a single
time series is available for training, corroborate the beneficial nature of including
local topological information through an attention mechanism.

1

Introduction

Time series are ubiquitous in science and industry, from medical signals (e.g., EEG), motion data
(e.g., speed, steps, etc.) or economic operating figures to ride/demand volumes of transportation
network companies (e.g., Uber, Lyft, etc.). Despite many advances in predicting future observations
from historical data via traditional statistical [5], or recent machine learning approaches [29, 42, 34,
32, 24, 44], reliable and accurate forecasting remains challenging. This is not least due to widely
different and often heavily domain dependent structural properties of time related sequential data.
In this work, we focus on the problem of (point) forecasting univariate time series, i.e., given a
length-T vector of historical data, the task is to predict future observations for a given time horizon
H. While neural network models excel in situations where a large corpus of time series is available
for training, the case of only a single (possibly long) time series is equally important. The arguably
most prominent benchmarks for the former type of forecasting problem are the “(M)akridakis”competitions, such as M3 [26] or M4 [28]. While combinations (and hybrids) of statistical and
machine learning approaches have largely dominated these competitions [28, see Table 4], Oreshkin
et al. [29] have recently demonstrated that a pure learning-based model (N-BEATS) attains state-ofthe-art performance. Interestingly, the latter approach is simply built from a collection of common
neural network primitives which are not specific to sequential data.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

