Visual Adversarial Imitation Learning
using Variational Models

Rafael Rafailov1 Tianhe Yu1 Aravind Rajeswaran2,3 Chelsea Finn1
{rafailov, tianheyu, cbfinn}@stanford.edu, aravraj@fb.com
1
Stanford University, 2 University of Washington, 3 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Reward function specification, which requires considerable human effort and iteration, remains a major impediment for learning behaviors through deep reinforcement learning. In contrast, providing visual demonstrations of desired behaviors
often presents an easier and more natural way to teach agents. We consider a setting
where an agent is provided a fixed dataset of visual demonstrations illustrating how
to perform a task, and must learn to solve the task using the provided demonstrations and unsupervised environment interactions. This setting presents a number of
challenges including representation learning for visual observations, sample complexity due to high dimensional spaces, and learning instability due to the lack of a
fixed reward or learning signal. Towards addressing these challenges, we develop a
variational model-based adversarial imitation learning (V-MAIL) algorithm. The
model-based approach provides a strong signal for representation learning, enables
sample efficiency, and improves the stability of adversarial training by enabling onpolicy learning. Through experiments involving several vision-based locomotion
and manipulation tasks, we find that V-MAIL learns successful visuomotor policies
in a sample-efficient manner, has better stability compared to prior work, and also
achieves higher asymptotic performance. We further find that by transferring the
learned models, V-MAIL can learn new tasks from visual demonstrations without
any additional environment interactions. All results including videos can be found
online at https://sites.google.com/view/variational-mail.

1

Introduction

The ability of reinforcement learning (RL) agents to autonomously learn by interacting with the
environment presents a promising approach for learning diverse skills. However, reward specification
has remained a major challenge in the deployment of RL in practical settings [1, 2, 3]. The ability
to imitate humans or other expert trajectories allows us to avoid the reward specification problem,
while also circumventing challenges related to task-specific exploration in RL. Visual demonstrations
can also be a more natural way to teach robots various tasks and skills in real-world applications.
However, this setting is also fraught with a number of technical challenges including representation
learning for visual observations, sample complexity due to the high dimensional observation spaces,
and learning instability [4, 5, 6] due to lack of a stationary learning signal. We aim to overcome these
challenges and to develop an algorithm that can learn from limited demonstration data and scale to
high-dimensional observation and action spaces often encountered in robotics applications.
Behaviour cloning (BC) is a classic algorithm to imitate expert demonstrations [7], which uses
supervised learning to greedily match the expert behaviour at demonstrated expert states. Due to
environment stochasticity, covariate shift, and policy approximation error, the agent may drift away
from the expert state distribution and ultimately fail to mimic the demonstrator [8]. While a wide
initial state distribution [9] or the ability to interactively query the expert policy [8] can circumvent
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

