Learning to Select Exogenous Events
for Marked Temporal Point Process

Ping Zhang∗

Rishabh Iyer∗
Ashish Tendulkar†
Gaurav Aggarwal†
∗
†
§
UT Dallas, Google Inc., IIT Bombay.
{Ping.Zhang,rishabh.iyer}@utdallas.edu,
{ashishvt,gauravaggarwal}@google.com, abir@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abir De§

Abstract
Marked temporal point processes (MTPPs) have emerged as a powerful modeling
tool for a wide variety of applications which are characterized using discrete
events localized in continuous time. In this context, the events are of two types—
endogenous events which occur due to the influence of the previous events and
exogenous events which occur due to the effect of the externalities. However, in
practice, the events do not come with endogenous or exogenous labels. To this
end, our goal in this paper is to identify the set of exogenous events from a set of
unlabeled events. To do so, we first formulate the parameter estimation problem
in conjunction with exogenous event set selection problem and show that this
problem is NP hard. Next, we prove that the underlying objective is a monotone
and α-submodular set function, with respect to the candidate set of exogenous
events. Such a characterization subsequently allows us to use a stochastic greedy
algorithm which was originally proposed in [64] for submodular maximization.
However, we show that it also admits an approximation guarantee for maximizing
α-submodular set function, even when the learning algorithm provides an imperfect
estimates of the trained parameters. Finally, our experiments with synthetic and
real data show that our method performs better than the existing approaches built
upon superposition of endogenous and exogenous MTPPs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, marked temporal point processes (MTPPs) have shown tremendous potential in
modeling the arrival process of the asynchronous events in continuous time [65, 46, 66, 16, 22,
17, 52, 82, 33, 13, 60, 83, 74, 49, 77, 27, 53, 47]. They are extensively used in a wide variety of
applications, e.g., information diffusion in social networks [66, 77, 16, 43, 12, 85, 76], improving
human learning [76, 74], location modeling [83], epidemic forecasting [49, 66], etc. At the outset, an
MTPP event consists of two elements— its arrival time and the mark, where the latter encodes the
category of the event, e.g., the topic of a blog post, the sentiment associated with a tweet, disease of
an individual, etc.
In the context of learning an MTPP, we observe two types of events— endogenous events which
occur due to influence of the previously observed events and, exogenous events which are driven by
the external sources or unobserved events, rather than being influenced by the previously observed
events. For example, a post in social media may be influenced by some external news source, rather
than the previous messages [26, 60, 13]; in epidemic process, an infection may be triggered by
community transmission where the source is other than any previously known infections [50], etc. In
such applications, the observed events appear unlabeled, i.e., they are not tagged with their sources of
influence. Consequently, the existing MTPP models [21, 12, 84, 78, 66] resort to the superposition of
exogenous and endogenous MTPPs. However, such approaches view an event being exogenous or
endogenous with equal likelihood and therefore, they do not focus on identifying which events are
more likely to be exogenous than others. Consequently, they often remain oblivious to the presence
of the exogenous events, which often preclude these models from realizing their full potential. While
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

