DECAF: Generating Fair Synthetic Data Using
Causally-Aware Generative Networks

Boris van Breugel∗
University of Cambridge
bv292@cam.ac.uk

Trent Kyono∗
University of California, Los Angeles
tmkyono@ucla.edu

Jeroen Berrevoets
University of Cambridge
jb2384@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning models have been criticized for reflecting unfair biases in the
training data. Instead of solving for this by introducing fair learning algorithms
directly, we focus on generating fair synthetic data, such that any downstream
learner is fair. Generating fair synthetic data from unfair data— while remaining
truthful to the underlying data-generating process (DGP) —is non-trivial. In this
paper, we introduce DECAF: a GAN-based fair synthetic data generator for tabular
data. With DECAF we embed the DGP explicitly as a structural causal model
in the input layers of the generator, allowing each variable to be reconstructed
conditioned on its causal parents. This procedure enables inference-time debiasing,
where biased edges can be strategically removed for satisfying user-defined fairness
requirements. The DECAF framework is versatile and compatible with several
popular definitions of fairness. In our experiments, we show that DECAF successfully removes undesired bias and— in contrast to existing methods —is capable
of generating high-quality synthetic data. Furthermore, we provide theoretical
guarantees on the generator’s convergence and the fairness of downstream models.

1

Introduction

Generative models are optimized to approximate the original data distribution as closely as possible.
Most research focuses on three objectives [1]: fidelity, diversity, and privacy. The first and second are
concerned with how closely synthetic samples resemble real data and how much of the real data’s
distribution is covered by the new distribution, respectively. The third objective aims to avoid simply
reproducing samples from the original data, which is important if the data contains privacy-sensitive
information [2, 3]. We explore a much-less studied concept: synthetic data fairness.
Motivation. Deployed machine learning models have been shown to reflect the bias of the data on
which they are trained [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. This has not only unfairly damaged the discriminated individuals
but also society’s trust in machine learning as a whole. A large body of work has explored ways of
detecting bias and creating fair predictors [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], while other authors propose
debiasing the data itself [9, 10, 11, 16]. This work’s aim is related to the work of [17]: to generate fair
synthetic data based on unfair data. Being able to generate fair data is important because end-users
creating models based on publicly available data might be unaware they are inadvertently including
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

