Approximate optimization of convex functions
with outlier noise
Anindya De
University of Pennsylvania
anindyad@cis.upenn.edu

Sanjeev Khanna
University of Pennsylvania
sanjeev@cis.upenn.edu

Huan Li
University of Pennsylvania
huanli@cis.upenn.edu

Hesam Nikpey
University of Pennsylvania
hesam@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of minimizing a convex function given by a zeroth order oracle that is possibly corrupted by outlier noise. Specifically, we assume the function
values at some points of the domain are corrupted arbitrarily by an adversary, with
the only restriction being that the total volume of corrupted points is bounded. The
goal then is to find a point close to the function’s minimizer using access to the
corrupted oracle.
We first prove a lower bound result showing that, somewhat surprisingly, one
cannot hope to approximate the minimizer nearly as well as one might expect, even
if one is allowed an unbounded number of queries to the oracle. Complementing
this negative result, we then develop an efficient algorithm that outputs a point
close to the minimizer of the convex function, where the specific distance matches
exactly, up to constant factors, the distance bound shown in our lower bound result.

1

Introduction

Unconstrained convex optimization is among the most well-studied problems in mathematical
optimization and has extensive applications in machine learning [7]. In the classic unconstrained
convex minimization problem, we are given oracle access to a convex function f : Rd → R, and seek
to efficiently find a point x̃ that is close to the minimizer of f (call it x∗ )1 . To obtain meaningful
guarantees for approximating the minimizer x∗ , one needs to make certain assumptions on the
convexity and smoothness of f . In particular, f is commonly assumed to be α-strongly convex and
β-smooth for some β > α > 0. This means that, when f is twice differentiable, its second derivative
in any direction is between α and β. For ease of presentation, we will say a convex function is
(α, β)-nice if it satisfies these two conditions.
It is well known that the minimizer of an (α, β)-nice function can be approximated arbitrarily
well in polynomial time by the classic gradient descent algorithm, or its accelerated version due
to Nesterov [18]. To formally state the performance of these two algorithms, let us suppose an
(α, β)-nice function f : Rd → R is given to us as a zeroth order oracle, which returns the function
value f (x) on any input point x ∈ Rd . Then we have:
Theorem 1.1 ([7]). Given any initial point x0 ∈ Rd and  > 0, the classic gradient descent algorithm
∗
k
outputs a point x̃ s.t. kx̃ − x∗ k2 ≤  using O(d(β/α) log kx0 −x
) oracle queries.

1
Sometimes, instead of finding a point close to x∗ , the goal is to find a point whose function value is close to
f (x∗ ). However, as we point out later, it is more natural to study approximations in the domain in our setting.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

