Optimal prediction of Markov chains with and without
spectral gap conditions

Yanjun Han
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
yjhan@berkeley.edu

Soham Jana
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
soham.jana@yale.edu

Yihong Wu
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
yihong.wu@yale.edu

Abstract
We study the following learning problem with dependent data: Observing a trajectory of length n from a stationary Markov
√ chain with k states, the goal is to
predict the next state. For 3 ≤ k ≤ O( n), using techniques from universal
compression, the optimal prediction risk in Kullback-Leibler divergence is shown
2
n
to be Θ( kn log kn2 ), in contrast to the optimal rate of Θ( log log
) for k = 2 previn
2
ously shown in [FOPS16]. These rates, slower than the parametric rate of O( kn ),
can be attributed to the memory in the data, as the spectral gap of the Markov
chain can be arbitrarily small. To quantify the memory effect, we study irreducible
reversible chains with a prescribed spectral gap. In addition to characterizing the
optimal prediction risk for two states, we show that, as long as the spectral gap is
2
not excessively small, the prediction risk in the Markov model is O( kn ), which
coincides with that of an iid model with the same number of parameters.

1

Introduction

Learning distributions from samples is a central question in statistics and machine learning. While
significant progress has been achieved in property testing and estimation based on independent and
identically distributed (iid) data, for many applications, most notably natural language processing, two
new challenges arise: (a) Modeling data as independent observations fails to capture their temporal
dependency; (b) Distributions are commonly supported on a large domain whose cardinality is
comparable to or even exceeds the sample size. Continuing the progress made in [FOPS16, HOP18],
in this paper we study the following prediction problem with dependent data modeled as Markov
chains.
Suppose X1 , X2 , . . . is a stationary first-order Markov chain on state space [k] ≜ {1, . . . , k} with
unknown statistics. Observing a trajectory X n ≜ (X1 , . . . , Xn ), the goal is to predict the next
state Xn+1 by estimating its distribution conditioned on the present data. We use the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence as the loss function: For distributions P = [p1 , . . . , pk ] , Q = [q1 , . . . , qk ],
Pk
D(P ∥Q) = i=1 pi log pqii if pi = 0 whenever qi = 0 and D(P ∥Q) = ∞ otherwise. The minimax
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

