Rate-Optimal Subspace Estimation on Random
Graphs
Zhixin Zhou1 , Fan Zhou2 , Ping Li2 , and Cun-Hui Zhang3
1

Department of Management Sciences, City University of Hong Kong
2
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research
3
Department of Statistics, Rutgers University
1
zhixzhou@cityu.edu.hk, 2 {zfyyde001, pingli98}@gmail.com, 3 cunhui@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We study the theory of random bipartite graph whose adjacency matrix is generated
according to a connectivity matrix M. We consider the bipartite graph to be sparse,
i.e., the entries of M are upper bounded by certain sparsity parameter. We show
that the performance of estimating the connectivity matrix M depends on the
sparsity of the graph. We focus on two measurement of performance of estimation:
the error of estimating M and the error of estimating the column space of M. In
the first case, we consider the operator norm and Frobenius norm of the difference
between the estimation and the true connectivity matrix. In the second case, the
performance will be measured by the difference between the estimated projection
matrix and the true projection matrix in operator norm and Frobenius norm. We
will show that the estimators we propose achieve the minimax optimal rate.

1

Introduction

There have been many fruitful results on subspace estimation principal component analysis. Researchers have been considering random matrix with Gaussian and sub-Gaussian noise. In the present
work, we focus on random bipartite graph, which have been a popular model in machine learning
and data mining [26, 11, 19]. A bipartite graph is a graph whose vertices can be divided into two
disjoint sets, U and V, such that every edge connects a vertex in U to one in V. In a random bipartite
graph, an edge connecting node i ∈ U to node j ∈ V exists with probability Mij independently.
Suppose |U| = n1 and |V| = n2 , a bipartite graph can be represented by an adjacency matrix A,
whose elements Aij , (i, j) ∈ [n1 ] × [n2 ] are independent Bernoulli random variables with latent
parameters Mij . In other words, we can focus on the random adjacency matrix A with entries
Aij ∼ Bernoulli(Mij ) for (i, j) ∈ [n1 ] × [n2 ] independently.

(1)

M with elements Mij is called the connectivity matrix. The goal of this paper is to find the rate
optimal estimation of the latent connectivity matrix M and its singular space, under the assumption
that M follows certain low-rank structure.
Formally speaking, for the task of estimating matrix M, we consider the following parameter space:
Θ1 (n1 , n2 , p, r) = {M ∈ [0, p]n1 ×n2 : rank(M) ≤ r}

for positive integers n1 , n2 , r.

(2)

In other words, Θ1 (n1 , n2 , p, r) consists of all n1 × n2 matrices with entries between 0 and p and
rank at most r. To avoid empty parameter space, we always assume r ≤ min{n1 , n2 }. The parameter
p controls the sparsity of the bipartite graph.
The work of Zhixin Zhou was conducted as a postdoctoral researcher at Baidu Research - Bellevue WA.
The work of Cun-Hui Zhang was conducted as a consulting researcher at Baidu Research - Bellevue WA.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

