ReLU Regression with Massart Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Jongho Park
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jongho.park@wisc.edu

Christos Tzamos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the fundamental problem of ReLU regression, where the goal is to fit
Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) to data. This supervised learning task is efficiently
solvable in the realizable setting, but is known to be computationally hard with
adversarial label noise. In this work, we focus on ReLU regression in the Massart
noise model, a natural and well-studied semi-random noise model. In this model,
the label of every point is generated according to a function in the class, but an
adversary is allowed to change this value arbitrarily with some probability, which is
at most ⌘ < 1/2. We develop an efficient algorithm that achieves exact parameter
recovery in this model under mild anti-concentration assumptions on the underlying
distribution. Such assumptions are necessary for exact recovery to be informationtheoretically possible. We demonstrate that our algorithm significantly outperforms
naive applications of `1 and `2 regression on both synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Learning in the presence of outliers is a key challenge in machine learning, with several data analysis
applications, including in ML security (4; 7; 46; 14) and in exploratory data analysis of real datasets
with natural outliers, e.g., in biology (43; 41; 36). The goal is to design computationally efficient
learners that can tolerate a constant fraction of outliers, independent of the dimensionality of the
data. Early work in robust statistics (28; 30) gave sample-efficient robust estimators for various
basic tasks, alas with exponential runtime. A recent line of work in computer science, starting
with (13; 35), developed the first computationally efficient robust learning algorithms for various
high-dimensional tasks. Since these early works, there has been significant progress in algorithmic
robust high-dimensional statistics by several communities, see (16) for a recent survey.
In this work, we study the problem of learning Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) in the presence of
label noise. The ReLU function ReLUw : Rd ! R, parameterized by a vector w 2 Rd , is defined
as ReLUw (x) := ReLU(w · x) = max {0, w · x}. ReLU regression – the task of fitting ReLUs
to a set of labeled examples – is a fundamental task and an important primitive in the theory of
deep learning. In recent years, ReLU regression has been extensively studied in theoretical machine
learning both from the perspective of designing efficient algorithms and from the perspective of
computational hardness, see, e.g., (26; 45; 37; 48; 27; 49; 11; 15; 25; 18). The computational
difficulty of this problem crucially depends on the assumptions about the input data. In the realizable
case, i.e., when the labels are consistent with the target function, the problem is efficiently solvable,
see, e.g., (45). On the other hand, in the presence of even a small constant fraction of adversarially
labeled data, computational hardness results are known even for approximate recovery (29; 37) and
under well-behaved distributions (27; 15; 25; 18). See Section 1.3 for a detailed summary of related
work.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

