Margin-Independent Online Multiclass Learning via
Convex Geometry

Guru Guruganesh
Google Research
gurug@google.com

Allen Liu
MIT
cliu568@mit.edu

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Joshua Wang
Google Research
joshuawang@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of multi-class classification, where a stream of adversarially chosen queries arrive and must be assigned a label online. Unlike traditional
bounds which seek to minimize the misclassification rate, we minimize the total
distance from each query to the region corresponding to its correct label. When
the true labels are determined via a nearest neighbor partition – i.e. the label of
a point is given by which of k centers it is closest to in Euclidean distance – we
show that one can achieve a loss that is independent of the total number of queries.
We complement this result by showing that learning general convex sets requires
an almost linear loss per query. Our results build off of regret guarantees for the
geometric problem of contextual search. In addition, we develop a novel reduction
technique from multiclass classification to binary classification which may be of
independent interest.

1

Introduction

Online multiclass classification is a ubiquitous problem in machine learning. In this problem, a
learning algorithm is presented with a stream of incoming query points and is tasked with assigning
each query with a label from a fixed set. After choosing a label, the algorithm is told the true label
of the query point. The goal of the algorithm is to learn over time how to label the query points as
accurately as possible.
Traditionally, theoretical treatments of this problem are built around the notion of a margin γ. This
margin represents the extent to which the input points are well-separated from the boundaries between
different labels. For example, the analysis of the classic Perceptron algorithm [Nov63] guarantees that
it makes at most O(1/γ 2 ) mistakes when performing binary classification, as long as all query points
are distance at least γ from a hyperplane separating the two classes. More sophisticated analyses and
algorithms (relying on e.g. hinge loss) do not necessarily assume the classes are as well separated,
but still inherently incorporate a margin γ (for example, the hinge loss associated with a point is
positive unless it is γ-separated).
In this paper, we present an alternative to the traditional margin approaches. Our approach weights
each mistake by how ambiguous the classification task is for that point, rather than penalizing all
mistakes equally. More precisely, consider a partition of the space of all possible query points into k
regions Ri , where Ri contains all query points whose true label is i. In our formulation assigning a
query point q a label i incurs a loss of ℓ(q, Ri ), where ℓ(q, Ri ) should be thought of as the distance
needed to move q so that it lies in Ri (i.e., for it to be labelled correctly). For example, in the case of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

