Recursive Causal Structure Learning in the Presence
of Latent Variables and Selection Bias
Sina Akbari
Department of Computer and
Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
sina.akbari@epfl.ch

Ehsan Mokhtarian
Department of Computer and
Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
ehsan.mokhtarian@epfl.ch

AmirEmad Ghassami
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
aghassa1@jhu.edu

Negar Kiyavash
College of Management of Technology
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the causal MAG of a system from observational data in the presence of latent variables and selection bias. Constraint-based
methods are one of the main approaches for solving this problem, but the existing
methods are either computationally impractical when dealing with large graphs or
lacking completeness guarantees. We propose a novel computationally efficient
recursive constraint-based method that is sound and complete. The key idea of
our approach is that at each iteration a specific type of variable is identified and
removed. This allows us to learn the structure efficiently and recursively, as this
technique reduces both the number of required conditional independence (CI)
tests and the size of the conditioning sets. The former substantially reduces the
computational complexity, while the latter results in more reliable CI tests. We
provide an upper bound on the number of required CI tests in the worst case. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the tightest bound in the literature. We further
provide a lower bound on the number of CI tests required by any constraint-based
method. The upper bound of our proposed approach and the lower bound at most
differ by a factor equal to the number of variables in the worst case. We provide
experimental results to compare the proposed approach with the state of the art on
both synthetic and real-world structures.

1

Introduction

Learning the causal structure among the set of variables in the system is the initial step for performing
statistical inference tasks such as estimating the reward of a policy in off-policy evaluation [23, 9, 12],
etc. In the literature, structure learning is for the most part done under the assumption that all the
variables in the system are observed [21, 10, 17, 11, 25]. However, in many applications in real-life
systems, this assumption is violated. Moreover, the accessible data may contain selection bias, i.e.,
some of the variables may have been conditioned on.
The problem of causal structure learning is significantly more challenging when unmeasured (latent)
confounders and selection variables exist in the system. This is because the set of directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) as independence models, which is the predominant modeling approach in the absence
of unobserved variables, is not closed under marginalization and conditioning [19]. That is, there
does not necessarily exist a DAG over the observed variables that demonstrate a one-to-one map with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

