Formalizing the Generalization-Forgetting Trade-Off
in Continual Learning

R. Krishnan1 and Prasanna Balaprakash1,2
1
Mathematics and Computer Science Division
2
Leadership Computing Facility
Argonne National Laboratory
kraghavan,pbalapra@anl.gov

Abstract
We formulate the continual learning problem via dynamic programming and model
the trade-off between catastrophic forgetting and generalization as a two-player
sequential game. In this approach, player 1 maximizes the cost due to lack of
generalization whereas player 2 minimizes the cost due to increased catastrophic
forgetting. We show theoretically and experimentally that a balance point between
the two players exists for each task and that this point is stable (once the balance is
achieved, the two players stay at the balance point). Next, we introduce balanced
continual learning (BCL), which is designed to attain balance between generalization and forgetting, and we empirically demonstrate that BCL is comparable to or
better than the state of the art.

1

Introduction

In continual learning (CL), we incrementally adapt a model to learn tasks (defined according to
the problem at hand) observed sequentially. CL has two main objectives: maintain long-term
memory (remember previous tasks) and navigate new experiences continually (quickly adapt to
new tasks). An important characterization of these objectives is provided by the stability-plasticity
dilemma [9], where the primary challenge is to balance network stability (preserve past knowledge;
minimize catastrophic forgetting) and plasticity (rapidly learn from new experiences; generalize
quickly). This balance provides a natural objective for CL: balance forgetting and generalization.
Traditional CL methods either minimize catastrophic forgetting or improve quick generalization but
do not model both. For example, common solutions to the catastrophic forgetting issue include (1)
representation-driven approaches [49, 25], (2) regularization approaches [27, 2, 34, 16, 48, 48, 24,
37, 10, 43], and (3) memory/experience replay [31, 32, 11, 12, 17]. Solutions to the generalization
problem include representation-learning approaches (matching nets [45], prototypical networks [42],
and metalearning approaches [18, 19, 8, 47]). More recently, several approaches [35, 16, 46, 23, 48,
15] have been introduced that combine methods designed for quick generalization with frameworks
designed to minimize forgetting.
The aforementioned CL approaches naively minimize a loss function (combination of forgetting and
generalization loss) but do not explicitly account for the trade-off in their optimization setup. The
first work to formalize this trade-off was presented in meta-experience replay (MER) [38], where
the forgetting-generalization trade-off was posed as a gradient alignment problem. Although MER
provides a promising methodology for CL, the balance between forgetting and generalization is
enforced with several hyperparameters. Therefore, two key challenges arise: (1) lack of theoretical
tools that study the existence (under what conditions does a balance point between generalization
and forgetting exists?) and stability (can this balance be realistically achieved?) of a balance point
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

