Interpreting Representation Quality of DNNs
for 3D Point Cloud Processing

Wen Shenb∗
Qihan Rena
Dongrui Liua
Quanshi Zhanga†
a
b
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Tongji University

Abstract
In this paper, we evaluate the quality of knowledge representations encoded in deep
neural networks (DNNs) for 3D point cloud processing. We propose a method to
disentangle the overall model vulnerability into the sensitivity to the rotation, the
translation, the scale, and local 3D structures. Besides, we also propose metrics to
evaluate the spatial smoothness of encoding 3D structures, and the representation
complexity of the DNN. Based on such analysis, experiments expose representation
problems with classic DNNs, and explain the utility of the adversarial training. The
code will be released when this paper is accepted.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited superior performance in various tasks, but the blackbox nature of DNNs hampers the analysis of knowledge representations. Previous studies on
explainable AI mainly focused on the following two directions. The first is to explain the knowledge
encoded in a DNN, e.g. visualizing patterns encoded by a DNN [24, 36, 50] and estimating the
saliency/importance/attribution of input variables w.r.t. the network output [20, 30, 57]. The second
is to evaluate the representation power of a DNN, e.g. the generalization and robustness of feature
representations.
This paper focuses on the intersection of the above two directions, i.e. analyzing the quality of
knowledge representations of DNNs for 3D point cloud processing. Specifically, we aim to design
metrics to illustrate properties of feature representations for different point cloud regions, including
various types of regional sensitivities, the spatial smoothness of encoding 3D structures, and the
representation complexity of a DNN. These metrics provide new perspectives to diagnose DNNs
for 3D point clouds. For example, unlike the image processing relying on color information, the
processing of 3D point clouds usually exclusively uses 3D structural information for classification.
Therefore, a well-trained DNN for 3D point cloud processing is supposed to just use scale information
and 3D structures for inference, and be robust to the rotation and translation.
Regional sensitivities. We first propose six metrics to disentangle the overall model vulnerability
into the regional rotation sensitivity, the regional translation sensitivity, the regional scale sensitivity,
and three types of regional structure sensitivity (sensitivity to edges, surfaces, and masses), so that
we can use such sensitivity metrics to evaluate the representation quality of a DNN (as Fig. 1 (a-b)
shows). Each sensitivity metric (let us take the rotation sensitivity for example) is defined as the
vulnerability of the regional attribution when we rotate the 3D point cloud with different angles. The
regional attribution is computed as the Shapley value, which is widely used as a unique unbiased
estimation of an input variable’s attribution [11, 20, 31, 37] from the perspective of game theory.
∗

This work was done when Wen Shen was an intern at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. This study was done under the supervision of Dr. Quanshi
Zhang. He is with the John Hopcroft Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

