BNS: Building Network Structures Dynamically for
Continual Learning

Qi Qin1,3 , Han Peng3 , Wenpeng Hu2 , Dongyan Zhao3,* and Bing Liu4,∗
1

2

Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University
Department of Information Science, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
{qinqi, phan, wenpeng.hu, zhaody}@pku.edu.cn, liub@uic.edu

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) of a sequence of tasks is often accompanied with the
catastrophic forgetting (CF) problem. Existing research has achieved remarkable
results in overcoming CF, especially for task continual learning. However, limited
work has been done to achieve another important goal of CL, knowledge transfer.
In this paper, we propose a technique (called BNS) to do both. The novelty of
BNS is that it dynamically builds a network to learn each new task to overcome
CF and to transfer knowledge across tasks at the same time. Experimental results
show that when the tasks are different (with little shared knowledge), BNS can
already outperform the state-of-the-art baselines. When the tasks are similar and
have shared knowledge, BNS outperforms the baselines substantially by a large
margin due to its knowledge transfer capability.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) incrementally learns a sequence of tasks in a neural network. Each task
consists of a set of classes to be learned together. CL is often accompanied by the catastrophic
forgetting (CF) problem [38]. Two main settings for CL have been extensively studied, namely, task
continual learning (Task-CL) and class continual learning (Class-CL). Task-CL learns a classifier for
each task. In testing, the task id is provided for the test data so that the specific task model can be
applied to assign a class to the test sample. Although Class-CL also learns a sequence of tasks, in
testing the task id is not provided for each sample. Note that there is also a less known or studied
CL setting called domain continual learning (Domain-CL), in which all tasks (or domains) share the
same set of classes [22] and no task id is provided in testing. This paper focuses on Task-CL.
A large amount of research has been done on overcoming CF [8]. The main existing techniques
include the regularization-based methods [63, 11, 25, 18], replay-based methods [43, 18, 56] and
structure-based methods [50, 61, 39]. Regularization-based methods are primarily designed to
evaluate the importance of the parameters learned from old tasks, and then use some mechanisms to
protect those important parameters so that the performance of old tasks will not be affected much
in the process of learning new tasks. Replay-based methods use part of the data cached in the past
or train a generator to generate some similar past data to help maintain the performance of the old
tasks in learning new tasks. Structure-based methods allow the neural network to adaptively adjust
the network structure during the learning process or to add a learning module that does not share in
∗
Corresponding authors. The main part of the work was done when Bing Liu was at Peking University on
leave of absence from University of Illinois at Chicago.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

