Credit Assignment Through
Broadcasting a Global Error Vector

David G. Clark, L.F. Abbott, SueYeon Chung
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Columbia University
New York, NY
{david.clark, lfabbott, sueyeon.chung}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Backpropagation (BP) uses detailed, unit-specific feedback to train deep neural
networks (DNNs) with remarkable success. That biological neural circuits appear
to perform credit assignment, but cannot implement BP, implies the existence of
other powerful learning algorithms. Here, we explore the extent to which a globally
broadcast learning signal, coupled with local weight updates, enables training of
DNNs. We present both a learning rule, called global error-vector broadcasting
(GEVB), and a class of DNNs, called vectorized nonnegative networks (VNNs), in
which this learning rule operates. VNNs have vector-valued units and nonnegative
weights past the first layer. The GEVB learning rule generalizes three-factor
Hebbian learning, updating each weight by an amount proportional to the inner
product of the presynaptic activation and a globally broadcast error vector when the
postsynaptic unit is active. We prove that these weight updates are matched in sign
to the gradient, enabling accurate credit assignment. Moreover, at initialization,
these updates are exactly proportional to the gradient in the limit of infinite network
width. GEVB matches the performance of BP in VNNs, and in some cases
outperforms direct feedback alignment (DFA) applied in conventional networks.
Unlike DFA, GEVB successfully trains convolutional layers. Altogether, our
theoretical and empirical results point to a surprisingly powerful role for a global
learning signal in training DNNs.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained using backpropagation (BP) have achieved breakthroughs
on a myriad of tasks [1, 2]. The power of BP lies in its ability to discover intermediate feature
representations by following the gradient of a loss function. In a manner analogous to DNN training,
synapses in multilayered cortical circuits undergo plasticity that modulates neural activity several
synapses downstream to improve performance on behavioral tasks [3, 4]. However, neural circuits
cannot implement BP, implying that evolution has found another algorithm, or collection thereof [5].
This observation has motivated biologically plausible alternatives to BP [6, 7].
Credit assignment algorithms based on broadcasting a global learning signal, such as node perturbation
[8], are attractive due to their biological plausibility, as the global signal could correspond to a
neuromodulator that influences local synaptic plasticity [9, 10]. However, perturbation methods
are of little practical relevance as the variance in their gradient estimates is prohibitively large
[7, 11]. Instead, recent research has focused on methods that compute or estimate the gradient by
transmitting detailed, unit-specific information to hidden layers through top-down feedback. The
foremost example of such a method is BP. BP’s use of the feedforward weights in the feedback
Code accompanying our paper is available at https://github.com/davidclark1/VectorizedNets.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

