Statistical Inference with M-Estimators on Adaptively
Collected Data
Kelly W. Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
kellywzhang@seas.harvard.edu

Lucas Janson
Departments of Statistics
Harvard University
ljanson@fas.harvard.edu

Susan A. Murphy
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science
Harvard University
samurphy@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Bandit algorithms are increasingly used in real-world sequential decision-making
problems. Associated with this is an increased desire to be able to use the resulting
datasets to answer scientific questions like: Did one type of ad lead to more
purchases? In which contexts is a mobile health intervention effective? However,
classical statistical approaches fail to provide valid confidence intervals when used
with data collected with bandit algorithms. Alternative methods have recently
been developed for simple models (e.g., comparison of means). Yet there is a
lack of general methods for conducting statistical inference using more complex
models on data collected with (contextual) bandit algorithms; for example, current
methods cannot be used for valid inference on parameters in a logistic regression
model for a binary reward. In this work, we develop theory justifying the use of
M-estimators—which includes estimators based on empirical risk minimization as
well as maximum likelihood—on data collected with adaptive algorithms, including
(contextual) bandit algorithms. Specifically, we show that M-estimators, modified
with particular adaptive weights, can be used to construct asymptotically valid
confidence regions for a variety of inferential targets.

1

Introduction

Due to the need for interventions that are personalized to users, (contextual) bandit algorithms are
increasingly used to address sequential decision making problems in health-care [Yom-Tov et al.,
2017, Liao et al., 2020], online education [Liu et al., 2014, Shaikh et al., 2019], and public policy
[Kasy and Sautmann, 2021, Caria et al., 2020]. Contextual bandits personalize, that is, minimize
regret, by learning to choose the best intervention in each context, i.e., the action that leads to the
greatest expected reward. Besides the goal of regret minimization, another critical goal in these
real-world problems is to be able to use the resulting data collected by bandit algorithms to advance
scientific knowledge [Liu et al., 2014, Erraqabi et al., 2017]. By scientific knowledge, we mean
information gained by using the data to conduct a variety of statistical analyses, including confidence
interval construction and hypothesis testing. While regret minimization is a within-experiment
learning objective, gaining scientific knowledge from the resulting adaptively collected data is
a between-experiment learning objective, which ultimately helps with regret minimization between
deployments of bandit algorithms. Note that the data collected by bandit algorithms are adaptively
collected because previously observed contexts, actions, and rewards are used to inform what actions
to select in future timesteps.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

