Local Hyper-Flow Diffusion

Kimon Fountoulakis
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
kimon.fountoulakis@uwaterloo.ca

Pan Li
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, United States
panli@purdue.edu

Shenghao Yang
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
shenghao.yang@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Recently, hypergraphs have attracted a lot of attention due to their ability to capture
complex relations among entities. The insurgence of hypergraphs has resulted in
data of increasing size and complexity that exhibit interesting small-scale and local
structure, e.g., small-scale communities and localized node-ranking around a given
set of seed nodes. Popular and principled ways to capture the local structure are the
local hypergraph clustering problem and the related seed set expansion problem.
In this work, we propose the first local diffusion method that achieves edge-sizeindependent Cheeger-type guarantee for the problem of local hypergraph clustering
while applying to a rich class of higher-order relations that covers a number of
previously studied special cases. Our method is based on a primal-dual optimization
formulation where the primal problem has a natural network flow interpretation,
and the dual problem has a cut-based interpretation using the `2 -norm penalty on
associated cut-costs. We demonstrate the new technique is significantly better than
state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Hypergraphs [1] generalize graphs by allowing a hyperedge to consist of multiple nodes that capture
higher-order relationships in complex systems and datasets [2]. Hypergraphs have been used for
music recommendation on Last.fm data [3], news recommendation [4], sets of product reviews on
Amazon [5], and sets of co-purchased products at Walmart [6]. Beyond the internet, hypergraphs are
used for analyzing higher-order structure in neuronal, air-traffic and food networks [7, 8].
In order to explore and understand higher-order relationships in hypergraphs, recent work has made
use of cut-cost functions that are defined by associating each hyperedge with a specific set function.
These functions assign specific penalties of separating the nodes within individual hyperedges. They
generalize the notion of hypergraph cuts and are crucial for determining small-scale community
structure [8, 9]. The most popular cut-cost functions with increasing capability to model complex
multiway relationships are the unit cut-cost [10–12], cardinality-based cut-cost [13, 14] and general
submodular cut-cost [15, 16]. An illustration of a hyperedge and the associated cut-cost function is
given in Figure 1. In the simplest setting, all cut-cost functions take value either 0 or 1 (e.g., the case
when γ1 = γ2 = 1 in Figure 1b), we obtain a unit cut-cost hypergraph. In a slightly more general
setting, the cut-costs are determined solely by the number of nodes in either side of the hyperedge cut
(e.g., the case when γ1 = 1/2 and γ2 = 1 in Figure 1b), we obtain a cardinality-based hypergraph.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

