A PAC-Bayes Analysis of Adversarial Robustness
Paul Viallard1⇤, Guillaume Vidot23⇤ , Amaury Habrard1 , Emilie Morvant1
1
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School,
Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-ETIENNE, France
2
Airbus Opération S.A.S
3
University of Toulouse, Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse, France

Abstract
We propose the first general PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for adversarial
robustness, that estimate, at test time, how much a model will be invariant to
imperceptible perturbations in the input. Instead of deriving a worst-case analysis
of the risk of a hypothesis over all the possible perturbations, we leverage the PACBayesian framework to bound the averaged risk on the perturbations for majority
votes (over the whole class of hypotheses). Our theoretically founded analysis
has the advantage to provide general bounds (i) that are valid for any kind of
attacks (i.e., the adversarial attacks), (ii) that are tight thanks to the PAC-Bayesian
framework, (iii) that can be directly minimized during the learning phase to obtain
a robust model on different attacks at test time.

1

Introduction

While machine learning algorithms are able to solve a huge variety of tasks, Szegedy et al. [2014]
pointed out a crucial weakness: the possibility to generate samples similar to the originals (i.e., with
no or insignificant change recognizable by the human eyes) but with a different outcome from the
algorithm. This phenomenon, known as “adversarial examples”, contributes to the impossibility to
ensure the safety of machine learning algorithms for safety-critical applications such as aeronautic
functions (e.g., vision-based navigation), autonomous driving, or medical diagnosis (see, e.g., Huang
et al. [2020]). Adversarial robustness is thus a critical issue in machine learning that studies the ability
of a model to be robust or invariant to perturbations of its input. A perturbed input that fools the
model is usually called an adversarial example. In other words, an adversarial example can be defined
as an example that has been modified by an imperceptible noise (or that does not exceed a threshold)
but which leads to a misclassification. One line of research is referred to as adversarial robustness
verification [e.g., Gehr et al., 2018, Huang et al., 2017, Singh et al., 2019, Tsuzuku et al., 2018],
where the objective is to formally check whether the neighborhood of each sample does not contain
any adversarial examples. This kind of method comes with some limitations such as scalability or
overapproximation [Gehr et al., 2018, Katz et al., 2017, Singh et al., 2019]. In this paper we stand in
another setting called adversarial attack/defense [e.g., Papernot et al., 2016, Goodfellow et al., 2015,
Madry et al., 2018, Carlini and Wagner, 2017, Zantedeschi et al., 2017, Kurakin et al., 2017]. An
adversarial attack consists in finding perturbed examples that defeat machine learning algorithms
while the adversarial defense techniques enhance their adversarial robustness to make the attacks
useless. While a lot of methods exist, adversarial robustness suffers from a lack of general theoretical
understandings (see Section 2.2).
To tackle this issue, we propose in this paper to formulate the adversarial robustness through the lens
of a well-founded statistical machine learning theory called PAC-Bayes and introduced by ShaweTaylor and Williamson [1997], McAllester [1998]. This theory has the advantage to provide tight
⇤

Paul Viallard and Guillaume Vidot contributed equally to this work

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

