Three-dimensional spike localization and improved
motion correction for Neuropixels recordings

Julien Boussard∗

Erdem Varol∗

Hyun Dong Lee

Nishchal Dethe

Liam Paninski

Department of Statistics and Neuroscience, Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Grossman Center
for the Statistics of Mind, Zuckerman Institute, Columbia University; *-equal contribution

Abstract
Neuropixels (NP) probes are dense linear multi-electrode arrays that have rapidly
become essential tools for studying the electrophysiology of large neural populations. Unfortunately, a number of challenges remain in analyzing the large datasets
output by these probes. Here we introduce several new methods for extracting useful spiking information from NP probes. First, we use a simple point neuron model,
together with a neural-network denoiser, to efficiently map single spikes detected
on the probe into three-dimensional localizations. Previous methods localized individual spikes in two dimensions only; we show that the new localization approach
is significantly more robust and provides an improved feature set for clustering
spikes according to neural identity (“spike sorting"). Next, we denoise the resulting
three-dimensional point-cloud representation of the data, and show that the resulting 3D images can be accurately registered over time, leading to improved tracking
of time-varying neural activity over the probe, and in turn, crisper estimates of
neural clusters over time. Open source code is available at https://github.
com/int-brain-lab/spikes_localization_registration.git.

1

Introduction

Neuropixels (NP) probes are dense linear multi-electrode arrays that enable the simultaneous observation of hundreds of neurons across multiple brain areas. Since their introduction in [13] (see also
[27]), they have rapidly become an essential neurotechnology, deployed in hundreds of labs around
the world. A number of challenges remain in analyzing the large datasets output by these probes. The
basic goal is “spike sorting" — i.e., to detect action potentials (“spikes") and assign these spikes to
individual neurons. Despite significant effort in the field [4, 12, 21, 27], current spike sorters for NP
data have trouble tracking temporally non-stationary data and accurately sorting small spikes [28].
One major advantage of NP probes is their spatial density: the high spatial resolution of electrodes on
the probe implies that each extracellular spike will typically be detected at multiple sites, providing
an opportunity to “triangulate" the location of each spike. If effective, this spike localization can be
helpful for multiple downstream tasks: spike locations serve as useful low-dimensional summarizations of the high-dimensional spatiotemporal spiking signals, which can in turn be visualized and
used as features for clustering and tracking as the probe undergoes small motion relative to the brain.
Several spike sorting algorithms localize spikes using a simple center of mass (CoM) method. More
precisely, for each waveform, they select a set of channels, and compute the weighted average of
the selected channels’ positions, where the weights are given by an estimate of the amplitude of the
spike on each channel. This fast, cheap method gives informative location estimates for spikes in
multi-electrode array (MEA) recordings where long dendritic or axonal signals are not prevalent
[23, 20, 10] (cf. the primate retina [17], where long axonal signals make localization approaches less
useful). However, by definition, the CoM approach localizes spikes inside the convex hull of the
electrodes, which is especially problematic for Neuropixels recordings, due to the long and thin shape
of the electrodes. Hurwitz et al. [11] propose an improved localization method that provides location
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

