Learnable Fourier Features for Multi-Dimensional
Spatial Positional Encoding

Yang Li
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
liyang@google.com

Si Si
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
sisidaisy@google.com

Gang Li
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
leebird@google.com

Samy Bengio∗
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
bengio@gmail.com

Cho-Jui Hsieh
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Attentional mechanisms are order-invariant. Positional encoding is a crucial component to allow attention-based deep model architectures such as Transformer to
address sequences or images where the position of information matters. In this
paper, we propose a novel positional encoding method based on learnable Fourier
features. Instead of hard-coding each position as a token or a vector, we represent
each position, which can be multi-dimensional, as a trainable encoding based
on learnable Fourier feature mapping, modulated with a multi-layer perceptron.
The representation is particularly advantageous for a spatial multi-dimensional
position, e.g., pixel positions on an image, where L2 distances or more complex
positional relationships need to be captured. Our experiments based on several
public benchmark tasks show that our learnable Fourier feature representation
for multi-dimensional positional encoding outperforms existing methods by both
improving the accuracy and allowing faster convergence.

1

Introduction

Attentional mechanisms are a central component in many deep architectures [1, 25], which allow
a model to selectively focus on specific information in the context. Transformer [38] and its many
variants, such as [29, 38, 16, 3], which are solely based on attentional mechanisms, have advanced
the state of the art on many tasks that involve data with inherent temporal and spatial orders, e.g.,
machine translation [38], image generation [16], and object detection [3].
In contrast to recurrent [14, 34, 27] or convolutional architectures [18], which automatically capture
the ordinal information as computation progresses based on sequential or spatial dependencies,
attentional mechanisms are order invariant. It allows a model to directly access information at an
arbitrary position in a sequence or space. The lack of ordinal information in the model is not an issue
when attentional mechanisms are combined with a recurrent or convolutional architecture [1, 25].
However, it is crucial for Transformer-alike models where the entire model is built based on attentional
mechanisms.
To capture positional information in the data, e.g., the token position in a sentence or the pixel
coordinates in an image, positional encoding has been introduced [10, 38], where a position in a
∗

Currently at Apple.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

