Co-evolution Transformer for Protein Contact
Prediction
He Zhang∗†
Xi’an Jiaotong University
mao736488798@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Jianwei Zhu
Microsoft Research Asia
jianwzhu@microsoft.com

Fusong Ju†
Microsoft Research Asia
fusongju@microsoft.com

Liang He
Microsoft Research Asia
lihe@microsoft.com

Nanning Zheng‡
Xi’an Jiaotong University
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Bin Shao‡
Microsoft Research Asia
binshao@microsoft.com

Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research Asia
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Proteins are the main machinery of life and protein functions are largely determined by their 3D structures. The measurement of the pairwise proximity between
amino acids of a protein, known as inter-residue contact map, well characterizes
the structural information of a protein. Protein contact prediction (PCP) is an essential building block of many protein structure related applications. The prevalent
approach to contact prediction is based on estimating the inter-residue contacts
using hand-crafted coevolutionary features derived from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs). To mitigate the information loss caused by hand-crafted features,
some recently proposed methods try to learn residue co-evolutions directly from
MSAs. These methods generally derive coevolutionary features by aggregating
the learned residue representations from individual sequences with equal weights,
which is inconsistent with the premise that residue co-evolutions are a reflection
of collective covariation patterns of numerous homologous proteins. Moreover,
non-homologous residues and gaps commonly exist in MSAs. By aggregating
features from all homologs equally, the non-homologous information may cause
misestimation of the residue co-evolutions. To overcome these issues, we propose
an attention-based architecture, Co-evolution Transformer (CoT), for PCP. CoT
jointly considers the information from all homologous sequences in the MSA to
better capture global coevolutionary patterns. To mitigate the influence of the nonhomologous information, CoT selectively aggregates the features from different
homologs by assigning smaller weights to non-homologous sequences or residue
pairs. Extensive experiments on two rigorous benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of CoT. In particular, CoT achieves a 51.6% top-L long-range
precision score for the Free Modeling (FM) domains on the CASP14 benchmark,
which outperforms the winner group of CASP14 contact prediction challenge by
9.8%.

∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Equal contribution.
‡
Corresponding authors.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

