Differentiable Quality Diversity

Stefanos Nikolaidis
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
nikolaid@usc.edu

Matthew C. Fontaine
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
mfontain@usc.edu

Abstract
Quality diversity (QD) is a growing branch of stochastic optimization research
that studies the problem of generating an archive of solutions that maximize a
given objective function but are also diverse with respect to a set of specified
measure functions. However, even when these functions are differentiable, QD
algorithms treat them as “black boxes”, ignoring gradient information. We present
the differentiable quality diversity (DQD) problem, a special case of QD, where
both the objective and measure functions are first order differentiable. We then
present MAP-Elites via a Gradient Arborescence (MEGA), a DQD algorithm that
leverages gradient information to efficiently explore the joint range of the objective
and measure functions. Results in two QD benchmark domains and in searching
the latent space of a StyleGAN show that MEGA significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art QD algorithms, highlighting DQD’s promise for efficient quality diversity
optimization when gradient information is available. Source code is available at
https://github.com/icaros-usc/dqd.

1

Introduction

We introduce the problem of differentiable quality diversity (DQD) and propose the MAP-Elites via
a Gradient Arborescence (MEGA) algorithm as the first DQD algorithm.
Unlike single-objective optimization, quality diversity (QD) is the problem of finding a range of
high quality solutions that are diverse with respect to prespecified metrics. For example, consider
the problem of generating realistic images that match as closely as possible a target text prompt
“Elon Musk”, but vary with respect to hair and eye color. We can formulate the problem of searching
the latent space of a generative adversarial network (GAN) [26] as a QD problem of discovering latent
codes that generate images maximizing a matching score for the prompt “Elon Musk”, while achieving
a diverse range of measures of hair and eye color, assessed by visual classification models [51]. More
generally, the QD objective is to maximize an objective f for each output combination of measure
functions mi . A QD algorithm produces an archive of solutions, where the algorithm attempts to
discover a representative for each measure output combination, whose f value is as large as possible.
While our example problem can be formulated as a QD problem, all current QD algorithms treat the
objective f and measure functions mi as a black box. This means, in our example problem, current
QD algorithms fail to take advantage of the fact that both f and mi are end-to-end differentiable
neural networks. Our proposed differentiable quality diversity (DQD) algorithms leverage first-order
derivative information to significantly improve the computational efficiency of solving a variety of
QD problems where f and mi are differentiable.
To solve DQD, we introduce the concept of a gradient arborescence. Like gradient ascent, a gradient
arborescence makes greedy ascending steps based on the objective f . Unlike gradient ascent, a
gradient arborescence encourages exploration by branching via the measures mi . We adopt the term
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

