Counterbalancing Learning and Strategic Incentives
in Allocation Markets
Jamie Kang
Stanford University
kangjh@stanford.edu
Moran Koren
Harvard University
me@mkoren.org

Faidra Monachou
Stanford University
monachou@stanford.edu
Itai Ashlagi
Stanford University
iashlagi@stanford.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the high discard rate of donated organs in the United States, we
study an allocation problem in the presence of learning and strategic incentives.
We consider a setting where a benevolent social planner decides whether and
how to allocate a single indivisible object to a queue of strategic agents. The
object has a common true quality, good or bad, which is ex-ante unknown to
everyone. Each agent holds an informative, yet noisy, private signal about the
quality. To make a correct allocation decision the planner attempts to learn the
object quality by truthfully eliciting agents’ signals. Under the commonly applied
sequential offering mechanism, we show that learning is hampered by the presence
of strategic incentives as herding may emerge. This can result in incorrect allocation
and welfare loss. To overcome these issues, we propose a novel class of incentivecompatible mechanisms. Our mechanism involves a batch-by-batch, dynamic
voting process using a majority rule. We prove that the proposed voting mechanisms
improve the probability of correct allocation whenever agents are sufficiently well
informed. Particularly, we show that such an improvement can be achieved via a
simple greedy algorithm. We quantify the improvement using simulations.

1

Introduction

This paper contributes to the growing literature in the intersection of learning and mechanism design,
by considering a fundamental allocation problem in the presence of learning and strategic agents. In
our setting, a planner needs to allocate a single indivisible object to at most one among several agents
waiting in a queue. The object’s true quality is either high (“good”) or low (“bad”), but is ex-ante
unknown to both the planner and the agents. Agents are privately informed, in the sense that each
receives a private signal that is informative about the true quality of the object, and strategic since
they choose to accept or reject the object based on the action maximizing their expected utility. In
this framework, agents thus engage in a social learning process as they observe the actions of their
predecessors but not their private signals. The planner’s goal is to design an incentive-compatible
mechanism that optimizes correctness, i.e., maximizes the ex-ante accuracy of allocation.
This problem finds a natural application in the allocation of donated organs to patients on a national
waitlist. The median waiting time for a first kidney transplant in the U.S. is around 3.6 years [25],
whereas the rate at which deceased donor kidneys are offered to patients but eventually discarded
has been growing steadily [23], exceeding 21.2% in 2020 [30]. The reasons leading to high discard
rates – even of seemingly high-quality organs – remain unclear. Clinical studies attribute this increase
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

