Provable Representation Learning for Imitation
with Contrastive Fourier Features
Ofir Nachum
Google Brain
ofirnachum@google.com

Mengjiao Yang
Google Brain
sherryy@google.com

Abstract
In imitation learning, it is common to learn a behavior policy to match an unknown
target policy via max-likelihood training on a collected set of target demonstrations.
In this work, we consider using offline experience datasets – potentially far from
the target distribution – to learn low-dimensional state representations that provably
accelerate the sample-efficiency of downstream imitation learning. A central
challenge in this setting is that the unknown target policy itself may not exhibit
low-dimensional behavior, and so there is a potential for the representation learning
objective to alias states in which the target policy acts differently. Circumventing
this challenge, we derive a representation learning objective that provides an
upper bound on the performance difference between the target policy and a lowdimensional policy trained with max-likelihood, and this bound is tight regardless
of whether the target policy itself exhibits low-dimensional structure. Moving to
the practicality of our method, we show that our objective can be implemented as
contrastive learning, in which the transition dynamics are approximated by either
an implicit energy-based model or, in some special cases, an implicit linear model
with representations given by random Fourier features. Experiments on both tabular
environments and high-dimensional Atari games provide quantitative evidence for
the practical benefits of our proposed objective.1

1

Introduction

In the field of sequential decision making one aims to learn a behavior policy to act in an environment
to optimize some criteria. The well-known field of reinforcement learning (RL) corresponds to one
aspect of sequential decision making, where the aim is to learn how to act in the environment to
maximize cumulative returns via trial-and-error experience [38]. In this work, we focus on imitation
learning, where the aim is to learn how to act in the environment to match the behavior of some
unknown target policy [25]. This focus puts us closer to the supervised learning regime, and, indeed,
a common approach to imitation learning – known as behavioral cloning (BC) – is to perform
max-likelihood training on a collected a set of target demonstrations composed of state-action pairs
sampled from the target policy [31, 34].
Since the learned behavior policy produces predictions (actions) conditioned on observations (states),
the amount of demonstrations needed to accurately match the target policy typically scales with the
state dimension, and this can limit the applicability of imitation learning to settings where collecting
large amounts of demonstrations is expensive, , in health [18] and robotics [24] applications. The
limited availability of target demonstrations stands in contrast to the recent proliferation of large
offline datasets for sequential decision making [28, 19, 7, 21]. These datasets may exhibit behavior
far from the target policy and so are not directly relevant to imitation learning via max likelihood
1
Find experimental code at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/
master/rl_repr.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

