Row-clustering of a Point Process-valued Matrix
Lihao Yin1,2

Ganggang Xu3

Huiyan Sang2

Yongtao Guan3

1

Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University, Beijing, China,
Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
3
University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida,
{lihao, huiyan}@stat.tamu.edu, {gangxu, yguan}@bus.miami.edu
2

Abstract
Structured point process data harvested from various platforms poses new challenges to the machine learning community. To cluster repeatedly observed marked
point processes, we propose a novel mixture model of multi-level marked point
processes for identifying potential heterogeneity in the observed data. Specifically,
we study a matrix whose entries are marked log-Gaussian Cox processes and cluster
rows of such a matrix. An efficient semi-parametric Expectation-Solution (ES)
algorithm combined with functional principal component analysis (FPCA) of point
processes is proposed for model estimation. The effectiveness of the proposed
framework is demonstrated through simulation studies and real data analyses.

1

Introduction

Large-scale, high-resolution, and irregularly scattered event time data has attracted enormous research
interest recently in many applications, including medical visiting records [13], financial transaction
ledgers [28] and server logs [11]. Given a collection of event time sequences, one research thread is
to identify groups displaying similar patterns. In practice, the significance of this task emerges in
multifarious scenarios. For example, matching users with similar activity patterns on social media
platforms is beneficial to ads recommendations; clustering patients by their visiting records may help
predict the course of the disease progression.
Our study is motivated by a dataset we collected from Twitter, which consists of posting times of
500 university official accounts from April 15, to May 14th, 2021. Figure 1 displays posting time
stamps of seven selected accounts in five consecutive days. While the daily posting patterns vary
across different accounts, the posting date seems to also play an important role. Specifically, all
accounts cascade a barrage of postings on April 16th while few postings appear on April 18th. Lastly,
each posting is associated with a specific type of activity, namely, tweet, retweet, or reply. Our main
interest is to cluster these multi-category, dynamic posting patterns into subgroups.
To characterize the highly complex posting patterns, we propose a mixture model of Multi-level
Marked Point Processes (MM-MPP). We assume that the event sequences from each cluster are
realizations of a multi-level log-Gaussian Cox process (LGCP) [16], which has been demonstrated
useful for modeling repeatedly observed event sequences [28]. We here extend their work to the
case of mixture models and propose a semiparametric Expectation-Solution algorithm to learn the
underlying cluster structure. The proposed learning algorithm avoids iterative numerical optimizations
within each ES step and hence is computationally efficient. In particular, the expectation step is
carried out using MCMC samples based on the FPCA of the latent Gaussian processes, which imposes
minimal parametric assumptions on the proposed model. Finally, we design an algorithm that can
take advantage of array programming and GPU acceleration to further speed up computation.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

