Fast and Memory Efficient Differentially
Private-SGD via JL Projections∗

Zhiqi Bu
University of Pennsylvania
zbu@sas.upenn.edu

Sivakanth Gopi
Microsoft Research
sigopi@microsoft.com

Yin Tat Lee
University of Washington
yintat@uw.edu

Judy Hanwen Shen
Stanford University
jhshen@stanford.edu

Janardhan Kulkarni
Microsoft Research
jakul@microsoft.com
Uthaipon Tantipongpipat
Twitter
uthaipon@gmail.com

Abstract
Differentially Private-SGD (DP-SGD) of [ACG+ 16] and its variations are the
only known algorithms for private training of large scale neural networks. This
algorithm requires computation of per-sample gradients norms which is extremely
slow and memory intensive in practice. In this paper, we present a new framework
to design differentially private optimizers called DP-SGD-JL and DP-Adam-JL.
Our approach uses Johnson–Lindenstrauss (JL) projections to quickly approximate
the per-sample gradient norms without exactly computing them, thus making the
training time and memory requirements of our optimizers closer to that of their
non-DP versions. Unlike previous attempts to make DP-SGD faster which work
only on a subset of network architectures or use compiler techniques, we propose
an algorithmic solution which works for any network in a black-box manner which
is the main contribution of this paper. To illustrate this, on IMDb dataset, we train
a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to achieve good privacy-vs-accuracy tradeoff,
while being significantly faster than DP-SGD and with a similar memory footprint
as non-private SGD.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, machine learning algorithms based on (deep) neural architectures have lead
to a revolution in applications such as computer vision, speech recognition and natural language
processing (NLP). An important factor contributing to this success is the abundance of data. For most
of these applications, however, the training data comes from individuals, often containing personal
and sensitive information about them. For example, natural language models for applications such as
suggested replies for e-mails and dialog systems rely on the training of neural networks on email
data of users [CLB+ 19, DBS19], who may be left vulnerable if personal information is revealed.
This could happen, for example, when a model generates a sentence or predicts a word that can
potentially reveal private information of users in the training set. Many studies have shown successful
membership inference attacks on deep learning models [SSSS17, CLE+ 19]. Indeed, in a recent work,
[CLE+ 19] show that “unintended memorization" in neural networks is both commonplace and hard
to prevent. Such memorization is not due to overtraining [TLL95, CLE+ 19], and ad hoc techniques
such as early-stopping, dropout etc., do not prevent the risk of privacy violations. Moreover, [Fel20]
shows that memorization is in fact necessary, provably, for some learning tasks. Thus, to prevent
unintended privacy breaches one needs a principled approach for private training of deep learning
∗

Author ordering is alphabetical. Work done when the first and the last two authors were interns at Algorithms
group, Microsoft Research Redmond.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

