Sequential Algorithms for Testing Closeness of
Distributions
Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Omar Fawzi
Univ Lyon, ENS Lyon, UCBL
CNRS, Inria, LIP, F-69342
Lyon Cedex 07, France
omar.fawzi@ens-lyon.fr
Aurélien Garivier
UMPA UMR 5669 and LIP UMR 5668 CNRS,
ENS de Lyon, UCB Lyon 1
Lyon, France
aurelien.garivier@ens-lyon.fr

Aadil Oufkir
LIP UMR 5668 CNRS
ENS de Lyon, UCB Lyon 1
Lyon, France
aadil.oufkir@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract

What advantage do sequential procedures provide over batch algorithms for testing
properties of unknown distributions? Focusing on the problem of testing whether
two distributions D1 and D2 on {1, . . . , n} are equal or ε-far, we give several
answers to this question. We show that for a small alphabet size n, there is a
sequential algorithm that outperforms any batch algorithm by a factor of at least 4
in terms sample complexity. For a general alphabet size n, we give a sequential
algorithm that uses no more samples than its batch counterpart, and possibly fewer
if the actual distance TV(D1 , D2 ) between D1 and D2 is larger than ε. As a
corollary, letting ε go to 0, we obtain a sequential algorithm for testing closeness
when no a priori bound on TV(D1 , D2 ) is given that has a sample complexity
2/3
n/ log n
Õ( TV(Dn1 ,D2 )4/3 ): this improves over the Õ( TV(D
2 ) tester of Daskalakis and
1 ,D2 )
Kawase [2017] and is optimal up to multiplicative constants. We also establish
limitations of sequential algorithms for the problem of testing closeness: they can
improve the worst case number of samples by at most a constant factor.

1

Introduction

How to test if two discrete sources of randomness are similar or distinct? This basic and ubiquitous
question is surprisingly not closed if frugality matters, that is if one wants to take the right decision
using as few samples as possible. To state the problem more precisely, one first needs to define
what “distinct" means. In this paper, we endow the set of probability distributions on {1, . . . , n}
with the total variation distance TV, and we fix a tolerance parameter ε ∈ [0, 1]. We consider
two distributions D1 and D2 , and we assume that either D1 = D2 or TV(D1 , D2 ) > ε. Whenever
0 < TV(D1 , D2 ) ≤ ε, we do not expect any determined behaviour from our test. When both
distributions are unknown we are testing closeness, based on an equal number of independent samples
of both distributions.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

