Adaptive Sampling for Minimax Fair Classification

Shubhanshu Shekhar ∗

Greg Fields ∗

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh †

Tara Javidi ∗

Abstract
Machine learning models trained on uncurated datasets can often end up adversely
affecting inputs belonging to underrepresented groups. To address this issue, we
consider the problem of adaptively constructing training sets which allow us to learn
classifiers that are fair in a minimax sense. We first propose an adaptive sampling
algorithm based on the principle of optimism, and derive theoretical bounds on
its performance. We also propose heuristic extensions of this algorithm suitable
for application to large scale, practical problems. Next, by deriving algorithm
independent lower-bounds for a specific class of problems, we show that the
performance achieved by our adaptive scheme cannot be improved in general. We
then validate the benefits of adaptively constructing training sets via experiments on
synthetic tasks with logistic regression classifiers, as well as on several real-world
tasks using convolutional neural networks (CNNs).

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly being applied for automating the decision-making
process in several sensitive applications, such as loan approval and employment screening. However,
recent work has demonstrated that discriminatory behaviour might get encoded in the model at various
stages of the ML pipeline, such as data collection, labelling, feature selection, and training, and as a
result, adversely impact members of some protected groups in rather subtle ways (Barocas and Selbst,
2016). This is why ML researchers have started to introduce a large number of fairness measures to
include the notion of fairness in the design of their algorithms. Some of the important measures of
fairness include demographic parity (Zemel et al., 2013), equal odds and opportunity (Hardt et al.,
2016; Woodworth et al., 2017), individual fairness (Dwork et al., 2012), and minimax fairness (Feldman et al., 2015). The minimax fairness is particularly important in scenarios in which it is necessary
to be as close as possible to equality without introducing unnecessary harm (Ustun et al., 2019).
These scenarios are common in areas such as healthcare and predicting domestic violence. A measure
that has been explored to achieve this goal is predictive risk disparity (Feldman et al., 2015; Chen
et al., 2018; Ustun et al., 2019). Instead of using the common approach of putting constraints on the
norm of discrimination gaps, Martinez et al. (2020) has recently introduced the notion of minimax
Pareto fairness. These are minimax classifiers that are on the Pareto frontier of prediction risk, i.e., no
decrease in the predictive risk of one group is possible without increasing the risk of another one.
In this paper, we are primarily interested in the notion of minimax fairness in terms of the predictive
risk. However, instead of studying the training phase of the ML pipeline, our focus is on the datacollection stage, motivated by Jo and Gebru (2019) and Holstein et al. (2018). In particular, we study
the following question: given a finite sampling budget, how should a learner construct a training set
consisting of elements from different protected groups in appropriate proportions to ensure that a
classifier trained on this dataset achieves minimax fairness?
Our work is motivated by the following scenario: suppose we have to learn a ML model for performing
a task (e.g., loan approval) for inputs belonging to different groups based on protected attributes, such
∗
†

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at UCSD ({shshekha,grfields,tjavidi}@ucsd.edu)
Google Research (ghavamza@google.com)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

