Implicit Regularization in Matrix Sensing via Mirror
Descent
Fan Wu
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
fan.wu@stats.ox.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study discrete-time mirror descent applied to the unregularized empirical risk in
matrix sensing. In both the general case of rectangular matrices and the particular
case of positive semidefinite matrices, a simple potential-based analysis in terms of
the Bregman divergence allows us to establish convergence of mirror descent—with
different choices of the mirror maps—to a matrix that, among all global minimizers
of the empirical risk, minimizes a quantity explicitly related to the nuclear norm, the
Frobenius norm, and the von Neumann entropy. In both cases, this characterization
implies that mirror descent, a first-order algorithm minimizing the unregularized
empirical risk, recovers low-rank matrices under the same set of assumptions that
are sufficient to guarantee recovery for nuclear-norm minimization. When the
sensing matrices are symmetric and commute, we show that gradient descent with
full-rank factorized parametrization is a first-order approximation to mirror descent,
in which case we obtain an explicit characterization of the implicit bias of gradient
flow as a by-product.

1

Introduction

Matrix sensing represents a paradigm in modern statistics [8, 26, 27], with applications ranging from
image compression [2] to collaborative filtering [18] and dimensionality reduction [34], for instance.
0
The goal is to recover a rank-r matrix X? ∈ Rn×n from a set of linear measurements yi = hAi , X? i,
0
i = 1, . . . , m, where the sensing matrices Ai ∈ Rn×n are observed. This formulation includes the
problem of matrix completion, where a subset of the entries of the matrix X? is observed.
Most of the literature on matrix sensing is based on some form of explicit regularization or rank
constraint to encourage or enforce low-rankness of the estimated matrix. A popular approach is
based on minimizing the nuclear norm or on using explicit regularization techniques based on the
nuclear norm, e.g. [5, 15, 17, 23, 26, 27, 30]. Another popular approach is based on non-convex
0
optimization and the low-rank factorization X = UV> with matrices U ∈ Rn×r , V ∈ Rn ×r ,
where the factorization itself enforces the low-rankness of X, e.g. [7, 8, 16, 21, 22, 29, 31, 39].
The literature on implicit regularization for matrix sensing is more recent and less well developed.
When X? is assumed to be a positive semidefinite matrix, it was first empirically observed in [14]
that mininizing the unregularized empirical risk using vanilla gradient descent with parametrization
X = UU> and random full-rank initialization close to zero yields a low nuclear norm solution, even
when U ∈ Rn×n , i.e. when no constraint on the rank of X is enforced. It was later proved that,
with this parametrization, gradient descent minimizes the nuclear norm under the assumption that
the sensing matrices Ai ’s commute [14], or when the sensing matrices satisfy a restricted isometry
property [19]. Gradient descent with low-rank initialization within a specific “capture neighborhood”
has been studied in [9], which ensures that the iterates of the algorithm stay low-rank. When X?
is a general rectangular matrix, implicit regularization in matrix sensing has been studied through
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

