Lower Bounds on Metropolized Sampling Methods
for Well-Conditioned Distributions
Yin Tat Lee
University of Washington and Microsoft Research
yintat@uw.edu

Ruoqi Shen
University of Washington
shenr3@cs.washington.edu

Kevin Tian
Stanford University
kjtian@stanford.edu

Abstract
We give lower bounds on the performance of two of the most popular sampling
methods in practice, the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA) and
multi-step Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) with a leapfrog integrator, when applied to well-conditioned distributions. Our main result is a nearly-tight lower
e
bound of Ω(κd)
on the mixing time of MALA from an exponentially warm start,
matching a line of algorithmic results [DCWY18, CDWY19, LST20a] up to logarithmic factors and answering an open question of [CLA+ 20]. We also show that a
polynomial dependence on dimension is necessary for the relaxation time of HMC
under any number of leapfrog steps, and bound the gains achievable by changing
the step count. Our HMC analysis draws upon a novel connection between leapfrog
integration and Chebyshev polynomials, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a continuous distribution in high dimensions is a fundamental problem in algorithm
design. As sampling serves as a key subroutine in a variety of tasks in machine learning [AdFDJ03],
statistical methods [RC99], and scientific computing [Liu01], it is an important undertaking to
understand the complexity of sampling from families of distributions arising in applications.
The more restricted problem of sampling from a particular distribution family we call “wellconditioned” has garnered a substantial amount of recent research effort from the algorithmic learning
and statistics communities. This specific family is interesting for a number of reasons. First, it is
practically relevant: Bayesian methods have found increasing use in machine learning applications
[Bar12], and many distributions in these settings are well-conditioned, such as multivariate Gaussians,
mixture models with small separation, and densities arising from Bayesian logistic regression with a
Gaussian prior [DCWY18]. Moreover, for several widely-used sampler implementations in popular
packages [Aba16, CGH+ 17], such as the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA) and
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), the target having a small condition number is in some sense a
minimal assumption for known provable guarantees (discussed more thoroughly in Section 1.2).
Finally, the highly-documented success of first-order (gradient) methods in optimization [Bec17],
which are particularly favorable in the well-conditioned setting, has driven interest in connections
between optimization and sampling. Exploring this connection has been highly fruitful: since seminal
work of [JKO98], demonstrating that the Langevin dynamics which MALA and HMC discretize has
an interpretation as gradient descent on density space, a flurry of work [Dal17, CCBJ18, DCWY18,
DR18, DM19, DMM19, CDWY19, CV19, SL19, MMW+ 19, LST20a, LST20b, CLA+ 20] has ob35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

