Perturbation Theory for the Information Bottleneck

Vudtiwat Ngampruetikorn,* David J. Schwab
Initiative for the Theoretical Sciences, The Graduate Center, CUNY
* vngampruetikorn@gc.cuny.edu

Abstract
Extracting relevant information from data is crucial for all forms of learning. The
information bottleneck (IB) method formalizes this, offering a mathematically precise and conceptually appealing framework for understanding learning phenomena.
However the nonlinearity of the IB problem makes it computationally expensive
and analytically intractable in general. Here we derive a perturbation theory for the
IB method and report the first complete characterization of the learning onset—the
limit of maximum relevant information per bit extracted from data. We test our
results on synthetic probability distributions, finding good agreement with the
exact numerical solution near the onset of learning. We explore the difference and
subtleties in our derivation and previous attempts at deriving a perturbation theory
for the learning onset and attribute the discrepancy to a flawed assumption. Our
work also provides a fresh perspective on the intimate relationship between the IB
method and the strong data processing inequality.

1

Information Bottleneck

Extracting relevant information from data is crucial for all forms of learning. Animals are very
adept at isolating biologically useful information from complicated real-world sensory stimuli: for
example, we instinctively ignore pixel-level noise when looking for a face in a photo. A failure
to disregard irrelevant bits could lead to suboptimal generalization performance especially when
the data contains spurious correlations. For instance, an image classifier that relies on background
texture to identify objects is likely to fail when presented with a new image showing an object in an
‘unusual’ background (see, e.g., Refs [7, 30]). Understanding the principles behind the identification
and extraction of relevant bits is therefore of fundamental and practical importance.
Formalizing this aspect of learning, the information bottleneck (IB) method provides a precise notion
of relevance with respect to a prediction target: the relevant information in a source (𝑋) is the bits that
carry information about the target (𝑌 ) [26]. The relevant bits in 𝑋 are summarized in a representation
(𝑍) via a stochastic map defined by an encoder 𝑞(𝑧|𝑥), obeying the Markov constraint 𝑍 ↔ 𝑋 ↔𝑌 .1
In general a trade-off exists between the amount of discarded information (compression) and the
remaining relevant information in 𝑍 (prediction), thus motivating the IB cost function,2
𝐿 [𝑞(𝑧|𝑥)] = 𝐼 (𝑍; 𝑋) − 𝛽𝐼 (𝑍; 𝑌 ),

(1)

where 𝛽 > 0 denotes the trade-off parameter and 𝐼 ( 𝐴; 𝐵) the mutual information. The first term favors
succinct representations whereas the second encourages predictive ones. The IB loss is minimized by
the representations that are most predictive of 𝑌 at fixed compression, parametrized by the Lagrange
multiplier 𝛽 (see, Fig 1a).
The IB method offers a highly versatile framework with wide-ranging applications, including neural
coding [16], evolutionary population dynamics [22], statistical physics [9], clustering [25], deep
1 This Markov chain implies 𝑃
𝑌 |𝑋 ,𝑍 = 𝑃𝑌 |𝑋 and 𝑃 𝑍 |𝑋 ,𝑌 = 𝑃 𝑍 |𝑋 (see, e.g., Ref [6]).
2 The optimization problem involving Eq (1) first appeared in a different context (see, e.g., Ref [27]).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

