Aligning Pretraining for Detection via
Object-Level Contrastive Learning

Fangyun Wei∗

Yue Gao∗

Zhirong Wu

Han Hu

Stephen Lin

Microsoft Research Asia
{fawe, yuegao, wuzhiron, hanhu, stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Image-level contrastive representation learning has proven to be highly effective
as a generic model for transfer learning. Such generality for transfer learning,
however, sacrifices specificity if we are interested in a certain downstream task.
We argue that this could be sub-optimal and thus advocate a design principle
which encourages alignment between the self-supervised pretext task and the
downstream task. In this paper, we follow this principle with a pretraining method
specifically designed for the task of object detection. We attain alignment in
the following three aspects: 1) object-level representations are introduced via
selective search bounding boxes as object proposals; 2) the pretraining network
architecture incorporates the same dedicated modules used in the detection pipeline
(e.g. FPN); 3) the pretraining is equipped with object detection properties such
as object-level translation invariance and scale invariance. Our method, called
Selective Object COntrastive learning (SoCo), achieves state-of-the-art results for
transfer performance on COCO detection using a Mask R-CNN framework. Code
is available at https://github.com/hologerry/SoCo.

1

Introduction

Pretraining and finetuning has been the dominant paradigm of training deep neural networks in
computer vision. Downstream tasks usually leverage pretrained weights learned on large labeled
datasets such as ImageNet [1] for initialization. As a result, supervised ImageNet pretraining has been
prevalent throughout the field. Recently, self-supervised pretraining [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] has achieved
considerable progress and alleviated the dependency on labeled data. These methods aim to learn
generic visual representations for various downstream tasks by means of image-level pretext tasks,
such as instance discrimination. Some recent works [10, 11, 12, 13] observe that the image-level
representations are sub-optimal for dense prediction tasks such as object detection and semantic
segmentation. A potential reason is that image-level pretraining may overfit to holistic representations
and fail to learn properties that are important outside of image classification.
The goal of this work is to develop self-supervised pretraining that is aligned to object detection. In
object detection, bounding boxes are widely adopted as the representation for objects. Translation
and scale invariance for object detection are reflected by the location and size of the bounding boxes.
An obvious representation gap exists between image-level pretraining and the object-level bounding
boxes of object detection.
Motivated by this, we present an object-level self-supervised pretraining framework, called Selective
Object COntrastive learning (SoCo), specifically for the downstream task of object detection. To
introduce object-level representations into pretraining, SoCo utilizes off-the-shelf selective search [14]
to generate object proposals. Different from prior image-level contrastive learning methods which
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

