BulletTrain: Accelerating Robust Neural Network
Training via Boundary Example Mining

Weizhe Hua1 , Yichi Zhang1 , Chuan Guo2 , Zhiru Zhang1 , G. Edward Suh1,2
1
Cornell University, 2 Facebook AI Research
{wh399,yz2499,zhiruz,gs272}@cornell.edu, chuanguo@fb.com

Abstract
Neural network robustness has become a central topic in machine learning in
recent years. Most training algorithms that improve the model’s robustness to
adversarial and common corruptions also introduce a large computational overhead,
requiring as many as ten times the number of forward and backward passes in
order to converge. To combat this inefficiency, we propose BulletTrain — a
boundary example mining technique to drastically reduce the computational cost
of robust training. Our key observation is that only a small fraction of examples
are beneficial for improving robustness. BulletTrain dynamically predicts these
important examples and optimizes robust training algorithms to focus on the
important examples. We apply our technique to several existing robust training
algorithms and achieve a 2.2× speed-up for TRADES and MART on CIFAR-10
and a 1.7× speed-up for AugMix on CIFAR-10-C and CIFAR-100-C without any
reduction in clean and robust accuracy.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, the performance and capabilities of deep neural networks (DNNs) have improved
at an unprecedented pace. However, the reliability of DNNs is undermined by their lack of robustness
against common and adversarial corruptions, raising concerns about their use in safety-critical
applications such as autonomous driving (Amodei et al., 2016). Towards improving the robustness of
DNNs, a line of recent works proposed robust training by generating and learning from corrupted
examples in addition to clean examples (Cubuk et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2020;
Madry et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019b). While these methods have demonstrably
enhanced model robustness, they are also very costly to deploy since the overall training time can be
increased by up to ten times.
Hard negative example mining techniques have shown success in improving the convergence rates
of support vector machine (SVM) (Joachims, 1999), DNNs (Shrivastava et al., 2016), metric learning (Manmatha et al., 2017), and contrastive learning (Kalantidis et al., 2020). Particularly, SVM with
hard example mining maintains a working set of “hard” examples and alternates between training an
SVM to convergence on the working set and updating the working set, where the “hard” examples
are significant in that they violate the margins of the current model. Partly inspired by hard example
mining, we hypothesize that there exists a small subset of examples that is critical to improving the
robustness of the DNN model, so that reducing the computation of the remaining examples leads to a
significant reduction in run time without compromising the robustness of the model.
As depicted in Figure 1b, the essential idea is to predict and focus on the “important” subset of clean
samples based on their geometric distance to the decision boundary (i.e., margin) of the current
model. For example, the correctly classified clean examples with a large margin are unlikely to
help improving robustness as the corrupted examples generated from them are still likely to be
appropriately categorized by the model. We refer to “important” examples as boundary examples
since they are close to the decision boundary (e.g.,  in Figure 1b). After identifying the boundary
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

