Exploiting the Intrinsic Neighborhood Structure for
Source-free Domain Adaptation

Shiqi Yang1 , Yaxing Wang1,2∗, Joost van de Weijer1 , Luis Herranz1 , Shangling Jui3
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
2
PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{syang,yaxing,joost,lherranz}@cvc.uab.es, jui.shangling@huawei.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to alleviate the domain shift between source domain
and target domain. Most DA methods require access to the source data, but
often that is not possible (e.g. due to data privacy or intellectual property). In
this paper, we address the challenging source-free domain adaptation (SFDA)
problem, where the source pretrained model is adapted to the target domain in
the absence of source data. Our method is based on the observation that target
data, which might no longer align with the source domain classifier, still forms
clear clusters. We capture this intrinsic structure by defining local affinity of the
target data, and encourage label consistency among data with high local affinity.
We observe that higher affinity should be assigned to reciprocal neighbors, and
propose a self regularization loss to decrease the negative impact of noisy neighbors.
Furthermore, to aggregate information with more context, we consider expanded
neighborhoods with small affinity values. In the experimental results we verify that
the inherent structure of the target features is an important source of information
for domain adaptation. We demonstrate that this local structure can be efficiently
captured by considering the local neighbors, the reciprocal neighbors, and the
expanded neighborhood. Finally, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on
several 2D image and 3D point cloud recognition datasets. Code is available in
https://github.com/Albert0147/SFDA_neighbors.

1

Introduction

Most deep learning methods rely on training on large amount of labeled data, while they cannot
generalize well to a related yet different domain. One research direction to address this issue is
Domain Adaptation (DA), which aims to transfer learned knowledge from a source to a target domain.
Most existing DA methods demand labeled source data during the adaptation period, however, it
is often not practical that source data are always accessible, such as when applied on data with
privacy or property restrictions. Therefore, recently, there have emerged a few works [16, 17, 20, 21]
tackling a new challenging DA scenario where instead of source data only the source pretrained
model is available for adapting, i.e., source-free domain adaptation (SFDA). Among these methods,
USFDA [16] addresses universal DA [57] and SF [17] addresses open-set DA [36]. In both universal
and open-set DA the label set is different for source and target domains. SHOT [21] and 3C-GAN [20]
are for closed-set DA where source and target domains have the same categories. 3C-GAN [20] is
based on target-style image generation with a conditional GAN, and SHOT [21] is based on mutual
information maximization and pseudo labeling. Finally, BAIT [56] extends MCD [35] to the SFDA
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

