PCA Initialization for Approximate Message Passing
in Rotationally Invariant Models

Marco Mondelli
IST Austria
marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at

Ramji Venkataramanan
University of Cambridge
rv285@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating a rank-1 signal in the presence of rotationally
invariant noise—a class of perturbations more general than Gaussian noise. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) provides a natural estimator, and sharp results
on its performance have been obtained in the high-dimensional regime. Recently,
an Approximate Message Passing (AMP) algorithm has been proposed as an alternative estimator with the potential to improve the accuracy of PCA. However, the
existing analysis of AMP requires an initialization that is both correlated with the
signal and independent of the noise, which is often unrealistic in practice. In this
work, we combine the two methods, and propose to initialize AMP with PCA. Our
main result is a rigorous asymptotic characterization of the performance of this
estimator. Both the AMP algorithm and its analysis differ from those previously
derived in the Gaussian setting: at every iteration, our AMP algorithm requires a
specific term to account for PCA initialization, while in the Gaussian case, PCA
initialization affects only the first iteration of AMP. The proof is based on a twophase artificial AMP that first approximates the PCA estimator and then mimics
the true AMP. Our numerical simulations show an excellent agreement between
AMP results and theoretical predictions, and suggest an interesting open direction
on achieving Bayes-optimal performance.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of estimating a rank-1 signal from a noisy data matrix. In the square
symmetric case, the data matrix is modeled as
α
X = u∗ u∗ T + W ∈ Rn×n ,
(1.1)
n
where u∗ ∈ Rn is the unknown rank-1 signal, W ∈ Rn×n is a symmetric noise matrix, and α > 0
captures the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In the rectangular case, we observe the data matrix
α
X = u∗ v ∗ T + W ∈ Rm×n ,
(1.2)
m
where u∗ ∈ Rm and v ∗ ∈ Rn are the unknown signals, and W ∈ Rm×n is a rectangular noise matrix.
A natural estimator of the signal in the symmetric case is the principal eigenvector of X (singular
vectors, in the rectangular case). The performance of this principal component analysis (PCA)
estimator and, more generally, the behavior of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of models like (1.1)-(1.2)
has been widely studied in statistics [27, 49] and random matrix theory [2, 3, 10, 11, 15, 22, 30].
If u∗ , v ∗ are unstructured (e.g., they are uniformly distributed on a sphere), then it is not generally
possible to improve on the PCA estimator. However, in a broad range of applications, the unknown
signals have some underlying structure, e.g., they may be sparse, their entries may belong to a certain
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

