Moiré Attack (MA): A New Potential Risk of
Screen Photos
Dantong Niu1∗ Ruohao Guo2
Yisen Wang3,4†
1
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
2
College of Information and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural University
3
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Images, captured by a camera, play a critical role in training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Usually, we assume the images acquired by cameras are consistent
with the ones perceived by human eyes. However, due to the different physical
mechanisms between human-vision and computer-vision systems, the final perceived images could be very different in some cases, for example shooting on
digital monitors. In this paper, we find a special phenomenon in digital image
processing, the moiré effect, that could cause unnoticed security threats to DNNs.
Based on it, we propose a Moiré Attack (MA) that generates the physical-world
moiré pattern adding to the images by mimicking the shooting process of digital devices. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed digital Moiré
Attack (MA) is a perfect camouflage for attackers to tamper with DNNs with a
high success rate (100.0% for untargeted and 97.0% for targeted attack with the
noise budget  = 4), high transferability rate across different models, and high
robustness under various defenses. Furthermore, MA owns great stealthiness because the moiré effect is unavoidable due to the camera’s inner physical structure,
which therefore hardly attracts the awareness of humans. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Dantong88/Moire_Attack.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) present huge potential in solving varies of vision tasks such as image
classification [19], instance segmentation [18], and object detection [32]. While such algorithms
bring huge productivity and greatly facilitate the daily life of humans, security risks also arise. It was
first revealed by Szegedy et al. [38] that small and imperceptible to human eyes perturbation on the
inputs can totally fool a DNN model and dramatically alter the results [14]. Since then, large amounts
of studies [14, 24, 22, 23, 10, 29, 11] have focused on crafting adversarial examples to mislead DNNs
to make wrong predictions which is called adversarial attack.
In the application of DNNs, an assumption are usually assumed that image samples used in the test
phase should follow the same distribution of the training data. However, in real-world applications, the
image samples are usually captured by various sensors (cameras, scanners, etc.) in different conditions
(light, angles, etc.). Such differences are reasonable to human eyes while may confuse a seemed
robust DNN. Especially, under some situations, the strange distortions beyond the commonly used
data augmentation methods may severely decrease its accuracy. One of such non-typical distortion we
focus on in this paper is moiré pattern, an artifact caused by interference of overlapping lines, grids
∗
†

Work was done during an internship at Peking University.
Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

