When in Doubt: Neural Non-Parametric Uncertainty
Quantification for Epidemic Forecasting

Harshavardhan Kamarthi Lingkai Kong Alexander Rodríguez
Chao Zhang B. Aditya Prakash
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
{harsha.pk,lkkong,arodriguezc,chaozhang,badityap}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Accurate and trustworthy epidemic forecasting is an important problem for public
health planning and disease mitigation. Most existing epidemic forecasting models
disregard uncertainty quantification, resulting in mis-calibrated predictions. Recent
works in deep neural models for uncertainty-aware time-series forecasting also
have several limitations; e.g., it is difficult to specify proper priors in Bayesian
NNs, while methods like deep ensembling can be computationally expensive. In
this paper, we propose to use neural functional processes to fill this gap. We model
epidemic time-series with a probabilistic generative process and propose a functional neural process model called E PI FNP, which directly models the probability
distribution of the forecast value in a non-parametric way. In E PI FNP, we use a
dynamic stochastic correlation graph to model the correlations between sequences,
and design different stochastic latent variables to capture functional uncertainty
from different perspectives. Our experiments in a real-time flu forecasting setting show that E PI FNP significantly outperforms state-of-the-art models in both
accuracy and calibration metrics, up to 2.5x in accuracy and 2.4x in calibration.
Additionally, as E PI FNP learns the relations between the current season and similar
patterns of historical seasons, it enables interpretable forecasts. Beyond epidemic
forecasting, E PI FNP can be of independent interest for advancing uncertainty
quantification in deep sequential models for predictive analytics.

1

Introduction

Infectious diseases like seasonal influenza and COVID-19 are major global health issues, affecting
millions of people [14, 34]. Forecasting disease time-series (such as infected cases) at various
temporal and spatial resolutions is a non-trivial and important task [34]. Estimating various indicators
e.g. future incidence, peak time/intensity and onset, gives policy makers valuable lead time to plan
interventions and optimize supply chain decisions, as evidenced by various Centers for Disease
Control (CDC) prediction initiatives for diseases like dengue, influenza and COVID-19 [33, 16, 30].
Statistical approaches [5] for the forecasting problem are fairly new compared to more traditional
mechanistic approaches [13, 38]. While valuable for ‘what-if’ scenario generation, mechanistic
models have several issues in real-time forecasting. For example, they cannot easily leverage data
from multiple indicators or predict composite signals. In contrast, deep learning approaches in this
context are a novel direction and have become increasingly promising, as they can ingest numerous
data signals without laborious feature engineering [37, 33, 1, 8].
However, there are several challenges in designing such methods, primarily with the need to handle
uncertainty to give more reliable forecasts [14]. Decision makers need to understand the inherent
uncertainty in the forecasts so that they can make robust decisions [32]. Providing probabilistic
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

