Learning Knowledge Graph-based
World Models of Textual Environments
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
raj.ammanabrolu@gatech.edu

Mark O. Riedl
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
riedl@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
World models improve a learning agent’s ability to efficiently operate in interactive
and situated environments. This work focuses on the task of building world models
of text-based game environments. Text-based games, or interactive narratives,
are reinforcement learning environments in which agents perceive and interact
with the world using textual natural language. These environments contain long,
multi-step puzzles or quests woven through a world that is filled with hundreds
of characters, locations, and objects. Our world model learns to simultaneously:
(1) predict changes in the world caused by an agent’s actions when representing
the world as a knowledge graph; and (2) generate the set of contextually relevant
natural language actions required to operate in the world. We frame this task as
a Set of Sequences generation problem by exploiting the inherent structure of
knowledge graphs and actions and introduce both a transformer-based multi-task
architecture and a loss function to train it. A zero-shot ablation study on neverbefore-seen textual worlds shows that our methodology significantly outperforms
existing textual world modeling techniques as well as the importance of each of
our contributions.

1

Introduction

World models, often in the form of probabilistic generative models, are used in conjunction with
model-based reinforcement learning to improve a learning agent’s ability to operate in various
environments [33, 7]. They are inspired by human cognitive processes [15], with a key hypothesis
being that the ability to predict how the world will change in response to one’s actions will help you
better plan what actions to take [12]. Evidence towards this hypothesis comes in the form of studies
showing that simulating trajectories using internal learned models of the world improves sample
efficiency in learning to operate in an environment [12, 30].
Text-based games, in which players perceive and interact with the world entirely through textual
natural language, are environments that provide new challenges for world model approaches. Textbased games are structured as long puzzles or quests that can only be solved by navigating and
interacting with potentially hundreds of locations, characters, and objects. The puzzle-like structures
to the games are exacerbated by two factors. First, these environments are partially observable,
i.e. observations of the world are incomplete. Second, the agent faces a combinatorially-sized
action space of the order of O(1014 ) possible actions at every step. For these reasons model-free
reinforcement learning in text-based games is extremely data inefficient.
Prior work on text-based game playing agents repeatedly demonstrated that providing agents with
structured memory in the form of knowledge graphs (sets of hs, r, oi tuples such that s is a subject, r
is a relation, and o is an object) is critical in enabling them to operate in and model these worlds [3,
21, 1, 2]—aiding in both the challenges mentioned. These works all rely on extracting information
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

