Multiclass Boosting and the Cost of Weak Learning

Nataly Brukhim
Princeton University
Google AI Princeton
nbrukhim@princeton.edu
Shay Moran
Technion
Google Research
smoran@technion.ac.il

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Google AI Princeton
ehazan@princeton.edu

Indraneel Mukherjee
indraneel.mukherjee@protonmail.com

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
Boosting is an algorithmic approach which is based on the idea of combining weak
and moderately inaccurate hypotheses to a strong and accurate one. In this work
we study multiclass boosting with a possibly large number of classes or categories.
Multiclass boosting can be formulated in various ways. Here, we focus on an
especially natural formulation in which the weak hypotheses are assumed to belong
to an “easy-to-learn” base class, and the weak learner is an agnostic PAC learner
for that class with respect to the standard classification loss. This is in contrast with
other, more complicated losses as have often been considered in the past. The goal
of the overall boosting algorithm is then to learn a combination of weak hypotheses
by repeatedly calling the weak learner.
We study the resources required for boosting, especially how they depend on the
number of classes k, for both the booster and weak learner. We find that the
boosting algorithm itself only requires O(log k) samples, as we show by analyzing
a variant of AdaBoost for our setting. In stark contrast, assuming typical limits on
the number of weak-learner calls, we prove that the number of samples required
by a weak learner is at least polynomial in k, exponentially more than the number
of samples needed by the booster. Alternatively, we prove that the weak learner’s
accuracy parameter must be smaller than an inverse polynomial in k, showing that
the returned weak hypotheses must be nearly the best in their class when k is large.
We also prove a trade-off between number of oracle calls and the resources required
of the weak learner, meaning that the fewer calls to the weak learner the more that
is demanded on each call.

1

Introduction

Boosting [16] is a fundamental primitive in machine learning, most widely studied and applied in
the context of binary supervised learning. Yet many important problems require classification into a
great many target classes. For example, in image object recognition and building language models,
the number of classes scales as the number of possible objects, or the dictionary size, respectively. It
is thus of practical as well as theoretical interest to generalize boosting to the multiclass setting.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

