FjORD: Fair and Accurate Federated Learning
under heterogeneous targets with Ordered Dropout

Samuel Horváth∗
KAUST†
Thuwal, KSA
samuel.horvath@kaust.edu.sa

Stefanos Laskaridis∗
Samsung AI Center
Cambridge, UK
mail@stefanos.cc

Mario Almeida∗
Samsung AI Center
Cambridge, UK
mario.a@samsung.com

Ilias Leontiadis
Samsung AI Center
Cambridge, UK
i.leontiadis@samsung.com

Stylianos I. Venieris
Samsung AI Center
Cambridge, UK
s.venieris@samsung.com

Nicholas D. Lane
Samsung AI Center &
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
nic.lane@samsung.com

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has been gaining significant traction across different ML
tasks, ranging from vision to keyboard predictions. In large-scale deployments,
client heterogeneity is a fact and constitutes a primary problem for fairness, training
performance and accuracy. Although significant efforts have been made into
tackling statistical data heterogeneity, the diversity in the processing capabilities
and network bandwidth of clients, termed as system heterogeneity, has remained
largely unexplored. Current solutions either disregard a large portion of available
devices or set a uniform limit on the model’s capacity, restricted by the least capable
participants. In this work, we introduce Ordered Dropout, a mechanism that
achieves an ordered, nested representation of knowledge in deep neural networks
(DNNs) and enables the extraction of lower footprint submodels without the need of
retraining. We further show that for linear maps our Ordered Dropout is equivalent
to SVD. We employ this technique, along with a self-distillation methodology, in
the realm of FL in a framework called FjORD. FjORD alleviates the problem of
client system heterogeneity by tailoring the model width to the client’s capabilities.
Extensive evaluation on both CNNs and RNNs across diverse modalities shows
that FjORD consistently leads to significant performance gains over state-of-the-art
baselines, while maintaining its nested structure.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, advances in deep learning have revolutionised the way we interact with everyday devices. Much of this success relies on the availability of large-scale training infrastructures and
the collection of vast amounts of training data. However, users and providers are becoming increasingly aware of the privacy implications of this ever-increasing data collection, leading to the creation
of various privacy-preserving initiatives by service providers [3] and government regulators [10].
Federated Learning (FL) [46] is a relatively new subfield of machine learning (ML) that allows
the training of models without the data leaving the users’ devices; instead, FL allows users to
collaboratively train a model by moving the computation to them. At each round, participating
devices download the latest model and compute an updated model using their local data. These locally
trained models are then sent from the participating devices back to a central server where updates are
∗
†

Indicates equal contribution.
Work while intern at Samsung AI Center.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

