Causal-BALD: Deep Bayesian Active Learning of
Outcomes to Infer Treatment-Effects from
Observational Data
Andrew Jesson∗
OATML
University of Oxford

Panagiotis Tigas*
OATML
University of Oxford

Joost van Amersfoort
OATML
University of Oxford

Uri Shalit
Machine Learning and Causal Inference in Healthcare Lab
Technion

Andreas Kirsch
OATML
University of Oxford

Yarin Gal
OATML
University of Oxford

Abstract
Estimating personalized treatment effects from high-dimensional observational data
is essential in situations where experimental designs are infeasible, unethical, or
expensive. Existing approaches rely on fitting deep models on outcomes observed
for treated and control populations. However, when measuring individual outcomes
is costly, as is the case of a tumor biopsy, a sample-efficient strategy for acquiring
each result is required. Deep Bayesian active learning provides a framework
for efficient data acquisition by selecting points with high uncertainty. However,
existing methods bias training data acquisition towards regions of non-overlapping
support between the treated and control populations. These are not sample-efficient
because the treatment effect is not identifiable in such regions. We introduce
causal, Bayesian acquisition functions grounded in information theory that bias data
acquisition towards regions with overlapping support to maximize sample efficiency
for learning personalized treatment effects. We demonstrate the performance of the
proposed acquisition strategies on synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets IHDP and
CMNIST and their extensions, which aim to simulate common dataset biases and
pathologies.

1

Introduction

How will a patient’s health be affected by taking a medication [37]? How will a user’s question be
answered by a search recommendation [34]? We can gain insight into these questions by learning
about personalized treatment effects. Estimating personalized treatment effects from observational
data is essential when experimental designs are infeasible, unethical, or expensive. Observational
data represent a population of individuals described by a set of pre-treatment covariates (age, blood
pressure, socioeconomic status), an assigned treatment (medication, no medication), and a posttreatment outcome (severity of migraines). An ideal personalized treatment effect is the difference
between the post-treatment outcome if the individual receives treatment and the post-treatment
outcome if they do not receive treatment. However, it is impossible to observe both outcomes for an
individual; therefore, the difference is estimated between populations instead. In the setting of binary
treatments, data belong to either the treatment group (individuals that received the treatment) or the
control group (individuals who did not). The personalized treatment effect is the expected difference
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {andrew.jesson, panagiotis.tigas}@cs.ox.ac.uk

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

