Reward-Free Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
with Linear Function Approximation

Weitong Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
weightzero@cs.ucla.edu

Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the model-based reward-free reinforcement learning with linear function
approximation for episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs). In this setting,
the agent works in two phases. In the exploration phase, the agent interacts with
the environment and collects samples without the reward. In the planning phase,
the agent is given a specific reward function and uses samples collected from the
exploration phase to learn a good policy. We propose a new provably efficient
algorithm, called UCRL-RFE under the Linear Mixture MDP assumption, where
the transition probability kernel of the MDP can be parameterized by a linear
function over certain feature mappings defined on the triplet of state, action, and
next state. We show that to obtain an ϵ-optimal policy for arbitrary reward function,
e 5 d2 ϵ−2 ) episodes during the exploration
UCRL-RFE needs to sample at most O(H
phase. Here, H is the length of the episode, d is the dimension of the feature
mapping. We also propose a variant of UCRL-RFE using Bernstein-type bonus and
show that it needs to sample at most e
O(H 4 d(H + d)ϵ−2 ) to achieve an ϵ-optimal
policy. By constructing a special class of linear Mixture MDPs, we also prove that
for any reward-free algorithm, it needs to sample at least e
Ω(H 2 dϵ−2 ) episodes to
obtain an ϵ-optimal policy. Our upper bound matches the lower bound in terms of
the dependence on ϵ and the dependence on d if H ≥ d.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the agent sequentially interacts with the environment and receives
reward from it. In many real-world RL problems, the reward function is manually designed to
encourage the desired behavior of the agent. Thus, engineers have to change the reward function time
by time and train the agent to check whether it has achieved the desired behavior. In this case, RL
algorithms need to be repeatedly executed with different reward functions and are therefore sample
inefficient or even intractable. To tackle this challenge, Jin et al. [9] proposed a new reinforcement
learning paradigm called Reward-Free Exploration (RFE), which explores the environment without
using any reward function. In detail, the reward-free RL algorithm consists of two phases. The first
phase is called Exploration Phase, where the algorithm explores the environment without receiving
reward signals. The second phase is called Planning Phase, where the algorithm is given a specific
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

