Learning Signal-Agnostic Manifolds of Neural Fields

Yilun Du1

Katherine Collins1,2

Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,2,3

Vincent Sitzmann1

yilundu@mit.edu

katiemc@mit.edu

jbt@mit.edu

sitzmann@mit.edu

1

MIT CSAIL 2 MIT BCS 3 MIT CBMM
https://yilundu.github.io/gem/

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been used widely to learn the latent structure of datasets,
across modalities such as images, shapes, and audio signals. However, existing
models are generally modality-dependent, requiring custom architectures and
objectives to process different classes of signals. We leverage neural fields to
capture the underlying structure in image, shape, audio and cross-modal audiovisual
domains in a modality-independent manner. We cast our task as one of learning
a manifold, where we aim to infer a low-dimensional, locally linear subspace in
which our data resides. By enforcing coverage of the manifold, local linearity, and
local isometry, our model — dubbed GEM — learns to capture the underlying
structure of datasets across modalities. We can then travel along linear regions of
our manifold to obtain perceptually consistent interpolations between samples, and
can further use GEM to recover points on our manifold and glean not only diverse
completions of input images, but cross-modal hallucinations of audio or image
signals. Finally, we show that by walking across the underlying manifold of GEM,
we may generate new samples in our signal domains1 .

1

Introduction

Every moment, we receive and perceive high-dimensional signals from the world around us. These
signals are in constant flux; yet remarkably, our perception system is largely invariant to these
changes, allowing us to efficiently infer the presence of coherent objects and entities across time.
One hypothesis for how we achieve this invariance is that we infer the underlying manifold in which
perceptual inputs lie [1], naturally enabling us to link high-dimensional perceptual changes with
local movements along such a manifold. In this paper, we study how we may learn and discover a
low-dimensional manifold in a signal-agnostic manner, over arbitrary perceptual inputs.
Manifolds are characterized by three core properties [2, 3]. First, a manifold should exhibit data
coverage, i.e., all instances and variations of a signal are explained in the underlying low-dimensional
space. Second, a manifold should be locally metric, enabling perceptual manipulation of a signal
by moving around the surrounding low-dimensional space. Finally, the underlying structure of a
manifold should be globally-consistent; e.g. similar signals should be embedded close to one another.
Existing approaches to learning generative models, such as GANs [4], can be viewed as instances of
manifold learning. However, such approaches have two key limitations. First, low-dimensional latent
codes learned by generative models do not satisfy all desired properties for a manifold; while the
underlying latent space of a GAN enables us to perceptually manipulate a signal, GANs suffer from
mode collapse, and the underlying latent space does not cover the entire data distribution. Second,
existing generative architectures are biased towards particular signal modalities, requiring custom
architectures and losses depending on the domain upon which they are applied – thereby preventing
us from discovering a manifold across arbitrary perceptual inputs in a signal-agnostic manner.
1

Code and additional results are available at https://yilundu.github.io/gem/.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

