Do Neural Optimal Transport Solvers Work?
A Continuous Wasserstein-2 Benchmark
Lingxiao Li
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
lingxiao@mit.edu

Alexander Korotin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
a.korotin@skoltech.ru
Aude Genevay
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
aude.genevay@gmail.com
Alexander Filippov
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Moscow, Russia
filippov.alexander@huawei.com

Justin Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
jsolomon@mit.edu
Evgeny Burnaev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Despite the recent popularity of neural network-based solvers for optimal transport
(OT), there is no standard quantitative way to evaluate their performance. In this
paper, we address this issue for quadratic-cost transport—specifically, computation
of the Wasserstein-2 distance, a commonly-used formulation of optimal transport in
machine learning. To overcome the challenge of computing ground truth transport
maps between continuous measures needed to assess these solvers, we use inputconvex neural networks (ICNN) to construct pairs of measures whose ground truth
OT maps can be obtained analytically. This strategy yields pairs of continuous
benchmark measures in high-dimensional spaces such as spaces of images. We
thoroughly evaluate existing optimal transport solvers using these benchmark
measures. Even though these solvers perform well in downstream tasks, many
do not faithfully recover optimal transport maps. To investigate the cause of this
discrepancy, we further test the solvers in a setting of image generation. Our study
reveals crucial limitations of existing solvers and shows that increased OT accuracy
does not necessarily correlate to better results downstream.
Solving optimal transport (OT) with continuous methods has become widespread in machine learning,
including methods for large-scale OT [11, 36] and the popular Wasserstein Generative Adversarial
Network (W-GAN) [3, 12]. Rather than discretizing the problem [31], continuous OT algorithms use
neural networks or kernel expansions to estimate transport maps or dual solutions. This helps scale OT
to large-scale and higher-dimensional problems not handled by discrete methods. Notable successes
of continuous OT are in generative modeling [42, 20, 19, 7] and domain adaptation [43, 37, 25].
In these applications, OT is typically incorporated as part of the loss terms for a neural network
model. For example, in W-GANs, the OT cost is used as a loss function for the generator; the
model incorporates a neural network-based OT solver to estimate the loss. Although recent W-GANs
provide state-of-the-art generative performance, however, it remains unclear to which extent this
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

