Learning with Labeling Induced Abstentions
Kareem Amin
Google Research
New York, NY
kamin@google.com

Giulia DeSalvo
Google Research
New York, NY
giuliad@google.com

Afshin Rostamizadeh
Google Research
New York, NY
rostami@google.com

Abstract
Consider a setting where we wish to automate an expensive task with a machine
learning algorithm using a limited labeling resource. In such settings, examples
routed for labeling are often out of scope for the machine learning algorithm. For
example, in a spam detection setting, human reviewers not only provide labeled
data but are such high-quality detectors of spam that examples routed to them no
longer require machine evaluation. As a consequence, the distribution of examples
routed to the machine is intimately tied to the process generating labels. We
introduce a formalization of this setting, and give an algorithm that simultaneously
learns a model and decides when to request a label by leveraging ideas from both
the abstention and active learning literatures. We prove an upper bound on the
algorithm’s label complexity and a matching lower bound for any algorithm in this
setting. We conduct a thorough set of experiments including an ablation study to
test different components of our algorithm. We demonstrate the effectiveness of an
efficient version of our algorithm over margin sampling on a variety of datasets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a system that relies on automated predictions made by a machine learning
model. We assume this system has a limited budget for requesting ground-truth labels (e.g. from a
domain expert). In practice, such request can be used, among other purposes, to gather additional
training data for the machine learning model. If the system asks for a label for an example, then it no
longer needs the model’s prediction for that particular example. Thus, the pattern of label queries
effectively defines the distribution that the model will learn with and predict on.
Take for example a large-scale video-hosting website. The website wants to automatically detect
videos that violate its community guidelines. In order to acquire labels for this task, some of
these videos are evaluated by a finite pool of human reviewers. There are two consequences of
this evaluation. Firstly, the reviewer provides a training label for the model. Secondly, the human
intervention makes it so that the machine learning algorithm is no longer tasked with making
predictions on these examples. As a result, the goal is then optimize the the model’s performance in
the domain where it will be executed.
We take the perspective of a system designer who wants to understand (and optimize for) the
performance of the automated system on the examples that it will be asked to evaluate. Let r : X !
{0, 1} be a rule governing whether the system requests a label for x 2 X . Let h : X ! R be a
hypothesis describing the automated system. We seek to minimize E[L(h(x), y) | r(x) = 0], where
L is a loss function. We can think of this setting as combining the objective studied in abstention
learning (minimizing E[L(h(x), y) | r(x) = 0]) with the feedback model studied in active learning
(labels are only available when r(x) = 1). We introduce a new framework, which we call dual
purpose learning framework, that combines these elements.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

