Smoothness Matrices Beat Smoothness Constants:
Better Communication Compression Techniques for
Distributed Optimization

Mher Safaryan
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
mher.safaryan.1@kaust.edu.sa

Filip Hanzely
TTIC, United States
fhanzely@gmail.com

Peter Richtárik
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Large scale distributed optimization has become the default tool for the training
of supervised machine learning models with a large number of parameters and
training data. Recent advancements in the field provide several mechanisms for
speeding up the training, including compressed communication, variance reduction
and acceleration. However, none of these methods is capable of exploiting the
inherently rich data-dependent smoothness structure of the local losses beyond standard smoothness constants. In this paper, we argue that when training supervised
models, smoothness matrices—information-rich generalizations of the ubiquitous
smoothness constants—can and should be exploited for further dramatic gains, both
in theory and practice. In order to further alleviate the communication burden inherent in distributed optimization, we propose a novel communication sparsification
strategy that can take full advantage of the smoothness matrices associated with
local losses. To showcase the power of this tool, we describe how our sparsification
technique can be adapted to three distributed optimization algorithms—DCGD
[Khirirat et al., 2018], DIANA [Mishchenko et al., 2019] and ADIANA [Li et al.,
2020]—yielding significant savings in terms of communication complexity. The
new methods always outperform the baselines, often dramatically so.

1

Introduction

With the desire to build and train high quality machine learning models comes an increased appetite
for larger models, both in terms of the number of parameters encoding them, and in the amount
of data required to train them. In the big data regime, the data is partitioned among many parallel
machines, which then cooperatively train a single global model, usually orchestrated by a central
server. Distributed training is cast as the distributed optimization problem
min f (x) + R(x),

x∈Rd

f (x) := n1

n
P

fi (x),

(1)

i=1

where d is the number of parameters of model x ∈ Rd , n is the number of machines participating
in the training, fi (x) is the loss associated with the data stored on machine i ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n},
f (x) is the empirical loss, and R(x) is a regularizer. Ample research over the past two decades
has shown that first-order methods are highly scalable and as a result are the methods of choice for
distributed optimization problems [Liu and Zhang, 2020]. In particular, a substantial amount of work
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

