Label consistency in overfitted generalized k-means

Linfan Zhang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
linfanz@g.ucla.edu

Arash A. Amini
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
aaamini@ucla.edu

Abstract
We provide theoretical guarantees for label consistency in generalized k-means
problems, with an emphasis on the overfitted case where the number of clusters
used by the algorithm is more than the ground truth. We provide conditions under
which the estimated labels are close to a refinement of the true cluster labels. We
consider both exact and approximate recovery of the labels. Our results hold for
any constant-factor approximation to the k-means problem. The results are also
model-free and only based on bounds on the maximum or average distance of the
data points to the true cluster centers. These centers themselves are loosely defined
and can be taken to be any set of points for which the aforementioned distances
can be controlled. We show the usefulness of the results with applications to some
manifold clustering problems.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of clustering data points sampled according to some probability measure µ
from a normed space X with norm k · kX . In the ideal setting, the generalized k-means clustering
minimizes the population cost function
Z
1/p
Q(ξ; µ) :=
min kx − ξ` kpX dµ(x)
(1)
1≤`≤L

L

where ξ = (ξ1 , . . . , ξL ) ∈ X is a set of L vectors in X , for some fixed integer L. In practical data
analysis, we are given a sample {x1 , . . . , xn } drawn from µ and solve an empirical version of (1),
namely,
b
Q(ξ) = Q(ξ; Pn ) :=

n
1 X

min kxi − ξ` kpX

n i=1 1≤`≤L

1/p

.

(2)

Pn
Here, Pn := n1 i=1 δxi is the empirical measure associated with the sample and δx is the point
mass measure at x. The minimizer of b
Q(·) over X L is denoted as ξb = (ξb1 , . . . , ξbL ) and each point xi
is assigned a cluster label zbi := argmin` kxi − ξb` kX .
Meanwhile, we assume that each data point xi also has a true cluster label zi ∈ [K] := {1, . . . , K}
which is determined solely by an unknown data-generating process. These true labels are not
necessarily related to the optimal solutions of (1) or (2). To distinguish the two, we refer to the
clustering induced by (zi ) as the true clustering, while a clustering that minimizes the generalized
k-means cost function (2), i.e., the clustering induced by (b
zi ), is referred to as an optimal k-means
clustering. In this paper, we consider the label consistency problem, that is, how close the labels
(b
zi ) estimated by k-means clustering are to the true labels (zi ). Note that we allow the number of
k-means clusters L to be different from the true number of clusters K.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

