A Trainable Spectral-Spatial Sparse Coding Model
for Hyperspectral Image Restoration

Théo Bodrito∗, Alexandre Zouaoui∗, Jocelyn Chanussot, and Julien Mairal
Inria, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Hyperspectral imaging offers new perspectives for diverse applications, ranging
from the monitoring of the environment using airborne or satellite remote sensing,
precision farming, food safety, planetary exploration, or astrophysics. Unfortunately, the spectral diversity of information comes at the expense of various sources
of degradation, and the lack of accurate ground-truth “clean” hyperspectral signals
acquired on the spot makes restoration tasks challenging. In particular, training
deep neural networks for restoration is difficult, in contrast to traditional RGB
imaging problems where deep models tend to shine. In this paper, we advocate
instead for a hybrid approach based on sparse coding principles that retains the interpretability of classical techniques encoding domain knowledge with handcrafted
image priors, while allowing to train model parameters end-to-end without massive
amounts of data. We show on various denoising benchmarks that our method is
computationally efficient and significantly outperforms the state of the art. 1

1

Introduction

Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) enables measurements of the electromagnetic spectrum of a scene on
multiple bands (typically about a hundred or more), which offers many perspectives over traditional
color RGB imaging. For instance, the high-dimensional information present in a single pixel is
sometimes sufficient to identify the signature of a particular material, which is of course infeasible
in the RGB domain. Not surprisingly, hyperspectral imaging is then of utmost importance and
has a huge number of scientific and technological applications such as remote sensing [8, 22, 46],
quality evaluation of food products [16, 19, 35], medical imaging [2, 18, 37], agriculture and forestry
[1, 36, 40], microscopy imaging in biology [25, 56], or exoplanet detection in astronomy [24].
Information contained in hyperspectral signals is much richer than in RGB images, but the price to
pay is the need to deal with complex degradations that may arise from multiple sources, including
sparse noise with specific patterns (stripes), in addition to photon and thermal noise [29, 51]. As a
consequence, HSI denoising is a crucial pre-processing step to enhance the image quality before
using data in downstream tasks such as semantic segmentation or spectral unmixing [30]. A second
issue is the lack of large-scale collection of ground-truth high-quality signals and the large diversity of
sensor types, which makes it particularly challenging to train machine learning models for restoration
such as convolutional neural networks. To deal with the scarcity of ground-truth data, most successful
approaches typically encode strong prior knowledge about data within the model architecture, which
may be low-rank representations of input patches [17, 23, 53, 60, 70], sparse coding [13, 21, 23], or
image self-similarities [39, 49, 71], which have proven to be very powerful in the RGB domain [9].
∗
1

Equal contribution
Code is available at https://github.com/inria-thoth/T3SC.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

