Score-based Generative Neural Networks for
Large-Scale Optimal Transport

Max Daniels
Northeastern University
daniels.g@northeastern.edu

Tyler Maunu ∗
Brandeis University
maunu@brandeis.edu

Paul Hand
Northeastern University
p.hand@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We consider the fundamental problem of sampling the optimal transport coupling
between given source and target distributions. In certain cases, the optimal transport
plan takes the form of a one-to-one mapping from the source support to the
target support, but learning or even approximating such a map is computationally
challenging for large and high-dimensional datasets due to the high cost of linear
programming routines and an intrinsic curse of dimensionality. We study instead
the Sinkhorn problem, a regularized form of optimal transport whose solutions are
couplings between the source and the target distribution. We introduce a novel
framework for learning the Sinkhorn coupling between two distributions in the
form of a score-based generative model. Conditioned on source data, our procedure
iterates Langevin Dynamics to sample target data according to the regularized
optimal coupling. Key to this approach is a neural network parametrization of the
Sinkhorn problem, and we prove convergence of gradient descent with respect to
network parameters in this formulation. We demonstrate its empirical success on a
variety of large scale optimal transport tasks.

1

Introduction

It is often useful to compare two data distributions by computing a distance between them in some
appropriate metric. For instance, statistical distances can be used to fit the parameters of a distribution
to match some given data. Comparison of statistical distances can also enable distribution testing,
quantification of distribution shifts, and provide methods to correct for distribution shift through
domain adaptation [12].
Optimal transport theory provides a rich set of tools for comparing distributions in Wasserstein
Distance. Intuitively, an optimal transport plan from a source distribution σ ∈ M+ (X ) to a target
distribution τ ∈ M+ (Y) is a blueprint for transporting the mass of σ to match that of τ as cheaply as
possible with respect to some ground cost. Here, X and Y are compact metric spaces and M+ (X )
denotes the set of positive Radon measures over X , and it is assumed that σ, τ are supported over all
of X , Y respectively. The Wasserstein Distance between two distributions is defined to be the cost of
an optimal transport plan.
Because the ground cost can incorporate underlying geometry of the data space, optimal transport
plans often provide a meaningful correspondence between points in X and Y. A famous example
is given by Brenier’s Theorem, which states that, when X , Y ⊆ Rd and σ, τ have finite variance,
the optimal transport plan under a squared-l2 ground cost is realized by a map T : X → Y [26,
Theorem 2.12]. However, it is often computationally challenging to exactly compute optimal transport
plans, as one must exactly solve a linear program requiring time which is super-quadratic in the size
of input datasets [5].
∗

Work done while an Instructor in Applied Mathematics at MIT.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

