Adaptive Denoising via GainTuning
Sreyas Mohan1 , Joshua L. Vincent2 , Ramon Manzorro2 , Peter A. Crozier 2 ,
Carlos Fernandez-Granda1,3 , Eero P. Simoncelli1,3,4
Center For Data Science, NYU,
School for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy, ASU
3
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU
4
Center for Neural Science, NYU and Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
1

2

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image denoising are typically
trained on large datasets. These models achieve the current state of the art, but they
do not generalize well to data that deviate from the training distribution. Recent
work has shown that it is possible to train denoisers on a single noisy image. These
models adapt to the features of the test image, but their performance is limited by the
small amount of information used to train them. Here we propose “GainTuning”, a
methodology by which CNN models pre-trained on large datasets can be adaptively
and selectively adjusted for individual test images. To avoid overfitting, GainTuning
optimizes a single multiplicative scaling parameter (the “Gain”) of each channel
in the convolutional layers of the CNN. We show that GainTuning improves
state-of-the-art CNNs on standard image-denoising benchmarks, boosting their
denoising performance on nearly every image in a held-out test set. These adaptive
improvements are even more substantial for test images differing systematically
from the training data, either in noise level or image type. We illustrate the
potential of adaptive GainTuning in a scientific application to transmission-electronmicroscope images, using a CNN that is pre-trained on synthetic data. In contrast to
the existing methodology, GainTuning is able to faithfully reconstruct the structure
of catalytic nanoparticles from these data at extremely low signal-to-noise ratios.

1

Introduction

Like many problems in image processing, the recovery of signals from noisy measurements has
been revolutionized by the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [66, 8, 67]. These
models are typically trained on large databases of images, either in a supervised [37, 66, 8, 68, 67]
or an unsupervised fashion [62, 3, 27, 29]. Once trained, these solutions are evaluated on noisy
test images. This approach achieves state-of-the-art performance when the test images and the
training data belong to the same distribution. However, when this is not the case, the performance of
these models is often substantially degraded [59, 37, 68]. This is an important limitation for many
practical applications, in which it is challenging (or even impossible) to gather a training dataset that
is comparable in noise and signal content to the images encountered at test time. Overcoming this
limitation requires adaptation to the test data.
A recent unsupervised method (Self2Self) has shown that CNNs can be trained exclusively on
individual test images, producing impressive results [46]. Despite this, the performance of Self2Self
is limited by the small amount of available training information, and is generally inferior to CNN
models trained on large databases.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

