Combining Human Predictions with Model
Probabilities via Confusion Matrices and Calibration
Gavin Kerrigan1
Padhraic Smyth1
Mark Steyvers2
2
Department of Computer Science
Department of Cognitive Sciences
University of California, Irvine
gavin.k@uci.edu
smyth@ics.uci.edu
mark.steyvers@uci.edu
1

Abstract
An increasingly common use case for machine learning models is augmenting
the abilities of human decision makers. For classification tasks where neither the
human nor model are perfectly accurate, a key step in obtaining high performance
is combining their individual predictions in a manner that leverages their relative
strengths. In this work, we develop a set of algorithms that combine the probabilistic
output of a model with the class-level output of a human. We show theoretically
that the accuracy of our combination model is driven not only by the individual
human and model accuracies, but also by the model’s confidence. Empirical results
on image classification with CIFAR-10 and a subset of ImageNet demonstrate
that such human-model combinations consistently have higher accuracies than the
model or human alone, and that the parameters of the combination method can be
estimated effectively with as few as ten labeled datapoints.

1

Introduction

One of the main goals of machine learning is to develop algorithms that can operate robustly in an
autonomous fashion without human supervision. However, there are many applications where hybrid
human-machine approaches are likely to be a preferred mode of operation for a variety of different
reasons, such as improving trust between humans and machines, and allowing for a human or a
model to take over in situations where the one or the other lacks expertise [Kamar, 2016, Vaughan,
2018, Kleinberg et al., 2017, Riedl, 2019, Trouille et al., 2019, Johnson and Vera, 2019, Zahedi and
Kambhampati, 2021].
The performance benefits of combining multiple predictors, rather than relying on a single predictor,
have been clearly demonstrated in past work in several fields. For example, in machine learning there
is a rich vein of research over the past few decades on combining models using a variety of different
estimation and algorithmic approaches [Kittler et al., 1998, Dietterich, 2000, Kuncheva, 2014, Sagi
and Rokach, 2018]. This existing line of work emphasizes that combinations of models that have
diversity in how they make predictions can systematically outperform a single model. In parallel,
in the behavioral science literature, there has been extensive prior work studying combinations of
human opinions where, again, diverse combinations tend to outperform any single individual [Hong
and Page, 2004, Lamberson and Page, 2012].
This naturally leads to questions about hybrid combinations of human and machine predictions, rather
than just combining one type or the other. For example, one motivation for hybrid combinations
is empirical evidence that human and machine classifiers do not make the same types of errors for
problems such as image classification [Geirhos et al., 2020, Rosenfeld et al., 2018, Serre, 2019], i.e.,
they are diverse in their predictions. These ideas have begun to have impact in real-world applications,
where hybrid human-machine teams have been found to be effective in areas such as crowdsourcing
[Kamar et al., 2012], citizen science [Beck et al., 2018], speech transcription [Gaur et al., 2015],
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

