DynamicViT: Efficient Vision Transformers with
Dynamic Token Sparsification

Yongming Rao1 Wenliang Zhao1 Benlin Liu2,3
Jiwen Lu1∗ Jie Zhou1 Cho-Jui Hsieh2
1

Tsinghua University

2

UCLA

3

University of Washington

Abstract
Attention is sparse in vision transformers. We observe the final prediction in
vision transformers is only based on a subset of most informative tokens, which is
sufficient for accurate image recognition. Based on this observation, we propose a
dynamic token sparsification framework to prune redundant tokens progressively
and dynamically based on the input. Specifically, we devise a lightweight prediction
module to estimate the importance score of each token given the current features.
The module is added to different layers to prune redundant tokens hierarchically. To
optimize the prediction module in an end-to-end manner, we propose an attention
masking strategy to differentiably prune a token by blocking its interactions with
other tokens. Benefiting from the nature of self-attention, the unstructured sparse
tokens are still hardware friendly, which makes our framework easy to achieve
actual speed-up. By hierarchically pruning 66% of the input tokens, our method
greatly reduces 31% ∼ 37% FLOPs and improves the throughput by over 40%
while the drop of accuracy is within 0.5% for various vision transformers. Equipped
with the dynamic token sparsification framework, DynamicViT models can achieve
very competitive complexity/accuracy trade-offs compared to state-of-the-art CNNs
and vision transformers on ImageNet. Code is available at https://github.com/
raoyongming/DynamicViT.

1

Introduction

These years have witnessed the great progress in computer vision brought by the evolution of CNNtype architectures [12, 18]. Some recent works start to replace CNN by using transformer for many
vision tasks, like object detection [36, 20] and classification [25]. Just like what has been done to the
CNN-type architectures in the past few years, it is also desirable to accelerate the transformer-like
models to make them more suitable for real-time applications.
One common practice for the acceleration of CNN-type networks is to prune the filters that are of less
importance. The way input is processed by the vision transformer and its variants, i.e. splitting the
input image into multiple independent patches, provides us another orthogonal way to introduce the
sparsity for the acceleration. That is, we can prune the tokens of less importance in the input instance,
given the fact that many tokens contribute very little to the final prediction. This is only possible for
the transformer-like models where the self-attention module can take the token sequence of variable
length as input, and the unstructured pruned input will not affect the self-attention module, while
dropping a certain part of the pixels can not really accelerate the convolution operation since the
unstructured neighborhood used by convolution would make it difficult to accelerate through parallel
computing. Since the hierarchical architecture of CNNs with structural downsampling has improved
model efficiency in various vision tasks, we hope to explore the unstructured and data-dependent
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

