Adversarially Robust 3D Point Cloud Recognition
Using Self-Supervisions
Jiachen Sun ∗1 , Yulong Cao 1 , Christopher Choy 2 , Zhiding Yu 2 , Anima Anandkumar 2,3 ,
Z. Morley Mao 1 , and Chaowei Xiao 2,4
1

University of Michigan, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Caltech, 4 ASU

Abstract
3D point cloud data is increasingly used in safety-critical applications such as
autonomous driving. Thus, the robustness of 3D deep learning models against
adversarial attacks becomes a major consideration. In this paper, we systematically study the impact of various self-supervised learning proxy tasks on different
architectures and threat models for 3D point clouds with adversarial training.
Specifically, we study MLP-based (PointNet), convolution-based (DGCNN), and
transformer-based (PCT) 3D architectures. Through extensive experimentation,
we demonstrate that appropriate applications of self-supervision can significantly
enhance the robustness in 3D point cloud recognition, achieving considerable
improvements compared to the standard adversarial training baseline. Our analysis
reveals that local feature learning is desirable for adversarial robustness in point
clouds since it limits the adversarial propagation between the point-level input
perturbations and the model’s final output. This insight also explains the success of
DGCNN and the jigsaw proxy task in achieving stronger 3D adversarial robustness.

1

Introduction

Point cloud data is one of the most broadly used representations in 3D computer vision. It is a
versatile data format available from various sensors and computer-aided design (CAD) models. Given
such advantages, many deep learning-based 3D perception systems have been proposed [1–6] and
achieved great success in safety-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving) [7–9]. Although deep
learning [5, 10] on point clouds has exhibited high performance, they are particularly vulnerable to
adversarial attacks [11–13]. Because of the wide applications in safety-critical fields, it is imperative
to study the adversarial robustness of point cloud recognition models.
However, there are at present two obstacles on the path reaching robust point cloud recognition:
Architectural Diversity. Deep 3D point cloud recognition is an emerging field. Many 3D architectures with various feature aggregation methods have been proposed. We broadly categorize them into
three families based on how networks aggregate the geometric information: multi-layer-perceptron
(MLP)-based networks [5, 10], convolutional networks [3, 4, 6, 14–16], and transformer-based networks [17, 18]. These networks have been studied mostly using clean accuracy as their main metric,
but an in-depth study of their robustness is lacking.
Vulnerability to Adaptive Attacks. A few defenses against 3D attacks have been recently proposed [19–21]. Some of the methods, however, merely obfuscate attackers by limiting the malicious
agents from accessing the defense systems and true gradients [22]. They have been shown vulnerable
to adaptive attackers who have the full knowledge of the defenses and can approximate the gradients [21]. Similar to the 2D domain [23], adversarial training (AT) [21] provides more longstanding
robustness in 3D even against adaptive attacks [22]. Nevertheless, further robustness improvements
on adversarial training are highly desired for practical usage and deployments.
∗

Correspondence to jiachens@umich.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

