Invertible DenseNets with Concatenated LipSwish
Yura Perugachi-Diaz
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
y.m.perugachidiaz@vu.nl

Jakub M. Tomczak
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
j.m.tomczak@vu.nl

Sandjai Bhulai
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
s.bhulai@vu.nl

Abstract
We introduce Invertible Dense Networks (i-DenseNets), a more parameter efficient
extension of Residual Flows. The method relies on an analysis of the Lipschitz
continuity of the concatenation in DenseNets, where we enforce invertibility of the
network by satisfying the Lipschitz constant. Furthermore, we propose a learnable
weighted concatenation, which not only improves the model performance but also
indicates the importance of the concatenated weighted representation. Additionally,
we introduce the Concatenated LipSwish as activation function, for which we
show how to enforce the Lipschitz condition and which boosts performance. The
new architecture, i-DenseNet, out-performs Residual Flow and other flow-based
models on density estimation evaluated in bits per dimension, where we utilize
an equal parameter budget. Moreover, we show that the proposed model outperforms Residual Flows when trained as a hybrid model where the model is both
a generative and a discriminative model.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are widely used to parameterize non-linear models in supervised learning tasks such
as classification. In addition, they are also utilized to build flexible density estimators of the true
distribution of the observed data [25, 33]. The resulting deep density estimators, also called deep
generative models, can be further used to generate realistic-looking images that are hard to separate
from real ones, detection of adversarial attacks [9, 17], and for hybrid modeling [27] which have the
property to both predict a label (classify) and generate.
Many deep generative models are trained by maximizing the (log-)likelihood function and their
architectures come in different designs. For instance, causal convolutional neural networks are used to
parameterize autoregressive models [28, 29] or various neural networks can be utilized in Variational
Auto-Encoders [19, 32]. The other group of likelihood-based deep density estimators, flow-based
models (or flows), consist of invertible neural networks since they are used to compute the likelihood
through the change of variable formula [31, 37, 36]. The main difference that determines an exact
computation or approximation of the likelihood function for a flow-based model lies in the design
of the transformation layer and tractability of the Jacobian-determinant. Many flow-based models
formulate the transformation that is invertible and its Jacobian is tractable [3, 6–8, 21, 30, 31, 38].
Recently, Behrmann et al. [2] proposed a different approach, namely, deep-residual blocks as a
transformation layer. The deep-residual networks (ResNets) of [12] are known for their successes in
supervised learning approaches. In a ResNet block, each input of the block is added to the output,
which forms the input for the next block. Since ResNets are not necessarily invertible, Behrmann
et al. [2] enforce the Lipschitz constant of the transformation to be smaller than 1 (i.e., it becomes a
contraction) that allows applying an iterative procedure to invert the network. Furthermore, Chen
et al. [4] proposed Residual Flows, an improvement of i-ResNets, that uses an unbiased estimator for
the logarithm of the Jacobian-determinant.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

