Counterfactual Invariance to Spurious Correlations:
Why and How to Pass Stress Tests
Victor Veitch1,2 , Alexander D’Amour1 , Steve Yadlowsky1 , and Jacob Eisenstein1
2

1
Google Research
University of Chicago

Abstract
Informally, a ‘spurious correlation’ is the dependence of a model on some aspect
of the input data that an analyst thinks shouldn’t matter. In machine learning,
these have a know-it-when-you-see-it character; e.g., changing the gender of a
sentence’s subject changes a sentiment predictor’s output. To check for spurious
correlations, we can ‘stress test’ models by perturbing irrelevant parts of input
data and seeing if model predictions change. In this paper, we study stress testing using the tools of causal inference. We introduce counterfactual invariance
as a formalization of the requirement that changing irrelevant parts of the input
shouldn’t change model predictions. We connect counterfactual invariance to outof-domain model performance, and provide practical schemes for learning (approximately) counterfactual invariant predictors (without access to counterfactual
examples). It turns out that both the means and implications of counterfactual
invariance depend fundamentally on the true underlying causal structure of the
data—in particular, whether the label causes the features or the features cause the
label. Distinct causal structures require distinct regularization schemes to induce
counterfactual invariance. Similarly, counterfactual invariance implies different
domain shift guarantees depending on the underlying causal structure. This theory is supported by empirical results on text classification.

1

Introduction

Our focus in this paper is the sort of spurious correlations revealed by “poke it and see what happens”
testing procedures for machine-learning models. For example, we might test a sentiment analysis
tool by changing one proper noun for another (“tasty Mexican food” to “tasty Indian food”), with the
expectation that the predicted sentiment should not change. This kind of perturbative stress testing is
increasingly popular: it is straightforward to understand and offers a natural way to test the behavior
of models against the expectations of practitioners [Rib+20; Wu+19; Nai+18].
Intuitively, models that pass such stress tests are preferable to those that do not. However, fundamental questions about the use and meaning of perturbative stress tests remain open. For instance, what
is the connection between passing stress tests and model performance on prediction? Eliminating
predictor dependence on a spurious correlation should help with domain shifts that affect the spurious correlation—but how do we make this precise? And, how should we develop models that pass
stress tests when our ability to generate perturbed examples is limited? For example, automatically
perturbing the sentiment of a document in a general fashion is difficult.
The ad hoc nature of stress testing makes it difficult to give general answers to such questions. In
this paper, we will use the tools of causal inference to formalize what it means for models to pass
stress tests, and use this formalization to answer the questions above. We will formalize passing
stress tests as counterfactual invariance, a condition on how a predictor should behave when given
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

