Backdoor Attack with Imperceptible Input and
Latent Modification
Khoa Doan, Yingjie Lao, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{khoadoan106, laoyingjie, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that deep neural networks (DNN) are vulnerable to
various adversarial attacks. In particular, an adversary can inject a stealthy backdoor
into a model such that the compromised model will behave normally without the
presence of the trigger. Techniques for generating backdoor images that are visually
imperceptible from clean images have also been developed recently, which further
enhance the stealthiness of the backdoor attacks from the input space. Along with
the development of attacks, defense against backdoor attacks is also evolving. Many
existing countermeasures found that backdoor tends to leave tangible footprints in
the latent or feature space, which can be utilized to mitigate backdoor attacks.
In this paper, we extend the concept of imperceptible backdoor from the input space
to the latent representation, which significantly improves the effectiveness against
the existing defense mechanisms, especially those relying on the distinguishability between clean inputs and backdoor inputs in latent space. In the proposed
framework, the trigger function will learn to manipulate the input by injecting
imperceptible input noise while matching the latent representations of the clean
and manipulated inputs via a Wasserstein-based regularization of the corresponding
empirical distributions. We formulate such an objective as a non-convex and constrained optimization problem and solve the problem with an efficient stochastic
alternating optimization procedure. We name the proposed backdoor attack as
Wasserstein Backdoor (WB), which achieves a high attack success rate while being
stealthy from both the input and latent spaces, as tested in several benchmark
datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR10, GTSRB, and TinyImagenet.

1

Introduction

In the past years, deep neural network (DNN) has successfully transformed many technological fields,
such as object classification [26, 20], face recognition [31, 1], autonomous driving [53], security
applications [19, 3], etc. Meanwhile, due to the underlying black-box nature, its security and privacy
implications have also raised serious concerns recently. Efforts in the research community have
exposed the vulnerability of DNN classifiers to various attacks [50, 41, 33]. For instance, adversarial
examples leverage the difference between the classifier and human to misclassify specific inputs by
adding imperceptible perturbations without altering the model [17]. Such attacks during the inference
phase are categorized as evasion attacks [27, 5]. On the other hand, poisoning attacks attempt to inject
malicious data points or manipulate the training process to either degrade the model accuracy [37, 45,
60] or cause misclassification for specific inputs (a.k.a. backdoor attacks) [8, 36, 34, 18].
In general, backdoor attacks aim at injecting a malicious behavior into a DNN model so that the
model would perform normally on clean inputs but yield misclassification in the presence of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

