Policy Optimization in Adversarial MDPs:
Improved Exploration via Dilated Bonuses

Haipeng Luo∗
Chen-Yu Wei∗
Chung-Wei Lee
{haipengl,chenyu.wei,leechung}@usc.edu
University of Southern California

Abstract
Policy optimization is a widely-used method in reinforcement learning. Due to
its local-search nature, however, theoretical guarantees on global optimality often
rely on extra assumptions on the Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) that bypass
the challenge of global exploration. To eliminate the need of such assumptions, in
this work, we develop a general solution that adds dilated bonuses to the policy
update to facilitate global exploration. To showcase the power and generality of
this technique, we apply it to several episodic MDP settings with adversarial losses
and bandit feedback, improving and
√ generalizing the state-of-the-art. Specifically,
e T ) regret where T is the number of episodes,
in the tabular case, we obtain O(
improving the e
O(T 2/3 ) regret bound by [27]. When the number of states is infinite,
under the assumption that the state-action values are linear in some low-dimensional
O(T 2/3 ) regret with the help of a simulator, matching the result
features, we obtain e
of [24] while importantly removing the need of an exploratory policy that their
algorithm requires. To our knowledge, this is the first algorithm with sublinear
regret for linear function approximation with adversarial losses, bandit feedback,
and no exploratory assumptions. Finally, we also discuss how to further improve the
regret or remove the need of a simulator using dilated bonuses, when an exploratory
policy is available.1

1

Introduction

Policy optimization methods are among the most widely-used methods in reinforcement learning.
Its empirical success has been demonstrated in various domains such as computer games [26]
and robotics [21]. However, due to its local-search nature, global optimality guarantees of policy
optimization often rely on unrealistic assumptions to ensure global exploration (see e.g., [1, 3, 24, 30]),
making it theoretically less appealing compared to other methods.
Motivated by this issue, a line of recent works [7, 27, 2, 35] equip policy optimization with global
exploration by adding exploration bonuses to the update, and prove favorable guarantees even without
making extra exploratory assumptions. Moreover, they all demonstrate some robustness aspect of
policy optimization (such as being able to handle adversarial losses or a certain degree of model misspecification). Despite these important progresses, however, many limitations still exist, including
worse regret rates comparing to the best value-based or model-based approaches [27, 2, 35], or
requiring full-information feedback on the entire loss function (as opposed to the more realistic bandit
feedback) [7].
∗

Equal contribution.
In an improved version of this paper, we show that under the linear MDP assumption, an exploratory policy
is not even needed. See https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.08346.
1

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

