Private learning implies quantum stability

Srinivasan Arunachalam
IBM Quantum, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA
Srinivasan.Arunachalam@ibm.com
Yihui Quek
Information Systems Laboratory, Stanford University, USA ∗
yquek@stanford.edu
John Smolin
IBM Quantum, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA
Smolin@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Learning an unknown n-qubit quantum state ρ is a fundamental challenge in quantum computing. Information-theoretically, it is known that tomography requires
exponential in n many copies of ρ to estimate its entries. Motivated by learning theory, Aaronson et al. introduced many (weaker) learning models: the PAC model of
learning states (Proc. of Royal Society A’07), shadow tomography (STOC’18) for
learning “shadows" of a state, a model that also requires learners to be differentially
private (STOC’19) and the online model of learning states (NeurIPS’18). In these
models it was shown that ρ can be learned “approximately" using linear in n many
copies of ρ. But is there any relationship between these models? In this paper we
prove a sequence of (information-theoretic) implications from differentially-private
PAC learning to online learning and then to quantum stability. Our main result
generalizes the recent work of Bun, Livni and Moran (Journal of the ACM’21)
who showed that finite Littlestone dimension (of Boolean-valued concept classes)
implies PAC learnability in the (approximate) differentially private (DP) setting.
We first extend their work to the real-valued setting, and further extend to the
setting of learning quantum states. Key to our results is our generic quantum
online learner, Robust Standard Optimal Algorithm (RSOA), which is robust to
adversarial imprecision. We then show information-theoretic equivalences between
DP learning quantum states in the PAC model, learnability of quantum states in
the one-way communication model, online learning of quantum states, quantum
stability, various combinatorial parameters and give further applications to gentle
shadow tomography and noisy quantum state learning.

1

Introduction

Learning an unknown quantum state ρ, given copies of the state is a fundamental task in quantum
computing, often referred to as tomography. Tomography is of great practical interest since it helps
in tasks such as verifying entanglement, understanding correlations, and is useful for calibrating,
understanding and controlling noise in quantum devices. In the last few years, questions about the
fundamental limits of this task have gained a lot of theoretical attention: how many copies of an
n-qubit quantum state ρ are required to estimate the density matrix of ρ up to small error? Recent
∗

https://stanford.edu/∼yquek

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

