Towards Open-World Feature Extrapolation:
An Inductive Graph Learning Approach
Qitian Wu, Chenxiao Yang, Junchi Yan⇤
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{echo740, chr26195, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We target open-world feature extrapolation problem where the feature space of
input data goes through expansion and a model trained on partially observed
features needs to handle new features in test data without further retraining. The
problem is of much significance for dealing with features incrementally collected
from different fields. To this end, we propose a new learning paradigm with graph
representation and learning. Our framework contains two modules: 1) a backbone
network (e.g., feedforward neural nets) as a lower model takes features as input
and outputs predicted labels; 2) a graph neural network as an upper model learns
to extrapolate embeddings for new features via message passing over a featuredata graph built from observed data. Based on our framework, we design two
training strategies, a self-supervised approach and an inductive learning approach,
to endow the model with extrapolation ability and alleviate feature-level over-fitting.
We also provide theoretical analysis on the generalization error on test data with
new features, which dissects the impact of training features and algorithms on
generalization performance. Our experiments over several classification datasets
and large-scale advertisement click prediction datasets demonstrate that our model
can produce effective embeddings for unseen features and significantly outperforms
baseline methods that adopt KNN and local aggregation.

1

Introduction

Learning a mapping from observation x (a vector of attribute features) to label y is a fundamental
and pervasive problem in ML community, with extensive applications spanning from classification/regression tasks for tabular data to advertisement click prediction [23, 38, 13, 37, 27], item
recommendation [26, 52, 14, 53], question answering [12, 11], or AI more broadly. Existing approaches focus on a fixed input feature space shared by training and test data. Nevertheless, practical
ML systems interact with a dynamic open-world where features are incrementally collected. For
example, in recommender/advertisement systems, there often occur new user profile features unseen
before for current prediction tasks. Also, with the advances of multi-modal recognition [45] and
federated learning [29], it is a requirement for a model trained with partial features to incorporate
new features from other fields for decision-making on a target task.
A challenge stems from the fact that off-the-shelf neural network models cannot deal with new
features without re-training on new data. As shown in Fig. 1(a), a neural network builds a mapping
from input features to a hidden representation through a weight matrix in the first layer. Given new
features as input, the network needs to be augmented with new weight parameters and cannot map
the new features to a desirable position in latent space if without re-training.
⇤

Junchi Yan is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

