RLlib Flow: Distributed Reinforcement Learning is a
Dataflow Problem
Eric Liang∗
UC Berkeley

Zhanghao Wu∗
UC Berkeley

Michael Luo
UC Berkeley

Sven Mika
Anyscale

Joseph E. Gonzalez
UC Berkeley

Ion Stoica
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Researchers and practitioners in the field of reinforcement learning (RL) frequently
leverage parallel computation, which has led to a plethora of new algorithms and
systems in the last few years. In this paper, we re-examine the challenges posed by
distributed RL and try to view it through the lens of an old idea: distributed dataflow.
We show that viewing RL as a dataflow problem leads to highly composable and
performant implementations. We propose RLlib Flow, a hybrid actor-dataflow
programming model for distributed RL, and validate its practicality by porting
the full suite of algorithms in RLlib, a widely adopted distributed RL library.
Concretely, RLlib Flow provides 2-9× code savings in real production code and
enables the composition of multi-agent algorithms not possible by end users before.
The open-source code is available as part of RLlib at https://github.com/
ray-project/ray/tree/master/rllib.

1

Introduction

The past few years have seen the rise of deep reinforcement learning (RL) as a new, powerful
optimization method for solving sequential decision making problems. As with deep supervised
learning, researchers and practitioners frequently leverage parallel computation, which has led to the
development of numerous distributed RL algorithms and systems as the field rapidly evolves.
However, despite the high-level of abstraction that RL algorithms are defined in (i.e., as a couple
dozen lines of update equations), their implementations have remained quite low level (i.e., at the
level of message passing). This is particularly true for distributed RL algorithms, which are typically
implemented directly on low-level message passing systems or actor frameworks [14]. Libraries such
as Acme [15], RLgraph [26], RLlib [19], and Coach [2] provide unified abstractions for defining
single-agent RL algorithms, but their user-facing APIs only allow algorithms to execute within the
bounds to predefined distributed execution patterns or “templates”.
While the aforementioned libraries have been highly successful at replicating a large number of
novel RL algorithms introduced over the years, showing the generality of their underlying actor or
graph-based computation models, the needs of many researchers and practitioners are often not met
by their abstractions. We have observed this firsthand from users of open source RL libraries:
First, RL practitioners are typically not systems engineers. They are not well versed with code that
mixes together the logical dataflow of the program and system concerns such as performance and
bounding memory usage. This leads to a high barrier of entry for most RL users to experimenting
with debugging existing distributed RL algorithms or authoring new distributed RL approaches.
∗ indicates equal contributions.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

