Neural Bellman-Ford Networks: A General Graph
Neural Network Framework for Link Prediction
Zhaocheng Zhu1,2 , Zuobai Zhang1,2 , Louis-Pascal Xhonneux1,2 , Jian Tang1,3,4
Mila - Québec AI Institute1 , Université de Montréal2
HEC Montréal3 , CIFAR AI Chair4
{zhaocheng.zhu, zuobai.zhang, louis-pascal.xhonneux}@mila.quebec
jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Link prediction is a very fundamental task on graphs. Inspired by traditional
path-based methods, in this paper we propose a general and flexible representation
learning framework based on paths for link prediction. Specifically, we define the
representation of a pair of nodes as the generalized sum of all path representations
between the nodes, with each path representation as the generalized product of
the edge representations in the path. Motivated by the Bellman-Ford algorithm
for solving the shortest path problem, we show that the proposed path formulation
can be efficiently solved by the generalized Bellman-Ford algorithm. To further
improve the capacity of the path formulation, we propose the Neural Bellman-Ford
Network (NBFNet), a general graph neural network framework that solves the
path formulation with learned operators in the generalized Bellman-Ford algorithm.
The NBFNet parameterizes the generalized Bellman-Ford algorithm with 3 neural
components, namely I NDICATOR, M ESSAGE and AGGREGATE functions, which
corresponds to the boundary condition, multiplication operator, and summation
operator respectively1 . The NBFNet covers many traditional path-based methods,
and can be applied to both homogeneous graphs and multi-relational graphs (e.g.,
knowledge graphs) in both transductive and inductive settings. Experiments on
both homogeneous graphs and knowledge graphs show that the proposed NBFNet
outperforms existing methods by a large margin in both transductive and inductive
settings, achieving new state-of-the-art results2 .

1

Introduction

Predicting the interactions between nodes (a.k.a. link prediction) is a fundamental task in the field of
graph machine learning. Given the ubiquitous existence of graphs, such a task has many applications,
such as recommender system [34], knowledge graph completion [41] and drug repurposing [27].
Traditional methods of link prediction usually define different heuristic metrics over the paths between
a pair of nodes. For example, Katz index [30] is defined as a weighted count of paths between two
nodes. Personalized PageRank [42] measures the similarity of two nodes as the random walk
probability from one to the other. Graph distance [37] uses the length of the shortest path between
two nodes to predict their association. These methods can be directly applied to new graphs, i.e.,
inductive setting, enjoy good interpretability and scale up to large graphs. However, they are designed
based on handcrafted metrics and may not be optimal for link prediction on real-world graphs.
1
Unless stated otherwise, we use summation and multiplication to refer the generalized operators in the path
formulation, rather than the basic operations of arithmetic.
2
Code is available at https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/NBFNet

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

