Improving Coherence and Consistency in Neural
Sequence Models with Dual-System,
Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning

Maxwell Nye∗
MIT

Michael Henry Tessler
MIT
DeepMind

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Brenden M. Lake
NYU
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Human reasoning can be understood as an interplay between two systems: the
intuitive and associative (“System 1”) and the deliberative and logical (“System 2”).
Neural sequence models—which have been increasingly successful at performing
complex, structured tasks—exhibit the advantages and failure modes of System 1:
they are fast and learn patterns from data, but are often inconsistent and incoherent.
In this work, we seek a lightweight, training-free means of improving existing
System 1-like sequence models by adding System 2-inspired logical reasoning.
We explore several variations on this theme in which candidate generations from
a neural sequence model are examined for logical consistency by a symbolic
reasoning module, which can either accept or reject the generations. Our approach
uses neural inference to mediate between the neural System 1 and the logical
System 2. Results in robust story generation and grounded instruction-following
show that this approach can increase the coherence and accuracy of neurally-based
generations.

1

Introduction

Despite recent success, neural sequence models often fail to produce consistent and coherent generations. When generating stories, language models may forget the attributes of specific characters (such
as personality and background information) (Welleck et al., 2018), ignore previously established
relationships between characters (such as family relationships) (Sinha et al., 2019), or otherwise
contradict prior statements (Brown et al., 2020). Similarly, neural models can make statements that
contradict basic world knowledge or the logical entailment structure of known facts.
Lake & Murphy (2020) illustrated several of these issues with GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019). When
given prompts of the form “A dolphin is a
”, GPT-2 predicts that the most likely answer is
“mammal”, “fish”, or “bird” depending on small differences in the wording of the prompt. In another
example, GPT-2 states that unicorns have “four horns,” directly after implying that unicorns only
have one horn. Upon diagnosing such issues, it is unclear how to apply a targeted fix to the model,
especially if retraining or fine-tuning is impractical.
In this work, we draw on insights from cognitive science, especially from “dual process” theories
of reasoning (Evans, 2003), to explore how neural sequence models can better interface with prior
knowledge and be made more coherent and consistent. According to dual process theories, human
cognition can be understood as an interplay between a more intuitive and associative “System 1”
and a more deliberative and logical “System 2.” Within this broad framework, automatic actions are
driven by System 1, whereas System 2 engages for more deliberative control: for example, judging
the validity of a logical argument that requires multiple steps of reasoning (Kahneman, 2013).
∗

Correspondence to mnye@mit.edu. Work primarily done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

