Predicting Event Memorability from Contextual
Visual Semantics
Qianli Xu

Institute for Infocomm Research
A*STAR, Singapore
qxu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Fen Fang

Ana Garcia del Molino

Institute for Infocomm Research
A*STAR, Singapore
fang_fen@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Vigneshwaran Subbaraju

Institute of High Performance Computing
A*STAR, Singapore
vigneshwaran_subbaraju@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

ByteDance AI Lab
Singapore
a.g.delmolino@gmail.com

Joo Hwee Lim

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Episodic event memory is a key component of human cognition. Predicting event
memorability, i.e., to what extent an event is recalled, is a tough challenge in
memory research and has profound implications for artificial intelligence. In this
study, we investigate factors that affect event memorability according to a cued
recall process. Specifically, we explore whether event memorability is contingent
on the event context, as well as the intrinsic visual attributes of image cues. We
design a novel experiment protocol and conduct a large-scale experiment with
47 elder subjects over 3 months. Subjects’ memory of life events is tested in a
cued recall process. Using advanced visual analytics methods, we build a first-ofits-kind event memorability dataset (called R3) with rich information about event
context and visual semantic features. Furthermore, we propose a contextual event
memory network (CEMNet) that tackles multi-modal input to predict item-wise
event memorability, which outperforms competitive benchmarks. The findings
inform deeper understanding of episodic event memory, and open up a new avenue
for prediction of human episodic memory. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/ffzzy840304/Predicting-Event-Memorability.

1

Introduction

Episodic event memory is a key component of human cognition and intelligence. Maintaining
high-level event memory is good for mental health and executive functioning [34]. Episodic memory
can be enhanced by cognitive training, such as regular photo review that triggers the reactivation
of certain memory traces [25, 42]. Recent advancements in visual lifelogging, including affordable
hardware and powerful visual analysis software, make it possible to implement lifelog-based memory
intervention [19, 31, 43]. However, without clear understanding of what factors influence event
memory (e.g., what events have higher value for training? how to select “good” photo cues to boost
training effect?), it is difficult to design effective cognitive intervention programs. This study attempts
to understand event memory, i.e., to what extent an event can be recalled. We probe the recall
process with visual cues, and explore factors that influence event memorability. We aim to extend
the understanding of event memory, beyond simple image recognition [22] and memory of event
categories [8], to the prediction of item-wise event memorability using contextual visual semantics.
A few major gaps exist in this field. First, there is scarcity of data for evaluating event memorability.
A sensible analysis requires rich event knowledge, including spatial-temporal information, personal
experience and profiles, as well as quantifiable memory performance on the respective events.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

