Dual Parameterization of Sparse Variational
Gaussian Processes
Vincent Adam∗
Aalto University / Secondmind.ai
Espoo, Finland / Cambridge, UK
vincent.adam@aalto.fi

Paul E. Chang∗
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
paul.chang@aalto.fi

Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan
RIKEN Center for AI Project
Tokyo, Japan
emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp

Arno Solin
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
arno.solin@aalto.fi

Abstract
Sparse variational Gaussian process (SVGP) methods are a common choice for
non-conjugate Gaussian process inference because of their computational benefits.
In this paper, we improve their computational efficiency by using a dual parameterization where each data example is assigned dual parameters, similarly to site
parameters used in expectation propagation. Our dual parameterization speeds-up
inference using natural gradient descent, and provides a tighter evidence lower
bound for hyperparameter learning. The approach has the same memory cost as
the current SVGP methods, but it is faster and more accurate.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs, [31]) have become ubiquitous models in the probabilistic machine learning
toolbox, but their application is challenging due to two issues: poor O(n3 ) scaling in the number of
data points, n, and challenging approximate inference in non-conjugate (non-Gaussian) models. In
recent years, variational inference has become the go-to solution to overcome these problems, where
sparse variational GP methods [35] tackle both the non-conjugacy and high computation cost. The
computation is reduced to O(nm2 ) by using a small number of m ≪ n inducing-input locations. For
large problems, the SVGP framework is a popular choice as it enables fast stochastic training, and
reduces the cost to O(m3 + nb m2 ) per step, where nb is the batch size [10, 11].
It is a common practice in SVGP to utilize the standard mean-covariance parameterization which
requires O(m2 ) memory. Inference is carried out by optimizing an objective L(q) that uses a Gaussian
distribution q parameterized by parameters ξ = (m, L) where m is the mean and L is the Cholesky
factor of the covariance matrix. We will refer to the SVGP methods using such parameterization
as the q-SVGP methods. The advantage of this formulation is that, for log-concave likelihoods, the
objective is convex and gradient-based optimization works well [2]. The optimization can further be
improved by using natural gradient descent (NGD) which is shown to be less sensitive to learning
rates [33]. The NGD algorithm with q-SVGP parameterization is currently the state-of-the-art and
available in the existing software implementations such as GPflow [26] and GPyTorch [9].
An alternate parameterization to the q-SVGP parameterization is the one where every likelihood is
assigned two sets of parameters which require O(n) memory. Existence of such parameterizations
was initially shown by Csató and Opper [8] for general GP models, and later on extended to variational
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

