On Memorization in Probabilistic
Deep Generative Models

Gerrit J.J. van den Burg∗
gertjanvandenburg@gmail.com

Christopher K.I. Williams
University of Edinburgh
The Alan Turing Institute
ckiw@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent advances in deep generative models have led to impressive results in a
variety of application domains. Motivated by the possibility that deep learning
models might memorize part of the input data, there have been increased efforts
to understand how memorization arises. In this work, we extend a recently proposed measure of memorization for supervised learning (Feldman, 2019) to the
unsupervised density estimation problem and adapt it to be more computationally
efficient. Next, we present a study that demonstrates how memorization can occur
in probabilistic deep generative models such as variational autoencoders. This
reveals that the form of memorization to which these models are susceptible differs
fundamentally from mode collapse and overfitting. Furthermore, we show that
the proposed memorization score measures a phenomenon that is not captured by
commonly-used nearest neighbor tests. Finally, we discuss several strategies that
can be used to limit memorization in practice. Our work thus provides a framework
for understanding problematic memorization in probabilistic generative models.

1

Introduction

In the last few years there have been incredible successes in generative modeling through the
development of deep learning techniques such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [1, 2], generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [3], normalizing flows [4, 5], and diffusion networks [6, 7], among
others. The goal of generative modeling is to learn the data distribution of a given data set, which
has numerous applications such as creating realistic synthetic data, correcting data corruption, and
detecting anomalies. Novel architectures for generative modeling are typically evaluated on how
well a complex, high dimensional data distribution can be learned by the model and how realistic the
samples from the model are. An important question in the evaluation of generative models is to what
extent training observations are memorized by the learning algorithm, as this has implications for
data privacy, model stability, and generalization performance. For example, in a medical setting it is
highly desirable to know if a synthetic data model could produce near duplicates of the training data.
A common technique to assess memorization in deep generative models is to take samples from the
model and compare these to their nearest neighbors in the training set. There are several problems
with this approach. First, it has been well established that when using the Euclidean metric this test
can be easily fooled by taking an image from the training set and shifting it by a few pixels [8]. For
this reason, nearest neighbors in the feature space of a secondary model are sometimes used, as well
as cropping and/or downsampling before identifying nearest neighbors (e.g., [9–11]). Second, while
there may not be any neighbors in the training set for a small selection of samples from the model,
this does not demonstrate that there are no observations that are highly memorized. Indeed, in several
∗

Work done while at The Alan Turing Institute.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

