Exploiting Domain-Specific Features to Enhance
Domain Generalization
Manh-Ha Bui1 Toan Tran1 Anh Tuan Tran1 Dinh Phung1,2
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam 2 Monash University, Australia
{v.habm1, v.toantm3, v.anhtt152, v.dinhpq2}@vinai.io ∗

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) aims to train a model, from multiple observed source
domains, in order to perform well on unseen target domains. To obtain the generalization capability, prior DG approaches have focused on extracting domaininvariant information across sources to generalize on target domains, while useful
domain-specific information which strongly correlates with labels in individual
domains and the generalization to target domains is usually ignored. In this paper,
we propose meta-Domain Specific-Domain Invariant (mDSDI) - a novel theoretically sound framework that extends beyond the invariance view to further capture
the usefulness of domain-specific information. Our key insight is to disentangle
features in the latent space while jointly learning both domain-invariant and domainspecific features in a unified framework. The domain-specific representation is
optimized through the meta-learning framework to adapt from source domains,
targeting a robust generalization on unseen domains. We empirically show that
mDSDI provides competitive results with state-of-the-art techniques in DG. A
further ablation study with our generated dataset, Background-Colored-MNIST,
confirms the hypothesis that domain-specific is essential, leading to better results
when compared with only using domain-invariant.

1

Introduction and Related work

Domain Generalization (DG) has recently become an important research topic in machine learning
due to its real-world applicability and its close connection to the way humans generalize to learn
in a new domain. In a DG framework, the learner is trained on multiple datasets collected under
different environments without any access to any data on the target domain (1). One of the most
notable approaches to this problem is to learn the “domain-invariant” features across these training
datasets, with the assumption that these invariant representations are also held in unseen target
domains (2; 3; 4; 5; 6). While this has been shown to work well in practice, its key drawback is
completely ignoring “domain-specific” information that could aid the generalization performance,
especially when the number of source domains increases (7).
For instance, consider the problem of classifying dog or fish images from two source domains: sketch
and photo. While the sketch contains a conceptual drawing of the animal, the photo includes their
taken picture within a background. In this case, sketch domain-invariant is kept across domains,
while domain-specific, e.g., a dog in a house or fish in the ocean, will be discarded due to only
existing in the photo domain. However, this background information, when present, could lead to an
improvement of the classification performance in target domains due to common association between
the objects of its background, and when negligent sketches are hard to distinguish. From a theoretical
standpoint, there has also been strong recent evidence to indicate the insufficiency of learning domaininvariant representation for successful adaptation in domain adaptation problems (8; 9). For example,
∗

Correspondence to Manh-Ha Bui: <hb.buimanhha@gmail.com>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

