Medical Dead-ends and Learning to Identify
High-risk States and Treatments
Mehdi Fatemi
Microsoft Research
mehdi.fatemi@microsoft.com

Taylor W. Killian
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
twkillian@cs.toronto.edu

Jayakumar Subramanian
Media and Data Science Research, Adobe India
jayakumar.subramanian@gmail.com

Marzyeh Ghassemi
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mghassem@mit.edu

Abstract
Machine learning has successfully framed many sequential decision making problems as either supervised prediction, or optimal decision-making policy identification via reinforcement learning. In data-constrained offline settings, both
approaches may fail as they assume fully optimal behavior or rely on exploring
alternatives that may not exist. We introduce an inherently different approach that
identifies possible “dead-ends” of a state space. We focus on the condition of patients in the intensive care unit, where a “medical dead-end” indicates that a patient
will expire, regardless of all potential future treatment sequences. We postulate
“treatment security” as avoiding treatments with probability proportional to their
chance of leading to dead-ends, present a formal proof, and frame discovery as an
RL problem. We then train three independent deep neural models for automated
state construction, dead-end discovery and confirmation. Our empirical results
discover that dead-ends exist in real clinical data among septic patients, and further
reveal gaps between secure treatments and those that were administered.

1

Introduction

Off-policy Reinforcement Learning (RL) was designed as the way to isolate behavioural policies,
which generate experience, from the target policy, which aims for optimality. It also enables learning
multiple target policies with different goals from the same data-stream or from previously recorded
experience [1]. This algorithmic approach is of particular importance in safety-critical domains such
as robotics [2], education [3] or healthcare [4] where data collection should be regulated as it is
expensive or carries significant risk. Despite significant advances made possible by off-policy RL
combined with deep neural networks [5–7], the performance of these algorithms degrade drastically
in fully offline settings [8], without additional interactions with the environment [9, 10]. These
challenges are deeply amplified when the dataset is limited and exploratory new data cannot be
collected for ethical or safety purposes. This is because robust identification of an optimal policy
requires exhaustive trial and error of various courses of actions [11, 12]. In such fully offline cases,
naively learned policies may significantly overfit to data-collection artifacts [13–15]. Estimation
errors due to limited data may further lead to mistimed or inappropriate decisions with adverse safety
consequences [16].
Even if optimality is not attainable in such constrained cases, negative outcomes in data can be used
to identify behaviors to avoid, thereby guarding against overoptimistic decisions in safety-critical
domains that may be significantly biased due to reduced data availability. In one such domain,
healthcare, RL has been used to identify optimal treatment policies based on observed outcomes of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

