Fuzzy Clustering with Similarity Queries
Wasim Huleihel
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel
wasimh@tauex.tau.ac.il

Arya Mazumdar
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
arya@ucsd.edu

Soumyabrata Pal
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
soumyabratap@umass.edu

Abstract
The fuzzy or soft k-means objective is a popular generalization of the well-known kmeans problem, extending the clustering capability of the k-means to datasets that
are uncertain, vague and otherwise hard to cluster. In this paper, we propose a semisupervised active clustering framework, where the learner is allowed to interact
with an oracle (domain expert), asking for the similarity between a certain set of
chosen items. We study the query and computational complexities of clustering in
this framework. We prove that having a few of such similarity queries enables one
to get a polynomial-time approximation algorithm to an otherwise conjecturally
NP-hard problem. In particular, we provide algorithms for fuzzy clustering in
this setting that ask O(poly(k) log n) similarity queries and run with polynomialtime-complexity, where n is the number of items. The fuzzy k-means objective is
nonconvex, with k-means as a special case, and is equivalent to some other generic
nonconvex problem such as non-negative matrix factorization. The ubiquitous
Lloyd-type algorithms (or alternating-minimization algorithms) can get stuck at a
local minima. Our results show that by making few similarity queries, the problem
becomes easier to solve. Finally, we test our algorithms over real-world datasets,
showing their effectiveness in real-world applications.

1

Introduction

The k-means objective for clustering is perhaps the most ubiquitous of all unsupervised learning
paradigms. It is extremely well studied, with Lloyd’s algorithm being the most popular solution
method, while the problem in general being NP Hard [11, 7]. A variety of approximate solutions for
k-means exists (such as, [20, 3]).
In recent times, there have been efforts to bring in a flavor of active learning in k-means clustering; by
allowing the learner to make a limited number of carefully chosen label/membership queries [4, 2, 18].
In this setting, the main objective is to show that a polynomial-time solution exists provided that
small number of such queries to an oracle is permitted. Note that, an alternative to membership query
(i.e., query of the form “does the ith element belong to the j th cluster”) is the same-cluster/similarity
query (i.e., “do elements i and j belong to the same cluster”). Given representatives from each cluster
is available, one can simulate any membership query with at most k same cluster queries. Hence
whatever is achievable with membership queries, can be also achieved by same cluster queries by
asking at most k times as many queries [4].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

