Domain Adaptation with Invariant Representation
Learning: What Transformations to Learn?

Petar Stojanov1,4∗ , Zijian Li2∗ , Mingming Gong3 ,
Ruichu Cai2 , Jaime G. Carbonell1 , Kun Zhang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne
4
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation, as a prevalent transfer learning setting, spans
many real-world applications. With the increasing representational power and
applicability of neural networks, state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods make
use of deep architectures to map the input features X to a latent representation
Z that has the same marginal distribution across domains. This has been shown
to be insufficient for generating optimal representation for classification, and
to find conditionally invariant representations, usually strong assumptions are
needed. We provide reasoning why when the supports of the source and target
data from overlap, any map of X that is fixed across domains may not be suitable
for domain adaptation via invariant features. Furthermore, we develop an efficient
technique in which the optimal map from X to Z also takes domain-specific
information as input, in addition to the features X. By using the property of
minimal changes of causal mechanisms across domains, our model also takes into
account the domain-specific information to ensure that the latent representation Z
does not discard valuable information about Y . We demonstrate the efficacy of our
method via synthetic and real-world data experiments. The code is available at:
https://github.com/DMIRLAB-Group/DSAN.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a common setting for supervised learning, in which the
labeled training and unlabeled test data come from different distributions. More formally, given
features X ∈ Rd and labels Y ∈ R, we observe labeled source and unlabeled target domain instances,
T
T mT
S
S
represented by (xS , yS ) = (xSk , y S )m
k=1 and xk = (x )k=1 respectively, where P (X, Y ) ̸=
T
P (X, Y ), and mS and mT are the number of observations in the source and target domains,
respectively. The main challenge of domain adaptation is to use the given source domain observations
for learning a predictor that will perform well in the target domain. To do so, the procedure needs to
make use of some similarities between the two domains. One way to formalize this is by making
assumptions about how the joint distribution joint P (X, Y ) changes across domains. For example,
in the well-studied setting of covariate shift [31, 44, 20, 35, 2, 8], the marginal distribution P (X)
changes while the conditional distribution P (Y |X) (i.e. the optimal predictor) is shared across
domains.
However, in many real-world applications, P (Y |X) can also change, and this requires making use
of further assumptions. One such assumption is that the factorization P (X, Y ) = P (Y )P (X|Y )
allows for addressing the changes in P (Y ) and P (X|Y ) independently in a situation where their
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

