Policy Finetuning: Bridging Sample-Efficient Offline
and Online Reinforcement Learning

Tengyang Xie
UIUC
tx10@illinois.edu

Nan Jiang
UIUC
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
cxiong@salesforce.com

Huan Wang
Salesforce Research
huan.wang@salesforce.com

Yu Bai
Salesforce Research
yu.bai@salesforce.com

Abstract
Recent theoretical work studies sample-efficient reinforcement learning (RL) extensively in two settings: learning interactively in the environment (online RL),
or learning from an offline dataset (offline RL). However, existing algorithms and
theories for learning near-optimal policies in these two settings are rather different
and disconnected. Towards bridging this gap, this paper initiates the theoretical
study of policy finetuning, that is, online RL where the learner has additional access
to a “reference policy” µ close to the optimal policy π? in a certain sense. We consider the policy finetuning problem in episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
with S states, A actions, and horizon length H. We first design a sharp offline
reduction algorithm—which simply executes µ and runs offline policy optimization
O(H 3 SC ? /ε2 )
on the collected dataset—that finds an ε near-optimal policy within e
?
episodes, where C is the single-policy concentrability coefficient between µ and
π? . This offline result is the first that matches the sample complexity lower bound
in this setting, and resolves a recent open question in offline RL. We then establish
an Ω(H 3 S min{C ? , A}/ε2 ) sample complexity lower bound for any policy finetuning algorithm, including those that can adaptively explore the environment. This
implies that—perhaps surprisingly—the optimal policy finetuning algorithm is
either offline reduction or a purely online RL algorithm that does not use µ. Finally,
we design a new hybrid offline/online algorithm for policy finetuning that achieves
better sample complexity than both vanilla offline reduction and purely online RL
algorithms, in a relaxed setting where µ only satisfies concentrability partially up
to a certain time step. Overall, our results offer a quantitative understanding on the
benefit of a good reference policy, and make a step towards bridging offline and
online RL.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL)—where agents learn to play sequentially in an environment to maximize
a cumulative reward function—has achieved great recent success in many artificial intelligence
challenges such as video games playing [38, 52], large-scale strategy games (e.g. GO) [44, 45],
robotic manipulation [3, 32], behavior learning in social scenarios [8], and more. In many such
challenging domains, achieving human-like or superhuman performance requires training the RL
agent with millions of samples (steps of acting or game playing) or more. Understanding and
improving the sample efficiency of RL algorithms has been a central topic of research.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

