When Expressivity Meets Trainability: Fewer than n
Neurons Can Work
Jiawei Zhang∗
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China
jiaweizhang2@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Yushun Zhang∗
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China
yushunzhang@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota - Twin Citie
MN, USA
mhong@umn.edu
Ruoyu Sun †
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
IL, USA
ruoyus@illinois.edu

Zhi-Quan Luo
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China
luozq@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern neural networks are often quite wide, causing large memory and computation costs. It is thus of great interest to train a narrower network. However,
training narrow neural nets remains a challenging task. We ask two theoretical
questions: Can narrow networks have as strong expressivity as wide ones? If so,
does the loss function exhibit a benign optimization landscape? In this work, we
provide partially affirmative answers to both questions for 1-hidden-layer networks
with fewer than n (sample size) neurons when the activation is smooth. First, we
prove that as long as the width m ≥ 2n/d (where d is the input dimension), its
expressivity is strong, i.e., there exists at least one global minimizer with zero
training loss. Second, we identify a nice local region with no local-min or saddle
points. Nevertheless, it is not clear whether gradient descent can stay in this nice region. Third, we consider a constrained optimization formulation where the feasible
region is the nice local region, and prove that every KKT point is a nearly global
minimizer. It is expected that projected gradient methods converge to KKT points
under mild technical conditions, but we leave the rigorous convergence analysis
to future work. Thorough numerical results show that projected gradient methods
on this constrained formulation significantly outperform SGD for training narrow
neural nets.

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks are huge (e.g. [8, 74]). Reducing the size of neural nets is appealing for
many reasons: first, small networks are more suitable for embedded systems and portable devices;
second, using smaller networks can reduce power consumption, contributing to “green computing”.
∗
†

Equal contribution. These authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Corresponding author: Ruoyu Sun.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

