Metropolis-Hastings Data Augmentation
for Graph Neural Networks

Hyeonjin Park1∗, Seunghun Lee1∗, Sihyeon Kim1 , Jinyoung Park1
Jisu Jeong2,3 , Kyung-Min Kim2,3 , Jung-Woo Ha2,3 , Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
Korea University1 , NAVER CLOVA2 , NAVER AI LAB3
{hyeonjin961030, llsshh319, sh_bs15, lpmn678, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
{jisu.jeong, kyungmin.kim.ml, jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) often suffer from weak-generalization due to
sparsely labeled data despite their promising results on various graph-based tasks.
Data augmentation is a prevalent remedy to improve the generalization ability of
models in many domains. However, due to the non-Euclidean nature of data space
and the dependencies between samples, designing effective augmentation on graphs
is challenging. In this paper, we propose a novel framework Metropolis-Hastings
Data Augmentation (MH-Aug) that draws augmented graphs from an explicit target
distribution for semi-supervised learning. MH-Aug produces a sequence of augmented graphs from the target distribution enables flexible control of the strength
and diversity of augmentation. Since the direct sampling from the complex target
distribution is challenging, we adopt the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to obtain
the augmented samples. We also propose a simple and effective semi-supervised
learning strategy with generated samples from MH-Aug. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that MH-Aug can generate a sequence of samples according to the
target distribution to significantly improve the performance of GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [1] have been widely used for representation learning on graphstructured data due to their superior performance in various applications such as node classification [2–
4], link prediction [5–7] and graph classification [8, 9]. They have been proven effective by achieving
impressive performance for diverse datasets such as social networks [10], citation networks [4],
physics [11], molecules [12], and knowledge graphs [10]. However, GNNs often suffer from weakgeneralization due to their small and sparsely labeled graph datasets. One prevalent remedy to address
the problem is data augmentation. Data augmentation increases the diversity of data and improves
the generalization power of machine learning models trained on randomly augmented samples. It
is widely used to enhance the generalization ability of models in many domains. For instance, in
image recognition, advanced methods like [13–15] as well as simple transformations such as random
cropping, cutout, Gaussian noise, or blurring have been used to achieve competitive performance.
However, unlike image recognition, designing effective and label-preserving data augmentation for
individual samples on graphs is challenging due to their non-Euclidean nature and the dependencies
between data samples. In image recognition, it is straightforward to identify operations that preserve
labels. For instance, human can verify that rotation, translation, and small color jittering do not
change the labels in image classification. In contrast, graphs are less interpretable and it is non-trivial
∗
†

First two authors have equal contribution
is the corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

