Learning High-Precision Bounding Box for Rotated
Object Detection via Kullback-Leibler Divergence

Xue Yang1∗, Xiaojiang Yang1 , Jirui Yang2 , Qi Ming3 , Wentao Wang1 , Qi Tian4 , Junchi Yan1†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Institute of Technology 4 Huawei Inc.
{yangxue-2019-sjtu, yangxiaojiang, wwt117, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
{yangjirui123, chaser.ming}@gmail.com tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Existing rotated object detectors are mostly inherited from the horizontal detection
paradigm, as the latter has evolved into a well-developed area. However, these
detectors are difficult to perform prominently in high-precision detection due to the
limitation of current regression loss design, especially for objects with large aspect
ratios. Taking the perspective that horizontal detection is a special case for rotated
object detection, in this paper, we are motivated to change the design of rotation
regression loss from induction paradigm to deduction methodology, in terms of
the relation between rotation and horizontal detection. We show that one essential
challenge is how to modulate the coupled parameters in the rotation regression loss,
as such the estimated parameters can influence to each other during the dynamic
joint optimization, in an adaptive and synergetic way. Specifically, we first convert
the rotated bounding box into a 2-D Gaussian distribution, and then calculate the
Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KLD) between the Gaussian distributions as the
regression loss. By analyzing the gradient of each parameter, we show that KLD
(and its derivatives) can dynamically adjust the parameter gradients according to
the characteristics of the object. For instance, it will adjust the importance (gradient
weight) of the angle parameter according to the aspect ratio. This mechanism can
be vital for high-precision detection as a slight angle error would cause a serious
accuracy drop for large aspect ratios objects. More importantly, we have proved
that KLD is scale invariant. We further show that the KLD loss can be degenerated
into the popular ln -norm loss for horizontal detection. Experimental results on
seven datasets using different detectors show its consistent superiority, and codes
are available at https://github.com/yangxue0827/RotationDetection.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental building block for visual analysis across aerial images, scene text etc., rotated
object detection has recently been developed rapidly [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], which benefit themselves
from the well-established horizontal detection approaches [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Specifically, many works
[12, 13, 14, 15] build themselves upon the previously established horizontal detection pipeline from
an inductive perspective, as shown in Figure 1(a). However, these detectors are often unable to cope
with challenging scenes well due to the limitations of current regression loss, such as large aspect
ratio objects, dense scenes, etc., resulting in obvious disadvantages in high-precision detection.
∗
†

Part of the work was done during an internship at Huawei Inc.
Correspondence author is Junchi Yan.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

