Property-Aware Relation Networks for Few-Shot
Molecular Property Prediction
Yaqing Wang1⇤ Abulikemu Abuduweili1,2⇤ Quanming Yao3†, Dejing Dou1
1
Baidu Research, Baidu Inc., China
2
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3
Department of EE, Tsinghua University, China
{wangyaqing01, v_abuduweili, doudejing}@baidu.com
qyaoaa@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecular property prediction plays a fundamental role in drug discovery to identify
candidate molecules with target properties. However, molecular property prediction
is essentially a few-shot problem, which makes it hard to use regular machine
learning models. In this paper, we propose Property-Aware Relation networks
(PAR) to handle this problem. In comparison to existing works, we leverage the fact
that both relevant substructures and relationships among molecules change across
different molecular properties. We first introduce a property-aware embedding
function to transform the generic molecular embeddings to substructure-aware
space relevant to the target property. Further, we design an adaptive relation graph
learning module to jointly estimate molecular relation graph and refine molecular
embeddings w.r.t. the target property, such that the limited labels can be effectively
propagated among similar molecules. We adopt a meta-learning strategy where
the parameters are selectively updated within tasks in order to model generic
and property-aware knowledge separately. Extensive experiments on benchmark
molecular property prediction datasets show that PAR consistently outperforms
existing methods and can obtain property-aware molecular embeddings and model
molecular relation graph properly.

1

Introduction

Drug discovery is an important biomedical task, which targets at finding new potential medical
compounds with desired properties such as better absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME), low toxicity and active pharmacological activity [1, 2, 3]. It is recorded that drug
discovery takes more than 2 billion and at least 10 years in average while the clinical success rate
is around 10% [4, 5, 6]. To speed up this process, quantitative structure property/activity relationship (QSPR/QSAR) modeling uses machine learning methods to establish the connection between
molecular structure and particular properties [7]. It usually consists of two components: a molecular
encoder which encodes molecular structure as a fixed-length molecular representation, and a predictor
which estimates the activity of a certain property based on the molecular representation. Predictive
models can be leveraged in virtual screening to discover potential molecules more efficiently [8].
However, molecular property prediction is essentially a few-shot problem, which makes it hard to
solve. Only a small amount of candidate molecules can pass virtual screening to be evaluated in the
lead optimization stage of drug discovery [9]. After a series of wet-lab experiments, most candidates
⇤
†

Equal contribution. A. Abuduweili did his work during internship at Baidu Research.
Correspondence to.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

