A Bi-Level Framework for Learning to Solve
Combinatorial Optimization on Graphs

Runzhong Wang1∗
Zhigang Hua2
Gan Liu2
Jiayi Zhang1
Junchi Yan1( )†
2
2
2
Feng Qi
Shuang Yang
Jun Zhou
Xiaokang Yang1
1
2
Department of CSE and MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Ant Group
{runzhong.wang,zhangjiayirr,yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
{z.hua,liugan.lg,feng.qi,shuang.yang,jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com

Abstract
Combinatorial Optimization (CO) has been a long-standing challenging research
topic featured by its NP-hard nature. Traditionally such problems are approximately
solved with heuristic algorithms which are usually fast but may sacrifice the solution
quality. Currently, machine learning for combinatorial optimization (MLCO) has
become a trending research topic, but most existing MLCO methods treat CO as
a single-level optimization by directly learning the end-to-end solutions, which
are hard to scale up and mostly limited by the capacity of ML models given the
high complexity of CO. In this paper, we propose a hybrid approach to combine
the best of the two worlds, in which a bi-level framework is developed with an
upper-level learning method to optimize the graph (e.g. add, delete or modify edges
in a graph), fused with a lower-level heuristic algorithm solving on the optimized
graph. Such a bi-level approach simplifies the learning on the original hard CO
and can effectively mitigate the demand for model capacity. The experiments and
results on several popular CO problems like Directed Acyclic Graph scheduling,
Graph Edit Distance and Hamiltonian Cycle Problem show its effectiveness over
manually designed heuristics and single-level learning methods. Code available at
https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/PPO-BiHyb.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) is a family of long-standing optimization problems. A large portion
of CO problems is NP-hard due to the combinatorial nature, raising challenges for traditional (exact)
solvers on even medium-sized problems. Heuristic algorithms are often adopted to approximately
solve CO problems within an acceptable time, and there is a growing trend adopting modern datadriven approaches to solve CO problems that achieve better and faster results [30].
The major line of works solving CO with machine learning (ML) is single-level [8, 25, 29, 30, 39,
41, 57, 59, 64], where the prediction of ML module lies in the solution space, assuming the model
has enough capacity learning the input-output mapping of the CO problem. However, achieving
such an assumption is non-trivial, leading to the following two aspects of challenges. On the
one hand, it is challenging to design a model with enough capacity with limited computational
resources, and existing models are usually tailored for specific problems which require heavy trailand-error [25, 57, 59]. On the other hand, training such a heavy model requires either supervision
from high-quality labels [31, 57, 60] which are infeasible to obtain for large-sized problems due to
the NP-hard nature, or reinforcement learning (RL) [8, 30, 38, 39] which might be unstable due to
the challenges of large action space and sparse reward especially for large-sized problems [52].
∗
†

Part of the work was done while the first author was working as an intern at Ant Group.
Junchi Yan is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

