On the Sample Complexity of Privately Learning
Axis-Aligned Rectangles

Menachem Sadigurschi∗

Uri Stemmer†

Abstract
We revisit the fundamental problem of learning Axis-Aligned-Rectangles over a
finite grid X d ⊆ Rd with differential privacy.
n Existing results show that theosample
1.5
complexity of this problem is at most min d· log |X| , d1.5 · (log∗ |X|)
. That
is, existing constructions either require sample complexity that grows linearly with
log |X|, or else it grows super linearly with the dimension
 d. We presenta novel al1.5
e
gorithm that reduces the sample complexity to only O d· (log∗ |X|)
, attaining
a dimensionality optimal dependency without requiring the sample complexity to
grow with log |X|. The technique used in order to attain this improvement involves
the deletion of “exposed” data-points on the go, in a fashion designed to avoid the
cost of the adaptive composition theorems. The core of this technique may be of
individual interest, introducing a new method for constructing statistically-efficient
private algorithms.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006] is a mathematical definition for privacy, that aims to enable
statistical analyses of databases while providing strong guarantees that individual-level information
does not leak. More specifically, consider a database containing data pertaining to individuals, and
suppose that we have some data analysis procedure that we would like to apply to this database. We
say that this procedure preserves differential privacy if no individual’s data has a significant effect
on the distribution of the outcome of the procedure. Intuitively, this guarantees that whatever is
learned about an individual from the outcome of the computation could also be learned with her data
arbitrarily modified (or without her data). Formally,
Definition 1.1 (Dwork et al. [2006]). A randomized algorithm A is (ε, δ)-differentially private if for
every two databases S, S 0 that differ on one row (such databases are called neighboring), and every
set of outcomes F , we have Pr[A(S) ∈ F ] ≤ eε · Pr[A(S 0 ) ∈ F ] + δ. The definition is referred to
as pure differential privacy when δ = 0, and approximate differential privacy when δ > 0.
Over the last decade, we have witnessed an explosion of research on differential privacy, and by now
it is largely accepted as a gold-standard for privacy preserving data analysis. In particular, there has
been a lot of interest in designing private learning algorithms, which are learning algorithms that
guarantee differential privacy for their training data. Intuitively, this guarantees that the outcome of
the learner (the identified hypothesis) leaks very little information on any particular point from the
training set. Works in this vein include [Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011, Beimel et al., 2014, 2019b,
2016, 2020, Bun et al., 2015, Feldman and Xiao, 2015, Bun et al., 2019, Beimel et al., 2019a, Kaplan
et al., 2019, 2020a, Alon et al., 2020, Kaplan et al., 2020b, Bun et al., 2020, Alon et al., 2019], and
much more.
∗
†

Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. sadigurs@post.bgu.ac.il.
Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University and Google Research. u@uri.co.il.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

