Offline Constrained Multi-Objective Reinforcement
Learning via Pessimistic Dual Value Iteration

Runzhe Wu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
runzhe@sjtu.edu.cn

Yufeng Zhang
Northwestern University
yufengzhang2023@u.northwestern.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
zy6@princeton.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
In constrained multi-objective RL, the goal is to learn a policy that achieves the best
performance specified by a multi-objective preference function under a constraint.
We focus on the offline setting where the RL agent aims to learn the optimal policy
from a given dataset. This scenario is common in real-world applications where
interactions with the environment are expensive and the constraint violation is
dangerous. For such a setting, we transform the original constrained problem into
a primal-dual formulation, which is solved via dual gradient ascent. Moreover, we
propose to combine such an approach with pessimism to overcome the uncertainty
in offline data, which leads to our Pessimistic Dual Iteration (PEDI). We establish
upper bounds on both the suboptimality and constraint violation for the policy
learned by PEDI based on an arbitrary dataset, which proves that PEDI is provably
sample efficient. We also specialize PEDI to the setting with linear function
approximation. To the best of our knowledge, we propose the first provably
efficient constrained multi-objective RL algorithm with offline data without any
assumption on the coverage of the dataset.

1

Introduction

There has been increased interest in multi-objective RL in recent years. Compared with traditional
single-objective RL, the goal of the multi-objective one depends on a preference function, which takes
the multiple objectives as input and outputs a scalar. The multi-objective optimization problems are
usually constrained, as otherwise, it may cause danger or malfunction in applications. For example,
consider a home automation system that helps humans monitor and control home attributes which can
be regarded as multi-objectives. Users at different times may value different aspects of its services.
Some may think highly of lighting at night, while others may concern the climate. We can formulate
the users’ preference as a preference function on the multiple objectives. Therefore, the system is
dealing with a multi-objective optimization problem. However, the system cannot optimize this
problem without any constraints, which might go against human’s will, such as generating extreme
climate inside a house or performing unacceptably energy-consuming operations.
We formulate the constrained multi-objective Markov decision process (CMOMDP), which is similar
to the constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999). The difference is that the
objectives are multiple and constraints can be nonlinear. We aim to minimize the value of a preference
function, which takes multiple objectives as input and outputs a scalar.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

