Pointwise Bounds for Distribution Estimation under
Communication Constraints
Wei-Ning Chen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
wnchen@stanford.edu

Peter Kairouz
Google Research
kairouz@google.com

Ayfer Özgür
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
aozgur@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a d-dimensional discrete distribution from
its samples observed under a b-bit communication constraint. In contrast to most
previous results that largely focus on the global minimax error, we study the local
behavior of the estimation error and provide pointwise bounds that depend on
the⇣ target⇣ distribution
⌘⌘ p. In particular, we show that the `2 error decays with
kpk1/2 1
O max n2b , n
when n is sufficiently large, hence it is governed by the
half-norm of p instead of the ambient dimension d. For the achievability result,
we propose a two-round sequentially interactive estimation scheme that achieves
this error rate uniformly over all p. This two-round scheme extends to `q loss with
q
1, and hence gives pointwise upper bounds on `q error. We also develop a
new local minimax lower bound with
(almost) matching
`2 error, showing that any
⇣ kpk
⌘
(1+ )/2
interactive scheme must admit a ⌦
`
error
for any > 0.
2
n2b

Our upper and lower bounds together indicate that the H1/2 (p) , log(kpk1/2 ) bits
of communication is both sufficient and necessary to achieve the optimal (centralized) performance, where H1/2 (p) is the Rényi entropy of order 2. Therefore,
under the `2 loss, the correct measure of the local communication complexity at p
is its Rényi entropy.

1

Introduction

Learning a distribution from its samples has been a fundamental task in unsupervised learning
dating back to the late nineteenth century [1]. This task, especially under distributed settings, has
gained growing popularity in the recent years as data is increasingly generated “at the edge” by
countless sensors, smartphones, and other devices. When data is distributed across multiple devices,
communication cost and bandwidth often become a bottleneck hampering the training of highaccuracy machine learning models [2]. This is even more so for federated learning and analytics type
settings [3] which rely on wireless mobile links for communication.
To resolve this issue, several communication-efficient distribution learning schemes have been recently
proposed and studied in the literature (see Section 1.2 for a thorough discussion). On the positive
side, the state-of-the-art schemes are known to be worst-case (minimax) optimal as they have been
shown to achieve the information-theoretic lower bounds on the global minimax error [4–8]. On the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

