Contrastive Learning of Global-Local
Video Representations

Shuang Ma
Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA

Zhaoyang Zeng
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China

Daniel McDuff
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Yale Song
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Abstract
Contrastive learning has delivered impressive results for various tasks in the selfsupervised regime. However, existing approaches optimize for learning representations specific to downstream scenarios, i.e., global representations suitable for
tasks such as classification or local representations for tasks such as detection and
localization. While they produce satisfactory results in the intended downstream
scenarios, they often fail to generalize to tasks that they were not originally designed
for. In this work, we propose to learn video representations that generalize to both
the tasks which require global semantic information (e.g., classification) and the
tasks that require local fine-grained spatio-temporal information (e.g., localization).
We achieve this by optimizing two contrastive objectives that together encourage our model to learn global-local visual information given audio signals. We
show that the two objectives mutually improve the generalizability of the learned
global-local representations, significantly outperforming their disjointly learned
counterparts. We demonstrate our approach on various tasks including action/sound
classification, lip reading, deepfake detection, event and sound localization.1

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen a surge of interest in contrastive self-supervised learning (CSL) [59, 38, 35, 16]
to obtain representations that generalize to various downstream scenarios. In CSL, the choice of
“contrasting views” plays a crucial role because the learned representations capture information
shared between different views by maximizing mutual information between them [8]. This makes it
critical to design contrastive objectives with the “right” contrasting views tailored for the intended
downstream scenarios [77], which has been the focus of many recent works [38, 10, 45, 74, 84, 83].
The progress made so far provides important insights for understanding how to select optimal
contrasting views for a given task [77]. However, the current paradigm of designing CSL approaches
specific to any intended (global or local) downstream scenarios could be suboptimal, as in the
real-world case the downstream scenarios are generally unknown in advance. This not only limits
the generalizability of the learned representations, evaluating the approaches solely on the intended
scenarios could produce misleading conclusions. Although existing approaches achieve impressive
results in their intended downstream tasks, they often fail to generalize to tasks that they were not
originally designed for, e.g., as we show later in our experiments, global representations do not
generalize well to tasks such as lip reading [22, 21] which require local spatio-temporal information.
Motivated by this, we take an orthogonal direction to the current CSL approaches: We aim to
learn representations agnostic to the types of downstream scenarios and generalize to both the
scenarios that require global representations (e.g., classification) and scenarios that require local
representations (e.g., localization). We focus on learning video representations using the natural
1

https://github.com/yunyikristy/global_local

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

