Navigating to the Best Policy
in Markov Decision Processes
Aymen Al Marjani
UMPA, ENS Lyon
Lyon, France
aymen.al_marjani@ens-lyon.fr
Aurélien Garivier
UMPA, CNRS, INRIA, ENS Lyon
Lyon, France
aurelien.garivier@ens-lyon.fr

Alexandre Proutiere
EECS and Digital Futures
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
We investigate the classical active pure exploration problem in Markov Decision
Processes, where the agent sequentially selects actions and, from the resulting
system trajectory, aims at identifying the best policy as fast as possible. We propose
a problem-dependent lower bound on the average number of steps required before
a correct answer can be given with probability at least 1 − δ. We further provide
the ﬁrst algorithm with an instance-speciﬁc sample complexity in this setting. This
algorithm addresses the general case of communicating MDPs; we also propose a
variant with a reduced exploration rate (and hence faster convergence) under an
additional ergodicity assumption. This work extends previous results relative to the
generative setting [MP21], where the agent could at each step query the random
outcome of any (state, action) pair. In contrast, we show here how to deal with the
navigation constraints, induced by the online setting. Our analysis relies on an
ergodic theorem for non-homogeneous Markov chains which we consider of wide
interest in the analysis of Markov Decision Processes.

1

Introduction

Somewhat surprisingly, learning in a Markov Decision Process is most often considered under
the performance criteria of consistency or regret minimization (see e.g. [SB18, Sze10, LS20] and
references therein). Regret minimization (see e.g. [AJO09, FCG10]) is particularly relevant when
the rewards accumulated during the learning phase are important. This is however not always the
case: for example, when learning a game (whether Go, chess, Atari, or whatever), winning or losing
during the learning phase does not really matter. One may intuitively think that sometimes getting
into difﬁculty on purpose so as to observe unheard situations can signiﬁcantly accelerate the learning
process. Another example is the training of robot prototypes in the factory: a reasonably good policy
is ﬁrst searched, regardless of the losses incurred, that can serve as an initialization for a second phase
regret-minimization mode that starts when the robot is deployed. It is hence also of great practical
importance to study the sample complexity of learning, and to work on strategies that might improve,
in this perspective, on regret minimizing algorithms.
In this work, we are interested in the best policy identiﬁcation (BPI) problem for inﬁnite-horizon
discounted MDPs. This framework was introduced by [Fie94] under the name of PAC-RL. In BPI
the algorithm explores the MDP until it has gathered enough samples to return an ε-optimal policy
with probability at least 1 − δ. Crucially, the algorithm halts at a random time step, determined by a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

