Spatial-Temporal Super-Resolution of Satellite
Imagery via Conditional Pixel Synthesis

Yutong He

Dingjie Wang
Marshall Burke

Nicholas Lai
William Zhang
Chenlin Meng
David B. Lobell
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
{kellyyhe, daviddw, nicklai, wxyz, chenlin, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu
{mburke, dlobell}@stanford.edu

Abstract
High-resolution satellite imagery has proven useful for a broad range of tasks, including measurement of global human population, local economic livelihoods, and
biodiversity, among many others. Unfortunately, high-resolution imagery is both
infrequently collected and expensive to purchase, making it hard to efficiently and
effectively scale these downstream tasks over both time and space. We propose a
new conditional pixel synthesis model that uses abundant, low-cost, low-resolution
imagery to generate accurate high-resolution imagery at locations and times in
which it is unavailable. We show that our model attains photo-realistic sample
quality and outperforms competing baselines on a key downstream task – object
counting – particularly in geographic locations where conditions on the ground are
changing rapidly.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in satellite technology have enabled granular insight into the evolution of
human activity on the planet’s surface. Multiple satellite sensors now collect imagery with spatial
resolution less than 1m, and this high-resolution (HR) imagery can provide sufficient information for
various fine-grained tasks such as post-disaster building damage estimation, poverty prediction, and
crop phenotyping [15, 3, 41]. Unfortunately, HR imagery is captured infrequently over much of the
planet’s surface (once a year or less), especially in developing countries where it is arguably most
needed, and was historically captured even more rarely (once or twice a decade) [7]. Even when
available, HR imagery is prohibitively expensive to purchase in large quantities. These limitations
often result in an inability to scale promising HR algorithms and apply them to questions of broad
social importance. Meanwhile, multiple sources of publicly-available satellite imagery now provide
sub-weekly coverage at global scale, albeit at lower spatial resolution (e.g. 10m resolution for
Sentinel-2). Unfortunately, such coarse spatial resolution renders small objects like residential
buildings, swimming pools, and cars unrecognizable.

Figure 1: Given a 10m low resolution (LR) image from 2016 and a 1m high resolution (HR) image
from 2018, we generate a photo-realistic and accurate HR image for 2016.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

