ToAlign: Task-oriented Alignment for Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation

Guoqiang Wei1∗ Cuiling Lan2† Wenjun Zeng2 Zhizheng Zhang2 Zhibo Chen1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Microsoft Research Asia

wgq7441@mail.ustc.edu.cn {culan,wezeng,zhizzhang}@microsoft.com
chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptive classifcation intends to improve the classifcation
performance on unlabeled target domain. To alleviate the adverse effect of domain
shift, many approaches align the source and target domains in the feature space.
However, a feature is usually taken as a whole for alignment without explicitly
making domain alignment proactively serve the classifcation task, leading to suboptimal solution. In this paper, we propose an effective Task-oriented Alignment
(ToAlign) for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). We study what features
should be aligned across domains and propose to make the domain alignment
proactively serve classifcation by performing feature decomposition and alignment
under the guidance of the prior knowledge induced from the classifcation task
itself. Particularly, we explicitly decompose a feature in the source domain into
a task-related/discriminative feature that should be aligned, and a task-irrelevant
feature that should be avoided/ignored, based on the classifcation meta-knowledge.
Extensive experimental results on various benchmarks (e.g., Offce-Home, Visda2017, and DomainNet) under different domain adaptation settings demonstrate the
effectiveness of ToAlign which helps achieve the state-of-the-art performance. The
code is publicly available at https://github.com/microsoft/UDA.

1 Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have made extraordinary progress in various computer vision
tasks, with image classifcation as a most representative one. The trained models generally perform
well on the testing data which shares similar data distribution to that of the training data. However, in
many practical scenarios, drastic performance degradation is observed when applying such trained
models to new domains with domain shift [57], where the data distributions between the training and
testing domains are different. Fine-tuning on labeled target data is a direct solution but is costly due
to the requirement of target sample annotations. In contrast, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
requires only the labeled source data and unlabeled target data to enhance the model’s performance
on the target domain, which has attracted increasing interest in both academia [3, 2, 72, 58, 25, 31]
and industry [63, 27].
There has been a large spectrum of UDA methods. Supported by the theoretical analysis [3], the
overwhelming majority of methods tend to align the distributions of source and target domains.
A line of works [6, 67, 43, 54, 55] explicitly align the distributions based on domain discrepancy
measurements, e.g., Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [6]. Another line of alignment-based
UDAs borrow ideas from Generative Adversarial Networks [19] and use domain adversarial training
∗
†

This work was done when Guoqiang Wei was an intern at MSRA.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

