Unbiased Classification Through Bias-Contrastive and
Bias-Balanced Learning

Youngkyu Hong†
Naver AI Lab
youngkyu.hong@navercorp.com

Eunho Yang
KAIST, AITRICS
eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Datasets for training machine learning models tend to be biased unless the data
is collected with complete care. In such a biased dataset, models are susceptible
to making predictions based on the biased features of the data. The biased model
fails to generalize to the case where correlations between biases and targets are
shifted. To mitigate this, we propose Bias-Contrastive (BiasCon) loss based on
the contrastive learning framework, which effectively leverages the knowledge of
bias labels. We further suggest Bias-Balanced (BiasBal) regression which trains
the classification model toward the data distribution with balanced target-bias
correlation. Furthermore, we propose Soft Bias-Contrastive (SoftCon) loss which
handles the dataset without bias labels by softening the pair assignment of the
BiasCon loss based on the distance in the feature space of the bias-capturing model.
Our experiments show that our proposed methods significantly improve previous
debiasing methods in various realistic datasets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models have achieved extremely high performance in a variety of tasks and
domains such as computer vision and natural language processing [15, 7, 39]. Recently, however,
many concerns have arisen that such evaluation does not reflect the real-world performance of the
model when it is deployed [35, 41]. Among others, failing especially due to the biases existing in the
dataset can lead to serious societal side effects such as prejudice or racism beyond simple algorithm
failure [45, 34, 5]. If bias features are highly correlated with the object class in the dataset, models
tend to use the bias as a cue for the prediction as they are easier to learn but enough to achieve high
accuracy even though they are not actually related to the target class [3, 33].
The failure of learning due to the bias existing in the dataset appears in various fields and tasks.
To name a few, in image classification task, [18, 30] discovered that state-of-the-art CNNs have
texture biases. Visual question answering (VQA) model is also known to be susceptible to biases as
it only uses the word occurrence in the question to generate answer [1, 11]. For example, if most of
the images of banana in the train sets are yellow, the model directly answers the question "What is
the color of the banana?" as "Yellow", without looking at the image of green banana. Surveillance
models, which can cause serious societal problems if misclassified, tend to give biased predictions
toward sensitive attributes such as race [34].
Considering the importance of the problem, many approaches have been proposed to mitigate
such biases in the training dataset. Depending on the presence or absence of bias information, the
approaches can be divided into two categories. When the bias label is available, [28, 43] add the bias
prediction branch for the unbiased prediction. [40, 10] directly regularize the feature embedding to
be indistinguishable across the bias classes. When the bias label is unavailable, [11, 3, 8, 20] design
†

This work was done as a student at KAIST.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

