A mechanistic multi-area recurrent network model of
decision-making
Michael Kleinman1 Chandramouli Chandrasekaran2⇤ Jonathan C. Kao1⇤
1
2
University of California, Los Angeles
Boston University
michael.kleinman@ucla.edu cchandr1@bu.edu kao@seas.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) trained on neuroscience-based tasks have been
widely used as models for cortical areas performing analogous tasks. However,
very few tasks involve a single cortical area, and instead require the coordination of
multiple brain areas. Despite the importance of multi-area computation, there is a
limited understanding of the principles underlying such computation. We propose
to use multi-area RNNs with neuroscience-inspired architecture constraints to
derive key features of multi-area computation. In particular, we show that incorporating multiple areas and Dale’s Law is critical for biasing the networks to learn
biologically plausible solutions. Additionally, we leverage the full observability
of the RNNs to show that output-relevant information is preferentially propagated
between areas. These results suggest that cortex uses modular computation to
generate minimal sufficient representations of task information. More broadly,
our results suggest that constrained multi-area RNNs can produce experimentally
testable hypotheses for computations that occur within and across multiple brain
areas, enabling new insights into distributed computation in neural systems.

1

Introduction

Decision-making, multisensory integration, attention, motor control, and timing emerge from the
coordination of multiple interconnected brain areas [1–9]. While neural activity in a particular area
can contain behaviorally relevant signals, such as choices or percepts, it is often unclear if these
signals originate within the area or are inherited from upstream brain areas [6]. Understanding the
neural bases of these behaviors necessitates an understanding of the intra- and inter-area dynamics,
that is, how neural activity evolves within and between brain areas. However, we currently lack clear
hypotheses for how distinct brain-area dynamics and connectivity relate to computation. To address
this gap, we use multi-area recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to model, probe, and gain insight into
how behaviorally relevant computations emerge within and across multiple brain areas.
Optimized feedforward and recurrent neural networks have been used for machine learning but are
also emerging tools to model computations associated with visual [10, 11], cognitive [12], timing
[3, 13], navigation [14], and motor tasks [15, 16]. RNNs transform experimenter-designed task
inputs into behavior-related outputs through recurrent dynamics. Its artificial units often exhibit
heterogeneous responses and population dynamics observed in brain areas implicated in cognitive
and motor tasks [12, 15, 17–20]. If artificial units resemble cortical neurons, RNNs are subsequently
analyzed to propose hypotheses for how a local computation occurs in a brain area [3, 12, 18, 21]. In
comparison to direct experimental recordings, an important advantage of RNNs is that the activity
⇤

Joint senior author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

