SE(3)-equivariant prediction of molecular
wavefunctions and electronic densities
Oliver T. Unke1,2,8,10∗ †
oliver.unke@gmail.com
Michael Gastegger1,2,9

Mihail Bogojeski1,8∗
mihailbogojeski@gmail.com
Mario Geiger3

Tess Smidt4,5

Klaus-Robert Müller 1,6,7,8,10
klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de
1

Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
DFG Cluster of Excellence “Unifying Systems in Catalysis” (UniSysCat), Technische Universität Berlin,
10623 Berlin, Germany
3
Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
4
Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720
5
Center for Advanced Mathematics for Energy Research Applications (CAMERA),
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720
6
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Korea
7
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Stuhlsatzenhausweg, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
8
BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Berlin, Germany
9
BASLEARN – TU Berlin/BASF Joint Lab for Machine Learning, Technische Universität Berlin,
10587 Berlin, Germany
10
Google Research, Brain Team, Berlin, Germany

2

Abstract
Machine learning has enabled the prediction of quantum chemical properties with
high accuracy and efficiency, allowing to bypass computationally costly ab initio
calculations. Instead of training on a fixed set of properties, more recent approaches
attempt to learn the electronic wavefunction (or density) as a central quantity of
atomistic systems, from which all other observables can be derived. This is complicated by the fact that wavefunctions transform non-trivially under molecular
rotations, which makes them a challenging prediction target. To solve this issue, we
introduce general SE(3)-equivariant operations and building blocks for constructing deep learning architectures for geometric point cloud data and apply them to
reconstruct wavefunctions of atomistic systems with unprecedented accuracy. Our
model achieves speedups of over three orders of magnitude compared to ab initio
methods and reduces prediction errors by up to two orders of magnitude compared
to the previous state-of-the-art. This accuracy makes it possible to derive properties
such as energies and forces directly from the wavefunction in an end-to-end manner.
We demonstrate the potential of our approach in a transfer learning application,
where a model trained on low accuracy reference wavefunctions implicitly learns
to correct for electronic many-body interactions from observables computed at a
higher level of theory. Such machine-learned wavefunction surrogates pave the
way towards novel semi-empirical methods, offering resolution at an electronic
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Work done at TU Berlin prior to joining Google Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

