SyncTwin: Treatment Effect Estimation with
Longitudinal Outcomes

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zq224@cam.ac.uk

Yao Zhang
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk

Angela Mary Wood
University of Cambridge
amw79@medschl.cam.ac.uk

Ioana Bica
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
UCLA
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Most of the medical observational studies estimate the causal treatment effects
using electronic health records (EHR), where a patient’s covariates and outcomes
are both observed longitudinally. However, previous methods focus only on adjusting for the covariates while neglecting the temporal structure in the outcomes.
To bridge the gap, this paper develops a new method, SyncTwin, that learns a
patient-specific time-constant representation from the pre-treatment observations.
SyncTwin issues counterfactual prediction of a target patient by constructing a
synthetic twin that closely matches the target in representation. The reliability
of the estimated treatment effect can be assessed by comparing the observed and
synthetic pre-treatment outcomes. The medical experts can interpret the estimate
by examining the most important contributing individuals to the synthetic twin.
In the real-data experiment, SyncTwin successfully reproduced the findings of a
randomized controlled clinical trial using observational data, which demonstrates
its usability in the complex real-world EHR.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal individual treatment effect (ITE) using observational data has become increasingly common in the medical literature due to the popularization of electronic health records (EHR).
The EHR is a longitudinal collection of records: it contains repeated measurements of a patient’s
health condition over irregular time intervals. Although the treatments may also vary over time, many
studies consider a point treatment, where the treatment allocation is performed at some observed time
and stays fixed during the study [12, 44, 34, 5, 51]. Point treatment is widely applicable to problems
involving one-off treatments (e.g. surgical operations) or treatments that do not change frequently
(e.g. long term medication for chronic disease). We will refer to the setting above as Longitudinal
and Irregularly sampled data with Point treatment setting, or LIP. The LIP setting will be the focus of
this work (Figure 1 A).
The LIP setting is different from the conventional settings in causal inference. This is because
we observe the pre-treatment outcome yt over time leading to the treatment allocation. These pretreatment outcomes may unveil the inherent temporal structure in the outcome time series (e.g. trend
and seasonality), leading to better ITE estimation over time. In contrast, the conventional settings
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

