Learning Models for Actionable Recourse
Alexis Ross⇤
Harvard University
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
alexisr@allenai.org

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@seas.harvard.edu

Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
obastani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
As machine learning models are increasingly deployed in high-stakes domains
such as legal and financial decision-making, there has been growing interest in
post-hoc methods for generating counterfactual explanations. Such explanations
provide individuals adversely impacted by predicted outcomes (e.g., an applicant
denied a loan) with recourse—i.e., a description of how they can change their
features to obtain a positive outcome. We propose a novel algorithm that leverages
adversarial training and PAC confidence sets to learn models that theoretically
guarantee recourse to affected individuals with high probability. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach with extensive experiments on real data.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in using machine learning to inform consequential
decisions in legal and financial decision-making—e.g., deciding whether to give an applicant a
loan [Hardt et al., 2016], bail to a defendant [Lakkaraju and Rudin, 2017], or parole to a prisoner [Zeng
et al., 2017]. Because these decisions have an impact on the lives of the concerned individuals, it is
critical to explain why the model made its prediction. Explanations are important not only to ensure
that there are no issues with the way the prediction is made (e.g., making sure the decision is free of
racial/gender bias [Hardt et al., 2016] and does not suffer from causal issues [Bastani et al., 2017]),
but also to give the affected individual a justification for the decision. Thus, there has been a great
deal of recent interest in explainable machine learning [Lou et al., 2012, Wang and Rudin, 2015,
Ribeiro et al., 2016b, Lakkaraju et al., 2019].
We focus on counterfactual explanations [Wachter et al., 2017], which specify how features can be
changed to obtain a different model prediction. These explanations can be used to provide individuals
who are negatively impacted by model outcomes with actionable recourses—i.e., actions they can
take to receive a positive outcome [Ustun et al., 2019]. For instance, for an applicant denied a loan, an
actionable recourse might be: “to get a loan, increase your income by $1,000.” Such a recourse must
satisfy two properties to be actionable: (i) it only changes features that the individual can realistically
modify—e.g., it cannot change race or gender, but can change income, and (ii) the magnitude of the
change must be reasonable. An actionable recourse like this may be considered necessary in some
settings because it provides an individual with agency over a consequential decision that affects them.
Prior research has addressed the need for recourses through post-hoc algorithms for computing
individual recourses corresponding to certain kinds of models—e.g., using integer linear programming
⇤

Work started at Harvard University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

