Discerning Decision-Making Process of Deep Neural
Networks with Hierarchical Voting Transformation

Ying Sun1,2,5,† , Hengshu Zhu2,∗ , Chuan Qin2 , Fuzhen Zhuang3,6∗ , Qing He1,5 , Hui Xiong4
1
IIP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc.
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
4
Artificial Intelligence Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science, Beihang University
{sunying17g, heqing}@ict.ac.cn, {zhuhengshu, chuanqin0426}@gmail.com,
zhuangfuzhen@buaa.edu.cn, xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract
Neural network based deep learning techniques have shown great success for
numerous applications. While it is expected to understand their intrinsic decisionmaking processes, these deep neural networks often work in a black-box way. To
this end, in this paper, we aim to discern the decision-making processes of neural
networks through a hierarchical voting strategy by developing an explainable deep
learning model, namely Voting Transformation-based Explainable Neural Network (VOTEN). Specifically, instead of relying on massive feature combinations,
VOTEN creatively models expressive single-valued voting functions between explicitly modeled latent concepts to achieve high fitting ability. Along this line, we
first theoretically analyze the major components of VOTEN and prove the relationship and advantages of VOTEN compared with Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), the
basic structure of deep neural networks. Moreover, we design efficient algorithms
to improve the model usability by explicitly showing the decision processes of
VOTEN. Finally, extensive experiments on multiple real-world datasets clearly
validate the performances and explainability of VOTEN.

1

Introduction

Neural network based deep learning techniques have attracted great attention from both academia and
industry in the past decade. Compared with classic machine learning models, deep neural networks
have much higher expressiveness and adaptability for complicated data input, and thus have made
tremendous success in various application domains, such as Computational Vision [29, 56], Natural
Language Processing [54, 20], and Recommender Systems [32, 24]. Nevertheless, since deep neural
networks usually have complicated connections of hidden units, a long-standing challenge is how
to decipher what’s inside the black box of models for understanding their intrinsic decision-making
processes. Indeed, in many real-world scenarios, such as business analysis [33, 57, 49] and human
resource management [50, 44, 46, 44], the lack of model explainability makes people less likely to
be convinced when the decision-making process of the model is not understandable. This prevents a
broader application of deep neural networks.
While many research efforts have been made in developing explainable deep learning models [45, 10],
most of existing works focus on post-hoc explanation [5, 18], i.e., designing metrics to measure
the feature relevance/contribution to the outputs of a trained model. Although these methods have
*Corresponding authors.
†This work was accomplished when Ying Sun was an intern in Baidu supervised by Hengshu Zhu.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

