Across-animal odor decoding by
probabilistic manifold alignment

Pedro Herrero-Vidal
Center for Neural Science
Neuroscience Institute
New York University
pmh314@nyu.edu

Dmitry Rinberg
Neuroscience Institute
Center for Neural Science
NYU Langone Health
rinberg@nyu.edu

Cristina Savin
Center for Neural Science
Center for Data Science
New York University
cs5360@nyu.edu

Abstract
Identifying the common structure of neural dynamics across subjects is key for
extracting unifying principles of brain computation and for many brain machine
interface applications. Here, we propose a novel probabilistic approach for aligning
stimulus-evoked responses from multiple animals in a common low dimensional
manifold and use hierarchical inference to identify which stimulus drives neural
activity in any given trial. Our probabilistic decoder is robust to a range of features
of the neural responses and significantly outperforms existing neural alignment
procedures. When applied to recordings from the mouse olfactory bulb, our
approach reveals low-dimensional population dynamics that are odor specific
and have consistent structure across animals. Thus, our decoder can be used for
increasing the robustness and scalability of neural-based chemical detection.

1

Introduction

Collective network dynamics are the foundation of neural computation, from early sensory encoding
[1], to working memory [2], decision making [3], or motor control [4]. Neural population activity
often has low-dimensional structure that is qualitatively preserved across sessions [3], behavioral
states [5], and even animals [6–8]. Aligning neural datasets from multiple recordings and animal
subjects into a common latent space could provide a powerful tool for extracting unifying principles
of brain computations. Nonetheless, progress is hampered by the lack of robust statistical tools for
extracting shared neural population dynamics across datasets.
The alignment of low-dimensional neural manifolds is equally important in brain-computer interface
(BCI) applications, where the assumption of a common low dimensional structure in neural responses
is used to compensate for instability in neural recordings and ensure robust performance over time
[9, 10]. This is not only restricted to motor control; in the sensory domain, a new generation of
chemical detectors exploit the unsurpassed sensitivity of rodent olfactory receptors, but bypass the
limitations of training animals to report odor identity by directly decoding it from neural responses
[11–13]. Unfortunately, the applicability of this idea is limited by the need to learn the mapping
between neural activity and chemical identity on an animal-by-animal basis, which involves costly
data collection [14]. Statistical tools that make use of data from previous animals to quickly calibrate
the decoder in a new animal could dramatically increase the practical use of such technologies.
The basic structure of the rodent olfactory bulb (OB) is well-understood [15]: a vast number of different olfactory receptors project to distinct OB subpopulations (glomeruli) whose spatial organization
is largely preserved across animals [16, 17]. Odor identity is encoded in low-dimensional transients
of their population dynamics [1, 18, 13], though how the glomerular topography translates into
stimulus-dependent network dynamics is less clear. Nonetheless, given the anatomical and functional
similarity of the rodent olfactory bulb, it is likely that the OB response to individual odors is itself
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

