Celebrating Diversity in Shared Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Chenghao Li, Tonghan Wang, Chengjie Wu, Qianchuan Zhao, Jun Yang∗, Chongjie Zhang∗
Tsinghua University
{lich18, wangth18, wucj19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{zhaoqc, yangjun603, chongjie}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has shown the promise
to solve complex cooperative tasks. Its success is partly because of parameter
sharing among agents. However, such sharing may lead agents to behave similarly
and limit their coordination capacity. In this paper, we aim to introduce diversity in
both optimization and representation of shared multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Specifically, we propose an information-theoretical regularization to maximize the
mutual information between agents’ identities and their trajectories, encouraging
extensive exploration and diverse individualized behaviors. In representation,
we incorporate agent-specific modules in the shared neural network architecture,
which are regularized by L1-norm to promote learning sharing among agents while
keeping necessary diversity. Empirical results show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on Google Research Football and super hard StarCraft
II micromanagement tasks† .

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has drawn increasing interest in recent
years, which provides a promise for solving many real-world challenging problems, such as sensor
networks [1], traffic management [2], and coordination of robot swarms [3]. However, learning
effective policies for such complex multi-agent systems remains challenging. One central problem is
that the joint action-observation space grows exponentially with the number of agents, which imposes
high demand on the scalability of learning algorithms.
To address this scalability challenge, policy decentralization with shared parameters (PDSP) is widely
used, where agents share their neural network weights. Parameter sharing significantly improves
learning efficiency because it dramatically reduces the total number of policy parameters, while
experiences and gradients of one agent can be used to train others. Enjoying these advantages, many
advanced deep MARL approaches adopt the PDSP paradigm, including value-based methods [4–8],
policy gradients [9–13] and communication learning algorithms [14, 15]. These approaches achieve
state-of-the-art performance on tasks such as StarCraft II micromanagement [16].
While parameter sharing has been proven to accelerate training [17], its drawbacks are also apparent
in complex tasks. These tasks typically require substantial exploration and diversified strategies
among agents. When parameters are shared, agents tend to acquire homogeneous behaviors because
they typically adopt similar actions under similar observations, preventing efficient exploration and
the emergence of sophisticated cooperative policies. This tendency becomes particularly problematic
* Equal advising
†
Videos are available at https://sites.google.com/view/celebrate-diversity-shared with
codes.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

