Best of Both Worlds: Practical and Theoretically
Optimal Submodular Maximization in Parallel

Yixin Chen
Department of Computer Science
Florida State University
Tallahassee, Florida
yc19e@my.fsu.edu

Tonmoy Dey
Department of Computer Science
Florida State University
Tallahassee, Florida
td18d@my.fsu.edu

Alan Kuhnle
Department of Computer Science
Florida State University
Tallahassee, Florida
kuhnle@cs.fsu.edu

Abstract
For the problem of maximizing a monotone, submodular function with respect to
a cardinality constraint k on a ground set of size n, we provide an algorithm that
achieves the state-of-the-art in both its empirical performance and its theoretical
properties, in terms of adaptive complexity, query complexity, and approximation
ratio; that is, it obtains, with high probability, query complexity of O (n) in expectation, adaptivity of O (log(n)), and approximation ratio of nearly 1 − 1/e. The
main algorithm is assembled from two components which may be of independent
interest. The first component of our algorithm, L INEAR S EQ, is useful as a preprocessing algorithm to improve the query complexity of many algorithms. Moreover,
a variant of L INEAR S EQ is shown to have adaptive complexity of O(log(n/k))
which is smaller than that of any previous algorithm in the literature. The second
component is a parallelizable thresholding procedure T HRESHOLD S EQ for adding
elements with gain above a constant threshold. Finally, we demonstrate that our
main algorithm empirically outperforms, in terms of runtime, adaptive rounds, total
queries, and objective values, the previous state-of-the-art algorithm FAST in a
comprehensive evaluation with six submodular objective functions.

1

Introduction

The cardinality-constrained optimization of a monotone, submodular function f : 2N → R+ , defined
on subsets of a ground set N of size n, is a general problem formulation that is ubiquitous in wideranging applications, e.g. video or image summarization [30], network monitoring [26], information
gathering [23], and MAP Inference for Determinantal Point Processes [20], among many others. The
function f : 2N → R+ is submodular iff for all S ⊆ T ⊆ N , x 6∈ T , ∆ (x | T ) ≤ ∆ (x | S)1 ; and
the function f is monotone if f (S) ≤ f (T ) for all S ⊆ T . In this paper, we study the following
submodular maximization problem (SM)
maximizef (S), subject to |S| ≤ k,
(SM)
where f is a monotone, submodular function; SM is an NP-hard problem. There has been extensive
effort into the design of approximation algorithms for SM over the course of more than 45 years, e.g.
[32, 12, 10, 21, 24]. For SM, the optimal ratio has been shown to be 1 − 1/e ≈ 0.63 [32].
1

∆ (x | S) denotes the marginal gain of x to S: f (S ∪ {x}) − f (S).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

