Error Compensated Distributed SGD
can be Accelerated
Xun Qian∗
xun.qian@kaust.edu.sa

Peter Richtárik†
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Tong Zhang‡
tongzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
Gradient compression is a recent and increasingly popular technique for reducing
the communication cost in distributed training of large-scale machine learning
models. In this work we focus on developing efficient distributed methods that can
work for any compressor satisfying a certain contraction property, which includes
both unbiased (after appropriate scaling) and biased compressors such as RandK
and TopK. Applied naively, gradient compression introduces errors that either slow
down convergence or lead to divergence. A popular technique designed to tackle
this issue is error compensation/error feedback. Due to the difficulties associated
with analyzing biased compressors, it is not known whether gradient compression
with error compensation can be combined with acceleration. In this work, we
show for the first time that error compensated gradient compression methods
can be accelerated. In particular, we propose and study the error compensated
loopless Katyusha method, and establish an accelerated linear convergence rate
under standard assumptions. We show through numerical experiments that the
proposed method converges with substantially fewer communication rounds than
previous error compensated algorithms.

1

Introduction

When training very large scale supervised machine learning problems, such as those arising in the
context of federated learning [Konečný et al., 2016b, McMahan et al., 2017, Konečný et al., 2016a]
(see also recent surveys [Li et al., 2019, Kairouz, 2019]), distributed algorithms are indispensable. In
such settings, communication is generally much slower than (local) computation, which makes it the
key bottleneck in the design of efficient distributed systems. There are several ways to tackle this
issue, including reliance on large mini-batches [Goyal et al., 2017, You et al., 2017], asynchronous
learning [Agarwal and Duchi, 2011, Lian et al., 2015, Recht et al., 2011], local updates [Ma et al.,
2017, Stich, 2020, Khaled et al., 2020, Hanzely and Richtárik, 2020, Woodworth et al., 2020] and
communication compression (e.g., quantization and sparsification) [Alistarh et al., 2017, Bernstein
et al., 2018, Mishchenko et al., 2019, Seide et al., 2014, Wen et al., 2017].
Communication compression. In this work, we focus on the last of these techniques: communication
compression. The key idea here is to apply a lossy compression transformation/operator to the
messages before they are communicated so as to save on communication time. While compression
reduces the communicated bits in each communication round, it introduces errors, and this generally
leads to an increase in the number of communication rounds needed to find a solution of any
predefined accuracy. Still, compression has been found useful in practice, as the trade-off often seems
to prefer compression to no compression.
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia; Moscow Institute of Physics
and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
‡
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

