Coupled Gradient Estimators for Discrete Latent
Variables
Zhe Dong
Google Research, Brain Team
zhedong@google.com

Andriy Mnih
DeepMind
andriy@deepmind.com

George Tucker
Google Research, Brain Team
gjt@google.com

Abstract
Training models with discrete latent variables is challenging due to the high variance of unbiased gradient estimators. While low-variance reparameterization
gradients of a continuous relaxation can provide an effective solution, a continuous relaxation is not always available or tractable. Dong et al. (2020) and Yin
et al. (2020) introduced a performant estimator that does not rely on continuous
relaxations; however, it is limited to binary random variables. We introduce a
novel derivation of their estimator based on importance sampling and statistical
couplings, which we extend to the categorical setting. Motivated by the construction of a stick-breaking coupling, we introduce gradient estimators based
on reparameterizing categorical variables as sequences of binary variables and
Rao-Blackwellization. In systematic experiments, we show that our proposed
categorical gradient estimators provide state-of-the-art performance, whereas even
with additional Rao-Blackwellization, previous estimators (Yin et al., 2019) underperform a simpler REINFORCE with a leave-one-out-baseline estimator (Kool
et al., 2019).

1

Introduction

Optimizing an expectation of a cost function of discrete variables with respect to the parameters
of their distribution is a frequently encountered problem in machine learning. This problem is
challenging because the gradient of the objective, like the objective itself, is an expectation over
an exponentially large space of joint configurations of the variables. As the number of variables
increases, these expectations quickly become intractable and thus are typically approximated using
Monte Carlo sampling, trading a reduction in computation time for variance in the estimates. When
such stochastic gradient estimates are used for learning, their variance determines the largest learning
rate that can be used without making training unstable. Thus finding estimators with lower variance
leads directly to faster training by allowing higher learning rates. For example, the use of the
reparameterization trick to yield low-variance gradient estimates has been essential to the success of
variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). However, this estimator,
also known as the pathwise derivative estimator (Glasserman, 2013), can only be applied to continuous
random variables.
For discrete random variables, there are two common strategies for stochastic gradient estimation. The
first one involves replacing discrete variables with continuous ones that approximate them as closely
as possible (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al., 2017) and training the resulting relaxed system with the
reparameterization trick. However, as after training, the system is evaluated with discrete variables,
this approach is not guaranteed to perform well and requires a careful choice of the continuous
relaxation. Moreover, evaluating the cost function at the relaxed values instead of the discrete ones is
not always desirable or even possible. The second strategy, involves using the REINFORCE estimator
Code and additional information: https://sites.google.com/view/disarm-estimator.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

