The balancing principle for parameter choice
in distance-regularized domain adaptation

Werner Zellinger1,∗

Natalia Shepeleva1

Hamid Eghbal-zadeh4,5

Marius-Constantin Dinu2,3

Duc Hoan Nguyen6

Sergei V. Pereverzyev6

Bernhard Nessler2

Bernhard A. Moser1

1

Software Competence Center Hagenberg GmbH
Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University Linz
3
Dynatrace Research
4
Institute of Computational Perception, Johannes Kepler University Linz
5
LIT AI Lab, Johannes Kepler University Linz
6
Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics, Austrian
Academy of Sciences
∗
werner.zellinger@scch.at
2

Abstract
We address the unsolved algorithm design problem of choosing a justified regularization parameter in unsupervised domain adaptation. This problem is intriguing
as no labels are available in the target domain. Our approach starts with the observation that the widely-used method of minimizing the source error, penalized by a
distance measure between source and target feature representations, shares characteristics with regularized ill-posed inverse problems. Regularization parameters in
inverse problems are optimally chosen by the fundamental principle of balancing
approximation and sampling errors. We use this principle to balance learning errors
and domain distance in a target error bound. As a result, we obtain a theoretically
justified rule for the choice of the regularization parameter. In contrast to the state
of the art, our approach allows source and target distributions with disjoint supports.
An empirical comparative study on benchmark datasets underpins the performance
of our approach.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation uses the knowledge in a source domain to improve the performance of an
algorithm on a related target domain [1]. In particular, domain adaptation tackles domain shifts in
machine learning applications: Medical diagnostic systems should be adapted to new physical human
variations; Industrial quality inspection systems should be accurate for new products; Self-driving
cars should be able to adapt to new geographical environments and weather conditions. In this work,
we focus on unsupervised domain adaptation where labels are only available in the source domain.
There are mainly two types of approaches for unsupervised domain adaptation: importance weighting [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and feature representation learning [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. In this work, we focus
on feature representation learning which goes beyond classical importance weighting by allowing a
target distribution with support outside of the source distribution. The core idea behind feature representation learning approaches is to map the data into a new feature space where the source and target
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

