Even your Teacher Needs Guidance:
Ground-Truth Targets Dampen Regularization
Imposed by Self-Distillation

Kenneth Borup
Department of Mathematics
Aarhus University
kennethborup@math.au.dk

Lars N. Andersen
Department of Mathematics
Aarhus University
larsa@math.au.dk

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is classically a procedure where a neural network is trained
on the output of another network along with the original targets in order to transfer
knowledge between the architectures. The special case of self-distillation, where
the network architectures are identical, has been observed to improve generalization
accuracy. In this paper, we consider an iterative variant of self-distillation in a
kernel regression setting, in which successive steps incorporate both model outputs
and the ground-truth targets. This allows us to provide the first theoretical results
on the importance of using the weighted ground-truth targets in self-distillation.
Our focus is on fitting nonlinear functions to training data with a weighted mean
square error objective function suitable for distillation, subject to `2 regularization
of the model parameters. We show that any such function obtained with selfdistillation can be calculated directly as a function of the initial fit, and that infinite
distillation steps yields the same optimization problem as the original with amplified
regularization. Furthermore, we provide a closed form solution for the optimal
choice of weighting parameter at each step, and show how to efficiently estimate this
weighting parameter for deep learning and significantly reduce the computational
requirements compared to a grid search.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation, most commonly known from Hinton et al. (2015), is a procedure to transfer
knowledge from one neural network (teacher) to another neural network (student).1 Often the student
has fewer parameters than the teacher, and the procedure can be seen as a model compression
technique. Originally, the distillation procedure achieves the knowledge transfer by training the
student network using the original training targets, denoted as ground-truth targets, as well as a
softened distribution of logits from the (already trained and fixed) teacher network.2 Since the
popularization of knowledge distillation by Hinton et al. (2015), the idea of knowledge distillation
has been extended to a variety of settings.3 This paper will focus on the special case where the teacher
and student are of identical architecture, called self-distillation, and where the aim is to improve
predictive performance, rather than compressing the model.
The idea of self-distillation is to use outputs from a trained model together with the original targets as
new targets for retraining the same model from scratch. We refer to this as one step of self-distillation,
and one can iterate this procedure for multiple distillation steps (see Figure 1). Empirically, it
has been shown that this procedure often generalizes better than the model trained merely on the
1

Often knowledge distillation is also referred to under the name Teacher-Student learning.
We will refer to the weighted outputs of the penultimate layer, i.e. pre-activation of the last layer, as logits.
3
See Section 2 for a brief overview, or see Wang and Yoon (2020) for a more exhaustive survey
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

