A 3D Generative Model for
Structure-Based Drug Design

Shitong Luo
HeliXon Research
luost@helixon.com
luost26@gmail.com

Jiaqi Guan
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jiaqi@illinois.edu

Jianzhu Ma
Peking University
majianzhu@pku.edu.cn

Jian Peng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study a fundamental problem in structure-based drug design — generating
molecules that bind to specific protein binding sites. While we have witnessed
the great success of deep generative models in drug design, the existing methods
are mostly string-based or graph-based. They are limited by the lack of spatial
information and thus unable to be applied to structure-based design tasks. Particularly, such models have no or little knowledge of how molecules interact with
their target proteins exactly in 3D space. In this paper, we propose a 3D generative
model that generates molecules given a designated 3D protein binding site. Specifically, given a binding site as the 3D context, our model estimates the probability
density of atom’s occurrences in 3D space — positions that are more likely to
have atoms will be assigned higher probability. To generate 3D molecules, we
propose an auto-regressive sampling scheme — atoms are sampled sequentially
from the learned distribution until there is no room for new atoms. Combined
with this sampling scheme, our model can generate valid and diverse molecules,
which could be applicable to various structure-based molecular design tasks such
as molecule sampling and linker design. Experimental results demonstrate that
molecules sampled from our model exhibit high binding affinity to specific targets
and good drug properties such as drug-likeness even if the model is not explicitly
optimized for them.

1

Introduction

Designing molecules that bind to a specific protein binding site, also known as structure-based drug
design, is one of the most challenging tasks in drug discovery [2]. Searching for suitable molecule
candidates in silico usually involves massive computational efforts because of the enormous space of
synthetically feasible chemicals [22] and conformational degree of freedom of both compound and
protein structures [11].
In recent years, we have witnessed the success of machine learning approaches to problems in drug
design, especially on molecule generation. Most of these approaches use deep generative models to
propose drug candidates by learning the underlying distribution of desirable molecules. However,
most of such methods are generally SMILES/string-based [10, 17] or graph-based [18, 19, 13, 14].
They are limited by the lack of spatial information and unable to perceive how molecules interact
with proteins in 3D space. Hence, these methods are not applicable to generating molecules that fit
to a specific protein structure which is also known as the drug target. Another line of work studies
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

