Clustering Effect of
(Linearized) Adversarial Robust Models
Yang Bai1⇤ Xin Yan2⇤ Yong Jiang1,2,5 Shu-Tao Xia2,5† Yisen Wang3,4†
1
Tsinghua Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

Abstract
Adversarial robustness has received increasing attention along with the study of
adversarial examples. So far, existing works show that robust models not only
obtain robustness against various adversarial attacks but also boost the performance
in some downstream tasks. However, the underlying mechanism of adversarial
robustness is still not clear. In this paper, we interpret adversarial robustness
from the perspective of linear components, and find that there exist some statistical properties for comprehensively robust models. Specifically, robust models
show obvious hierarchical clustering effect on their linearized sub-networks, when
removing or replacing all non-linear components (e.g., batch normalization, maximum pooling, or activation layers). Based on these observations, we propose a
novel understanding of adversarial robustness and apply it on more tasks including
domain adaption and robustness boosting. Experimental evaluations demonstrate
the rationality and superiority of our proposed clustering strategy. Our code is
available at https://github.com/bymavis/Adv_Weight_NeurIPS2021.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown a strong learning capacity through a huge
number of parameters and diverse structures [16, 31, 11]. Meanwhile, adversary has raised increasing
security concerns on DNNs due to the observation of adversarial examples (i.e., the examples
mislead a classifier when crafted with human imperceptible but carefully designed perturbations) [13].
Adversarial robustness and defense techniques have thus become crucial for deep learning, yet many
adversarial defense techniques are found with deficiencies such as obfuscated gradient [2]. Up to now,
the widely accepted techniques to improve adversarial robustness are adversarial training variants
[23, 32, 38, 33, 35, 36], by training a DNN after data augmentation with the worst-case adversarial
examples. Recent study has found that not only do robust models show moderate robustness under
vast attacks, but also they can surprisingly boost the downstream tasks (e.g., domain adaption task
with subpopulation shift) [29].
However, the underlying mechanism of adversarial robustness is still not clear. Existing studies have
explored adversary on some specific components of DNNs, such as batch normalization [12], skip
connection [34], or activation layers [14, 4], which yield some enlightening understanding. On the
other hand, despite variation in DNNs’ structure, the components can be roughly divided into linear
and non-linear ones. The non-linear components tend to be instance-wise. For example, adversarial
* Equal contribution.
†

Correspondence to: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn) and Shu-Tao Xia (xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) .

