Dynamic influence maximization

Binghui Peng
Columbia University
bp2601@columbia.edu

Abstract
We initiate a systematic study on dynamic influence maximization (DIM). In the
DIM problem, one maintains a seed set S of at most k nodes in a dynamically
involving social network, with the goal of maximizing the expected influence
spread while minimizing the amortized updating cost. We consider two evolution
models. In the incremental model, the social network gets enlarged over time
and one only introduces new users and establishes new social links, we design an
algorithm that achieves (1−1/e−)-approximation to the optimal solution and has
k · poly(log n, −1 ) amortized running time, which matches the state-of-art offline
algorithm with only poly-logarithmic overhead. In the fully dynamic model, users
join in and leave, influence propagation gets strengthened or weakened in real time,
we prove that under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH), no algorithm
1−o(1)
can achieve 2−(log n)
-approximation unless the amortized running time is
1−o(1)
n
. On the technical side, we exploit novel adaptive sampling approaches
that reduce DIM to the dynamic MAX-k coverage problem, and design an efficient
(1 − 1/e − )-approximation algorithm for it. Our lower bound leverages the recent
developed distributed PCP framework.

1

Introduction

Influence maximization (IM) is the algorithmic task of given a social network and a stochastic
diffusion model, finding a seed set of at most k nodes with the largest expected influence spread
over the network [35]. Influence maximization and its variants have been extensively studied in the
literature over past decades [35, 13, 29, 45, 49, 38, 4, 22, 8], and it has applications in viral market,
rumor control, advertising, etc.
Social influence can be highly dynamic and the propagation tendencies between users can alter
dramatically over time. For example, in a Twitter network, new users join in and existing users drop
out in real time, pop stars arise instantly for breaking news and trending topics; in a DBLP network,
scientific co-authorship is built up and expands gradually over time. The classic IM algorithms
make crucial assumptions on a stationary social network and they fail to capture the elastic nature of
social networks. As a consequence, their seeding set could become outdated rapidly in a constantly
involving social network. To mitigate the issue, one designs a dynamic influence maximization
algorithm, which maintains a feasible seed set with high influence impact over time, and at the same
time, saturates low average computation cost per update of the social network.
In this paper, we initiate a systematic study on the dynamic influence maximization (DIM) problem .
Two types of evolution models are of interests to us. In an incremental model1 , the social networks
keep growing: new users join in and new social relationship is built up or strengthened over time. The
motivating example is the DBLP network, where co-authorship gets expanded over time. Another
justification is the preferential attachment involving model of social network [12, 41]. In a fully
1

These terms are standard notions in the dynamic algorithm literature, e.g., see [30, 1]

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

