Neural Population Geometry Reveals the Role of
Stochasticity in Robust Perception

Joel Dapello∗,1,2,3 , Jenelle Feather∗,1,2,4 , Hang Le∗,1 , Tiago Marques1,2,4
David D. Cox5 , Josh H. McDermott1,2,4,6 , James J. DiCarlo1,2,4 , SueYeon Chung1,7,8
∗

1

Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
4
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
5
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
6
Speech and Hearing Bioscience and Technology, Harvard University
7
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University
8
Zuckerman Institute, Columbia Univeristy

Abstract
Adversarial examples are often cited by neuroscientists and machine learning researchers as an example of how computational models diverge from biological
sensory systems. Recent work has proposed adding biologically-inspired components to visual neural networks as a way to improve their adversarial robustness.
One surprisingly effective component for reducing adversarial vulnerability is response stochasticity, like that exhibited by biological neurons. Here, using recently
developed geometrical techniques from computational neuroscience, we investigate
how adversarial perturbations influence the internal representations of standard, adversarially trained, and biologically-inspired stochastic networks. We find distinct
geometric signatures for each type of network, revealing different mechanisms for
achieving robust representations. Next, we generalize these results to the auditory
domain, showing that neural stochasticity also makes auditory models more robust
to adversarial perturbations. Geometric analysis of the stochastic networks reveals
overlap between representations of clean and adversarially perturbed stimuli, and
quantitatively demonstrates that competing geometric effects of stochasticity mediate a tradeoff between adversarial and clean performance. Our results shed light on
the strategies of robust perception utilized by adversarially trained and stochastic
networks, and help explain how stochasticity may be beneficial to machine and
biological computation.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have come to dominate both visual object recognition and auditory recognition tasks [1, 2, 3], establishing them as leading candidate models for
several domains of human perception [4, 5, 6, 7]. However, they still exhibit many non-human-like
traits [8, 9]. One such failure is in the existence of adversarial perturbations – small changes to
stimuli explicitly crafted to fool a model that remain imperceptible to humans [10, 11, 12] – which
demonstrate the fragility of some ANNs as models of biological perception.
1

See https://github.com/chung-neuroai-lab/adversarial-manifolds for accompanying code.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

