Post-Training Quantization for Vision Transformer

Zhenhua Liu1,2 , Yunhe Wang2∗, Kai Han2 , Wei Zhang2 , Siwei Ma1,3 , Wen Gao1,3
1
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
liu-zh@pku.edu.cn, {yunhe.wang, kai.han, wz.zhang}@huawei.com,
{swma, wgao}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, transformer has achieved remarkable performance on a variety of computer vision applications. Compared with mainstream convolutional neural networks, vision transformers are often of sophisticated architectures for extracting
powerful feature representations, which are more difficult to be developed on mobile devices. In this paper, we present an effective post-training quantization algorithm for reducing the memory storage and computational costs of vision transformers. Basically, the quantization task can be regarded as finding the optimal low-bit
quantization intervals for weights and inputs, respectively. To preserve the functionality of the attention mechanism, we introduce a ranking loss into the conventional
quantization objective that aims to keep the relative order of the self-attention results after quantization. Moreover, we thoroughly analyze the relationship between
quantization loss of different layers and the feature diversity, and explore a mixedprecision quantization scheme by exploiting the nuclear norm of each attention
map and output feature. The effectiveness of the proposed method is verified on
several benchmark models and datasets, which outperforms the state-of-the-art posttraining quantization algorithms. For instance, we can obtain an 81.29% top-1 accuracy using DeiT-B model on ImageNet dataset with about 8-bit quantization. Code
will be available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/VTPTQ.

1

Introduction

Following the applications in Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, transformer-based models
have shown great power in various Computer Vision (CV) tasks, such as image classification [11, 26],
object detection [4, 39] and image super-resolution [5]. Pre-trained with large-scale data, these
models usually have hundreds of millions of parameters. For instance, there are 307M parameters
and 64G FLOPs in the ViT-L model, which is both memory and computation expensive during
inference. This brings great challenges for these models to run on resource-constrained devices like
mobile phones and intelligent cars. Besides, the real-time computer vision applications that integrate
transformer-based models have to meet low latency requirements to achieve a high quality customer
experience. Therefore, the model compression technology of transformer-based models is urgently
needed for deployment in industrial environments.
Among various compression methods like pruning [16, 29, 19] and weight decomposition [37],
quantization method [9, 38, 7, 27, 14, 32] compresses a neural network by using lower bit-width for
weight values without changing the model architecture, which is particularly useful for carefullydesigned network architectures like transformers. Quantizing both weights and inputs can speed up
inference by tuning floating-point operations into integer or bit operations. There have been some
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

