Breaking the Linear Iteration Cost Barrier for Some
Well-known Conditional Gradient Methods Using
MaxIP Data-structures
Zhaozhuo Xu
Rice University
zx22@rice.edu

Zhao Song
Adobe Research
zsong@adobe.com

Anshumali Shrivastava
Rice University and ThirdAI Corp.
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Conditional gradient methods (CGM) are widely used in modern machine learning. CGM’s overall running time usually consists of two parts: the number of
iterations and the cost of each iteration. Most efforts focus on reducing the number of iterations as a means to reduce the overall running time. In this work, we
focus on improving the per iteration cost of CGM. The bottleneck step in most
CGM is maximum inner product search (MaxIP), which requires a linear scan
over the parameters. In practice, approximate MaxIP data-structures are found to
be helpful heuristics. However, theoretically, nothing is known about the combination of approximate MaxIP data-structures and CGM. In this work, we answer
this question positively by providing a formal framework to combine the locality
sensitive hashing type approximate MaxIP data-structures with CGM algorithms.
As a result, we show the first algorithm, where the cost per iteration is sublinear
in the number of parameters, for many fundamental optimization algorithms, e.g.,
Frank-Wolfe, Herding algorithm, and policy gradient.

1

Introduction

Conditional gradient methods (CGM), such as Frank-Wolfe and its variants, are well-known optimization approaches that have been extensively used in modern machine learning. For example,
CGM has been applied to kernel methods [1, 2], structural learning [3] and online learning [4, 5, 6].
Running Time Acceleration in Optimization: Recent years have witnessed the success of largescale machine learning models trained on vast amounts of data. In this learning paradigm, the
computational overhead of most successful models is dominated by the optimization process [7,
8]. Therefore, reducing the running time of the optimization algorithm is of practical importance.
The total running time in optimization can be decomposed into two components: (1) the number
of iterations towards convergence, (2) the cost spent in each iteration. Reducing the number of
iterations requires a better understanding of the geometric proprieties of the problem at hand and the
invention of better potential functions to analyze the progress of the algorithm [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15]. Reducing the cost spent per iteration usually boils down to designing problem-specific discrete
data-structures. In the last few years, we have seen a remarkable growth of using data-structures to
reduce iteration cost [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24].
MaxIP Data-structures for Iteration Cost Reduction: A well-known strategy in optimization,
with CGM, is to perform a greedy search over the weight vectors [9, 10, 13, 16, 25] or training
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

