CLDA: Contrastive Learning for Semi-Supervised
Domain Adaptation

Ankit Singh
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
singh.ankit@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to align the labeled source distribution with the unlabeled target distribution to obtain domain invariant predictive
models. However, the application of well-known UDA approaches does not generalize well in Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation (SSDA) scenarios where few
labeled samples from the target domain are available. This paper proposes a simple
Contrastive Learning framework for semi-supervised Domain Adaptation (CLDA)
that attempts to bridge the intra-domain gap between the labeled and unlabeled
target distributions and the inter-domain gap between source and unlabeled target
distribution in SSDA. We suggest employing class-wise contrastive learning to
reduce the inter-domain gap and instance-level contrastive alignment between the
original(input image) and strongly augmented unlabeled target images to minimize the intra-domain discrepancy. We have empirically shown that both of these
modules complement each other to achieve superior performance. Experiments
on three well-known domain adaptation benchmark datasets, namely DomainNet,
Office-Home, and Office31, demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. CLDA
achieves state-of-the-art results on all the above datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep Convolutional networks [30, 52] have shown impressive performance in various computer
vision tasks, e.g., image classification [19, 22] and action recognition [48, 23, 57, 32]. However,
there is an inherent problem of generalizability with deep-learning models, i.e., models trained on
one dataset(source domain) does not perform well on another domain. This loss of generalization is
due to the presence of domain shift [11, 55] across the dataset. Recent works [46, 29] have shown
that the presence of few labeled data from the target domain can significantly boost the performance
of the convolutional neural network(CNN) based models. This observation led to the formulation of
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaption (SSDA), which is a variant of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
where we have access to a few labeled samples from the target domain.
Unsupervised domain adaptation methods [42, 12, 36, 51, 35] try to transfer knowledge from the
label rich source domain to the unlabeled target domain. Many such existing domain adaptation
approaches [42, 12, 51] align the features of the source distribution with the target distribution without
considering the category of the samples. These class-agnostic methods fail to generate discriminative
features when aligning global distributions. Recently, owing to the success of contrastive approaches
[6, 18, 39], in self-representation learning, some recent works [26, 28] have turned to instance-based
contrastive approaches to reduce discrepancies across domains.
[46] reveals that the direct application of the well-known UDA approaches in Semi-Supervised
Domain Adaptation yields sub-optimal performance. [29] has shown that supervision from labeled
source and target samples can only ensure the partial cross-domain feature alignment. This creates
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

