A Regression Approach to Learning-Augmented
Online Algorithms

Keerti Anand
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
kanand@cs.duke.edu

Rong Ge
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Amit Kumar
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology
Hauz Khas, New Delhi - 110016
amitk@cse.iitd.ernet.in

Debmalya Panigrahi
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
The emerging field of learning-augmented online algorithms uses ML techniques
to predict future input parameters and thereby improve the performance of online
algorithms. Since these parameters are, in general, real-valued functions, a natural
approach is to use regression techniques to make these predictions. We introduce
this approach in this paper, and explore it in the context of a general online search
framework that captures classic problems like (generalized) ski rental, bin packing,
minimum makespan scheduling, etc. We show nearly tight bounds on the sample
complexity of this regression problem, and extend our results to the agnostic
setting. From a technical standpoint, we show that the key is to incorporate online
optimization benchmarks in the design of the loss function for the regression
problem, thereby diverging from the use of off-the-shelf regression tools with
standard bounds on statistical error.

1

Introduction

A recent trend in online algorithms has seen the use of future predictions generated by ML techniques
to bypass pessimistic worst-case lower bounds. A growing body of work has started to emerge in this
area in the last few years addressing a broad variety of problems in online algorithms such as rent
or buy, caching, metrical task systems, matching, scheduling, experts learning, stopping problems,
and others (see related work for references). The vast majority of this literature is focused on using
ML predictions in online algorithms, but does not address the question of how these predictions are
generated. This raises the question: what can we learn from data that will improve the performance
of online algorithms? Abstractly, this question comes in two inter-dependent parts: the first part
is a learning problem where we seek to learn a function that maps the feature domain to predicted
parameters, and the second part is to re-design the online algorithm to use these predictions. In this
paper, we focus on the first part of this design pipeline, namely we develop a regression approach to
generating ML predictions for online algorithms.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

