One More Step Towards Reality:
Cooperative Bandits with Imperfect Communication
Udari Madhushani
Princeton University
udarim@princeton.edu

Abhimanyu Dubey
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
dubeya@mit.edu

Naomi Ehrich Leonard
Princeton University
naomi@princeton.edu

Alex Pentland
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
pentland@mit.edu

Abstract
The cooperative bandit problem is increasingly becoming relevant due to its applications in large-scale decision-making. However, most research for this problem
focuses exclusively on the setting with perfect communication, whereas in most
real-world distributed settings, communication is often over stochastic networks,
with arbitrary corruptions and delays. In this paper, we study cooperative bandit learning under three typical real-world communication scenarios, namely, (a)
message-passing over stochastic time-varying networks, (b) instantaneous rewardsharing over a network with random delays, and (c) message-passing with adversarially corrupted rewards, including byzantine communication. For each of
these environments, we propose decentralized algorithms that achieve competitive
performance, along with near-optimal guarantees on the incurred group regret as
well. Furthermore, in the setting with perfect communication, we present an improved delayed-update algorithm that outperforms the existing state-of-the-art on
various network topologies. Finally, we present tight network-dependent minimax
lower bounds on the group regret. Our proposed algorithms are straightforward to
implement and obtain competitive empirical performance.

1

Introduction

The cooperative multi-armed bandit problem involves a group of N agents collectively solving a
multi-armed bandit while communicating with one another. This problem is relevant for a variety
of applications that involve decentralized decision-making, for example, in distributed controls
and robotics [31] and communication [21]. In the typical formulation of this problem, a group of
agents are arranged in a network G = (V, E), wherein each agent interacts with the bandit, and
communicates with its neighbors in G, to maximize the cumulative reward.
A large body of recent work on this problem assumes the communication network G to be fixed [20,
22]. Furthermore, these algorithms inherently require precise communication, as they construct
careful confidence intervals for cumulative arm statistics across agents, e.g., for stochastic bandits,
it has been shown that the standard UCB1 algorithm [3] with a neighborhood confidence interval is
close to optimal [11, 20], and correspondingly, for adversarial bandits, a neighborhood-weighted loss
estimator can be utilized with the EXP3 algorithm to provide competitive regret [7]. Such approaches
are indeed feasible when communication is perfect, e.g., the network G is fixed, and messages are
not lost or corrupted. In real-world environments, however, this is rarely true: messages can be lost,
agents can be byzantine, and communication networks are rarely static [23]. This aspect has hence
received much attention in the distributed optimization literature [35]. However, contrary to network
optimization where dynamics in communication can behave synergistically [17], bandit problems
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

