AugMax: Adversarial Composition of Random
Augmentations for Robust Training
Haotao Wang1∗, Chaowei Xiao2,3 , Jean Kossaifi2 , Zhiding Yu2 ,
Anima Anandkumar2,4 , and Zhangyang Wang1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin
2
NVIDIA 3 Arizona State University 4 California Institute of Technology
1
{htwang, atlaswang}@utexas.edu
2
{chaoweix, jkossaifi, zhidingy, aanandkumar}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Data augmentation is a simple yet effective way to improve the robustness of deep
neural networks (DNNs). Diversity and hardness are two complementary dimensions of data augmentation to achieve robustness. For example, AugMix explores
random compositions of a diverse set of augmentations to enhance broader coverage, while adversarial training generates adversarially hard samples to spot the
weakness. Motivated by this, we propose a data augmentation framework, termed
AugMax, to unify the two aspects of diversity and hardness. AugMax first randomly
samples multiple augmentation operators and then learns an adversarial mixture of
the selected operators. Being a stronger form of data augmentation, AugMax leads
to a significantly augmented input distribution which makes model training more
challenging. To solve this problem, we further design a disentangled normalization
module, termed DuBIN (Dual-Batch-and-Instance Normalization), that disentangles the instance-wise feature heterogeneity arising from AugMax. Experiments
show that AugMax-DuBIN leads to significantly improved out-of-distribution
robustness, outperforming prior arts by 3.03%, 3.49%, 1.82% and 0.71% on
CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C, Tiny ImageNet-C and ImageNet-C. Codes and pretrained models are available: https://github.com/VITA-Group/AugMax.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) samples present a challenge when deploying AI models in the real world.
Examples include natural corruptions (e.g., due to camera blurs or noise, snow, rain, or fog in image
data), sensory perturbations (e.g., sensor transient error, electromagnetic interference) and domain
shifts (e.g., summer → winter). However, deep networks are often trained on limited amounts of data
which may not cover sufficient scenarios. As a result, they are vulnerable to unforeseen distributional
changes despite achieving high performance on standard benchmarks [1–3]. This jeopardizes their
trustworthiness as well as safe deployment in real-world environments. Thus it is critical to develop
techniques that improve robustness even when training with relatively clean datasets.
Several techniques have been proposed to consolidate the robustness against unforeseen corruptions,
including robust data augmentation [5, 3, 8, 6], Lipschitz continuity [9–11], stability training [12],
pre-training [13–16], and robust network structures [17–19], to name a few. Among these techniques,
data augmentation is of particular interest due to its empirical effectiveness, ease of implementation,
low computational overhead, and plug-and-play nature.
∗

Work partially done during an internship at NVIDIA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

