Differentiable Simulation of Soft Multi-body Systems

Yi-Ling Qiao ∗
University of Maryland, College Park
Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Junbang Liang ∗
University of Maryland, College Park
Ming C. Lin
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
We present a method for differentiable simulation of soft articulated bodies. Our
work enables the integration of differentiable physical dynamics into gradient-based
pipelines. We develop a top-down matrix assembly algorithm within Projective
Dynamics and derive a generalized dry friction model for soft continuum using
a new matrix splitting strategy. We derive a differentiable control framework for
soft articulated bodies driven by muscles, joint torques, or pneumatic tubes. The
experiments demonstrate that our designs make soft body simulation more stable
and realistic compared to other frameworks. Our method accelerates the solution
of system identification problems by more than an order of magnitude, and enables
efficient gradient-based learning of motion control with soft robots.

1

Introduction

Soft articulated bodies have been studied and utilized in a number of important applications, such as
microsurgery [32], underwater robots [37], and adaptive soft grippers [20]. Since the compliance
of deformable materials can enable robots to operate more robustly and adaptively, soft biomimetic
robots are drawing a lot of attention and have made considerable progress. A snailfish robot dives
at a depth of 10,900 meters in the Mariana Trench [43]. Drones equipped with soft manipulators
grasp and transmit objects with a 91.7% success rate [17]. Soft hands with pneumatic actuators are
able to grasp objects of different shapes, including water bottles, eyeglasses, and sheets of cloth [12].
To enable rapid prototyping of soft robots and efficient design of control algorithms through virtual
experiments, we aim to create a realistic deformable multi-body dynamics framework, in which soft
articulated robots can be simulated to learn powerful control policies.
Design and control of soft robots are challenging because of their nonlinear dynamics and many
degrees of freedom. Differentiable physics has shown great promise to deal with such complex
problems [4, 14, 31, 68]. One possibility is to treat soft bodies as volumes that are modeled as sets of
particles or finite elements [29, 16]. These methods have made great progress, but the volumetric
representations are difficult to scale to large multi-body systems and are poorly suited to modeling
internal skeletons. Moreover, contact handling in recent differentiable physics frameworks [51, 30]
often does not comply with Coulomb’s Law, which is central to plausible visual realism and correct
physical behavior.
In this paper, we design a powerful and accurate differentiable simulator for soft multi-body dynamics.
Since our entire framework is differentiable, our method can be embedded with gradient-based optimization and learning algorithms, supporting gradient-based system identification, motion planning,
and motor control. Within the simulator, we first use tetrahedral meshes to enable adaptive resolution
and more accurate modeling. Next, to couple soft materials with articulated skeletons, we design a
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

