RoMA: Robust Model Adaptation
for Offline Model-based Optimization

Sihyun Yu1

Sungsoo Ahn2

Le Song2,3

Jinwoo Shin1

1

2

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI) 3 BioMap
{sihyun.yu, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
{Peter.Ahn, Le.Song}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
We consider the problem of searching an input maximizing a black-box objective
function given a static dataset of input-output queries. A popular approach to
solving this problem is maintaining a proxy model, e.g., a deep neural network
(DNN), that approximates the true objective function. Here, the main challenge is
how to avoid adversarially optimized inputs during the search, i.e., the inputs where
the DNN highly overestimates the true objective function. To handle the issue,
we propose a new framework, coined robust model adaptation (RoMA), based
on gradient-based optimization of inputs over the DNN. Specifically, it consists
of two steps: (a) a pre-training strategy to robustly train the proxy model and (b)
a novel adaptation procedure of the proxy model to have robust estimates for a
specific set of candidate solutions. At a high level, our scheme utilizes the local
smoothness prior to overcome the brittleness of the DNN. Experiments under
various tasks show the effectiveness of RoMA compared with previous methods,
obtaining state-of-the-art results, e.g., RoMA outperforms all at 4 out of 6 tasks
and achieves runner-up results at the remaining tasks.

1

Introduction

Designing new objects with the desired property is a fundamental problem in a wide range of
real-world domains, including chemistry [13], biology [5, 41], robotics [3, 28], and aircraft design
[20]. Unfortunately, many of them often require evaluating an expensive objective function, e.g.,
synthesizing and measuring the fluorescence of the protein [5]. Model-based optimization (MBO) is a
powerful framework to circumvent this issue, based on an approximation of the expensive evaluation
of objective functions by a cheap proxy model. Specifically, MBO optimizes a solution with respect
to the proxy model instead of the costly objective function. For obtaining a better proxy model,
predominant works have typically assumed active (or online) learning scenarios, i.e., they allow for
updating the model interactively with new queries of choice to approximate the ground-truth objective
function better around optima [22, 37, 39, 40, 43, 45, 46].
Recently, researchers have also proposed offline versions of MBO algorithms [5, 8, 11, 25, 52] which
build the proxy model from a given static dataset, i.e., input-output pairs collected from the objective
function prior to building the proxy model. Such frameworks are beneficial for various real-world
scenarios where the new interactive access to the objective functions may accompany serious danger
or expensive cost for evaluation, e.g., drug discovery or aircraft design. The common challenge to be
addressed for offline MBO is to construct a proxy model that yields an accurate approximation of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

