Neural Symplectic Form: Learning Hamiltonian
Equations on General Coordinate Systems

Yuhan Chen
Kobe University
Kobe, Japan 657–8501
193x226x@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp

Takashi Matsubara
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan 560–8531
matsubara@sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Takaharu Yaguchi
Kobe University
Kobe, Japan 657–8501
yaguchi@pearl.kobe-u.ac.jp

Abstract
In recent years, substantial research on the methods for learning Hamiltonian
equations has been conducted. Although these approaches are very promising,
the commonly used representation of the Hamilton equation uses the generalized
momenta, which are generally unknown. Therefore, the training data must be
represented in this unknown coordinate system, and this causes difficulty in applying the model to real data. Meanwhile, Hamiltonian equations also have a
coordinate-free expression that is expressed by using the symplectic 2-form. In
this paper, we propose a model that learns the symplectic form from data using
neural networks, thereby providing a method for learning Hamiltonian equations
from data represented in general coordinate systems, which are not limited to the
generalized coordinates and the generalized momenta. Consequently, the proposed
method is capable not only of modeling the target equations of both Hamiltonian
and Lagrangian formalisms but also of extracting unknown Hamiltonian structures
hidden in the data. For example, many polynomial ordinary differential equations
such as the Lotka–Volterra equation are known to admit non-trivial Hamiltonian
structures, and our numerical experiments show that such structures can certainly
be learned from data. Technically, each symplectic 2-form is associated with a
skew-symmetric matrix, but not all skew-symmetric matrices define a symplectic
2-form. In the proposed method, using the fact that symplectic 2-forms are derived
as the exterior derivative of certain differential 1-forms, we model the differential
1-form by neural networks, thereby improving the efficiency of learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the applications of deep learning to learn the fundamental equations of classical
mechanics have been actively studied. Analytical mechanics, which is a theory of classical mechanics,
is classified into Lagrangian mechanics and Hamiltonian mechanics [1, 3, 18]. The equations of
motion of Lagrangian mechanics are called the Euler–Lagrange equation, for which several neural
network models were proposed [7, 17]. In Lagrangian mechanics, the equations are described using
the state variables and the time derivatives of them. This feature of Lagrangian mechanics makes
it easy to prepare the data necessary for learning. On the other hand, Hamiltonian mechanics can
describe more general equations which are not covered by Lagrangian mechanics. In the previous
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

