Nearly Horizon-Free Offline Reinforcement Learning
Tongzheng Ren1 Jialian Li2 Bo Dai3 Simon S. Du4 Sujay Sanghavi1, 5
1
UT Austin 2 Tsinghua University 3 Google Research, Brain Team
4
University of Washington 5 Amazon Search
tongzheng@utexas.edu, lijialian7@163.com, bodai@google.com,
ssdu@cs.washington.edu, sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
We revisit offline reinforcement learning on episodic time-homogeneous Markov
Decision Processes (MDP). For tabular MDP with S states and A actions, or linear
MDP with anchor points and feature dimension d, given the collected K episodes
data with minimum visiting probability of (anchor) state-action pairs dm , we obtain
nearly horizon H-free sample complexity bounds for offline reinforcement learning
when the total reward is upper bounded by 1.
Specifically: ⌘
⇣q
1
• For offline policy evaluation, we obtain an Õ
error bound for the
Kdm
plug-in estimator, which matches the lower bound up to logarithmic factors and
does not have additional dependency on poly (H, S, A, d) in higher-order term.
⇣q
⌘
min(S,d)
1
• For offline policy optimization, we obtain an Õ
subKdm + Kdm
optimality gap for the empirical optimal policy, which approaches the lower
bound up to logarithmic factors and a high-order term, improving upon the best
known result by [1] that has additional poly (H, S, d) factors in the main term.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the first set of nearly horizon-free bounds
for episodic time-homogeneous offline tabular MDP and linear MDP with anchor
points. Central to our analysis is a simple yet effective recursion based method to
bound a “total variance” term in the offline scenarios, which could be of individual
interest.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn to make sequential decisions to maximize the long-term
reward in unknown environments, and has demonstrated success in game-playing [2, 3], robotics [4],
and automatic algorithm design [5]. These successes rely on being able to deploy the algorithms in a
way that directly interacts with the respective environment, allowing them to improve the policies
in a trial-and-error way. However, such direct interactions with real environments can be expensive
or even impossible in other real-world applications, e.g., education [6], health and medicine [7, 8],
conversational AI [9] and recommendation systems [10]. Instead, we are often given a collection of
logged experiences generated by potentially multiple and possibly unknown policies in the past.
This lack of access to real-time interactions with an environment led to the field of offline reinforcement
learning [11]. Within this, offline policy evaluation (OPE) focuses on evaluating a policy, and offline
policy optimization (OPO) focuses on improving policies; both rely only upon the given fixed past
experiences without any further interactions. OPE and OPO are in general notoriously difficult, as
unbiased estimators of the policy value can suffer from exponentially increasing variance in terms of
horizon in the worst case [12, 13].
To overcome this “curse of horizon” in OPE, [14, 15] first introduced marginalized importance
sampling (MIS) based estimators. They showed that if (1) all of the logged experiences are generated
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

