Distributed Deep Learning In Open Collaborations

Michael Diskin∗♥†
Lucile Saulnier‡

Alexey Bukhtiyarov∗†♣
Quentin Lhoest‡

Anton Sinitsin†♥

Dmitry Pyrkin♥

Maxim Kashirin♥

Albert Villanova del Moral‡

Denis Mazur♣

Thomas Wolf‡

Max Ryabinin∗†♥
Dmitry Popov†♥

Alexander Borzunov†♥
Ilia Kobelev†♣

Yacine Jernite‡

Gennady Pekhimenko♦♠

† Yandex, Russia
‡ Hugging Face, USA
♥ HSE University, Russia
♣ Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
♦ University of Toronto, Canada
♠ Vector Institute, Canada

Abstract
Modern deep learning applications require increasingly more compute to train
state-of-the-art models. To address this demand, large corporations and institutions
use dedicated High-Performance Computing clusters, whose construction and
maintenance are both environmentally costly and well beyond the budget of most
organizations. As a result, some research directions become the exclusive domain
of a few large industrial and even fewer academic actors. To alleviate this disparity,
smaller groups may pool their computational resources and run collaborative
experiments that benefit all participants. This paradigm, known as grid- or volunteer
computing, has seen successful applications in numerous scientific areas. However,
using this approach for machine learning is difficult due to high latency, asymmetric
bandwidth, and several challenges unique to volunteer computing. In this work,
we carefully analyze these constraints and propose a novel algorithmic framework
designed specifically for collaborative training. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach for SwAV and ALBERT pretraining in realistic conditions and
achieve performance comparable to traditional setups at a fraction of the cost.
Finally, we provide a detailed report of successful collaborative language model
pretraining with 40 participants.

1

Introduction

The deep learning community is becoming increasingly more reliant on transfer learning. In computer
vision, pretraining convolutional networks on large image collections such as ImageNet [1] is the
de facto standard for a wide range of applications ranging from object detection [2] and semantic
segmentation [3] to image classification [4] and even learning perceptual similarity [5]. A growing
number of natural language processing systems capitalize on language models with billions of
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to mryabinin0@gmail.com
Detailed author contributions are listed at the end of the work.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

