Learning 3D Dense Correspondence via
Canonical Point Autoencoder
An-Chieh Cheng1 , Xueting Li2 , Min Sun13 , Ming-Hsuan Yang245 , Sifei Liu6 ,
1
National Tsing-Hua University 2 University of California, Merced,
3
Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare,
4
Google Research, 5 Yonsei University, 6 NVIDIA

Abstract
We propose a canonical point autoencoder (CPAE) that predicts dense correspondences between 3D shapes of the same category. The autoencoder performs two key
functions: (a) encoding an arbitrarily ordered point cloud to a canonical primitive,
e.g., a sphere, and (b) decoding the primitive back to the original input instance
shape. As being placed in the bottleneck, this primitive plays a key role to map
all the unordered point clouds on the canonical surface and to be reconstructed in
an ordered fashion. Once trained, points from different shape instances that are
mapped to the same locations on the primitive surface are determined to be a pair
of correspondence. Our method does not require any form of annotation or selfsupervised part segmentation network and can handle unaligned input point clouds
within a certain rotation range. Experimental results on 3D semantic keypoint
transfer and part segmentation transfer show that our model performs favorably
against state-of-the-art correspondence learning methods. The source code and
trained models can be found at https://anjiecheng.github.io/cpae/.

1

Introduction

With prior knowledge and experience, humans can easily perceive corresponding object parts (e.g.,
the wings from two different airplanes), understand their shape and appearance variance, in order to
distinguish different objects coming from the same category. In computer vision, modeling dense
correspondence between 3D shapes in one category is fundamental for numerous applications, such
as robot grasping [1, 2], object manipulation [3] and texture mapping [2, 4]. However, existing
3D cameras typically capture raw point clouds of shape surfaces that are arbitrarily-ordered and
unstructured, in which correspondences are not established. 3D mesh representation, although is
usually parameterized with UV maps that can indicate correspondences, cannot be directly obtained
from sensors and needs to be reconstructed from other types of representations, e.g., 2D images
[5, 6] or 3D point clouds [7]. In this work, we focus on learning point cloud correspondences, which
remains an open challenge since it is infeasible to label ground truth correspondence annotations.
Without ground truth annotations, existing methods mainly discover shape correspondences via
seeking a form of canonical space that can associate various instance shapes. For example, in
particular shape domains such as human bodies [8] and human faces [9], parameterized shape
primitives have been designed to fit the observed raw data and to obtain the correspondences. Such
designs, however, cannot be generalized to other categories, e.g., man-made objects [10]. Recently,
several part co-segmentation networks relax the requirements of specific parameterized primitives,
but instead decompose input shapes into an ordered group of simplest part constitutions [11, 12],
in a self-supervised manner. These methods, however, require careful selection of the autoencoder
architectures (i.e., they need to be considerably shallow to let the branches only able to represent
simple shapes), and the number of part bases. Moreover, such part-based representation does not
explicitly provide fine-grained (e.g., point-level) correspondences.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

