Diffusion Normalizing Flow
Yongxin Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology
yongchen@gatech.edu

Qinsheng Zhang
Georgia Institute of Technology
qzhang419@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present a novel generative modeling method called diffusion normalizing ﬂow
based on stochastic differential equations (SDEs). The algorithm consists of two
neural SDEs: a forward SDE that gradually adds noise to the data to transform the
data into Gaussian random noise, and a backward SDE that gradually removes the
noise to sample from the data distribution. By jointly training the two neural SDEs
to minimize a common cost function that quantiﬁes the difference between the
two, the backward SDE converges to a diffusion process the starts with a Gaussian
distribution and ends with the desired data distribution. Our method is closely
related to normalizing ﬂow and diffusion probabilistic models and can be viewed as
a combination of the two. Compared with normalizing ﬂow, diffusion normalizing
ﬂow is able to learn distributions with sharp boundaries. Compared with diffusion
probabilistic models, diffusion normalizing ﬂow requires fewer discretization steps
and thus has better sampling efﬁciency. Our algorithm demonstrates competitive
performance in both high-dimension data density estimation and image generation
tasks.

1

Introduction

Generative model is a class of machine learning models used to estimate data distributions and
sometimes generate new samples from the distributions [8, 35, 16, 37, 7]. Many generative models
learn the data distributions by transforming a latent variable z with a tractable prior distribution to
the data space [8, 35, 32]. To generate new samples, one can sample from the latent space and then
follow the transformation to the data space. There exist a large class of generative models where
the latent space and the data space are of the same dimension. The latent variable and the data are
coupled through trajectories in the same space. These trajectories serve two purposes: in the forward
direction x → z, the trajectories infer the posterior distribution in the latent space associated with a
given data sample x, and in the backward direction z → x, it generates new samples by simulating
the trajectories starting from the latent space. This type of generative model can be roughly divided
into two categories, depending on whether these trajectories connecting the latent space and the data
space are deterministic or stochastic.
When deterministic trajectories are used, these generative models are known as ﬂow-based models.
The latent space and the data space are connected through an invertible map, which could either
be realized by the composition of multiple invertible maps [35, 8, 20] or a differential equation
[4, 14]. In these models, the probability density at each data point can be evaluated explicitly using
the change of variable theorem, and thus the training can be carried out by minimizing the negative
log-likelihood (NLL) directly. One limitation of the ﬂow-based model is that the invertible map
parameterized by neural networks used in it imposes topological constraints on the transformation
from z to x. Such limitation affects the performance signiﬁcantly when the prior distribution on z is
a simple unimodal distribution such as Gaussian while the target data distribution is a well-separated
multi-modal distribution, i.e., its support has multiple isolated components. In [6], it is shown that
there are some fundamental issues of using well-conditioned invertible functions to approximate such
complicated multi-modal data distributions.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

