A Generative Nonparametric Bayesian Model
for Whole Genomes
Alan N. Aminú 1,2 , Eli N. Weinsteinú 2,3 and Debora S. Marks2,4
1
Program in Systems, Synthetic and Quantitative Biology
2
Department of Systems Biology
Harvard Medical School
3
Program in Biophysics, Harvard University
4
Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT
alanamin@fas.harvard.edu, eweinstein@g.harvard.edu, debbie@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Generative probabilistic modeling of biological sequences has widespread
existing and potential use across biology and biomedicine, particularly given
advances in high-throughput sequencing, synthesis and editing. However,
we still lack methods with nucleotide resolution that are tractable at the
scale of whole genomes and that can achieve high predictive accuracy in
theory and practice. In this article we propose a new generative sequence
model, the Bayesian embedded autoregressive (BEAR) model, which uses a
parametric autoregressive model to specify a conjugate prior over a nonparametric Bayesian Markov model. We explore, theoretically and empirically,
applications of BEAR models to a variety of statistical problems including density estimation, robust parameter estimation, goodness-of-fit tests,
and two-sample tests. We prove rigorous asymptotic consistency results
including nonparametric posterior concentration rates. We scale inference
in BEAR models to datasets containing tens of billions of nucleotides. On
genomic, transcriptomic, and metagenomic sequence data we show that
BEAR models provide large increases in predictive performance as compared
to parametric autoregressive models, among other results. BEAR models
offer a flexible and scalable framework, with theoretical guarantees, for
building and critiquing generative models at the whole genome scale.

1

Introduction

Measuring and making DNA is central to modern biology and biomedicine. Generative
probabilistic modeling offers a framework for learning from sequencing data and forming
experimentally testable predictions of unobserved or future sequences that can be synthesized
in the laboratory [19, 31, 63]. Existing approaches to genome modeling typically preprocess
the data to build a matrix of genetic variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms [25, 57].
However, most modes of sequence variation are more complex. Structural variation occurs
widely within individuals (e.g. in cancer), between individuals (e.g. in domesticated plant
populations) and between species (e.g. in the human microbiome), and methods for detecting
and classifying structural variants are heuristic and designed only for predefined types
of sequence variation such as repeats [12, 44, 50, 69, 78]. Ideally, we would be able to
directly model genome sequencing data and/or assembled genome sequences. However,
building generative models that work with raw nucleotides, not matrices of alleles, raises the
ú

These authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

