ReAct: Out-of-distribution Detection With
Rectified Activations
Yiyou Sun
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sunyiyou@cs.wisc.edu

Chuan Guo
Facebook AI Research
chuanguo@fb.com

Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has received much attention lately due to its
practical importance in enhancing the safe deployment of neural networks. One of
the primary challenges is that models often produce highly confident predictions
on OOD data, which undermines the driving principle in OOD detection that the
model should only be confident about in-distribution samples. In this work, we
propose ReAct—a simple and effective technique for reducing model overconfidence on OOD data. Our method is motivated by novel analysis on internal
activations of neural networks, which displays highly distinctive signature patterns
for OOD distributions. Our method can generalize effectively to different network
architectures and different OOD detection scores. We empirically demonstrate that
ReAct achieves competitive detection performance on a comprehensive suite of
benchmark datasets, and give theoretical explication for our method’s efficacy. On
the ImageNet benchmark, ReAct reduces the false positive rate (FPR95) by 25.05%
compared to the previous best method1 .

1

Introduction

Neural networks deployed in real-world systems often encounter out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs—
unknown samples that the network has not been exposed to during training. Identifying and handling
these OOD inputs can be paramount in safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving [9]
and health care. For example, an autonomous vehicle may fail to recognize objects on the road that
do not appear in its object detection model’s training set, potentially leading to a crash. This can be
prevented if the system identifies the unrecognized object as OOD and warns the driver in advance.
A driving idea behind OOD detection is that the model should be much more uncertain about samples
outside of its training distribution. However, Nguyen et al. [38] revealed that modern neural networks
can produce overconfident predictions on OOD inputs. This phenomenon renders the separation
of in-distribution (ID) and OOD data a non-trivial task. Indeed, much of the prior work on OOD
detection focused on defining more suitable measures of OOD uncertainty [17, 19, 28, 29, 31, 33].
Despite the improvement, it is arguable that continued research progress in OOD detection requires
insights into the fundamental cause and mitigation of model overconfidence on OOD data.
In this paper, we start by revealing an important observation that OOD data can trigger unit activation
patterns that are significantly different from ID data. Figure 1(b) shows the distribution of activations
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/react.git

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

