A Probabilistic State Space Model for Joint Inference
from Differential Equations and Data

Jonathan Schmidt
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
jonathan.schmidt@uni-tuebingen.de

Nicholas Krämer
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
nicholas.kraemer@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Mechanistic models with differential equations are a key component of scientific
applications of machine learning. Inference in such models is usually computationally demanding, because it involves repeatedly solving the differential equation.
The main problem here is that the numerical solver is hard to combine with standard
inference techniques. Recent work in probabilistic numerics has developed a new
class of solvers for ordinary differential equations (ODEs) that phrase the solution
process directly in terms of Bayesian filtering. We here show that this allows
such methods to be combined very directly, with conceptual and numerical ease,
with latent force models in the ODE itself. It then becomes possible to perform
approximate Bayesian inference on the latent force as well as the ODE solution in
a single, linear complexity pass of an extended Kalman filter / smoother — that is,
at the cost of computing a single ODE solution. We demonstrate the expressiveness
and performance of the algorithm by training, among others, a non-parametric
SIRD model on data from the COVID-19 outbreak.

1

Introduction

Mechanistic models based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are popular across a wide range of scientific
disciplines. To increase the descriptive power of such
models, it is common to consider parametrized versions of
ODEs and find a set of parameters such that the dynamics
reproduce empirical observations as accurately as possible. Algorithms for this purpose typically involve repeated
forward simulations in the context of, e.g., Markov-chain
Monte Carlo or optimization. The need for iterated computation of ODE solutions may demand simplifications in
the model to meet limits in the computational budget.

Only data
Only ODE

Both (ours)
Data ; Truth

Figure 1: Inferring an unknown funcThis work describes an algorithm that merges mechanistic tion with a Gaussian Process and differknowledge in the form of an ODE with a non-parametric ent sources of information.
model over the parameters controlling the ODE – a latent
force that represents quantities of interest. The algorithm then infers a trajectory that is informed
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

