Reinforcement Learning in Linear MDPs:
Constant Regret and Representation Selection

Matteo Papini
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
matteo.papini@upf.edu
Aldo Pacchiano∗
Microsoft Research
apacchiano@microsoft.com

Andrea Tirinzoni
INRIA Lille
andrea.tirinzoni@inria.fr

Marcello Restilli
Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
lazaric@fb.com

Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research
pirotta@fb.com

Abstract
We study the role of the representation of state-action value functions in regret
minimization in finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with linear
structure. We first derive a necessary condition on the representation, called
universally spanning optimal features (U NI SOFT), to achieve constant regret in any
MDP with linear reward function. This result encompasses the well-known settings
of low-rank MDPs and, more generally, zero inherent Bellman error (also known
as the Bellman closure assumption). We then demonstrate that this condition is
also sufficient for these classes of problems by deriving a constant regret bound for
two optimistic algorithms (LSVI-UCB and ELEANOR). Finally, we propose an
algorithm for representation selection and we prove that it achieves constant regret
when one of the given representations, or a suitable combination of them, satisfies
the U NI SOFT condition.

1

Introduction

The ability of an agent to learn an informative mapping from complex observations to a succinct
representation is one of the essential factors for the success of machine learning in fields such as
computer vision, language modeling, and more broadly in deep learning [Bengio et al., 2013]. In
supervised learning, it is well understood that a “good” representation is one that allows to accurately
fit any target function of interest (e.g., correctly classify a set of objects in an image). In Reinforcement
Learning (RL), this concept is more subtle, as it can be applied to different aspects of the problem,
such as the optimal value function or the optimal policy. Furthermore, recent works have shown that
realizability (e.g., being able to represent the optimal value function) is not a sufficient condition for
solving an RL problem, as the sample complexity using realizable representations is exponential in
the worst case [e.g., Weisz et al., 2021]. As such, a desirable property of a “good” representation in
RL is to enable learning a near-optimal policy with a polynomial sample complexity (or similarly
sublinear regret bound).
Several works have focused on online learning — considering sample complexity or regret minimization — and identified sufficient assumptions for efficient learning. Standard examples are
∗

Work done while at Facebook AI Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

