Implicit Bias of SGD for Diagonal Linear Networks:
a Provable Benefit of Stochasticity

Scott Pesme
EPFL
scott.pesme@epfl.ch

Loucas Pillaud-Vivien
EPFL
loucas.pillaud-vivien@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
Understanding the implicit bias of training algorithms is of crucial importance in
order to explain the success of overparametrised neural networks. In this paper, we
study the dynamics of stochastic gradient descent over diagonal linear networks
through its continuous time version, namely stochastic gradient flow. We explicitly
characterise the solution chosen by the stochastic flow and prove that it always
enjoys better generalisation properties than that of gradient flow. Quite surprisingly,
we show that the convergence speed of the training loss controls the magnitude
of the biasing effect: the slower the convergence, the better the bias. To fully
complete our analysis, we provide convergence guarantees for the dynamics. We
also give experimental results which support our theoretical claims. Our findings
highlight the fact that structured noise can induce better generalisation and they
help explain the greater performances of stochastic gradient descent over gradient
descent observed in practice.

1

Introduction

Understanding the performance of neural networks is certainly one of the most thrilling challenges
for the current machine learning community. From the theoretical point of view, progress has been
made in several directions: we have a better functional analysis description of neural networks [3]
and we steadily understand the convergence of training algorithms [29, 10] as well as the role of
initialisation [20, 12]. Yet there remain many unanswered questions. One of which is why do the
currently used training algorithms converge to solutions which generalise well, and this with very
little use of explicit regularisation [39].
To understand this phenomenon, the concept of implicit bias has emerged: if over-fitting is benign,
it must be because the optimisation procedure converges towards some particular global minimum
which enjoys good generalisation properties. Though no explicit regularisation is added, the algorithm
is implicitly selecting a particular solution: this is referred to as the implicit bias of the training
procedure. The implicit regularisation of several algorithms has been studied, the simplest and
most emblematic being that of gradient descent and stochastic gradient descent in the least-squares
framework: they both converge towards the global solution which has the lowest squared distance
from the initialisation. For logistic regression on separable data, Soudry et al. show in the seminal
paper [31] that gradient descent selects the max-margin classifier. This type of result has then been
extended to neural networks and to other frameworks. Overall, characterising the implicit bias of
gradient methods has almost always come down to unveiling mirror-descent like structures which
underlie the algorithms.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

