Stabilizing Deep Q-Learning with ConvNets and
Vision Transformers under Data Augmentation
Nicklas Hansen1 Hao Su1 Xiaolong Wang1
1
University of California, San Diego

nihansen@ucsd.edu {haosu,xiw012}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
While agents trained by Reinforcement Learning (RL) can solve increasingly challenging tasks directly from visual observations, generalizing learned skills to novel
environments remains very challenging. Extensive use of data augmentation is a
promising technique for improving generalization in RL, but it is often found to
decrease sample efficiency and can even lead to divergence. In this paper, we investigate causes of instability when using data augmentation in common off-policy
RL algorithms. We identify two problems, both rooted in high-variance Q-targets.
Based on our findings, we propose a simple yet effective technique for stabilizing
this class of algorithms under augmentation. We perform extensive empirical
evaluation of image-based RL using both ConvNets and Vision Transformers (ViT)
on a family of benchmarks based on DeepMind Control Suite, as well as in robotic
manipulation tasks. Our method greatly improves stability and sample efficiency
of ConvNets under augmentation, and achieves generalization results competitive
with state-of-the-art methods for image-based RL in environments with unseen
visuals. We further show that our method scales to RL with ViT-based architectures,
and that data augmentation may be especially important in this setting.†

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) from visual observations has achieved tremendous success in various
applications such as video-games [43, 4, 70], robotic manipulation [37], and autonomous navigation
[42, 83]. However, it is still very challenging for current methods to generalize the learned skills to
novel environments, and policies trained by RL can easily overfit to the training environment [81, 13],
especially for high-dimensional observation spaces such as images [8, 58].
Increasing the variability in training data via domain randomization [66, 50] and data augmentation [57, 35, 33, 51] has demonstrated encouraging results for learning policies invariant to changes
in environment observations. Specifically, recent works on data augmentation [35, 33] both show improvements in sample efficiency from simple cropping and translation augmentations, but the studies
also conclude that additional data augmentation in fact decrease sample efficiency and even cause
divergence. While these augmentations have the potential to improve generalization, the increasingly
varied data makes the optimization more challenging and risks instability. Unlike supervised learning,
balancing the trade-off between stability and generalization in RL requires substantial trial and error.
In this paper, we illuminate causes of instability when applying data augmentation to common
off-policy RL algorithms [43, 38, 15, 18]. Based on our findings, we provide an intuitive method for
stabilizing this class of algorithms under use of strong data augmentation. Specifically, we find two
main causes of instability in previous work’s application of data augmentation: (i) indiscriminate
application of data augmentation resulting in high-variance Q-targets; and (ii) that Q-value estimation
strictly from augmented data results in over-regularization.
†

Website and code is available at: https://nicklashansen.github.io/SVEA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

