On the Generative Utility of Cyclic Conditionals

1

Chang Liu1∗, Haoyue Tang2†, Tao Qin1 , Jintao Wang2 , Tie-Yan Liu1
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, 100080. 2 Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084.

Abstract
We study whether and how can we model a joint distribution p(x, z) using two
conditional models p(x|z) and q(z|x) that form a cycle. This is motivated by
the observation that deep generative models, in addition to a likelihood model
p(x|z), often also use an inference model q(z|x) for extracting representation,
but they rely on a usually uninformative prior distribution p(z) to define a joint
distribution, which may render problems like posterior collapse and manifold
mismatch. To explore the possibility to model a joint distribution using only p(x|z)
and q(z|x), we study their compatibility and determinacy, corresponding to the
existence and uniqueness of a joint distribution whose conditional distributions
coincide with them. We develop a general theory for operable equivalence criteria
for compatibility, and sufficient conditions for determinacy. Based on the theory,
we propose a novel generative modeling framework CyGen that only uses the
two cyclic conditional models. We develop methods to achieve compatibility and
determinacy, and to use the conditional models to fit and generate data. With the
prior constraint removed, CyGen better fits data and captures more representative
features, supported by both synthetic and real-world experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have achieved a remarkable success in the past decade for generating realistic
complex data x and extracting useful representations through their latent variable z. Variational
auto-encoders (VAEs) [45, 67, 14, 15, 46, 80] follow the Bayesian framework and specify a prior
distribution p(z) and a likelihood model p(x|z), so that a joint distribution p(x, z) = p(z)p(x|z)
is defined for generative modeling (the joint induces a distribution p(x) on data). An inference
model q(z|x) is also used to approximate the posterior distribution p(z|x) (derived from the joint
p(x, z)), which serves for extracting representations. Other frameworks like generative adversarial
nets [30, 25, 27], flow-based models [24, 60, 44, 31] and diffusion-based models [74, 38, 76, 49]
follow the same structure, with different choices of the conditional models p(x|z) and q(z|x) and
training objectives. While for the prior p(z), there is often not much knowledge for complex data
(like images, text, audio), and these models widely adopt an uninformative prior such as a standard
Gaussian. This however, introduces some side effects:
• Posterior collapse [15, 34, 64]: The standard Gaussian prior tends to squeeze q(z|x) towards
the origin for all x, which degrades the representativeness of the inferred z for x and hurts
downstream tasks in the latent space like classification and clustering.
• Manifold mismatch [22, 28, 41]: Typically the likelihood model is continuous (keeps topology),
so the standard Gaussian prior would restrict the modeled data distribution to a simply-connected
support, which limits the capacity for fitting data from a non-(simply) connected support.
While there are works trying to mitigate the two problems, they require either a strong domain
knowledge [48, 41], or additional cost to learn a complicated prior model [52, 21, 79] sometimes
even at the cost of inconvenient inference [59, 87].
∗
†

Correspondence to: Chang Liu <changliu@microsoft.com>.
Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

