Structured in Space, Randomized in Time:
Leveraging Dropout in RNNs for Efficient Training

Anup Sarma Sonali Singh Huaipan Jiang
Rui Zhang Mahmut T. Kandemir Chita R. Das
Pennsylvania State University
{avs6194, sms821, hzj5142, rmz5227, mtk2, cxd12}@psu.edu

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), more specifically their Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) variants, have been widely used as a deep learning tool for
tackling sequence-based learning tasks in text and speech. Training of such LSTM
applications is computationally intensive due to the recurrent nature of hidden
state computation that repeats for each time step. While sparsity in Deep Neural
Nets has been widely seen as an opportunity for reducing computation time in
both training and inference phases, the usage of non-ReLU activation in LSTM
RNNs renders the opportunities for such dynamic sparsity associated with neuron
activation and gradient values to be limited or non-existent. In this work, we
identify dropout induced sparsity for LSTMs as a suitable mode of computation
reduction. Dropout is a widely used regularization mechanism, which randomly
drops computed neuron values during each iteration of training. We propose to
structure dropout patterns, by dropping out the same set of physical neurons within
a batch, resulting in column (row) level hidden state sparsity, which are well
amenable to computation reduction at run-time in general-purpose SIMD hardware
as well as systolic arrays. We provide a detailed analysis of how the dropoutinduced sparsity propagates through the different stages of network training and
how it can be leveraged in each stage. More importantly, our proposed approach
works as a direct replacement for existing dropout-based application settings. We
conduct our experiments for three representative NLP tasks: language modelling
on the PTB dataset, OpenNMT based machine translation using the IWSLT De-En
and En-Vi datasets, and named entity recognition sequence labelling using the
CoNLL-2003 shared task. We demonstrate that our proposed approach can be used
to translate dropout-based computation reduction into reduced training time, with
improvement ranging from 1.23× to 1.64×, without sacrificing the target metric.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are an important class of machine learning approaches for
analyzing sequential data including language, speech, time-series data, etc. Given an input training
sequence, RNNs cells pass information from the previous time-step to the current time-step, in the
form of a hidden-state, which helps the network to learn inherent temporal constructs. To further
enhance the ability to learn from past information, Long Short-Term Memory(LSTM) [Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997] cells have been proposed, which consist of multiple internal gates and
a cell-state in addition to the hidden-state. Such LSTM cell-based RNNs have been successfully
deployed in a variety of application domains, e.g., language modelling [Mikolov and Zweig, 2012],
automatic speech recognition [Hannun et al., 2014, Amodei et al., 2016, Graves et al., 2013],
sentiment analysis [Ma et al., 2018], and machine translation [Luong et al., 2015]. However, training
such RNNs is a time- and compute-intensive task. This is because, for each input sequence, a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

