MERLOT:
Multimodal Neural Script Knowledge Models

Rowan Zellers♠
Ximing Lu♠♥
Jack Hessel♥
♥
♠
♠♥
Youngjae Yu
Jae Sung Park
Jize Cao
Ali Farhadi♠ Yejin Choi♠♥
♠
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
♥
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
https://rowanzellers.com/merlot

Abstract
As humans, we understand events in the visual world contextually, performing
multimodal reasoning across time to make inferences about the past, present, and
future. We introduce MERLOT, a model that learns multimodal script knowledge
by watching millions of YouTube videos with transcribed speech – in an entirely
label-free, self-supervised manner. By pretraining with a mix of both framelevel (spatial) and video-level (temporal) objectives, our model not only learns
to match images to temporally corresponding words, but also to contextualize
what is happening globally over time. As a result, MERLOT exhibits strong
out-of-the-box representations of temporal commonsense, and achieves state-ofthe-art performance on 12 different video QA datasets when finetuned. It also
transfers well to the world of static images, allowing models to reason about
the dynamic context behind visual scenes. On Visual Commonsense Reasoning,
MERLOT answers questions correctly with 80.6% accuracy, outperforming stateof-the-art models of similar size by over 3%, even those that make heavy use of
auxiliary supervised data (like object bounding boxes).
Ablation analyses demonstrate the complementary importance of: 1) training on
videos versus static images; 2) scaling the magnitude and diversity of the pretraining
video corpus; and 3) using diverse objectives that encourage full-stack multimodal
reasoning, from the recognition to cognition level.

MERLOT

TVQA(+)
TGIFQA

Video QA

What’s she holding
onto before he leaves?
Which of the chef’s
hands has a watch?

Commonsense
Single-Image QA

6M videos

VCR
Visual Commonsense Reasoning

Why is the man
poin.ng?

Figure 1: Multimodal Event Representation Learning Over Time. We learn representations of
multimodal script knowledge from 6 million YouTube videos. These representations can then be
applied to a variety of downstream tasks that require commonsense or temporal visual reasoning.

1

Introduction

The human capacity for commonsense reasoning is shaped by how we experience causes and effects
over time. Consider the still image of people dining at a restaurant in the bottom right of Figure 1:
while a literal, concrete description like “people sitting at a table eating" might be technically
correct for the static scene, it doesn’t capture the richer temporal, commonsense inferences that are
nonetheless obvious: before sitting down, the people had to meet up, agree where to go, and enter the
: Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

