(Almost) Free Incentivized Exploration from
Decentralized Learning Agents

Chengshuai Shi
University of Virginia
cs7ync@virginia.edu

Haifeng Xu
University of Virginia
hx4ad@virginia.edu

Wei Xiong
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
wxiongae@connect.ust.hk

Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Abstract
Incentivized exploration in multi-armed bandits (MAB) has witnessed increasing
interests and many progresses in recent years, where a principal offers bonuses to
agents to do explorations on her behalf. However, almost all existing studies are
confined to temporary myopic agents. In this work, we break this barrier and study
incentivized exploration with multiple and long-term strategic agents, who have
more complicated behaviors that often appear in real-world applications. An important observation of this work is that strategic agents’ intrinsic needs of learning
benefit (instead of harming) the principal’s explorations by providing “free pulls”.
Moreover, it turns out that increasing the population of agents significantly lowers
the principal’s burden of incentivizing. The key and somewhat surprising insight
revealed from our results is that when there are sufficiently many learning agents
involved, the exploration process of the principal can be (almost) free. Our main
results are built upon three novel components which may be of independent interest:
(1) a simple yet provably effective incentive-provision strategy; (2) a carefully
crafted best arm identification algorithm for rewards aggregated under unequal
confidences; (3) a high-probability finite-time lower bound of UCB algorithms.
Experimental results are provided to complement the theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits (MAB) is a simple yet powerful model for sequential decision making with an
exploration-exploitation tradeoff (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi, 2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020).
In standard MAB settings, one principal, who has a long-term system-level objective, takes charge of
selecting and playing arms. However, such assumption does not always hold in reality. It is often
the case that arm pulls are performed by multiple different agents whose individual goals are not
aligned with the system, and the principal can only observe agents’ actions. One typical example
is the individual buyers (agents) and the online shopping platform (the principal). Such scenarios
complicate decision making and introduce significant difficulties to optimize the system performance.
Incentivized exploration has been proposed to address this problem (Frazier et al., 2014; Mansour
et al., 2015). Specifically, bonuses can be offered by the principal to incentivize agents to perform
specific actions, e.g., to explore their originally underrated arms. This framework provides an
opportunity to reconcile different interests between the principal and agents. As a concrete example,
the online shopping platform can offer discounts on certain items so that individual buyers would buy
them and provide feedbacks, which can be used to optimize future strategies of the platform.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

