Matrix Encoding Networks
for Neural Combinatorial Optimization

Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jinho Choo, Iljoo Yoon, Minah Park, Duwon Park, Youngjune Gwon
Samsung SDS
{y.d.kwon, jinho12.choo, iljoo.yoon, minah86.park, dw21.park, gyj.gwon}@samsung.com

Abstract
Machine Learning (ML) can help solve combinatorial optimization (CO) problems better. A popular approach is to use a neural net to compute on the parameters of a given CO problem and extract useful information that guides the search
for good solutions. Many CO problems of practical importance can be specified in
a matrix form of parameters quantifying the relationship between two groups of
items. There is currently no neural net model, however, that takes in such matrixstyle relationship data as an input. Consequently, these types of CO problems have
been out of reach for ML engineers. In this paper, we introduce Matrix Encoding
Network (MatNet) and show how conveniently it takes in and processes parameters of such complex CO problems. Using an end-to-end model based on MatNet,
we solve asymmetric traveling salesman (ATSP) and flexible flow shop (FFSP)
problems as the earliest neural approach. In particular, for a class of FFSP we
have tested MatNet on, we demonstrate a far superior empirical performance to
any methods (neural or not) known to date.

1

Introduction

Many combinatorial optimization (CO) problems of industrial importance are NP-hard, leaving them
intractable to solve optimally at a large scale. Fortunately, researchers in operations research (OR)
have developed ways to tackle these NP-hard problems in practice, mixed integer programming
(MIP) and meta-heuristics being two of the most general and popular approaches. With the rapid
progress in deep learning techniques over the last several years, a new approach based on machine
learning (ML) has emerged. ML has been applied in both ways successfully [1], as a helper for
the traditional OR methods aforementioned or as an independent CO problem solver trained in an
end-to-end fashion.
One way to leverage ML for solving CO problems is to employ a “front-end” neural net, which
directly takes in the data specifying each problem. The neural net plays a critical role of analyzing all
input data as a whole, from which it extracts useful global information. In an end-to-end ML-based
approach, such global information may be encoded onto the representations of the entities making
up the problem. Greedy selection strategies based on these representations are then no longer too
near-sighted, allowing globally (near-) optimal solutions to be found quickly. Existing OR methods
can also benefit from incorporating the global information. Many hybrid approaches already exist
that leverage information extracted by a neural net, both in ML-MIP forms [2, 3] and ML-heuritic
forms [4, 5, 6].
The literature on neural combinatorial optimization contains many different types of the front-end
models, conforming to the variety of data types upon which CO problems are defined. Yet, there has
been no research for a model that encodes matrix-type data. This puts a serious limitation on the
range of CO problems that an ML engineer can engage. Take, for example, the traveling salesman
problem (TSP), the most intensely studied topic by the research community of neural combinatorial
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

