Replacing Rewards with Examples: Example-Based
Policy Search via Recursive Classification

Benjamin Eysenbach1 2
Sergey Levine2 3
Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University,
Google Brain, 3 UC Berkeley
beysenba@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms assume that users specify tasks by manually writing down a reward function. However, this process can be laborious
and demands considerable technical expertise. Can we devise RL algorithms that
instead enable users to specify tasks simply by providing examples of successful
outcomes? In this paper, we derive a control algorithm that maximizes the future
probability of these successful outcome examples. Prior work has approached
similar problems with a two-stage process, first learning a reward function and
then optimizing this reward function using another RL algorithm. In contrast, our
method directly learns a value function from transitions and successful outcomes,
without learning this intermediate reward function. Our method therefore requires
fewer hyperparameters to tune and lines of code to debug. We show that our method
satisfies a new data-driven Bellman equation, where examples take the place of the
typical reward function term. Experiments show that our approach outperforms
prior methods that learn explicit reward functions.1

1

Introduction

In supervised learning settings, tasks are defined by data: what causes a car detector to detect cars is
not the choice of loss function (which might be the same as for an airplane detector), but the choice of
training data. Defining tasks in terms of data, rather than specialized loss functions, arguably makes it
easier to apply machine learning algorithms to new domains. In contrast, reinforcement learning (RL)
problems are typically posed in terms of reward functions, which are typically manually designed.
Arguably, the challenge of designing reward functions has limited RL to applications with simple
reward functions, and has been restricted to users who speak this language of mathematically-defined
reward functions. Can we make task specification in RL similarly data-driven?
Whereas the standard MDP formalism centers around predicting and maximizing the future reward,
we will instead focus on the problem classifying whether a task will be solved in the future. The user
will provide a collection of example success states, not a reward function. We call this problem setting
example-based control. In effect, these examples tell the agent “What would the world look like if
the task were solved?" For example, for the task of opening a door, success examples correspond to
different observations of the world when the door is open. The user can find examples of success
even for tasks that they themselves do not know how to solve. For example, the user could solve the
task using actions unavailable to the agent (e.g., the user may have two arms, but a robotic agent
may have only one) or the user could find success examples by searching the internet. As we will
discuss in Sec. 3.1, this problem setting is different from imitation learning: we maximize a different
objective function and only assume access to success examples, not entire expert trajectories.
1

Project site with videos and code: https://ben-eysenbach.github.io/rce

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

