Streaming Linear System Identification with Reverse
Experience Replay

Prateek Jain
Google AI Research Lab,
Bengaluru, India 560016
prajain@google.com

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Department of EECS
MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139
dheeraj@mit.edu

Suhas S Kowshik
Department of EECS
MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139
suhask@mit.edu
Praneeth Netrapalli
Google AI Research Lab,
Bengaluru, India 560016
pnetrapalli@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a linear time-invariant (LTI) dynamical
system from a single trajectory via streaming algorithms, which is encountered in
several applications including reinforcement learning (RL) and time-series analysis.
While the LTI system estimation problem is well-studied in the offline setting, the
practically important streaming/online setting has received little attention. Standard
streaming methods like stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are unlikely to work
since streaming points can be highly correlated. In this work, we propose a novel
streaming algorithm, SGD with Reverse Experience Replay (SGD − RER), that
is inspired by the experience replay (ER) technique popular in the RL literature.
SGD − RER divides data into small buffers and runs SGD backwards on the data
stored in the individual buffers. We show that this algorithm exactly deconstructs
the dependency structure and obtains information theoretically optimal guarantees
for both parameter error and prediction error. Thus, we provide the first – to the
best of our knowledge – optimal SGD-style algorithm for the classical problem
of linear system identification with a first order oracle. Furthermore, SGD − RER
can be applied to more general settings like sparse LTI identification with known
sparsity pattern, and non-linear dynamical systems. Our work demonstrates that
the knowledge of data dependency structure can aid us in designing statistically and
computationally efficient algorithms which can “decorrelate” streaming samples.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the problem of learning linear-time invariant (LTI) systems, where the goal is
to estimate the matrix A∗ ∈ Rd×d from the given samples (X0 , . . . , XT ) that obey:
i.i.d.

Xτ +1 = A∗ Xτ + ητ , Xτ ∈ Rd , ητ ∼ µ,

(1)

where µ is an unbiased noise distribution. The problem is central in control theory and reinforcement
learning (RL) literature [1, 2]. It is also equivalent to estimating Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model
popular in the time-series analysis literature [3], where it has been used in several applications like
finding gene regulatory information network [4].
Despite a long line of classical literature for the problem, most of the existing results focus on the
offline setting, where all the samples (X0 , . . . , XT ) are available apriori. In this setting, ordinary
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

