Generative Occupancy Fields for 3D Surface-Aware
Image Synthesis

Xudong Xu†
Xingang Pan‡
Dahua Lin†
Bo Dai§
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
Max Planck Institute for Informatics § S - Lab, Nanyang Technological University
†

†

{xx018, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

‡

xpan@mpi-inf.mpg.de

§

bo.dai@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The advent of generative radiance fields has significantly promoted the development
of 3D-aware image synthesis. The cumulative rendering process in radiance fields
makes training these generative models much easier since gradients are distributed
over the entire volume, but leads to diffused object surfaces. In the meantime,
compared to radiance fields occupancy representations could inherently ensure
deterministic surfaces. However, if we directly apply occupancy representations to
generative models, during training they will only receive sparse gradients located
on object surfaces and eventually suffer from the convergence problem. In this
paper, we propose Generative Occupancy Fields (GOF), a novel model based on
generative radiance fields that can learn compact object surfaces without impeding
its training convergence. The key insight of GOF is a dedicated transition from
the cumulative rendering in radiance fields to rendering with only the surface
points as the learned surface gets more and more accurate. In this way, GOF
combines the merits of two representations in a unified framework. In practice,
the training-time transition of start from radiance fields and march to occupancy
representations is achieved in GOF by gradually shrinking the sampling region
in its rendering process from the entire volume to a minimal neighboring region
around the surface. Through comprehensive experiments on multiple datasets, we
demonstrate that GOF can synthesize high-quality images with 3D consistency and
simultaneously learn compact and smooth object surfaces. Our code is available at
https://github.com/SheldonTsui/GOF_NeurIPS2021.

1

Introduction

Deep generative adversarial networks [1–4] have demonstrated their superiority in synthesizing
photorealistic and striking images. However, these models are often constrained in the 2D domain,
struggling to generate 3D consistent images, let alone grasping the underlying 3D object shapes.
3D-aware image synthesis thus becomes an appealing and promising choice as it learns a 3D
representation explicitly from a collection of unposed images. Consequently, it can not only synthesize
3D consistent images by manually controlling the rendering camera poses, but also pave the way for
various downstream tasks such as shape editing and relighting.
Inspired by the success of neural radiance fields (NeRF) [5] in 3D scene modeling, recent 3D-aware
generative models, referred to as generative radiance fields (GRAFs), have applied NeRF as the
explicit 3D representation for image synthesis [6, 7]. With the help of NeRF, they are capable of
hallucinating photorealistic images in a 3D consistent manner. Moreover, since NeRF holds the
superior ability for rendering translucent objects by compositing colored densities along each ray
in its volume rendering process, it also significantly facilitates the training of GRAFs as gradients
are naturally distributed over the entire volume. However, they still incur an inevitable incapacity of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

