On Robust Optimal Transport: Computational
Complexity and Barycenter Computation

Khang Le?

Huy Nguyen?

Quang Minh Nguyen

University of Texas, Austin

VinAI Research

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

khanglnt@utexas.edu

v.huynm12@vinai.io

nmquang@mit.edu

Tung Pham

Hung Bui

Nhat Ho

VinAI Research

VinAI Research

University of Texas, Austin

v.tungph4@vinai.io

v.hungbh1@vinai.io

minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider robust variants of the standard optimal transport, named robust optimal
transport, where marginal constraints are relaxed via Kullback-Leibler divergence.
We show that Sinkhorn-based algorithms can approximate the optimal cost of
e n2 ) time, in which n is the number of supports of
robust optimal transport in O(
ε
the probability distributions and ε is the desired error. Furthermore, we investigate
a fixed-support robust barycenter problem between m discrete probability distributions with at most n number of supports and develop an approximating algorithm
based on iterative Bregman projections (IBP). For the specific case m = 2, we
e mn2 )
show that this algorithm can approximate the optimal barycenter value in O(
ε
e mn2 2 ) of the IBP algorithm
time, thus being better than the previous complexity O(
ε
for approximating the Wasserstein barycenter.

1

Introduction

The recent advance in computation with optimal transport (OT) problem [12, 3, 13, 7, 22, 26, 20] has
led to a surge of interest in using that tool in various domains of machine learning and statistics. The
range of its applications is broad, including deep generative models [4, 16, 36], scalable Bayes [33, 34],
mixture and hierarchical models [24], and other applications [32, 29, 10, 17, 37, 35, 8].
The goal of optimal transport is to find a minimal cost of moving masses between (supports of)
probability distributions. It is known that the estimation of transport cost is not robust when there
are outliers. To deal with this issue, [38] proposed a trimmed version of optimal transport. In
particular, they search for truncated probability distributions such that the transport cost between
them is minimized. However, their trimmed optimal transport is non-trivial to compute, which
hinders its usage in practical applications. Another line of works proposed using unbalanced optimal
transport (UOT) to solve the sensitivity of optimal transport to outliers [5, 31]. More specifically,
their idea is to assign as small as possible masses to outliers by relaxing the marginal constraints
of OT through a penalty function such as the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. This direction
of robust optimal transport has been shown to have good performance in generative models and
domain adaptation [5]. Although this approach achieved considerable success, the full picture of its
computational complexity has remained missing.
? Khang Le and Huy Nguyen contributed equally to this work.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

