Meta-Learning to Improve Pre-Training

Aniruddh Raghu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
araghu@mit.edu

Jonathan Lorraine
University of Toronto

Matthew McDermott
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Simon Kornblith
Google Research

David Duvenaud
Google Research & University of Toronto

Abstract
Pre-training (PT) followed by fine-tuning (FT) is an effective method for training
neural networks, and has led to significant performance improvements in many domains. PT can incorporate various design choices such as task and data reweighting
strategies, augmentation policies, and noise models, all of which can significantly
impact the quality of representations learned. The hyperparameters introduced by
these strategies therefore must be tuned appropriately. However, setting the values
of these hyperparameters is challenging. Most existing methods either struggle to
scale to high dimensions, are too slow and memory-intensive, or cannot be directly
applied to the two-stage PT and FT learning process. In this work, we propose
an efficient, gradient-based algorithm to meta-learn PT hyperparameters. We formalize the PT hyperparameter optimization problem and propose a novel method
to obtain PT hyperparameter gradients by combining implicit differentiation and
backpropagation through unrolled optimization. We demonstrate that our method
improves predictive performance on two real-world domains. First, we optimize
high-dimensional task weighting hyperparameters for multitask pre-training on
protein-protein interaction graphs and improve AUROC by up to 3.9%. Second, we
optimize a data augmentation neural network for self-supervised PT with SimCLR
on electrocardiography data and improve AUROC by up to 1.9%.

1

Introduction

A popular and important learning paradigm for neural networks is pre-training (PT) followed by finetuning (FT), an approach commonly used in transfer learning [13, 59, 19, 27, 52, 11, 37, 74, 35, 28],
and semi-supervised learning [9, 8, 24]. This paradigm has led to performance improvements in
many domains, including computer vision [13, 59, 19, 37, 74, 35], natural language processing
[27, 52, 11, 40, 34], graph structured prediction [28], and clinical machine learning [45, 46, 2, 48],
and is especially helpful in settings where downstream tasks have limited training data.
The PT & FT paradigm introduces high-dimensional, complex PT hyperparameters, such as parameterized data augmentation policies used in contrastive representation learning [8, 22] or the
use of task, class, or instance weighting variables in multi-task PT to avoid negative transfer [70].
These hyperparameters can significantly affect the quality of pre-trained models [8], and thus finding
techniques to set their values optimally is an important area of research.
Choosing optimal PT hyperparameter values is challenging, and existing methods do not work well.
Simple approaches such as random or grid search are inefficient since evaluating a hyperparameter
setting requires performing the full, two-stage PT & FT optimization, which may be prohibitively
computationally expensive. Gradient-free approaches, such as Bayesian optimization or evolutionary
algorithms [33, 61, 47], are also limited in how well they scale to this setting. Gradient-based
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

