Debiased Visual Question Answering from Feature
and Sample Perspectives

Zhiquan Wen1,2 , Guanghui Xu1 , Mingkui Tan1,3∗, Qingyao Wu1∗ , Qi Wu4
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
PengCheng Laboratory, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (South China University of Technology),
Ministry of Education
4
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide
{sewenzhiquan, sexuguanghui}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
{mingkuitan, qyw}@scut.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
1

Abstract
Visual question answering (VQA) is designed to examine the visual-textual reasoning ability of an intelligent agent. However, recent observations show that
many VQA models may only capture the biases between questions and answers
in a dataset rather than showing real reasoning abilities. For example, given a
question, some VQA models tend to output the answer that occurs frequently in the
dataset and ignore the images. To reduce this tendency, existing methods focus on
weakening the language bias. Meanwhile, only a few works also consider vision
bias implicitly. However, these methods introduce additional annotations or show
unsatisfactory performance. Moreover, not all biases are harmful to the models.
Some “biases” learnt from datasets represent natural rules of the world and can
help limit the range of answers. Thus, how to filter and remove the true negative
biases in language and vision modalities remain a major challenge. In this paper,
we propose a method named D-VQA to alleviate the above challenges from the
feature and sample perspectives. Specifically, from the feature perspective, we
build a question-to-answer and vision-to-answer branch to capture the language and
vision biases, respectively. Next, we apply two unimodal bias detection modules to
explicitly recognise and remove the negative biases. From the sample perspective,
we construct two types of negative samples to assist the training of the models,
without introducing additional annotations. Extensive experiments on the VQA-CP
v2 and VQA v2 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our D-VQA method.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-language tasks [5, 43, 45] require an agent to perform visual-textual reasoning, and
play an important role in helping humans or intelligent robots to understand the physical world.
As a typical case of the vision-and-language task, visual question answering (VQA) [8, 35, 42]
aims to answer a textual question based on a given image. In this sense, VQA models should
master and apply the strong reasoning ability to address the sophistical questions. However, recent
studies [3, 23, 36] demonstrate that many VQA models answer the questions without reasoning.
Instead, they excessively rely on superficial correlations (i.e., bias) between the question and answers
without considering the image. For example, some VQA models tend to answer “2” for the questions
“How many . . . ”, since most corresponding answers in the dataset are “2”. In this case, the VQA
models memorise the bias but ignore the image, resulting in a poor generalisation ability.
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

