Communication-efficient SGD: From Local SGD to
One-Shot Averaging

Artin Spiridonoff
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
artin@bu.edu

Alex Olshevsky
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
alexols@bu.edu

Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
yannisp@bu.edu

Abstract
We consider speeding up stochastic gradient descent (SGD) by parallelizing it
across multiple workers. We assume the same data set is shared among N workers,
who can take SGD steps and coordinate with a central server. While it is possible
to obtain a linear reduction in the variance by averaging all the stochastic gradients
at every step, this requires a lot of communication between the workers and the
server, which can dramatically reduce the gains from parallelism. The Local SGD
method, proposed and analyzed in the earlier literature, suggests machines should
make many local steps between such√communications. While the initial analysis
of Local SGD showed it needs Ω( T ) communications for T local gradient
steps in order for the error to scale proportionately to 1/(N T ), this has been
successively improved in a string of papers, with the state of the art requiring
Ω (N ( poly(log T ))) communications. In this paper, we suggest a Local SGD
scheme that communicates less overall by communicating less frequently as the
number of iterations grows. Our analysis shows that this can achieve an error that
scales as 1/(N T ) with a number of communications that is completely independent
of T . In particular, we show that Ω(N ) communications are sufficient.
√ Empirical
evidence suggests this bound is close to tight as we further show that N or N 3/4
communications fail to achieve linear speed-up in simulations. Moreover, we
show that under mild assumptions, the main of which is twice differentiability on
any neighborhood of the optimal solution, one-shot averaging which only uses
a single round of communication can also achieve the optimal convergence rate
asymptotically.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a widely used algorithm to minimize convex functions f in
which model parameters are updated iteratively as
xt+1 = xt − ηt ĝt ,
where ĝt is a stochastic gradient of f at the point xt and ηt is the learning rate. This algorithm can be
naively parallelized by adding more workers independently to compute a gradient and then average
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

