An Axiomatic Theory of Provably-Fair
Welfare-Centric Machine Learning

Cyrus Cousins
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
cyrus_cousins@brown.edu

Abstract
We address an inherent difficulty in welfare-theoretic fair machine learning (ML),
by proposing an equivalently-axiomatically justified alternative setting, and studying the resulting computational and statistical learning questions. Welfare metrics
quantify overall wellbeing across a population of groups, and welfare-based objectives and constraints have recently been proposed to incentivize fair ML methods to
satisfy their diverse needs. However, many ML problems are cast as loss minimization tasks, rather than utility maximization, and thus require nontrivial modeling
to construct utility functions. We define a complementary metric, termed malfare,
measuring overall societal harm, with axiomatic justification via the standard
axioms of cardinal welfare, and cast fair ML as malfare minimization over the
risk values (expected losses) of each group. Surprisingly, the axioms of cardinal
welfare (malfare) dictate that this is not equivalent to simply defining utility as
negative loss and maximizing welfare. Building upon these concepts, we define
fair-PAC learning, where a fair-PAC learner is an algorithm that learns an ε-δ
malfare-optimal model with bounded sample complexity, for any data distribution
and (axiomatically justified) malfare concept. Finally, we show conditions under
which many standard PAC-learners may be converted to fair-PAC learners, which
places fair-PAC learning on firm theoretical ground, as it yields statistical — and
in some cases computational — efficiency guarantees for many well-studied ML
models. Fair-PAC learning is also practically relevant, as it democratizes fair ML
by providing concrete training algorithms with rigorous generalization guarantees.

1

Introduction

It is now well-understood that contemporary ML systems exhibit differential accuracy across gender,
race, and other protected groups, for tasks like facial recognition [5–7], in medical settings [2, 17],
and many others. This exacerbates existing inequality, as facial recognition in policing yields
disproportionate false-arrest rates, and medical ML yields disproportionate health outcomes. Welfarecentric ML methods encode both accuracy and fairness in a welfare function defined on a set of
groups, and optimize or constrain welfare to learn fairly. This addresses differential accuracy and bias
issues across groups by ensuring that (1) each group is seen and considered during training, and (2)
an outcome is incentivized that is desirable overall, ideally according to some mutually-agreed-upon
welfare function. Unfortunately, welfare metrics require a notion of (positive) utility, and we argue
that this is not natural to many ML tasks, wherein we instead minimize some negatively connoted
loss value. We thus define a complementary measure to welfare, which we term malfare, measuring
societal harm (rather than wellbeing). In particular, malfare arises naturally when one applies the
standard axioms of cardinal welfare to loss values rather than utility values. We then cast fair ML as
a direct malfare minimization problem, and study its computational and statistical aspects.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

