Representation Learning Beyond Linear Prediction
Functions
Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Ziping Xu
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
zipingxu@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent papers on the theory of representation learning has shown the importance of
a quantity called diversity when generalizing from a set of source tasks to a target
task. Most of these papers assume that the function mapping shared representations
to predictions is linear, for both source and target tasks. In practice, researchers in
deep learning use different numbers of extra layers following the pretrained model
based on the difficulty of the new task. This motivates us to ask whether diversity
can be achieved when source tasks and the target task use different prediction
function spaces beyond linear functions. We show that diversity holds even if the
target task uses a neural network with multiple layers, as long as source tasks use
linear functions. If source tasks use nonlinear prediction functions, we provide
a negative result by showing that depth-1 neural networks with ReLu activation
function need exponentially many source tasks to achieve diversity. For a general
function class, we find that eluder dimension gives a lower bound on the number
of tasks required for diversity. Our theoretical results imply that simpler tasks
generalize better. Though our theoretical results are shown for the global minimizer
of empirical risks, their qualitative predictions still hold true for gradient-based
optimization algorithms as verified by our simulations on deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

It has become a common practice (Tan et al., 2018) to use a pre-trained network as the representation
for a new task with small sample size in various areas including computer vision (Marmanis et al.,
2015), speech recognition (Dahl et al., 2011; Jaitly et al., 2012; Howard and Ruder, 2018) and
machine translation (Weng et al., 2020). Most representation learning is based on the assumption that
the source tasks and the target task share the same low-dimensional representation.
In this paper, following the work of Tripuraneni et al. (2020), we assume that each task, indexed by t,
generates observations noisily from the mean function ft∗ ◦ h∗ , where h∗ is the true representation
shared by all the tasks and ft∗ is called the prediction function. We assume h∗ ∈ H, the representation
function space and ft ∈ Ft , the prediction function space. Tripuraneni et al. (2020) proposed a
diversity condition which guarantees that the learned representation will generalize to target tasks
with any prediction function. Assume we have T source tasks labeled by 1, . . . , T and F1 = · · · =
FT = Fso . We denote the target task by ta and let Et (f, h) ∈ R be the excess error of f, h ∈ Ft × H
for task t. The diversity condition can be stated as follows: there exists some ν > 0, such that for any
∗
fta
∈ Fta and any h ∈ H,
T

inf

Eta (fta , h)

fta ∈Fta
Excess error given h for target task

≤ν

1X
Et (ft , h).
ft ∈Fso ,t=1,...,T T
t=1
inf

Excess error given h for source tasks

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

