Towards Hyperparameter-free Policy Selection
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Siyuan Zhang
Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
siyuan3@illinois.edu

Nan Jiang
Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Abstract
How to select between policies and value functions produced by different training
algorithms in offline reinforcement learning (RL)—which is crucial for hyperparameter tuning—is an important open question. Existing approaches based on
off-policy evaluation (OPE) often require additional function approximation and
hence hyperparameters, creating a chicken-and-egg situation. In this paper, we
design hyperparameter-free algorithms for policy selection based on BVFT [XJ21],
a recent theoretical advance in value-function selection, and demonstrate their
effectiveness in discrete-action benchmarks such as Atari. To address performance
degradation due to poor critics in continuous-action domains, we further combine
BVFT with OPE to get the best of both worlds, and obtain a hyperparameter-tuning
method for Q-function based OPE with theoretical guarantees as a side product.

1

Introduction and Related Works

Learning a good policy from historical data without interactive access to the actual environment, or
offline (batch) reinforcement learning (RL), is a promising approach to applying RL to real-world scenarios when high-fidelity simulators are not available [LKTF20]. Despite the fast development in the
training algorithms, a burning question that remains wide open is how to tune their hyperparameters,
sometimes known as the offline policy selection problem [Pai+20; YDNTS20; Fu+21].
Standard approaches reduce the problem to off-policy evaluation (OPE), which estimates the expected
return of the candidate policies and choose accordingly. Unfortunately, OPE itself is a difficult
problem, and standard estimators such as importance sampling suffer exponential (in horizon)
variance [LMS15; JL16]. While polynomial-variance estimators exist, either using TD (e.g., Fitted-Q
Evaluation, or FQE [LVY19]) or marginalized importance sampling [LLTZ18; NCDL19; UHJ20],
they require additional function approximation, inducing yet another set of hyperparameters (e.g.,
the neural-net architecture) which need to be carefully chosen. [Pai+20] recently conclude that FQE
can be effective for offline policy selection, but “an important remaining challenge is how to choose
hyperparameters for FQE”. (Incidentally, we are able to address this question as a side product of
our approach in Section 5.) In other words, to tune hyperparameters for training we need to tune the
hyperparameters for OPE, creating a chicken-and-egg situation. To this end, we want to ask:
Can we design effective hyperparameter-free methods for offline policy selection?
The question has been investigated in the theoretical literature [FS11], mostly reformulated so that we
select indirectly among value functions instead of policies to trade-off directness for tractability. More
precisely, [FS11] imagines that training algorithms produce candidate Q-functions Q1 , Q2 , . . . , Qm ,
which is a reasonable assumption as most offline algorithms produce value functions as a side product.
The goal is to select Qi ≈ Q? —assuming one exists—so that the induced greedy policy, πQi , is
near-optimal. While kQ − Q? k is only a surrogate for the performance of πQ , the hope is that whether
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

