ATISS: Autoregressive Transformers for Indoor
Scene Synthesis

Despoina Paschalidou∗1,3,4

Amlan Kar4,5,6

Andreas Geiger1,2,3
1

Maria Shugrina4

Karsten Kreis4

Sanja Fidler4,5,6

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
4
NVIDIA 5 University of Toronto 6 Vector Institute

{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

{amlank, mshugrina, kkreis, sfidler}@nvidia.com

Abstract
The ability to synthesize realistic and diverse indoor furniture layouts automatically
or based on partial input, unlocks many applications, from better interactive 3D
tools to data synthesis for training and simulation. In this paper, we present
ATISS, a novel autoregressive transformer architecture for creating diverse and
plausible synthetic indoor environments, given only the room type and its floor
plan. In contrast to prior work, which poses scene synthesis as sequence generation,
our model generates rooms as unordered sets of objects. We argue that this
formulation is more natural, as it makes ATISS generally useful beyond fully
automatic room layout synthesis. For example, the same trained model can be
used in interactive applications for general scene completion, partial room rearrangement with any objects specified by the user, as well as object suggestions for
any partial room. To enable this, our model leverages the permutation equivariance
of the transformer when conditioning on the partial scene, and is trained to be
permutation-invariant across object orderings. Our model is trained end-to-end
as an autoregressive generative model using only labeled 3D bounding boxes as
supervision. Evaluations on four room types in the 3D-FRONT dataset demonstrate
that our model consistently generates plausible room layouts that are more realistic
than existing methods. In addition, it has fewer parameters, is simpler to implement
and train and runs up to 8x faster than existing methods.

1

Introduction

Generating synthetic 3D content that is both realistic and diverse is a long-standing problem in
computer vision and graphics. In the last decade, there has been increased demand for tools that
automate the creation of 3D artificial environments for applications like video games and AR/VR,
as well as general 3D content creation [61, 16, 36, 4, 62]. These tools can also synthesize data to
train computer vision models, avoiding expensive and laborious annotations. Generative models
[28, 19, 13, 29, 56] have demonstrated impressive results on synthesizing photorealistic images
[7, 1, 24, 8, 25] and intelligible text [46, 2], and are beginning to be adopted for the generation of 3D
environments.
Recent works proposed to solve the scene synthesis task by incorporating procedural modeling
techniques [45, 43, 23, 9] or by generating scene graphs with generative models [34, 57, 65, 35, 44,
64, 63, 27, 12]. Procedural modeling requires specifying a set of rules for the scene formation process,
∗

Work done during Despoina’s internship at NVIDIA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

