Robust Generalization despite Distribution Shift via
Minimum Discriminating Information

Tobias Sutter
University of Konstanz, Germany
tobias.sutter@uni-konstanz.de

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Daniel Kuhn
EPFL, Switzerland
daniel.kuhn@epfl.ch

Abstract
Training models that perform well under distribution shifts is a central challenge
in machine learning. In this paper, we introduce a modeling framework where, in
addition to training data, we have partial structural knowledge of the shifted test
distribution. We employ the principle of minimum discriminating information to
embed the available prior knowledge, and use distributionally robust optimization
to account for uncertainty due to the limited samples. By leveraging large deviation
results, we obtain explicit generalization bounds with respect to the unknown
shifted distribution. Lastly, we demonstrate the versatility of our framework by
demonstrating it on two rather distinct applications: (1) training classifiers on systematically biased data and (2) off-policy evaluation in Markov Decision Processes.

1

Introduction

Developing machine learning-based systems for real world applications is challenging, particularly
because the conditions under which the system was trained are rarely the same as when using the
system. Unfortunately, a standard assumption in most machine learning methods is that test and
training distribution are the same [78, 59, 12]. This assumption, however, rarely holds in practice,
and the performance of many models suffers in light of this issue, often called dataset shift [52] or
equivalently distribution shift. Consider building a model for diagnosing a specific heart disease,
and suppose that most participants of the study are middle to high-aged men. Further suppose
these participants have a higher risk for the specific disease, and as such do not reflect the general
population with respect to age and gender. Consequently, the training data suffers from the so-called
sample selection bias inducing a covariate shift [62, 52]. Many other reasons lead to distribution
shifts, such as non-stationary environments [67], imbalanced data [52], domain shifts [3], label shifts
[83] or observed contextual information [8, 9]. A specific type of distribution shift takes center stage
in off-policy evaluation (OPE) problems. Here, one is concerned with the task of estimating the
resulting cost of an evaluation policy for a sequential decision making problem based on historical
data obtained from a different policy known as behavioral policy [73]. This problem is of critical
importance in various applications of reinforcement learning—particularly, when it is impossible or
unethical to evaluate the resulting cost of an evaluation policy by running it on the underlying system.
Solving a learning problem facing an arbitrary and unknown distribution shift based on training
data in general is hopeless. Oftentimes, fortunately, partial knowledge about the distribution shift
is available. In the medical example above, we might have prior information how the demographic
attributes in our sample differ from the general population. Given a training distribution and partial
knowledge about the shifted test distribution, one might ask what is the “most natural" distribution
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

