Bayesian Optimization with High-Dimensional
Outputs
Wesley J. Maddox
New York University
wjm363@nyu.edu

Maximilian Balandat
Facebook
balandat@fb.com

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Eytan Bakshy
Facebook
eytan@fb.com

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization is a sample-efficient black-box optimization procedure that
is typically applied to problems with a small number of independent objectives.
However, in practice we often wish to optimize objectives defined over many
correlated outcomes (or “tasks”). For example, network operators may want to
optimize the coverage of a cell tower network across a dense grid of locations.
Similarly, engineers may seek to balance the performance of a robot across dozens
of different environments via constrained or robust optimization. However, the
Gaussian Process (GP) models typically used as probabilistic surrogates for multitask Bayesian Optimization scale poorly with the number of outcomes, which
greatly limitis their applicability. We devise an efficient technique for exact multitask GP sampling that combines exploiting Kronecker structure in the covariance
matrices with Matheron’s identity, allowing us to perform Bayesian Optimization
using exact multi-task GP models with tens of thousands of correlated outputs.
In doing so, we achieve substantial improvements in sample efficiency compared
to existing approaches that only model aggregate functions of the outcomes. We
demonstrate how this unlocks a new class of applications for Bayesian Optimization
across a range of tasks in science and engineering, including optimizing interference
patterns of an optical interferometer with more than 65,000 outputs.

1

Introduction

Many problems in science and engineering involve reasoning about multiple, correlated outputs. For
example, cell towers broadcast signal across an area, and thus signal strength is spatially correlated.
In randomized experiments, treatment effects on multiple outcomes are naturally correlated due
to shared causal mechanisms. Without further knowledge of the internal mechanisms (i.e., in a
“black-box” setting), Multi-task Gaussian processes (MTGPs) are a natural model for these types
of problems as they model the relationship between each output (or “task”) while maintaining the
gold standard predictive capability and uncertainty quantification of Gaussian processes (GPs). Many
downstream analyses require more of the model than just prediction; they also involve sampling from
the posterior distribution to estimate quantities of interest. For instance, we may be interested in the
performance of a complex stock trading strategy that requires modeling different stock prices jointly,
and want to characterize its conditional value at risk (CVaR) [49], which generally requires Monte
Carlo (MC) estimation strategies [10]. Or, we want to use MTGPs in Bayesian Optimization (BO), a
method for sample-efficient optimization of black-box functions. Many state of the art BO approaches
use MC acquisition functions [60, 3, 4], which require sampling from the posterior distribution over
new candidate data points.
Drawing posterior samples from MTGPs means sampling over all tasks and all new data points,
which typically scales multiplicatively in the number of tasks (t) and test data points (n), e.g. like
O(n3 t3 ) [52, 6]. For problems with more than a few tasks, posterior sampling thus quickly becomes
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

