Causal Identification with Matrix Equations
Sanghack Lee
Graduate School of Data Science
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
sanghack@snu.ac.kr

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, USA
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Causal effect identification is concerned with determining whether a causal effect
is computable from a combination of qualitative assumptions about the underlying
system (e.g., a causal graph) and distributions collected from this system. Many
identification algorithms exclusively rely on graphical criteria made of a non-trivial
combination of probability axioms, do-calculus, and refined c-factorization (e.g.,
Lee & Bareinboim, 2020). In a sequence of increasingly sophisticated results, it
has been shown how proxy variables can be used to identify certain effects that
would not be otherwise recoverable in challenging scenarios through solving matrix
equations (e.g., Kuroki & Pearl, 2014; Miao et al., 2018). In this paper, we develop
a new causal identification algorithm which utilizes both graphical criteria and matrix equations. Specifically, we first characterize the relationships between certain
graphically-driven formulae and matrix multiplications. With such characterizations, we broaden the spectrum of proxy variable based identification conditions
and further propose novel intermediary criteria based on the pseudoinverse of a
matrix. Finally, we devise a causal effect identification algorithm, which accepts
as input a collection of marginal, conditional, and interventional distributions,
integrating enriched matrix-based criteria into a graphical identification approach.

1

Introduction

Cause and effect relations are one of the most common types of knowledge sought after throughout
the empirical sciences. These relations are one of the main ingredients in the construction of stable
explanations, and usually underpin robust and generalizable decision-making strategies [19, 26].
There is a growing literature that aims to systematically find causal relations by fusing observations,
experiments, and substantive knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation [19, 3, 20].
Formally, the inferential target usually appears as the effect of a set of variables do(X = x) on another
set of variables Y, which is written as P (y|do(x)) or Px (y). Assumptions about the underlying
data-generating processes are commonly expressed as a causal graph G over endogenous variables V.
There are different lines of investigation that aims to establish the quantity Px (y).
First, one line of investigation attempts to exploit the non-parametric constraints encoded in G to
determine whether the quantity Px (y) (i.e., query) is uniquely computable from the different available
distributions. For instance, Pearl’s celebrated method known as do-calculus provides a symbolic
way of determining whether a query can be identified from G and observational data P (V) [18]. A
number of necessary and sufficient conditions were developed for systematically determining the
identifiability status of the query from observational data [18, 29, 23, P
9]. For example, the causal
effect Px (y) in Fig. 1a is identified by a back-door criterion as Px (y) = u P (y|x, u)P (u). Further
methods were developed to identify the query from a combination of observational and experimental
distributions [2, 14, 12, 11]. The key ideas behind these methods are (i) to decompose the given
causal query into standard factors (following Tian’s c-factorization, [29]), leveraging the graphical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

