Settling the Variance of Multi-Agent Policy Gradients
Jakub Grudzien Kuba⇤,1,2 , Muning Wen⇤,3 , Linghui Meng4 , Shangding Gu4 ,
Haifeng Zhang4 , David Henry Mguni2 , Jun Wang5 , Yaodong Yang†,6
1
Imperial College London, 2 Huawei R&D UK, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science,
5
University College London, 6 Institute for AI, Peking University.

Abstract
Policy gradient (PG) methods are popular reinforcement learning (RL) methods
where a baseline is often applied to reduce the variance of gradient estimates. In
multi-agent RL (MARL), although the PG theorem can be naturally extended, the
effectiveness of multi-agent PG (MAPG) methods degrades as the variance of gradient estimates increases rapidly with the number of agents. In this paper , we offer
a rigorous analysis of MAPG methods by, firstly, quantifying the contributions of
the number of agents and agents’ explorations to the variance of MAPG estimators.
Based on this analysis, we derive the optimal baseline (OB) that achieves the minimal variance. In comparison to the OB, we measure the excess variance of existing
MARL algorithms such as vanilla MAPG and COMA. Considering using deep neural networks, we also propose a surrogate version of OB, which can be seamlessly
plugged into any existing PG methods in MARL. On benchmarks of Multi-Agent
MuJoCo and StarCraft challenges, our OB technique effectively stabilises training
and improves the performance of multi-agent PPO and COMA algorithms by a
significant margin. Code is released at https://github.com/morning9393/
Optimal-Baseline-for-Multi-agent-Policy-Gradients.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient (PG) methods refer to the category of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms where
the parameters of a stochastic policy are optimised with respect to the expected reward through
gradient ascent. Since the earliest embodiment of REINFORCE [40], PG methods, empowered by
deep neural networks [33], are among the most effective model-free RL algorithms on various kinds
of tasks [2, 6, 10]. However, the performance of PG methods is greatly affected by the variance of
the PG estimator [35, 37]. Since the RL agent behaves in an unknown stochastic environment, which
is often considered as a black box, the randomness of expected reward can easily become very large
with increasing sizes of the state and action spaces; this renders PG estimators with high variance,
which concequently leads to low sample efficiency and unsuccessful trainings [9, 35].
To address the large variance issue and improve the PG estimation, different variance reduction
methods were developed [9, 23, 35, 48]. One of the most successfully applied and extensively
studied methods is the control variate subtraction [8, 9, 37], also known as the baseline trick. A
baseline is a scalar random variable, which can be subtracted from the state-action value samples in
the PG estimates so as to decrease the variance, meanwhile introducing no bias to its expectation.
Baselines can be implemented through a constant value [8, 12] or a value that is dependent on the
state [8, 9, 11, 33] such as the state value function, which results in the zero-centered advantage
function and the advantage actor-critic algorithm [18]. State-action dependent baselines can also be
applied [9, 41], although they are reported to have no advantages over state-dependent baselines [35].
⇤

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

