Large Scale Learning on Non-Homophilous Graphs:
New Benchmarks and Strong Simple Methods
Derek Lim⇤
Cornell University
dl772@cornell.edu
Sijia Linda Huang
Cornell University
sh837@cornell.edu

Felix Hohne⇤
Cornell University
fmh42@cornell.edu

Vaishnavi Gupta
Cornell University
vg222@cornell.edu

Xiuyu Li⇤
Cornell University
xl289@cornell.edu

Omkar Bhalerao
Cornell University
opb7@cornell.edu

Ser-Nam Lim
Facebook AI
sernam@gmail.com

Abstract
Many widely used datasets for graph machine learning tasks have generally been
homophilous, where nodes with similar labels connect to each other. Recently,
new Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been developed that move beyond the
homophily regime; however, their evaluation has often been conducted on small
graphs with limited application domains. We collect and introduce diverse nonhomophilous datasets from a variety of application areas that have up to 384x more
nodes and 1398x more edges than prior datasets. We further show that existing scalable graph learning and graph minibatching techniques lead to performance degradation on these non-homophilous datasets, thus highlighting the need for further
work on scalable non-homophilous methods. To address these concerns, we introduce LINKX — a strong simple method that admits straightforward minibatch training and inference. Extensive experimental results with representative simple methods and GNNs across our proposed datasets show that LINKX achieves state-ofthe-art performance for learning on non-homophilous graphs. Our codes and data
are available at https://github.com/CUAI/Non-Homophily-Large-Scale.

1

Introduction

Graph learning methods generate predictions by leveraging complex inductive biases captured in
the topology of the graph [7]. A large volume of work in this area, including graph neural networks
(GNNs), exploits homophily as a strong inductive bias, where connected nodes tend to be similar to
each other in terms of labels [46, 3]. Such assumptions of homophily, however, do not always hold
true. For example, malicious node detection, a key application of graph machine learning, is known
to be non-homophilous in many settings [55, 13, 25, 11].
Further, while new GNNs that work better in these non-homophilous settings have been developed
[82, 44, 81, 17, 15, 73, 36, 35, 9, 54], their evaluation is limited to a few graph datasets used by
Pei et al. [58] (collected by [61, 66, 48]) that have certain undesirable properties such as small
size, narrow range of application areas, and high variance between different train/test splits [82].
Consequently, method scalability has not been thoroughly studied in non-homophilous graph learning.
In fact, many non-homophilous techniques frequently require more parameters and computational
resources [82, 1, 17], which is neither evident nor detrimental when they are evaluated on very small
datasets. Even though scalable graph learning techniques do exist, these methods generally cannot
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

