Regret Bounds for Gaussian-Process Optimization in
Large Domains

Manuel Wüthrich∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany

Bernhard Schölkopf
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to characterize Gaussian-Process optimization in the
setting where the function domain is large relative to the number of admissible
function evaluations, i.e., where it is impossible to find the global optimum. We
provide upper bounds on the suboptimality (Bayesian simple regret) of the solution found by optimization strategies that are closely related to the widely used
expected improvement (EI) and upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithms. These
regret bounds illuminate the relationship between the number of evaluations, the
domain size (i.e. cardinality of finite domains / Lipschitz constant of the covariance function in continuous domains), and the optimality of the retrieved function
value. In particular, we show that even when the number of evaluations is far
too small to find the global optimum, we can find nontrivial function values (e.g.
values that achieve a certain ratio with the optimal value).

1

Introduction

In practice, nonconvex, gradient-free optimization problems arise frequently, for instance when
tuning the parameters of an algorithm or optimizing the controller of a physical system (see e.g.
Shahriari et al. [2016]) for more concrete examples). Different versions of this problem have been
addressed e.g. in the multi-armed-bandit and the Bayesian-optimization literature (which we review
below). However, the situation where the number of admissible function evaluations is too small to
identify the global optimum has so far received little attention, despite arising frequently in practice.
For instance, when optimizing the hyper-parameters of a machine-learning method or the controllerparameters of a physical system, it is typically impossible to explore the domain exhaustively. We
take first steps towards a better understanding of this setting through a theoretical analysis based
on the adaptive-submodularity framework by Golovin and Krause [2011]. It is not the purpose of
the present paper to propose a novel algorithm with better performance (we modify the EI and UCB
strategies merely to facilitate the proof), but rather to gain an understanding of how GP-optimization
performs in the aforementioned setting, as a function of the number of evaluations and the domain
size.
As is done typically, we model the uncertainty about the underlying function as a Gaussian Process
(GP). The question is how close we can get to the global optimum with T function evaluations,
where T is small relative to the domain of the function (i.e., it is impossible to identify the global
optimum with high confidence with only T evaluations). As a performance measure, we use the
Bayesian simple regret, i.e., the expected difference between the optimal function value and the
value attained by the algorithm. For the discrete case with domain size N , we derive a problemindependent regret bound (i.e., it only depends on T, N and is worst-case in terms of the GP prior)
for two optimization algorithms that are closely related to the well-known expected improvement
(EI, Jones et al. [1998]) and the upper confidence bound (UCB, Auer et al. [2002], Srinivas et al.
∗

manuel.wuthrich@pm.me

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

