Damped Anderson Mixing for Deep Reinforcement
Learning: Acceleration, Convergence, and
Stabilization
Ke Sun∗1 , Yafei Wang∗1 , Yi Liu1 , Yingnan Zhao1,2 , Bo Pan1 , Shangling Jui3 ,
Bei Jiang1 , Linglong Kong1†
1
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
Huawei Technologies Ltd.
{ksun6,yafei2,yliu16,yingnan6,pan1,bei1,lkong}@ublberta.ca
jui.shangling@huawei.com

Abstract
Anderson mixing has been heuristically applied to reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms for accelerating convergence and improving the sampling efficiency
of deep RL. Despite its heuristic improvement of convergence, a rigorous mathematical justification for the benefits of Anderson mixing in RL has not yet been
put forward. In this paper, we provide deeper insights into a class of acceleration
schemes built on Anderson mixing that improve the convergence of deep RL algorithms. Our main results establish a connection between Anderson mixing and
quasi-Newton methods and prove that Anderson mixing increases the convergence
radius of policy iteration schemes by an extra contraction factor. The key focus of
the analysis roots in the fixed-point iteration nature of RL. We further propose a
stabilization strategy by introducing a stable regularization term in Anderson mixing and a differentiable, non-expansive MellowMax operator that can allow both
faster convergence and more stable behavior. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our proposed method enhances the convergence, stability, and performance of
RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) [28], an agent seeks an optimal policy in a sequential decisionmaking process. Deep RL has recently achieved significant improvements in a variety of challenging
tasks, including game playing [20, 26, 18] and robust navigation [19]. A flurry of state-of-theart algorithms have been proposed, including Deep Q-Learning (DQN) [20] and variants such as
Double-DQN [13], Dueling-DQN [31], Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [16], Soft
Actor-Critic [12] and distributional RL algorithms [5, 17, 33], all of which have successfully solved
end-to-end decision-making problems such as playing Atari games. However, the slow convergence
and sample inefficiency of RL algorithms still hinders the progress of RL research, particularly in
high-dimensional state spaces where deep neural network are used as function approximators, making
learning in real physical worlds impractical.
To address these issues, various acceleration strategies have been proposed, including the classical
Gauss-Seidel Value Iteration [23] and Jacobi Value Iteration [24]. Another popular branch of techniques accelerates RL by leveraging historical data. Interpolation methods such as Average-DQN [2]
∗
†

Equal contributions in alphabetical order
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

