Dual Adaptivity: A Universal Algorithm for
Minimizing the Adaptive Regret of Convex Functions

∗

Lijun Zhang∗ , Guanghui Wang∗ , Wei-Wei Tu† , Wei Jiang∗ , Zhi-Hua Zhou∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
†
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing 100000, China
{zhanglj, wanggh, jiangw, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tuwwcn@gmail.com

Abstract
To deal with changing environments, a new performance measure—adaptive regret,
defined as the maximum static regret over any interval, was proposed in online
learning. Under the setting of online convex optimization, several algorithms have
been successfully developed to minimize the adaptive regret. However, existing
algorithms lack universality in the sense that they can only handle one type of
convex functions and need apriori knowledge of parameters. By contrast, there
exist universal algorithms, such as MetaGrad, that attain optimal static regret for
multiple types of convex functions simultaneously. Along this line of research, this
paper presents the first universal algorithm for minimizing the adaptive regret of
convex functions. Specifically, we borrow the idea of maintaining multiple learning
rates in MetaGrad to handle the uncertainty of functions, and utilize the technique
of sleeping experts to capture changing environments. In this way, our algorithm
automatically adapts to the property of functions (convex, exponentially concave,
or strongly convex), as well as the nature of environments (stationary or changing).
As a by product, it also allows the type of functions to switch between rounds.

1

Introduction

Online learning aims to make a sequence of accurate decisions given knowledge of answers to
previous tasks and possibly additional information [Shalev-Shwartz, 2011]. It is performed in a
sequence of consecutive rounds, where at round t the learner is asked to select a decision wt from a
domain Ω. After submitting the answer, a loss function ft : Ω 7→ R is revealed and the learner suffers
a loss ft (wt ). The standard performance measure is the regret [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]:
Regret(T ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (wt ) − min

w∈Ω

T
X

ft (w)

t=1

defined as the difference between the cumulative loss of the online learner and that of the best decision
chosen in hindsight. When both the domain Ω and the loss ft (·) are convex, it becomes online convex
optimization (OCO) [Zinkevich, 2003].
In the literature, there exist plenty of algorithms to minimize the regret under the setting of OCO
[Hazan, 2016]. However, when the environment undergoes many changes, regret may not be the
best measure of performance. That is because regret chooses a fixed comparator, and for the same
reason, it is also referred to as static regret. To address this limitation, Hazan and Seshadhri [2007]
introduce the concept of adaptive regret, which measures the performance with respect to a changing
comparator. Following the terminology of Daniely et al. [2015], we define the strongly adaptive
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

