Hyperparameter Tuning is All You Need for LISTA

Xiaohan Chen1∗ Jialin Liu2∗ Zhangyang Wang1
1

Wotao Yin2

University of Texas at Austin 2 Alibaba US, Damo Academy
{xiaohan.chen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu
{jialin.liu, wotao.yin}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Learned Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (LISTA) introduces the concept of unrolling an iterative algorithm and training it like a neural network. It has
had great success on sparse recovery. In this paper, we show that adding momentum
to intermediate variables in the LISTA network achieves a better convergence rate
and, in particular, the network with instance-optimal parameters is superlinearly
convergent. Moreover, our new theoretical results lead to a practical approach of
automatically and adaptively calculating the parameters of a LISTA network layer
based on its previous layers. Perhaps most surprisingly, such an adaptive-parameter
procedure reduces the training of LISTA to tuning only three hyperparameters
from data: a new record set in the context of the recent advances on trimming down
LISTA complexity. We call this new ultra-light weight network HyperLISTA. Compared to state-of-the-art LISTA models, HyperLISTA achieves almost the same
performance on seen data distributions and performs better when tested on unseen
distributions (specifically, those with different sparsity levels and nonzero magnitudes). Code is available: https://github.com/VITA-Group/HyperLISTA.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the sparse linear inverse problem, where we strive to recover an unknown
sparse vector x∗ ∈ Rn from its noisy linear measurement b generated from
b = Ax∗ + ε,

(1)

where b ∈ Rm is the measurement that we observe, A ∈ Rm×n is the dictionary, x∗ ∈ Rn is the
unknown ground truth that we aim to recover, and ε ∈ Rm is additive Gaussian white noise. For
simplicity, each column of A, is normalized to have unit `2 norm. Typically, we have much fewer
rows than columns in the dictionary A, i.e., m  n. Therefore, Equation (1) is an under-determined
system. The sparse inverse problem, also known as sparse coding, plays essential roles in a wide
range of applications including feature selection, signal reconstruction and pattern recognition.
Sparse linear inverse problems are well studied in the literature of optimization. For example, it
can be formulated into LASSO [29] and solved by many optimization algorithms [9, 3]. These
solutions explicitly consider and incorporate the sparsity prior and usually exploit iterative routines.
Deep-learning-based approaches are proposed for empirically solving inverse problems recently [25],
which produce black-box models that are trained with data in an end-to-end way, while somehow
ignoring the sparsity prior. Comparing the two streams, the former type, i.e., the classic optimization
methods, takes hundreds to thousands of iterations to generate accurate solutions, while black-box
deep learning models, if properly trained, can achieve similar accuracy in tens of layers. However,
classic methods come with data-agnostic convergence (rate) guarantees under suitable conditions,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
∗

The first two authors made equal contributions.

