Neural Scene Flow Prior
Xueqian Li∗ 1,2
Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes1
Simon Lucey2
1
2
Argo AI
The University of Adelaide

Abstract
Before the deep learning revolution, many perception algorithms were based on
runtime optimization in conjunction with a strong prior/regularization penalty. A
prime example of this in computer vision is optical and scene flow. Supervised
learning has largely displaced the need for explicit regularization. Instead, they
rely on large amounts of labeled data to capture prior statistics, which are not
always readily available for many problems. Although optimization is employed to
learn the neural network, the weights of this network are frozen at runtime. As a
result, these learning solutions are domain-specific and do not generalize well to
other statistically different scenarios. This paper revisits the scene flow problem
that relies predominantly on runtime optimization and strong regularization. A
central innovation here is the inclusion of a neural scene flow prior, which
uses the architecture of neural networks as a new type of implicit regularizer.
Unlike learning-based scene flow methods, optimization occurs at runtime, and
our approach needs no offline datasets—making it ideal for deployment in new
environments such as autonomous driving. We show that an architecture based
exclusively on multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) can be used as a scene flow prior.
Our method attains competitive—if not better—results on scene flow benchmarks.
Also, our neural prior’s implicit and continuous scene flow representation allows
us to estimate dense long-term correspondences across a sequence of point clouds.
The dense motion information is represented by scene flow fields where points can
be propagated through time by integrating motion vectors. We demonstrate such a
capability by accumulating a sequence of lidar point clouds.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art results have recently been achieved by learning-based models [17, 30, 47, 60, 68] for
the scene flow problem—the task of estimating 3D motion fields from dynamic scenes. However,
such models heavily rely on large-scale data to capture prior knowledge, which is not always readily
available. Scene flow annotations are expensive, and most methods train on synthetic and unrealistic
scenarios to fine-tune on small real datasets.
Poor generalization to unseen, out-of-the-distribution inputs is another problem. Prior information
is generally limited to the statistics of the data used for training. Real-world applications
such as autonomous driving require robust solutions to low-level vision tasks such as depth,
optical, and scene flow estimation that work in statistically different scenarios. Inspired by
recent innovations that make use of coordinate-based networks (i.e., pixels or 3D positions
as inputs) [9, 36, 37, 39, 56] for 3D modeling and rendering, we investigate the use of such
networks to regularize the scene flow problem without any learning directly from point clouds.
Optimization happens at runtime, and instead of learning a prior from data, the network structure
itself captures the prior information. It is not limited to the statistics of a specific dataset.
∗

Research done during internship at Argo AI. Corresponding e-mail: xueqian.li@adelaide.edu.au.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

