Why Lottery Ticket Wins? A Theoretical Perspective
of Sample Complexity on Pruned Neural Networks

Shuai Zhang
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA 12180
zhangs21@rpi.edu

Meng Wang
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA 12180
wangm7@rpi.edu

Sijia Liu
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, USA 48824
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
liusiji5@msu.edu

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 10562
Pin-Yu.Chen@ibm.com

Jinjun Xiong
University at Buffalo
Buffalo NY, USA 14260
jinjun@buffalo.edu

Abstract
The lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) [20] states that learning on a properly pruned
network (the winning ticket) improves test accuracy over the original unpruned network. Although LTH has been justified empirically in a broad range of deep neural
network (DNN) involved applications like computer vision and natural language
processing, the theoretical validation of the improved generalization of a winning
ticket remains elusive. To the best of our knowledge, our work, for the first time,
characterizes the performance of training a pruned neural network by analyzing
the geometric structure of the objective function and the sample complexity to
achieve zero generalization error. We show that the convex region near a desirable
model with guaranteed generalization enlarges as the neural network model is
pruned, indicating the structural importance of a winning ticket. Moreover, when
the algorithm for training a pruned neural network is specified as an (accelerated)
stochastic gradient descent algorithm, we theoretically show that the number of
samples required for achieving zero generalization error is proportional to the
number of the non-pruned weights in the hidden layer. With a fixed number of
samples, training a pruned neural network enjoys a faster convergence rate to the
desired model than training the original unpruned one, providing a formal justification of the improved generalization of the winning ticket. Our theoretical results
are acquired from learning a pruned neural network of one hidden layer, while
experimental results are further provided to justify the implications in pruning
multi-layer neural networks.

1

Introduction

Neural network pruning can reduce the computational cost of model training and inference significantly and potentially lessen the chance of overfitting [33, 26, 15, 25, 28, 51, 58, 41]. The recent
Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [20] claims that a randomly initialized dense neural network al35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

