BooVAE: Boosting Approach for Continual Learning of VAE

Evgenii Egorov ⇤†
University of Amsterdam
egorov.evgenyy@ya.ru

Anna Kuzina ⇤†
Vrije Universiteit
av.kuzina@yandex.ru

Evgeny Burnaev
Skoltech, AIRI
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Variational autoencoder (VAE) is a deep generative model for unsupervised learning, allowing to encode observations into the meaningful latent space. VAE is
prone to catastrophic forgetting when tasks arrive sequentially, and only the data
for the current one is available. We address this problem of continual learning for
VAEs. It is known that the choice of the prior distribution over the latent space is
crucial for VAE in the non-continual setting. We argue that it can also be helpful
to avoid catastrophic forgetting. We learn the approximation of the aggregated
posterior as a prior for each task. This approximation is parametrised as an additive
mixture of distributions induced by encoder evaluated at trainable pseudo-inputs.
We use a greedy boosting-like approach with entropy regularisation to learn the
components. This method encourages components diversity, which is essential as
we aim at memorising the current task with the fewest components possible. Based
on the learnable prior, we introduce an end-to-end approach for continual learning
of VAEs and provide empirical studies on commonly used benchmarks (MNIST,
Fashion MNIST, NotMNIST) and CelebA datasets. For each dataset, the proposed
method avoids catastrophic forgetting in a fully automatic way.

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) are deep generative models used in
various domains (Lee et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2020). The VAE model consists of deep neural networks
(DNNs): an encoder (inference network) and decoder (generative network). DNNs are known to
reduce their quality on previously learned tasks when trained on data from a new task. Several
directions to address this problem of catastrophic forgetting were suggested. But this phenomenon is
mainly considered without attention to the specific properties of the VAE. We want to discuss current
approaches to continual learning and formulate requirements for the ideal solution.
Dynamic architecture approach adds task-specific last layers (multi-heads) to encoder and decoder
for each task (Rusu et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2018; Li & Hoiem, 2018). We suppose that practical
applications of VAE require the common latent space, which is violated in multi-heads. Using multiheads requires deciding which head to apply to the new data and when to expand the architecture.
They reduce reuse of similarities between tasks. Hence, we suppose that the approach should keep
the static architecture for both encoder and decoder.
The generative replay (Shin et al., 2017; Rao et al., 2019) uses a "teacher" generative model for
generating "fake" data that mimics former training examples. Then the "student" model is trained
on joint "fake" and new data. This approach is conceptually simple, model-agnostic and overcomes
forgetting. However, these benefits come with a computational price. We need to retrain model while
generating the dataset from all the past tasks, asses samples quality and the task-balance. Thus the
approach should avoid generative replay).
⇤
†

These authors contributed equally
The work was done while the author was at the Skoltech, Moscow, 2019

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

