Shape your Space: A Gaussian Mixture
Regularization Approach to Deterministic
Autoencoders
Amrutha Saseendran1 , Kathrin Skubch1 , Stefan Falkner1 and Margret Keuper2
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
2
University of Siegen, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
Amrutha.Saseendran@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are powerful probabilistic models to learn representations of complex data distributions. One important limitation of VAEs
is the strong prior assumption that latent representations learned by the model
follow a simple uni-modal Gaussian distribution. Further, the variational training
procedure poses considerable practical challenges. Recently proposed regularized autoencoders offer a deterministic autoencoding framework, that simplifies
the original VAE objective and is significantly easier to train. Since these models only provide weak control over the learned latent distribution, they require
an ex-post density estimation step to generate samples comparable to those of
VAEs. In this paper, we propose a simple and end-to-end trainable deterministic
autoencoding framework, that efficiently shapes the latent space of the model
during training and utilizes the capacity of expressive multi-modal latent distributions. The proposed training procedure provides direct evidence if the latent
distribution adequately captures complex aspects of the encoded data. We show
in experiments the expressiveness and sample quality of our model in various
challenging continuous and discrete domains. An implementation is available at
https://github.com/boschresearch/GMM_DAE.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) constitute one of the popular generative learning frameworks widely
used for applications such as image understanding and generation, sentence modeling, and optimizing
discrete data and graph-based structures [7, 23, 34, 40, 48]. The VAE framework elegantly combines
autoencoders with variational inference [24]. The encoder of the model maps the input data into
a lower-dimensional latent space according to a given inference model. The decoder provides a
mapping from the latent space back to the original input space. Both are jointly optimized by
maximizing a lower bound on the model evidence, regularizing the latent space towards a fixed
prior distribution, usually a uni-modal Gaussian. By sampling from the latent space prior, we can
utilize the decoder network to efficiently generate new samples from the training distribution. Due
to the variational formulation, optimizing the VAE training objective poses significant practical
challenges. Further, the over simplistic prior assumption often leads to an unsatisfying trade-off
between the quality of reconstructed samples and the prior regularization [2]. Recent work has shown
that choosing more flexible priors helps to improve the generative performance of VAEs [44].
Since the initial introduction of VAEs, various novel training objectives have been proposed. One line
of work focuses on different regularization techniques derived from alternative probabilistic metrics
to shape the latent space of the model during training, e.g. using the Wasserstein distance [43]. In
contrast to the KL-divergence, the Wasserstein distance measure induces a metric on probability
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

