Privately Learning Mixtures of Axis-Aligned
Gaussians
Ishaq Aden-Ali
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
adenali@mcmaster.ca

Hassan Ashtiani
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
zokaeiam@mcmaster.ca

Christopher Liaw
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
cvliaw@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning mixtures of Gaussians under the constraint of
e 2 d log3/2 (1/δ)/α2 ε) samples
approximate differential privacy. We prove that O(k
are sufficient to learn a mixture of k axis-aligned Gaussians in Rd to within total
variation distance α while satisfying (ε, δ)-differential privacy. This is the first result for privately learning mixtures of unbounded axis-aligned (or even unbounded
univariate) Gaussians. If the covariance matrices of each of the Gaussians is the
2
e
identity matrix, we show that O(kd/α
+ kd log(1/δ)/αε) samples are sufficient.
To prove our results, we design a new technique for privately learning mixture
distributions. A class of distributions F is said to be list-decodable if there is
an algorithm that, given “heavily corrupted” samples from f ∈ F, outputs a list
of distributions one of which approximates f . We show that if F is privately
list-decodable then we can learn mixtures of distributions in F. Finally, we show
axis-aligned Gaussian distributions are privately list-decodable, thereby proving
mixtures of such distributions are privately learnable.

1

Introduction

The fundamental problem of distribution learning concerns the design of algorithms (i.e., estimators)
that, given samples generated from an unknown distribution f , output an “approximation” of f .
While distribution learning has a long history [54], studying it under privacy constraints is relatively
new and unexplored.
In this paper, we work with a rigorous and practical notion of data privacy known as differential
privacy [36]. Roughly speaking, differential privacy guarantees that no single data point can influence
the output of an algorithm too much. Intuitively, this provides privacy by “hiding” the contribution of
each individual. Differential privacy is the de facto standard for modern private analysis and has seen
widespread impact in both industry and government [12, 22, 28, 29, 39].
In recent years, there has been a flurry of activity in differentially private distribution learning and a
number of techniques have been developed in the literature. In the pure differentially private setting,
Bun et al. [17] introduced a method to learn classes of distributions that admit a finite cover, i.e. when
the class of distributions is well-approximated by a finite number of distributions. They show that this
is an exact characterization of distributions which can be learned under pure differential privacy in the
sense that a class of distributions is learnable under pure differential privacy if and only if the class
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

