Multiwavelet-based Operator Learning for
Differential Equations

Gaurav Gupta, Xiongye Xiao, Paul Bogdan
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
{ggaurav, xiongyex, pbogdan}@usc.edu

Abstract
The solution of a partial differential equation can be obtained by computing the
inverse operator map between the input and the solution space. Towards this end,
we introduce a multiwavelet-based neural operator learning scheme that compresses the associated operator’s kernel using fine-grained wavelets. By explicitly
embedding the inverse multiwavelet filters, we learn the projection of the kernel
onto fixed multiwavelet polynomial bases. The projected kernel is trained at multiple scales derived from using repeated computation of multiwavelet transform.
This allows learning the complex dependencies at various scales and results in
a resolution-independent scheme. Compare to the prior works, we exploit the
fundamental properties of the operator’s kernel which enable numerically efficient
representation. We perform experiments on the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation,
Burgers’ equation, Darcy Flow, and Navier-Stokes equation. Compared with the
existing neural operator approaches, our model shows significantly higher accuracy
and achieves state-of-the-art in a range of datasets. For the time-varying equations,
the proposed method exhibits a (2X −10X) improvement (0.0018 (0.0033) relative
L2 error for Burgers’ (KdV) equation). By learning the mappings between function
spaces, the proposed method has the ability to find the solution of a high-resolution
input after learning from lower-resolution data.

1

Introduction

Many natural and human-built systems (e.g., aerospace, complex fluids, neuro-glia information
processing) exhibit complex dynamics characterized by partial differential equations (PDEs) [52, 60].
For example, the design of wings and airplanes robust to turbulence, requires to learn complex PDEs.
Along the same lines, complex fluids (gels, emulsions) are multiphasic materials characterized by a
macroscopic behavior [55] modeled by non-linear PDEs. Understanding their variations in viscosity
as a function of the shear rate is critical for many engineering projects. Moreover, modeling the
dynamics of continuous and discrete cyber and physical processes in complex cyber-physical systems
can be achieved through PDEs [68].
Recent efforts on learning PDEs (i.e., mappings between infinite-dimensional spaces of functions),
from trajectories of variables, focused on developing machine learning and in particular deep neural
networks (NNs) techniques. Towards this end, a stream of work aims at parameterizing the solution
map as deep NNs [2, 13, 33, 40, 71]. One issue, however, is that the NNs are tied to a specific
resolution during training, and therefore, may not generalize well to other resolutions, thus, requiring
retraining (and possible modifications of the model) for every set of discretizations. In parallel,
another stream of work focuses on constructing the PDE solution function as a NN architecture
[31, 42, 57, 65]. This approach, however, is designed to work with one instance of a PDE and,
therefore, upon changing the coefficients associated with the PDE, the model has to be re-trained.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

