Pooling by Sliced-Wasserstein Embedding

Navid Naderializadeh∗
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
nnaderi@seas.upenn.edu
Joseph F. Comer, Reed W. Andrews, Heiko Hoffmann
HRL Laboratories, LLC.
Malibu, CA 90265
{jfcomer, rwandrews, hhoffmann}@hrl.com
Soheil Kolouri∗
Computer Science Department
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235
soheil.kolouri@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Learning representations from sets has become increasingly important with many
applications in point cloud processing, graph learning, image/video recognition, and
object detection. We introduce a geometrically-interpretable and generic pooling
mechanism for aggregating a set of features into a fixed-dimensional representation.
In particular, we treat elements of a set as samples from a probability distribution
and propose an end-to-end trainable Euclidean embedding for sliced-Wasserstein
distance to learn from set-structured data effectively. We evaluate our proposed
pooling method on a wide variety of set-structured data, including point-cloud,
graph, and image classification tasks, and demonstrate that our proposed method
provides superior performance over existing set representation learning approaches.
Our code is available at https://github.com/navid-naderi/PSWE.

1

Introduction

Many modern machine learning (ML) tasks deal with learning from set-structured data. In some
cases, the input object itself is a set, as in point cloud classification/regression, and in other cases, the
complex input object is described as a set of features after being processed through a backbone, i.e., a
feature extractor. For instance, in graph mining, a graph is represented as a set of node embeddings,
and in computer vision, an image is represented as a set of local features extracted from its different
regions (i.e., fields of view). There are unique challenges in dealing with such set-structured data,
namely: i) the set cardinalities could differ from one instance to another, and ii) the elements of the
set do not necessarily have an inherent ordering. These challenges call for ML models that can both
handle varied input sizes and are invariant to permutations, i.e., the model output does not change
under any permutation of the input set elements.
Prior work on learning from set-structured data can be broadly categorized as methods based on
either implicit or explicit embedding of sets into a Hilbert space. Implicit embedding approaches
∗

Work done while at HRL Laboratories, LLC.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

