T-LoHo: A Bayesian Regularization Model for
Structured Sparsity and Smoothness on Graphs

Changwoo J. Lee
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
c.lee@stat.tamu.edu

Zhao Tang Luo
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
ztluo@stat.tamu.edu

Huiyan Sang
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
huiyan@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
Graphs have been commonly used to represent complex data structures. In models
dealing with graph-structured data, multivariate parameters may not only exhibit
sparse patterns but have structured sparsity and smoothness in the sense that both
zero and non-zero parameters tend to cluster together. We propose a new prior
for high-dimensional parameters with graphical relations, referred to as the Treebased Low-rank Horseshoe (T-LoHo) model, that generalizes the popular univariate
Bayesian horseshoe shrinkage prior to the multivariate setting to detect structured
sparsity and smoothness simultaneously. The T-LoHo prior can be embedded in
many high-dimensional hierarchical models. To illustrate its utility, we apply it to
regularize a Bayesian high-dimensional regression problem where the regression
coefficients are linked by a graph, so that the resulting clusters have flexible shapes
and satisfy the cluster contiguity constraint with respect to the graph. We design an
efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm that delivers full Bayesian inference
with uncertainty measures for model parameters such as the number of clusters. We
offer theoretical investigations of the clustering effects and posterior concentration
results. Finally, we illustrate the performance of the model with simulation studies
and a real data application for anomaly detection on a road network. The results
indicate substantial improvements over other competing methods such as the sparse
fused lasso. Code is available at https://github.com/changwoo-lee/TLOHO.

1

Introduction

In high-dimensional models such as linear regressions where the number of parameters p may exceed
the sample size n, it is often assumed that the parameter vector β ∈ Rp has many zero components,
namely the sparsity assumption. This sparsity assumption allows the unknown parameter β to lie on
a low-dimensional subspace of Rp , which addresses overfitting and leads to improved predictions
and easier interpretations (Hastie et al., 2015). In many real-life applications, however, the parameter
of interest β should be understood in a certain context where specific data structures exist, such as in
time series, spatial, image, and network data analysis. In many such cases, it is desirable to consider
another type of low-dimensional structure, where β is assumed to have clustered patterns and many
possibly clustered zeros, which we shall call sparse homogeneity assumption.
One of the most popular models which assumes sparse homogeneity is the sparse fused lasso (Tibshirani et al., 2005) in linear regression settings. 1-D sparse fused lasso imposes an `1 penalty on
the differences of time-neighboring coefficients as well as individual coefficients. The notion of
‘time-neighboring’ can be further generalized by considering a graph G = (V, E) with |V | = p so
that G represents the general context or structure in which β should be interpreted. It leads to the
generalized lasso (Tibshirani et al., 2011) where the penalty term now involves m := |E| number
of pairwise differences of neighboring vertices with respect to G which facilitates βi = βj , where
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

