Mining the Benefits of Two-stage and One-stage
HOI Detection
Aixi Zhang1∗ Yue Liao2 * Si Liu2†
Miao Lu
Yongliang Wang1 Chen Gao2 Xiaobo Li1
1
Alibaba Group 2 Beihang University
1

Abstract
Two-stage methods have dominated Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection for
several years. Recently, one-stage HOI detection methods have become popular. In
this paper, we aim to explore the essential pros and cons of two-stage and one-stage
methods. With this as the goal, we find that conventional two-stage methods mainly
suffer from positioning positive interactive human-object pairs, while one-stage
methods are challenging to make an appropriate trade-off on multi-task learning,
i.e., object detection, and interaction classification. Therefore, a core problem is
how to take the essence and discard the dregs from the conventional two types of
methods. To this end, we propose a novel one-stage framework with disentangling
human-object detection and interaction classification in a cascade manner. In detail,
we first design a human-object pair generator based on a state-of-the-art one-stage
HOI detector by removing the interaction classification module or head and then
design a relatively isolated interaction classifier to classify each human-object pair.
Two cascade decoders in our proposed framework can focus on one specific task,
detection or interaction classification. In terms of the specific implementation, we
adopt a transformer-based HOI detector as our base model. The newly introduced
disentangling paradigm outperforms existing methods by a large margin, with
a significant relative mAP gain of 9.32% on HICO-Det. The source codes are
available at https://github.com/YueLiao/CDN.

1

Introduction

The goal of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection [2, 20, 6, 18, 7, 8, 17, 3] is to make a machine
detailedly understand human activities from a static image. Human activities in this task are abstracted
as a set of <human, object, action> HOI triplets. Thus, an HOI detector is required to locate humanobject pairs and classify their corresponding action simultaneously. Based on this definition, we
can summarize conventional HOI detection methods into two paradigms, i.e., two-stage methods,
and one-stage methods. These two paradigms have made significant progress with the development
of deep learning, but both paradigms still have their shortcomings due to their structural design.
This paper aims to present a detailed analysis of methods under these two paradigms and propose a
solution to mine the benefits of two-stage and one-stage methods.
We first take a closer look at the conventional two-stage and one-stage HOI detectors. Conventional
two-stage methods [6, 2, 18, 5] are mostly with a serial architecture. As shown in Figure 1 (a),
two-stage methods detect humans and objects first and then feeds the human-object pairs, which
are generated by matching humans and objects one by one, into an interaction classifier. The serial
architecture suffers from locating the interactive human-object pairs under the interference of a
large number of negative pairs only based on local region features. Otherwise, the efficiency of
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author (liusi@buaa.edu.cn)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

