Loss function based second-order Jensen inequality
and its application to particle variational inference

Futoshi Futami, Tomoharu Iwata, Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
{futoshi.futami.uk,tomoharu.iwata.gy,naonori.ueda.fr}@hco.ntt.co.jp
Issei Sato, Masashi Sugiyama
The University of Tokyo
sato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp,sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Bayesian model averaging, obtained as the expectation of a likelihood function by a
posterior distribution, has been widely used for prediction, evaluation of uncertainty,
and model selection. Various approaches have been developed to efficiently capture
the information in the posterior distribution; one such approach is the optimization
of a set of models simultaneously with interaction to ensure the diversity of the
individual models in the same way as ensemble learning. A representative approach
is particle variational inference (PVI), which uses an ensemble of models as an
empirical approximation for the posterior distribution. PVI iteratively updates
each model with a repulsion force to ensure the diversity of the optimized models.
However, despite its promising performance, a theoretical understanding of this
repulsion and its association with the generalization ability remains unclear. In this
paper, we tackle this problem in light of PAC-Bayesian analysis. First, we provide
a new second-order Jensen inequality, which has the repulsion term based on the
loss function. Thanks to the repulsion term, it is tighter than the standard Jensen
inequality. Then, we derive a novel generalization error bound and show that it
can be reduced by enhancing the diversity of models. Finally, we derive a new
PVI that optimizes the generalization error bound directly. Numerical experiments
demonstrate that the performance of the proposed PVI compares favorably with
existing methods in the experiment.

1

Introduction

Bayesian model averaging (BMA) has been widely employed for prediction, evaluation of uncertainty,
and model selection in Bayesian inference. BMA is obtained as the expectation of a likelihood
function by a posterior distribution and thus it contains information of each model drawn from the
posterior distribution [21]. Since estimating the posterior distribution is computationally difficult
in practice, various approximations have been developed to efficiently capture the diversity in the
posterior distribution [21, 1, 2].
One of these recently proposed approaches involves optimizing a set of models simultaneously with
interaction to ensure the diversity of the individual models, similar to ensemble learning. One notable
example is particle variational inference (PVI) [17, 28], which uses an ensemble as an empirical
approximation for the posterior distribution. Such PVI methods have been widely employed in
variational inference owing to their high computational efficiency and flexibility. They iteratively
update the individual models and the update equations contain the gradient of the likelihood function
and the repulsion force that disperses the individual models. Thanks to this repulsion term, the
obtained ensemble can appropriately approximate the posterior distribution. When only one model is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

