Curriculum Disentangled Recommendation with
Noisy Multi-feedback

Hong Chen1∗, Yudong Chen1,2∗, Xin Wang1†,
Ruobing Xie2 , Rui Wang2 , Feng Xia2 , Wenwu Zhu1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent.
{h-chen20,cyd18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin_wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{ruobingxie,rysanwang,xiafengxia}@tencent.com

Abstract
Learning disentangled representations for user intentions from multi-feedback (i.e.,
positive and negative feedback) can enhance the accuracy and explainability of
recommendation algorithms. However, learning such disentangled representations
from multi-feedback data is challenging because i) multi-feedback is complex:
there exist complex relations among different types of feedback (e.g., click, unclick,
and dislike, etc) as well as various user intentions, and ii) multi-feedback is noisy:
there exists noisy (useless) information both in features and labels, which may
deteriorate the recommendation performance. Existing disentangled recommendation works only focus on positive feedback, failing to handle the complex relations
and noise hidden in multi-feedback data. To solve this problem, in this work we
propose a Curriculum Disentangled Recommendation (CDR) model that is capable of efficiently learning disentangled representations from complex and noisy
multi-feedback for better recommendation. Concretely, we design a co-filtering
dynamic routing mechanism which simultaneously captures the complex relations
among different behavioral feedback and user intentions as well as denoise the
representations in the feature level. We then present an adjustable self-evaluating
curriculum that is able to evaluate sample difficulties for better model training
and conduct denoising in the label level via disregarding useless information. Our
extensive experiments on several real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed
CDR model can significantly outperform several state-of-the-art methods in terms
of recommendation accuracy3 .

1

Introduction

Recommenders aim to capture the user’s preferences from different aspects of information for more
accurate prediction[1–4] . Learning disentangled representations that can uncover and disentangle
the latent explanatory factors hidden in user behavioral data has recently been shown as an effective
way to discover users’ intentions, improving both recommendation accuracy and explainability [5–9].
Multi-feedback, normally including the positive feedback (e.g., click) and negative feedback (unclick
and dislike, etc.), is of great significance to depict the user’s unbiased and various intentions [10].
Learning disentangled representation from multi-feedback is able to capture various user intentions
more accurately, leading to improvement of accuracy and explainability in recommendation.
However, learning such disentangled representation from multi-feedback that can best serve recommendation is quite challenging due to two reasons. i) Multi-feedback is complex: different types of
∗

Equal contributions
Corresponding Authors.
3
Our code will be released at https://github.com/forchchch/CDR

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

