Coresets for Time Series Clustering

Lingxiao Huang
Tsinghua University

K. Sudhir
Yale University

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
We study the problem of constructing coresets for clustering problems with time
series data. This problem has gained importance across many fields including
biology, medicine, and economics due to the proliferation of sensors for real-time
measurement and rapid drop in storage costs. In particular, we consider the setting
where the time series data on N entities is generated from a Gaussian mixture
model with autocorrelations over k clusters in Rd . Our main contribution is an
algorithm to construct coresets for the maximum likelihood objective for this
mixture model. Our algorithm is efficient, and, under a mild assumption on the
covariance matrices of the Gaussians, the size of the coreset is independent of the
number of entities N and the number of observations for each entity, and depends
only polynomially on k, d and 1/ε, where ε is the error parameter. We empirically
assess the performance of our coresets with synthetic data.

1

Introduction


A multivariate time series dataset, represented as X = Xi = (xi1 , . . . , xi,Ti ) ⊂ RTi ×d | i ∈ [N ] ,
where N is the number of entities, Ti is the number of time periods corresponding to entity i and d is
the number of features, tracks features of a cross-section of entities longitudinally over time. Such
data is also referred to as panel data [8] and has seen rapid growth due to proliferation of sensors, IOT
and wearables that facilitate real time measurement of various features associated with entities and the
rapid drop in storage costs. Specific examples of time series data include biomedical measurements
(e.g., blood pressure and electrocardiogram), epidemiology and diffusion through social networks,
weather, consumer search, content browsing and purchase behaviors, mobility through cell phone
and GPS locations, stock prices and exchange rates in finance [2].
Computational problems of interest with time series data include pattern discovery [49], regression/prediction [39], forecasting [9], and clustering [47, 31, 2] which arises in applications such as
anomaly detection [46]. Though clustering is a central and well-studied problem in unsupervised
learning, most standard treatments of clustering tend to be on static data with one observation per
entity [35, 11]. Time series clustering introduces a number of additional challenges and is an active
area of research, with many types of clustering methods proposed [15]; direct methods on raw data,
indirect methods based on features generated from the raw data, and model based clustering where
the data are assumed to be generated from a model. For surveys of time series clustering, see [47, 2].
We focus on model-based time series clustering using a likelihood framework that naturally extends
clustering with static data [11] to time series data [47], where each multivariate time series is generated
by one of k different parametrically specified models. For a survey of the importance of this subliterature and its various real-world applications, see [30]. A prevalent approach is to assume a finite
mixture of data generating models, with Gaussian mixture models being a common specification
[50, 53]. Roughly, the problem is to partition X probabilistically into k clusters, grouping those series
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

