Efficient First-Order Contextual Bandits:
Prediction, Allocation, and Triangular Discrimination

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research, New England

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research, NYC

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

akshaykr@microsoft.com

Abstract
A recurring theme in statistical learning, online learning, and beyond is that faster
convergence rates are possible for problems with low noise, often quantified by
the performance of the best hypothesis; such results are known as first-order or
small-loss guarantees. While first-order guarantees are relatively well understood
in statistical and online learning, adapting to low noise in contextual bandits (and
more broadly, decision making) presents major algorithmic challenges. In a COLT
2017 open problem, Agarwal et al. [5] asked whether first-order guarantees are
even possible for contextual bandits and—if so—whether they can be attained
by efficient algorithms. We give a resolution to this question by providing an
optimal and efficient reduction from contextual bandits to online regression with the
logarithmic (or, cross-entropy) loss. Our algorithm is simple and practical, readily
accommodates rich function classes, and requires no distributional assumptions
beyond realizability. In a large-scale empirical evaluation, we find that our approach
typically outperforms comparable non-first-order methods.
On the technical side, we show that the logarithmic loss and an informationtheoretic quantity called the triangular discrimination play a fundamental role
in obtaining first-order guarantees, and we combine this observation with new
refinements to the regression oracle reduction framework of Foster and Rakhlin
[29]. The use of triangular discrimination yields novel results even for the classical
statistical learning model, and we anticipate that it will find broader use.

1

Introduction

In the contextual bandit problem, a learning agent repeatedly makes decisions based on contextual
information, with the goal of learning a decision-making policy that minimizes their total loss over
time. This model captures simple reinforcement learning tasks in which the agent must learn to
make high-quality decisions in an uncertain environment, but does not need to engage in long-term
planning or credit assignment. Owing to the availability of high-quality engineered reward metrics,
contextual bandit algorithms are now routinely deployed in production for online personalization
systems [4, 61].
Contextual bandits encompass both the general problem of statistical learning with function approximation (specifically, cost-sensitive classification) and the classical multi-armed bandit problem,
yet present algorithmic challenges greater than the sum of both parts. In spite of these difficulties,
extensive research effort over the past decade has resulted in efficient, general-purpose algorithms, as
well as a sharp understanding of the optimal worst-case sample complexity [9, 12, 3, 29, 58].
While the algorithmic and statistical foundations for contextual bandits are beginning to take shape,
we still lack an understanding of adaptive or data-dependent algorithms that can go beyond the
worst case and exploit nice properties of real-world instances for better performance. This is in stark
contrast to supervised statistical learning, where adaptivity has substantial theory, and where standard
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

