Structure learning in polynomial time: Greedy
algorithms, Bregman information, and exponential
families
Goutham Rajendran
University of Chicago
goutham@uchicago.edu

Bohdan Kivva
University of Chicago
bkivva@uchicago.edu

Ming Gao
University of Chicago
minggao@uchicago.edu

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
Greedy algorithms have long been a workhorse for learning graphical models, and
more broadly for learning statistical models with sparse structure. In the context
of learning directed acyclic graphs, greedy algorithms are popular despite their
worst-case exponential runtime. In practice, however, they are very efficient. We
provide new insight into this phenomenon by studying a general greedy scorebased algorithm for learning DAGs. Unlike edge-greedy algorithms such as the
popular GES and hill-climbing algorithms, our approach is vertex-greedy and
requires at most a polynomial number of score evaluations. We then show how
recent polynomial-time algorithms for learning DAG models are a special case
of this algorithm, thereby illustrating how these order-based algorithms can be
rigorously interpreted as score-based algorithms. This observation suggests new
score functions and optimality conditions based on the duality between Bregman
divergences and exponential families, which we explore in detail. Explicit sample
and computational complexity bounds are derived. Finally, we provide extensive
experiments suggesting that this algorithm indeed optimizes the score in a variety
of settings.

1

Introduction

Learning the structure of a graphical model from data is a notoriously difficult combinatorial problem
with numerous applications in machine learning, artificial intelligence, and causal inference as well
as scientific disciplines such as genetics, medicine, and physics. Owing to its combinatorial structure,
greedy algorithms have proved popular and efficient in practice. For undirected graphical models
(e.g. Ising, Gaussian) in particular, strong statistical and computational guarantees exist for a variety
of greedy algorithms [27, 28]. These algorithms are based on the now well-known forward-backward
greedy algorithm [29, 57], which has been applied to a range of problems beyond graphical models
including regression [57], multi-task learning [52], and atomic norm regularization [44].
Historically, the use of the basic forward-backward greedy scheme for learning directed acyclic
graphical (DAG) models predates some of this work, dating back to the classical greedy equivalence
search [GES, 13] algorithm. Since its introduction, GES has become a gold-standard for learning
DAGs, and is known to be asymptotically consistent under certain assumptions such as faithfulness
and score consistency [13, 34]. Both of these assumptions are known to hold for certain parametric
families [21], however, extending GES to distribution-free settings has proven difficult. Furthermore,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

