Learning to Compose Visual Relations
Nan Liu ⇤
University of Michigan
liunan@umich.edu

Shuang Li ⇤
MIT CSAIL
lishuang@mit.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL, BCS, CBMM
jbt@mit.edu

Yilun Du ⇤
MIT CSAIL
yilundu@mit.edu
Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL
torralba@mit.edu

Abstract
The visual world around us can be described as a structured set of objects and their
associated relations. An image of a room may be conjured given only the description of the underlying objects and their associated relations. While there has been
significant work on designing deep neural networks which may compose individual
objects together, less work has been done on composing the individual relations
between objects. A principal difficulty is that while the placement of objects is
mutually independent, their relations are entangled and dependent on each other.
To circumvent this issue, existing works primarily compose relations by utilizing a
holistic encoder, in the form of text or graphs. In this work, we instead propose
to represent each relation as an unnormalized density (an energy-based model),
enabling us to compose separate relations in a factorized manner. We show that
such a factorized decomposition allows the model to both generate and edit scenes
that have multiple sets of relations more faithfully. We further show that decomposition enables our model to effectively understand the underlying relational scene
structure. Project page at: https://composevisualrelations.github.io/

1

Introduction

The ability to reason about the component objects and their relations in a scene is key for a wide
variety of robotics and AI tasks, such as multistep manipulation planning [11], concept learning [25],
navigation [43], and dynamics prediction [3]. While a large body of work has explored inferring and
understanding the underlying objects in a scene, robustly understanding the component relations in
a scene remains a challenging task. In this work, we explore how to robustly understand relational
scene description (Figure 1).
Naively, one approach towards understanding relational scene descriptions is to utilize existing
multi-modal language and vision models. Such an approach has recently achieved great success in
DALL-E [36] and CLIP [35], both of which show compelling results on encoding object properties
with language. However, when these approaches are instead utilized to encode relations between
objects, their performance rapidly deteriorates, as shown in [36] and which we further illustrate in
Figure 7. We posit that the lack of compositionality in the language encoder prevents it from capturing
all the underlying relations in an image.
To remedy this issue, we propose instead to factorize the scene description with respect to each
individual relation. Separate models are utilized to encode each individual relation, which are then
subsequently composed together to represent a relational scene description. The most straightforward
⇤

indicates equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

