Online Active Learning with Surrogate Loss
Functions
Giulia DeSalvo
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
giuliad@google.com

Claudio Gentile
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
cgentile@google.com

Tobias Sommer Thune
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, DK
tobias.thune@gmail.com

Abstract
We derive a novel active learning algorithm in the streaming setting for binary
classification tasks. The algorithm leverages weak labels to minimize the number
of label requests, and trains a model to optimize a surrogate loss on a resulting
set of labeled and weak-labeled points. Our algorithm jointly admits two crucial
properties: theoretical guarantees in the general agnostic setting and a strong
empirical performance. Our theoretical analysis shows that the algorithm attains
favorable generalization and label complexity bounds, while our empirical study
on 18 real-world datasets demonstrate that the algorithm outperforms standard
baselines, including the Margin Algorithm, or Uncertainty Sampling, a highperforming active learning algorithm favored by practitioners.

1

Introduction

While unlabeled data is generated at increasing rates, supervised learning often requires large portions
of this data to be annotated by human raters, which carry significant costs. Active learning seeks
to significantly alleviate this problem through algorithms that attain comparable performance to
passive learning (i.e., to full supervision) while using considerably fewer labels. Because of the ever
increasing use of labeled data in modern machine learning approaches, this calls for the development
of more and more effective active learning techniques.
In this paper, we are specifically interested in binary classification problems in the so-called streaming
(or online) setting of active learning. In this setting, learning proceeds in a sequence of rounds, where
in each round an unlabeled sample is received, and the learner decides on-the-fly whether or not
to observe the associated binary label. Now, it is common practice, in active learning or machine
learning in general, that even for binary classification problems, the loss used both for training and
for evaluating statistical performance is not the zero-one loss, but some surrogate function thereof.
This results in more tractable (e.g. convex) optimization problems in the training phase, but also
in more calibrated metrics in the evaluation phase. For instance, we may be compelled to output
estimates of class probabilities, say, the success rate of a given set of decisions, and thus deploy a
maximum posterior probability estimator for such probabilities. Then, given a training set with labels
y ∈ {±1} and if p̂(x) is an estimate of the conditional class probability P [y = 1 | x], a standard goal
1−y
1
1
is to minimize the log-loss 1+y
2 log p̂(x) + 2 log 1−p̂(x) . In these cases, the logistic link function
1
p̂(x) = 1+e−h(x)
is often adopted to model conditional class probabilities where h is some (unknown)
function in a given hypothesis class. In this and many other situations that arise in practice, it is thus
advisable to resort to surrogate loss functions for both training and evaluation.
The online active learning literature contains a number of proposed algorithms that admit theoretical
guarantees for both generalization error and label complexity, that is, the expected number of label
requests. The theoretical analyses found in these works are either tailored to the zero-one loss or to
general surrogate losses, with much more emphasis historically placed on the former. The papers that
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

