TransMatcher: Deep Image Matching Through
Transformers for Generalizable Person
Re-identification
Shengcai Liao∗ and Ling Shao
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
https://liaosc.wordpress.com/

Abstract
Transformers have recently gained increasing attention in computer vision. However, existing studies mostly use Transformers for feature representation learning,
e.g. for image classification and dense predictions, and the generalizability of
Transformers is unknown. In this work, we further investigate the possibility of
applying Transformers for image matching and metric learning given pairs of images. We find that the Vision Transformer (ViT) and the vanilla Transformer with
decoders are not adequate for image matching due to their lack of image-to-image
attention. Thus, we further design two naive solutions, i.e. query-gallery concatenation in ViT, and query-gallery cross-attention in the vanilla Transformer. The latter
improves the performance, but it is still limited. This implies that the attention
mechanism in Transformers is primarily designed for global feature aggregation,
which is not naturally suitable for image matching. Accordingly, we propose a
new simplified decoder, which drops the full attention implementation with the
softmax weighting, keeping only the query-key similarity computation. Additionally, global max pooling and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) head are applied to
decode the matching result. This way, the simplified decoder is computationally
more efficient, while at the same time more effective for image matching. The
proposed method, called TransMatcher, achieves state-of-the-art performance in
generalizable person re-identification, with up to 6.1% and 5.7% performance gains
in Rank-1 and mAP, respectively, on several popular datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/ShengcaiLiao/QAConv.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [24] is a neural network based on attention mechanisms. It has shown great success
in the field of natural language processing. Recently, it has also shown promising performance
for computer vision tasks, including image classification [7, 14], object detection [2, 37, 14, 26],
and image segmentation [14, 26], thus gaining increasing attention in this field. However, existing
studies mostly use Transformers for feature representation learning, e.g. for image classification
or dense predictions, and the generalizability of Transformers is unknown. At a glance, query-key
similarities are computed by dot products in the attention mechanisms of Transformers. Therefore,
these models could potentially be useful for image matching. In this work, we further investigate the
possibility of applying Transformers for image matching and metric learning given pairs of images,
with applications in generalizable person re-identification.
Attention mechanisms are used to gather global information from different locations according
to query-key similarities. The vanilla Transformer [24] is composed of an encoder that employs
∗

Shengcai Liao is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

