Parallelizing Thompson Sampling

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Mohammad Shadravan
Yale University
mohammad.shadravan@yale.edu

Abstract
How can we make use of information parallelism in online decision making problems while efficiently balancing the exploration-exploitation trade-off? In this
paper, we introduce a batch Thompson Sampling framework for two canonical
online decision making problems, namely, stochastic multi-arm bandit and linear contextual bandit with finitely many arms. Over a time horizon T , our batch
Thompson Sampling policy achieves the same (asymptotic) regret bound of a fully
sequential one while carrying out only O(log T ) batch queries. To achieve this exponential reduction, i.e., reducing the number of interactions from T to O(log T ),
our batch policy dynamically determines the duration of each batch in order to balance the exploration-exploitation trade-off. We also demonstrate experimentally
that dynamic batch allocation dramatically outperforms natural baselines such as
static batch allocations.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning and artificial intelligence are sequential in nature and require
making decisions over a long period of time and under uncertainty. Examples include A/B testing
[Graepel et al., 2010], hyper-parameter tuning [Kandasamy et al., 2018], adaptive experimental
design [Berry and Fristedt, 1985], ad placement [Schwartz et al., 2017], clinical trials [Villar et al.,
2015], and recommender systems [Kawale et al., 2015], to name a few. Bandit problems provide
a simple yet expressive view of sequential decision making with uncertainty. In such problems, a
repeated game between a learner and the environment is played where at each round the learner
selects an action, so called an arm, and then the environment reveals the reward. The goal of the
learner is to maximize the accumulated reward over a horizon T . The main challenge faced by
the learner is that the environment is unknown, and thus the learner has to follow a policy that
identifies an efficient trade-off between the exploration (i.e., trying new actions) and exploitation
(i.e., choosing among the known actions). A common way to measure the performance of a policy
is through regret, a game-theoretic notion, which is defined as the difference between the reward
accumulated by the policy and that of the best fixed action in hindsight.
We say that a policy has no regret, if its regret growth-rate as a function of T is sub-linear. There has
been a large body of work aiming to develop no-regret policies for a wide range of bandit problems
(for a comprehensive overview, see [Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020, Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012, Slivkins, 2019]). However, almost all the existing policies are fully sequential in nature,
meaning that once an action is executed the reward is immediately observed by the learner and can
be incorporated to make the subsequent decisions. In practice however, it is often more preferable
(and sometimes the only way) to explore many actions in parallel, so called a batch of actions, in
order to gain more information about the environment in a timely fashion. For instance, in clinical
trials, a phase of medical treatment is often carried out on a group of individuals and the results
are gathered for the entire group at the end of the phase. Based on the collected information, the
treatment for the subsequent phases are devised [Perchet et al., 2016]. Similarly, in a marketing
campaign, the response to a line of products is not collected in a fully sequential manner, instead,
a batch of products are mailed to a subset of costumers and their feedback is gathered collectively
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

