Data-Efficient GAN Training Beyond (Just)
Augmentations: A Lottery Ticket Perspective

Tianlong Chen1 , Yu Cheng2 , Zhe Gan2 , Jingjing Liu3 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Microsoft Corporation, 3 Tsinghua University
{tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu,{yu.cheng,zhe.gan}@microsoft.com
JJLiu@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Training generative adversarial networks (GANs) with limited real image data
generally results in deteriorated performance and collapsed models. To conquer
this challenge, we are inspired by the latest observation, that one can discover
independently trainable and highly sparse subnetworks (a.k.a., lottery tickets) from
GANs. Treating this as an inductive prior, we suggest a brand-new angle towards
data-efficient GAN training: by first identifying the lottery ticket from the original
GAN using the small training set of real images; and then focusing on training that
sparse subnetwork by re-using the same set. We find our coordinated framework to
offer orthogonal gains to existing real image data augmentation methods, and we
additionally present a new feature-level augmentation that can be applied together
with them. Comprehensive experiments endorse the effectiveness of our proposed
framework, across various GAN architectures (SNGAN, BigGAN, and StyleGANV2) and diverse datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Tiny-ImageNet, ImageNet, and
multiple few-shot generation datasets). Codes are available at: https://github.
com/VITA-Group/Ultra-Data-Efficient-GAN-Training.

1

Introduction

The quantity, diversity, and high quality of natural images available in the general domain have played an
essential role in the achieved breakthroughs of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [2–11] over the
past few years. However, it could become challenging or even infeasible for specific application domains
to collect a sufficiently large-scale dataset, due to various constraints on the imaging expense, subject type,
image quality, privacy, copyright status, and more.
That prohibits GANs’ broader applications in these
domains, e.g., for generating synthetic training data
[12]. Examples of such domains include medical images, images from scientific experiments, images of
rare species, or photos of a specific person or landmark. Eliminating the need of immense datasets for
GAN training is highly demanded for those scenarios. Naively training GAN with scarce samples leads
to overconfident discriminators that overfit the small
training data [13–15, 1]; it usually ends up with training divergence and drastic performance degradation
(evidenced later in Figure 2).

48.80%

36.00%

20

67.24%

73.79%

25

30

35

40

0.00%

Stage I
Stage I+II
Baseline

86.58%

Figure 1: FIDs on training BigGAN on 10% training data from CIFAR-100. Smaller distance to the
origin indicates smaller FID/better performance.
Compared to the vanilla training baseline (H, i.e.,
dense model or 0% sparsity), our method’s Stage
I (•) finds highly sparse lottery tickets from the
original BigGAN, with a range of sparsity up to
86.58%. Higher sparsity appears to bring better
data-efficiency. Stage II further boosts the training
of those found sparse subnetworks, by incorporating existing data-level augmentation [1] and our
newly proposed feature-level augmentation (•).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

