Sparse is Enough in Scaling Transformers

Sebastian Jaszczur∗
University of Warsaw

Aakanksha Chowdhery
Google Research

Wojciech Gajewski
Google Research

Afroz Mohiuddin
Google Research

Henryk Michalewski
Google Research

Łukasz Kaiser∗
OpenAI

Jonni Kanerva
Google Research

Abstract
Large Transformer models yield impressive results on many tasks, but are expensive to train, or even fine-tune, and so slow at decoding that their use and study
becomes out of reach. We address this problem by leveraging sparsity. We study
sparse variants for all layers in the Transformer and propose Scaling Transformers,
a family of next generation Transformer models that use sparse layers to scale
efficiently and perform unbatched decoding much faster than the standard Transformer as we scale up the model size. Surprisingly, the sparse layers are enough
to obtain the same perplexity as the standard Transformer with the same number
of parameters. We also integrate with prior sparsity approaches to attention and
enable fast inference on long sequences even with limited memory. This results in
performance competitive to the state-of-the-art on long text summarization.

1

Introduction

The field of natural language processing has seen dramatic improvements in recent years due to large
neural networks based on the Transformer architecture. The original Transformer [42] significantly
advanced state-of-the-art in machine translation. BERT [7] surpassed all previous methods on
question answering, language inference and other NLP tasks and was followed by a line of models
like T5 [30] that further improved these results. The GPT line of models [29, 3] elevated language
generation to the point that GPT-2 was invited to write short passages for the Economist and GPT-3
created whole articles almost indistinguishable from human-written ones.
The benefits of this progress are undercut by the huge costs such models incur. Strubell et al. [36]
estimate that training a single base BERT model costs $4k-$12k and emits as much CO2 as one
passenger’s share of a 4-hour flight and later Patterson et al. [27] estimate that training GPT-3 has
three times as much tCO2 e (metric tons of CO2 equivalent) emissions as a SF-NY round trip flight.
Data and serving costs are also forbidding: a single training run of BERT, for example, processes
128B tokens, and Google Translate reportedly 1 serves over 143B words per day.
With the growing popularity and size of these models, it is increasingly valuable to make them scale
efficiently. In this work we propose Scaling Transformers with a separate sparse mechanism for the
query, key, value and output layers (QKV layers for short) and combine it with sparse feedforward
blocks to get a fully sparse Transformer architecture.
To quantify the computational complexity of inference in Transformer models, recall the architecture
of a Transformer decoder block. It consists of three parts: a masked self-attention layer, an encoderdecoder attention layer and a feedforward block. The sizes of these layers are parameterized by dmodel
and dff . The base BERT model sets dmodel = 768, the large BERT has dmodel = 1024, the largest
1

∗
Work done while at Google Research.
https://cutt.ly/skkFJ7a

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

