Relaxed Marginal Consistency for Differentially
Private Query Answering
Ryan McKenna, Siddhant Pradhan, Daniel Sheldon, Gerome Miklau
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01002
{rmckenna, sspradhan, sheldon, miklau}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Many differentially private algorithms for answering database queries involve a
step that reconstructs a discrete data distribution from noisy measurements. This
provides consistent query answers and reduces error, but often requires space that
grows exponentially with dimension. P RIVATE -PGM is a recent approach that uses
graphical models to represent the data distribution, with complexity proportional to
that of exact marginal inference in a graphical model with structure determined by
the co-occurrence of variables in the noisy measurements. P RIVATE -PGM is highly
scalable for sparse measurements, but may fail to run in high dimensions with dense
measurements. We overcome the main scalability limitation of P RIVATE -PGM
through a principled approach that relaxes consistency constraints in the estimation
objective. Our new approach works with many existing private query answering
algorithms and improves scalability or accuracy with no privacy cost.

1

Introduction

A central problem in the design of differentially private algorithms is answering sets of counting
queries from a database. Many proposed algorithms follow the select-measure-reconstruct paradigm:
they select a set of measurement queries, they privately measure them (using Gaussian or Laplace
noise addition), and then they reconstruct the data or query answers from the noisy measurements.
When done in a principled manner, the reconstruct phase serves a number of critical functions:
it combines the noisy evidence provided by the measurement queries, it allows new unmeasured
queries to be answered (with no additional privacy cost), and it resolves inconsistencies in the noisy
measurements to produce consistent estimates, which often have lower error. In this paper, we propose
a novel, scalable, and general-purpose approach to the reconstruct step. With a principled approach
to this problem, future research can focus on the challenging open problem of query selection.
Most existing general-purpose methods for reconstruction cannot scale to high-dimensional data, as
they operate over a vectorized representation of the data, whose size is exponential in the dimensionality [1–6]. Some special purpose methods exist that have better scalability, but are only applicable
within a particular mechanism or in certain special cases [7–11, 5, 12–15]. A recently-proposed
method, P RIVATE -PGM [16], offers the scalability of these special purpose methods and retains
much of the generality of the general-purpose methods. P RIVATE -PGM can be used for the reconstruction phase whenever the measurements only depend on the data through its low-dimensional
marginals. P RIVATE -PGM avoids the data vector representation in favor of a more compact graphical
model representation, and was shown to dramatically improve the scalability of a number of popular
mechanisms while also improving accuracy [16]. P RIVATE -PGM was used in the winning entry of
the 2018 NIST differential privacy synthetic data contest [17, 18], as well as in both the ﬁrst and
second-place entry of the follow-up 2020 NIST differential privacy temporal map contest [19, 20].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

