Validating the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis with Inertial
Manifold Theory

Zeru Zhang1∗ Jiayin Jin1∗ Zijie Zhang1 Yang Zhou1† Xin Zhao1
Jiaxiang Ren1 Ji Liu2 Lingfei Wu3 Ruoming Jin4 Dejing Dou2,5
1
Auburn University, 2 Baidu Research, 3 JD.COM Silicon Valley Research Center,
4
Kent State University, 5 University of Oregon
zzz0054@auburn.edu, jzj0042@auburn.edu, zzz0092@auburn.edu,
yangzhou@auburn.edu, cmkk684735@gmail.com, jzr0065@auburn.edu,
liuji04@baidu.com, lwu@email.wm.edu, rjin1@kent.edu,
dou@cs.uoregon.edu, doudejing@baidu.com

Abstract
Despite achieving remarkable efficiency, traditional network pruning techniques
often follow manually-crafted heuristics to generate pruned sparse networks. Such
heuristic pruning strategies are hard to guarantee that the pruned networks achieve
test accuracy comparable to the original dense ones. Recent works have empirically
identified and verified the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH): a randomly-initialized
dense neural network contains an extremely sparse subnetwork, which can be
trained to achieve similar accuracy to the former. Due to the lack of theoretical
evidence, they often need to run multiple rounds of expensive training and pruning
over the original large networks to discover the sparse subnetworks with low
accuracy loss. By leveraging dynamical systems theory and inertial manifold
theory, this work theoretically verifies the validity of the LTH. We explore the
possibility of theoretically lossless pruning as well as one-time pruning, compared
with existing neural network pruning and LTH techniques. We reformulate the
neural network optimization problem as a gradient dynamical system and reduce
this high-dimensional system onto inertial manifolds to obtain a low-dimensional
system regarding pruned subnetworks. We demonstrate the precondition and
existence of pruned subnetworks and prune the original networks in terms of the
gap in their spectrum that make the subnetworks have the smallest dimensions.

1

Introduction

Deep learning techniques utilize the architecture of large model size and over-parameterization to
achieve state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of applications [17, 18]. The performance improvements can be owed to the availability of large-scale neural networks and massive computational
resources to train such complex models. However, large model size and extreme over-parameterization
typically lead to high training cost, slow inference speed, and large memory consumption. This
hinders the applicability of deep learning models in resource-intensive scenarios with the requirement
of low latency and energy consumption, such as Internet of Things [2] and mobile computing [51, 55].
We have witnessed a large number of research advances in neural network pruning for reducing the
time and space requirements of deep neural networks both at training and test time, with minimal loss
in accuracy [31, 20, 34]. These techniques identify non-essential weights, filters, and other structures
∗
†

Equal contributors
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

