Looking Beyond Single Images for Contrastive
Semantic Segmentation Learning

Feihu Zhang
Philip Torr
University of Oxford

René Ranftl∗
Stephan R. Richter∗
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present an approach to contrastive representation learning for semantic
segmentation. Our approach leverages the representational power of existing
feature extractors to find corresponding regions across images. These cross-image
correspondences are used as auxiliary labels to guide the pixel-level selection of
positive and negative samples for more effective contrastive learning in semantic
segmentation. We show that auxiliary labels can be generated from a variety
of feature extractors, ranging from image classification networks that have been
trained using unsupervised contrastive learning to segmentation models that have
been trained on a small amount of labeled data. We additionally introduce a novel
metric for rapidly judging the quality of a given auxiliary-labeling strategy, and
empirically analyze various factors that influence the performance of contrastive
learning for semantic segmentation. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method both in the low-data as well as the high-data regime on various datasets. Our
experiments show that contrastive learning with our auxiliary-labeling approach
consistently boosts semantic segmentation accuracy when compared to standard
ImageNet pre-training and outperforms existing approaches of contrastive and
semi-supervised semantic segmentation.

1

Introduction

Training semantic segmentation models typically requires a large amount of densely annotated
images. Producing such dense annotations for an adequate number of images at sufficient quality
is an extremely laborious and costly task [17]. Self-supervised and weakly-supervised learning
techniques offer the possibility to significantly reduce the manual labeling effort that is required to
train high-performance machine learning models. Contrastive learning [14, 22] has recently emerged
as a promising technique for self-supervised representation learning that can leverage large amounts
of unlabeled data for augmenting and extending existing labeled datasets without costly manual
annotation. However, recent works on contrastive learning primarily focused on image/instance-level
learning. Few works have studied contrastive learning in dense image labeling tasks, such as semantic
segmentation [50, 51], as dense pixel-level segmentation poses unique challenges.
At its core, self-supervised contrastive learning is rooted in the availability of training samples that
can be grouped automatically into positive pairs of similar concepts, and negative pairs of dissimilar
concepts. The notion of similarity thereby depends strongly on the task at hand.
The appropriate selection of such pairs is of paramount importance for the performance of the resulting
models. While it is often straightforward to generate negative pairs, automatically generating positive
pairs can present a formidable challenge that requires intimate knowledge about the data and task at
hand. Image augmentations are both simple and effective to generate positive pairs for image/instancelevel learning [14, 15] but are too coarse-grained to learn representations at a pixel level.
∗

Equal advising.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

