Motif-based Graph Self-Supervised Learning for
Molecular Property Prediction

Zaixi Zhang1 , Qi Liu1∗ , Hao Wang1 , Chengqiang Lu1 , Chee-Kong Lee2∗
1: Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
2: Tencent America
{zaixi, wanghao3, lunar}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn
cheekonglee@tencent.com

Abstract
Predicting molecular properties with data-driven methods has drawn much attention
in recent years. Particularly, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated
remarkable success in various molecular generation and prediction tasks. In cases
where labeled data is scarce, GNNs can be pre-trained on unlabeled molecular data
to first learn the general semantic and structural information before being finetuned
for specific tasks. However, most existing self-supervised pre-training frameworks
for GNNs only focus on node-level or graph-level tasks. These approaches cannot
capture the rich information in subgraphs or graph motifs. For example, functional
groups (frequently-occurred subgraphs in molecular graphs) often carry indicative
information about the molecular properties. To bridge this gap, we propose Motifbased Graph Self-supervised Learning (MGSSL) by introducing a novel selfsupervised motif generation framework for GNNs. First, for motif extraction from
molecular graphs, we design a molecule fragmentation method that leverages a
retrosynthesis-based algorithm BRICS and additional rules for controlling the
size of motif vocabulary. Second, we design a general motif-based generative
pre-training framework in which GNNs are asked to make topological and label
predictions. This generative framework can be implemented in two different ways,
i.e., breadth-first or depth-first. Finally, to take the multi-scale information in
molecular graphs into consideration, we introduce a multi-level self-supervised
pre-training. Extensive experiments on various downstream benchmark tasks show
that our methods outperform all state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed the remarkable success of deep learning in natural language processing
(NLP) [5], computer vision (CV) [13], and graph analysis [19]. Inspired by these developments,
researchers in the chemistry domain have also tried to exploit deep learning methods for moleculebased tasks such as retrosynthesis [47] and drug discovery [8]. To preserve the internal structural
information, molecules can be naturally modeled as graphs where nodes represent atoms and edges
denote the chemical bonds. Recently, some works applied Graph Neural Network (GNN) and some
of its variants for molecular property prediction and obtained promising results [8, 25].
Though GNNs have achieved remarkable accuracy on molecular property prediction, they are usually
data-hungry, i.e. a large amount of labeled data (i.e., molecules with known property data) is required
for training [8, 12]. However, labeled molecules only occupy an extremely small portion of the
∗

Qi Liu and Chee-Kong Lee are corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

