Reliable Decisions with Threshold Calibration
Roshni Sahoo
Stanford University
rsahoo@stanford.edu

Shengjia Zhao
Stanford University
sjzhao@stanford.edu

Alyssa Chen
UTSW Medical Center
alyssa.chen@utsw.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@stanford.edu

Abstract
Decision makers rely on probabilistic forecasts to predict the loss of different
decision rules before deployment. When the forecasted probabilities match the
true frequencies, predicted losses will be accurate. Although perfect forecasts are
typically impossible, probabilities can be calibrated to match the true frequencies
on average. However, we find that this average notion of calibration, which is
typically used in practice, does not necessarily guarantee accurate decision loss
prediction. Specifically in the regression setting, the loss of threshold decisions,
which are decisions based on whether the forecasted outcome falls above or below
a cutoff, might not be predicted accurately. We propose a stronger notion of
calibration called threshold calibration, which is exactly the condition required to
ensure that decision loss is predicted accurately for threshold decisions. We provide
an efficient algorithm which takes an uncalibrated forecaster as input and provably
outputs a threshold-calibrated forecaster. Our procedure allows downstream
decision makers to confidently estimate the loss of any threshold decision under any
threshold loss function. Empirically, threshold calibration improves decision loss
prediction without compromising on the quality of the decisions in two real-world
settings: hospital scheduling decisions and resource allocation decisions.

1

Introduction

Decision makers need to understand the consequences of their decisions prior to making them. When
decisions are based on predictions from a machine learning model, the decision loss – the loss
incurred under a decision rule based on the predictions – summarizes the consequences of these
decisions. As an example, suppose a machine learning practitioner develops a model to predict patient
length-of-stay in the hospital [17, 3]. A hospital decides whether they have capacity to admit new
patients based on the model’s predictions of current patients’ length-of-stay (e.g. for each current
patient who is predicted to have a length-of-stay that is less than k days, the hospital schedules a
new patient). Incorrect decisions due to the model’s predictions cause the hospital to accrue costs
from under-utilizing resources or overbooking procedures. The decision loss is an aggregation of
the costs incurred from incorrect decisions. To determine whether a decision rule is safe to use, the
hospital would like to have an accurate estimate of the decision loss under different choices of k
and different costs associated with errors. This type of decision-making scenario occurs in many
high-stakes settings such as designing interventions for adverse weather events [33, 9] and resource
allocation decisions using economic estimates [15, 32].
Probabilistic predictions (probabilistic forecasts) can be used to estimate decision loss prior to
deployment. In this work, we consider the regression setup, where a forecast is represented by
a cumulative distribution function over the possible outcomes. If the forecasted probabilities of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

