Do Different Tracking Tasks Require
Different Appearance Models?

1

Zhongdao Wang1,2

Hengshuang Zhao3,4

Ya-Li Li1,2

Shengjin Wang1,2∗

Philip H.S. Torr3

Luca Bertinetto5

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Torr Vision Group, University of Oxford
4
The University of Hong Kong
5
Five AI
https://zhongdao.github.io/UniTrack

Abstract
Tracking objects of interest in a video is one of the most popular and widely
applicable problems in computer vision. However, with the years, a Cambrian
explosion of use cases and benchmarks has fragmented the problem in a multitude
of different experimental setups. As a consequence, the literature has fragmented
too, and now novel approaches proposed by the community are usually specialised
to fit only one specific setup. To understand to what extent this specialisation is
necessary, in this work we present UniTrack, a solution to address five different
tasks within the same framework. UniTrack consists of a single and task-agnostic
appearance model, which can be learned in a supervised or self-supervised fashion,
and multiple “heads” that address individual tasks and do not require training.
We show how most tracking tasks can be solved within this framework, and that
the same appearance model can be successfully used to obtain results that are
competitive against specialised methods for most of the tasks considered. The
framework also allows us to analyse appearance models obtained with the most
recent self-supervised methods, thus extending their evaluation and comparison to
a larger variety of important problems.

1

Introduction

Unlike popular image-based computer vision tasks such as classification and object detection, which
are (for the most part) unambiguous and clearly defined, the problem of object tracking has been
considered under different setups and scenarios, each motivating the design of a separate set of
benchmarks and methods. For instance, for the Single Object Tracking (SOT) and Video Object
Segmentation (VOS) communities [70, 29, 48], tracking means estimating the location of an arbitrary
user-annotated target object throughout a video, where the location of the object is represented
by a bounding box in SOT and by a pixel-wise mask in VOS. Instead, in multiple object tracking
settings (MOT [41], MOTS [57] and PoseTrack [2]), tracking means connecting sets of (often given)
detections across video frames to address the problem of identity association and forming trajectories.
Despite these tasks only differing in the number of objects per frame to consider and observation
format (bounding boxes, keypoints or masks), the best practices developed by the methods tackling
them vary significantly.
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

