TRS: Transferability Reduced Ensemble via
Promoting Gradient Diversity and Model Smoothness

Zhuolin Yang1∗
Linyi Li1∗
2
Qian Chen
Benjamin Rubinstein3
1

Xiaojun Xu1∗
Pan Zhou4

Shiliang Zuo1
Ce Zhang5
Bo Li1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Tencent Inc. 3 University of Melbourne
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 5 ETH Zurich
{zhuolin5, linyi2, xiaojun3, szuo3, lbo}@illinois.edu
qianchen@tencent.com
benjamin.rubinstein@unimelb.edu.au
panzhou@hust.edu.cn
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Adversarial Transferability is an intriguing property – adversarial perturbation
crafted against one model is also effective against another model, while these models are from different model families or training processes. To better protect ML
systems against adversarial attacks, several questions are raised: what are the sufficient conditions for adversarial transferability and how to bound it? Is there a way
to reduce the adversarial transferability in order to improve the robustness of an
ensemble ML model? To answer these questions, in this work we first theoretically
analyze and outline sufficient conditions for adversarial transferability between
models; then propose a practical algorithm to reduce the transferability between
base models within an ensemble to improve its robustness. Our theoretical analysis
shows that only promoting the orthogonality between gradients of base models is
not enough to ensure low transferability; in the meantime, the model smoothness is
an important factor to control the transferability. We also provide the lower and
upper bounds of adversarial transferability under certain conditions. Inspired by
our theoretical analysis, we propose an effective Transferability Reduced Smooth
(TRS) ensemble training strategy to train a robust ensemble with low transferability
by enforcing both gradient orthogonality and model smoothness between base models. We conduct extensive experiments on TRS and compare with 6 state-of-the-art
ensemble baselines against 8 whitebox attacks on different datasets, demonstrating
that the proposed TRS outperforms all baselines significantly.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems, especially those based on deep neural networks (DNNs), have been widely
applied in numerous applications [27, 18, 46, 10]. However, recent studies show that DNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are able to mislead DNNs by adding small magnitude of
perturbations to the original instances [47, 17, 54, 52]. Several attack strategies have been proposed
so far to generate such adversarial examples in both digital and physical environments [36, 32, 51,
53, 15, 28]. Intriguingly, though most attacks require access to the target models (whitebox attacks),
several studies show that adversarial examples generated against one model are able to transferably
∗

The authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

