Large-Scale Unsupervised Object Discovery

Huy V. Vo1,2
1

Elena Sizikova3

Cordelia Schmid1

Patrick Pérez2

Jean Ponce1,3

INRIA, Département d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France
2
Valeo.ai 3 Center for Data Science, New York University
{van-huy.vo, cordelia.schmid, jean.ponce}@inria.fr
es5223@nyu.edu patrick.perez@valeo.com

Abstract
Existing approaches to unsupervised object discovery (UOD) do not scale up to
large datasets without approximations that compromise their performance. We
propose a novel formulation of UOD as a ranking problem, amenable to the
arsenal of distributed methods available for eigenvalue problems and link analysis.
Through the use of self-supervised features, we also demonstrate the first effective
fully unsupervised pipeline for UOD. Extensive experiments on COCO [42] and
OpenImages [35] show that, in the single-object discovery setting where a single
prominent object is sought in each image, the proposed LOD (Large-scale Object
Discovery) approach is on par with, or better than the state of the art for mediumscale datasets (up to 120K images), and over 37% better than the only other
algorithms capable of scaling up to 1.7M images. In the multi-object discovery
setting where multiple objects are sought in each image, the proposed LOD is over
14% better in average precision (AP) than all other methods for datasets ranging
from 20K to 1.7M images. Using self-supervised features, we also show that the
proposed method obtains state-of-the-art UOD performance on OpenImages1 .

Figure 1: Sample UOD results obtained by LOD on the OpenImages dataset [35] which contains 1.7M images.
Ground-truth boxes are shown in yellow, and predictions are in red. Best viewed in color.

1

Introduction

This paper addresses the problem of identifying prominent objects in large image collections without
manual annotations, a process known as unsupervised object discovery (UOD). Early approaches to
UOD focused mostly on finding clusters of images featuring objects of the same category [22, 58, 61,
62, 64, 69]. Some of them [58, 61, 62] also output object locations in images, but their evaluations
are limited to small datasets with distinctive object classes. More recent techniques [8, 66, 67] focus
on the discovery of image links and individual object locations within much more diverse image
collections. They typically rely on combinatorial optimization to select objects, or rather, object
bounding boxes, among thousands of candidate region proposals [46, 65, 67, 83] given similarity
scores computed for pairs of proposals associated with different images. Although these techniques
achieve promising results, their computational cost and inherently sequential nature limit the size of
the dataset they can be applied to. Attempts to scale up the state-of-the-art approach [67] by reducing
the search space size have revealed that this compromises its ability to discover multiple objects in
1

Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/huyvvo/LOD.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

