Risk-Aware Transfer in Reinforcement Learning
using Successor Features

Michael Gimelfarb∗
University of Toronto
mike.gimelfarb@mail.utoronto.ca
Scott Sanner∗
University of Toronto
ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

André Barreto
DeepMind
andrebarreto@google.com
Chi-Guhn Lee
University of Toronto
cglee@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Sample efficiency and risk-awareness are central to the development of practical
reinforcement learning (RL) for complex decision-making. The former can be
addressed by transfer learning and the latter by optimizing some utility function of
the return. However, the problem of transferring skills in a risk-aware manner is not
well-understood. In this paper, we address the problem of risk-aware policy transfer
between tasks in a common domain that differ only in their reward functions, in
which risk is measured by the variance of reward streams. Our approach begins
by extending the idea of generalized policy improvement to maximize entropic
utilities, thus extending policy improvement via dynamic programming to sets of
policies and levels of risk-aversion. Next, we extend the idea of successor features
(SF), a value function representation that decouples the environment dynamics
from the rewards, to capture the variance of returns. Our resulting risk-aware
successor features (RaSF) integrate seamlessly within the RL framework, inherit
the superior task generalization ability of SFs, and incorporate risk-awareness into
the decision-making. Experiments on a discrete navigation domain and control of
a simulated robotic arm demonstrate the ability of RaSFs to outperform alternative
methods including SFs, when taking the risk of the learned policies into account.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general framework for solving sequential decision-making problems,
in which an agent interacts with an environment and receives continuous feedback in the form of
rewards. However, many classical algorithms in RL do not explicitly address the need for safety,
making them unreliable and difficult to deploy in some real-world applications [10]. One reason for
this is the relative sample inefficiency of model-free RL algorithms, which often require millions of
costly or dangerous interactions with the environment or fail to converge altogether [44, 46]. Transfer
learning addresses these problems by incorporating prior knowledge or skills [23, 41]. Despite this,
using the expected return as a measure of optimality could still lead to undesirable behavior such as
excessive risk-taking, since low-probability catastrophic outcomes with negative reward and high
variance could be underrepresented [29]. For this reason, risk-awareness is becoming an important
aspect in the design of practical RL [14]. Thus, an ultimate goal of developing reliable systems
should be to ensure that they are both sample efficient and risk-aware.
∗

Affiliate to Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

