Robust Regression Revisited:
Acceleration and Improved Estimation Rates

Arun Jambulapati
Stanford University
jmblpati@stanford.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
jerrl@microsoft.com

Tselil Schramm
Stanford University
tselil@stanford.edu

Kevin Tian
Stanford University
kjtian@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study fast algorithms for statistical regression problems under the strong contamination model, where the goal is to approximately optimize a generalized linear
model (GLM) given adversarially corrupted samples. Prior works in this line of
research were based on the robust gradient descent framework of [PSBR20], a firstorder method using biased gradient queries, or the Sever framework of [DKK+ 19],
an iterative outlier-removal method calling a stationary point finder.
We present nearly-linear time algorithms for robust regression problems with
improved runtime or estimation guarantees compared to the state-of-the-art. For
the general case of smooth GLMs (e.g. logistic regression), we show that the
robust gradient descent framework of [PSBR20] can be accelerated, and show our
algorithm extends to optimizing the Moreau envelopes of Lipschitz GLMs (e.g.
support vector machines), answering several open questions in the literature.
For the well-studied case of robust linear regression, we present an alternative
approach obtaining improved estimation rates over prior nearly-linear time algorithms. Interestingly, our algorithm starts with an identifiability proof introduced
in the context of the sum-of-squares algorithm of [BP21], which achieved optimal
error rates while requiring large polynomial runtime and sample complexity. We
reinterpret their proof within the Sever framework and obtain a dramatically faster
and more sample-efficient algorithm under fewer distributional assumptions.

1

Introduction

Parameter estimation in generalized linear models (GLMs), such as linear and logistic regression
problems, is among the most fundamental and well-studied statistical optimization problems. It
serves as the primary workhorse in statistical studies arising from a variety of disciplines, ranging
from economics [Smi12], biology [VGSM05], and the social sciences [Gor10]. Formally, given a
link function γ : R2 → R and a dataset of covariates and labels {(Xi , yi )}i∈[n] ⊂ Rd × R drawn
from an underlying distribution DXy , the problem of statistical (generalized linear) regression asks to


?
estimate θ := argminθ∈Rd
E
[γ(hθ, Xi , y)] .
(1)
(X,y)∼DXy

For example, when γ(v, y) = 12 (v−y)2 , (1) corresponds to (statistical) linear regression. The problem

(1) also has an interpretation as computing a maximum likelihood estimate for a parameterized
distributional model for data generation, and indeed is only tractable under certain distributional
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

