Uncertainty Calibration for Ensemble-Based
Debiasing Methods

Ruibin Xiong1,2,3∗ , Yimeng Chen2,4∗† , Liang Pang2,5 , Xueqi Cheng1,2 ,
Zhiming Ma2,4 and Yanyan Lan6‡
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Baidu Inc.
4
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Data Intelligence System Research Center,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
{xiongruibin18, chenyimeng14}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{cxq, pangliang}@ict.ac.cn,
mazm@amt.ac.cn,lanyanyan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Ensemble-based debiasing methods have been shown effective in mitigating the
reliance of classifiers on specific dataset bias, by exploiting the output of a biasonly model to adjust the learning target. In this paper, we focus on the bias-only
model in these ensemble-based methods, which plays an important role but has not
gained much attention in the existing literature. Theoretically, we prove that the
debiasing performance can be damaged by inaccurate uncertainty estimations of
the bias-only model. Empirically, we show that existing bias-only models fall short
in producing accurate uncertainty estimations. Motivated by these findings, we
propose to conduct calibration on the bias-only model, thus achieving a three-stage
ensemble-based debiasing framework, including bias modeling, model calibrating,
and debiasing. Experimental results on NLI and fact verification tasks show that our
proposed three-stage debiasing framework consistently outperforms the traditional
two-stage one in out-of-distribution accuracy.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models have achieved remarkable performance on natural language understanding [10; 7; 28] and computer vision [16; 17]. However, observations have shown that these models
have difficulties in generalizing well in out-of-distribution settings [30; 40; 2; 11], which limits their
applications to real-world scenarios. A major cause of this failure is the reliance of the model on
specific dataset bias [33]. For instance, McCoy et al. [23] have shown that sentence pairs with high
word overlaps in MNLI are easy to be classified as the label ‘entailment’, even if they have different
relations.
A growing body of literature recognizes debiasing as an important direction in machine learning
and natural language processing [38; 3; 4; 34]. Within these works, ensemble-based debiasing
(EBD) methods [15; 22; 8; 39; 5] have caused considerable interest within the community, as shown
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done while Yimeng Chen was interning at Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

