COCO-LM: Correcting and Contrasting Text
Sequences for Language Model Pretraining

Yu Meng1∗, Chenyan Xiong2 , Payal Bajaj2 , Saurabh Tiwary2 ,
Paul Bennett2 , Jiawei Han1 , Xia Song2
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Microsoft
1
{yumeng5,hanj}@illinois.edu
2
{chenyan.xiong,payal.bajaj,satiwary,
paul.n.bennett,xiaso}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a self-supervised learning framework, COCO-LM, that pretrains Language Models by COrrecting and COntrasting corrupted text sequences. Following
ELECTRA-style pretraining, COCO-LM employs an auxiliary language model
to corrupt text sequences, upon which it constructs two new tasks for pretraining
the main model. The first token-level task, Corrective Language Modeling, is to
detect and correct tokens replaced by the auxiliary model, in order to better capture
token-level semantics. The second sequence-level task, Sequence Contrastive
Learning, is to align text sequences originated from the same source input while ensuring uniformity in the representation space. Experiments on GLUE and SQuAD
demonstrate that COCO-LM not only outperforms recent state-of-the-art pretrained
models in accuracy, but also improves pretraining efficiency. It achieves the MNLI
accuracy of ELECTRA with 50% of its pretraining GPU hours. With the same
pretraining steps of standard base/large-sized models, COCO-LM outperforms the
previous best models by 1+ GLUE average points.

1

Introduction

Pretrained language models (PLMs) have reshaped the way AI systems process natural language [11,
36, 39, 40]. Before task-specific training, it is now a common practice to first pretrain the deep
neural networks, often Transformers [53], via a self-supervised token-level language modeling
task [29, 31, 40]. Whether it is autoregressive [39], permutational [62], or masked language modeling
(MLM) [11], the Transformer networks are pretrained to recover some omitted tokens using the rest
of input texts. Then the language semantics captured during pretraining are conveyed to downstream
tasks via the pretrained Transformer parameters [5, 8, 44].
Recent research [14, 16, 25, 43] observed several challenges in this self-supervised learning framework. One challenge is its efficiency. After pretrained for a while with the standard token-level
language modeling, the networks have already captured the basic language patterns, making a large
fraction of pretraining signals no longer informative. Linear improvement in the model effectiveness
often requires exponentially more pretraining compute and parameters [25], which is unsustainable.
Another challenge is the anisotropy of text representations from pretrained models. The sequence
representations from many pretrained models are quite irregular [30, 43] and require dedicated
fine-tuning approaches to be useful in sequence-level applications [32, 60].
Clark et al. [7] proposed a new pretraining strategy, ELECTRA, that uses an auxiliary language model
(“generator”) to replace tokens in input texts and pretrains the main Transformer (“discriminator”) to
∗

Part of this work was done while Yu was interning at Microsoft.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

