Information Directed Reward Learning
for Reinforcement Learning

David Lindner
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
david.lindner@inf.ethz.ch

Matteo Turchetta
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
matteo.turchetta@inf.ethz.ch

Sebastian Tschiatschek
Department of Computer Science
University of Vienna
sebastian.tschiatschek@univie.ac.at

Kamil Ciosek∗
Spotify
kamilc@spotify.com

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
For many reinforcement learning (RL) applications, specifying a reward is difficult.
This paper considers an RL setting where the agent obtains information about the
reward only by querying an expert that can, for example, evaluate individual states
or provide binary preferences over trajectories. From such expensive feedback,
we aim to learn a model of the reward that allows standard RL algorithms to
achieve high expected returns with as few expert queries as possible. To this
end, we propose Information Directed Reward Learning (IDRL), which uses a
Bayesian model of the reward and selects queries that maximize the information
gain about the difference in return between plausibly optimal policies. In contrast to
prior active reward learning methods designed for specific types of queries, IDRL
naturally accommodates different query types. Moreover, it achieves similar
or better performance with significantly fewer queries by shifting the focus from
reducing the reward approximation error to improving the policy induced by
the reward model. We support our findings with extensive evaluations in multiple
environments and with different query types.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL; Sutton and Barto, 2018) casts the problem of learning to perform
complex tasks by interacting with an environment as an optimization problem where the learning
agent aims to maximize its expected cumulative reward. Despite the remarkable successes of
RL (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016), specifying reward functions that capture complex
tasks is still an open problem. A promising approach is to learn a reward function from human
feedback (e.g., Christiano et al., 2017). However, since human feedback is expensive, active reward
learning aims to minimize the number of queries. Prior work often focuses on approximating
the reward function uniformly well. However, this may not be aligned with the original goal
of RL: finding an optimal policy, as Figure 1 shows. Moreover, prior work is often tailored to
∗

Work done while at Microsoft Research Cambridge.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

