Probabilistic Transformer for Time Series Analysis

Binh Tang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
bvt5@cornell.edu

David S. Matteson
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
matteson@cornell.edu

Abstract
Generative modeling of multivariate time series has remained challenging partly
due to the complex, non-deterministic dynamics across long-distance time steps.
In this paper, we propose deep probabilistic methods that combine state-space
models (SSMs) with transformer architectures. In contrast to previously proposed
SSMs, our approaches use attention mechanism to model non-Markovian dynamics in the latent space and avoid recurrent neural networks entirely. We also extend
our models to include several layers of stochastic variables organized in a hierarchy for further expressiveness. Compared to transformer models, ours are probabilistic, non-autoregressive, and capable of generating diverse long-term forecasts
with accounted uncertainty. Extensive experiments show that our models consistently outperform competitive baselines on various tasks and datasets, including
time series forecasting and human motion prediction.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of multivariate time series is a challenging problem with wide-ranging applications in demand forecasting [15, 76], autonomous driving [2, 16], robotics [29, 67], and health
care [20, 21, 59]. Despite remarkable progress in recent years, models that predict high-dimensional
future observations from a few past examples have remained intractable, partly due to the complex,
non-deterministic temporal dynamics across long-distance time steps. Given a sequence of human
poses, for example, such models must internally figure out the involved dynamics of various body
components across space and time while maintaining the inherent uncertainty of multiple plausible
futures, even though only one such future is observed.
Among proposed probabilistic approaches, state space models (SSMs) provide a principled framework for learning and drawing inference from sequential inputs [27, 66]. While autoregressive
models feed its predictions back into the dynamics model without any compressed representation of
data, SSMs model stochastic transitions between abstract states using latent variables, allowing for
efficient state-to-state sampling without the need to render high-dimensional observations. Gaussian
linear dynamical systems (LDSs), one of the best known SSMs [92], for example, postulate linear
state transitions and enjoy exact inference via the celebrated Kalman filter algorithm.
While early extensions of LDSs focus on linearization [46] and unscented transform [88], recent
work that marry state space models with deep neural networks offers much more flexibility to model
complex dependencies across different time steps. Some approaches retain the Markovian dynamics
of LDSs and only replace their linear observation models with feed-forward networks [23, 31, 47,
71], whereas others favor nonlinear state transitions and parametrize such dependencies via recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) [22, 23, 30, 39, 51, 75]. Despite differences, both Markovian transitions
and RNNs are often not capable of capturing long-range dependencies in highly structured sequential
inputs [36, 100], limiting the capacity of the corresponding SSMs.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

