XCiT: Cross-Covariance Image Transformers
Alaaeldin El-Nouby1,2

Hugo Touvron1,3

Mathilde Caron1,2

Matthijs Douze1

Armand Joulin1

Ivan Laptev2

Gabriel Synnaeve1
1

Facebook AI

Jakob Verbeek1
2

Inria

3

Piotr Bojanowski1

Natalia Neverova1

Hervé Jégou1

Sorbonne University

Abstract
Following tremendous success in natural language processing, transformers have
recently shown much promise for computer vision. The self-attention operation
underlying transformers yields global interactions between all tokens, i.e. words
or image patches, and enables flexible modelling of image data beyond the local
interactions of convolutions. This flexibility, however, comes with a quadratic
complexity in time and memory, hindering application to long sequences and highresolution images. We propose a “transposed” version of self-attention that operates
across feature channels rather than tokens, where the interactions are based on the
cross-covariance matrix between keys and queries. The resulting cross-covariance
attention (XCA) has linear complexity in the number of tokens, and allows efficient
processing of high-resolution images. Our cross-covariance image transformer
(XCiT) – built upon XCA – combines the accuracy of conventional transformers
with the scalability of convolutional architectures. We validate the effectiveness and
generality of XCiT by reporting excellent results on multiple vision benchmarks,
including (self-supervised) image classification on ImageNet-1k, object detection
and instance segmentation on COCO, and semantic segmentation on ADE20k.

1

Introduction

Transformers architectures [68] have provided quantitative and qualitative breakthroughs in speech
and natural language processing (NLP). After a few attempts to incorporate wide-range self-attention
in vision architectures [71, 82], Dosovitskiy et al. [21] established transformers as a viable architecture
for learning visual representations, reporting competitive results for image classification while relying
on large-scale pre-training. Touvron et al. [64] have shown on par or better accuracy/throughput
compared to strong convolutional baselines such as EfficientNets [58] when training transformers
on ImageNet-1k using extensive data augmentation and improved training schemes. Promising
results have been obtained for other vision tasks, including image retrieval [22], object detection and
semantic segmentation [44, 70, 81, 83], as well as video understanding [2, 7, 23].
One major drawback of transformers is the time and memory complexity of the core self-attention
operation, that increases quadratically with the number of input tokens, or similarly number of
patches in computer vision. For w⇥h images, this translates to a complexity of O(w2 h2 ), which is
prohibitive for most tasks involving high-resolution images, such as object detection and segmentation.
Various strategies have been proposed to alleviate this complexity, for instance using approximate
forms of self-attention [44, 81], or pyramidal architectures which progressively downsample the
feature maps [70]. However, none of the existing solutions are fully satisfactory, as they either trade
complexity for accuracy, or their complexity remains excessive for processing very large images.
We replace the self-attention, as originally introduced by Vaswani et al. [68], with a “transposed”
attention that we denote as “cross-covariance attention” (XCA). Cross-covariance attention substiCode: https://github.com/facebookresearch/xcit
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

