Federated Split Vision Transformer for COVID-19
CXR Diagnosis using Task-Agnostic Training

Sangjoon Park1∗
Jeongsol Kim1

Gwanghyun Kim1∗
Boah Kim1

Jong Chul Ye1,2,3

1

Department of Bio and Brain Engineering
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, 3 Deptartment of Mathematical Sciences
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{depecher, gwang.kim, wjdthf3927, boahkim, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Federated learning, which shares the weights of the neural network across clients,
is gaining attention in the healthcare sector as it enables training on a large corpus
of decentralized data while maintaining data privacy. For example, this enables
neural network training for COVID-19 diagnosis on chest X-ray (CXR) images
without collecting patient CXR data across multiple hospitals. Unfortunately, the
exchange of the weights quickly consumes the network bandwidth if highly expressive network architecture is employed. So-called split learning partially solves
this problem by dividing a neural network into a client and a server part, so that
the client part of the network takes up less extensive computation resources and
bandwidth. However, it is not clear how to find the optimal split without sacrificing the overall network performance. To amalgamate these methods and thereby
maximize their distinct strengths, here we show that the Vision Transformer, a
recently developed deep learning architecture with straightforward decomposable
configuration, is ideally suitable for split learning without sacrificing performance.
Even under the non-independent and identically distributed data distribution which
emulates a real collaboration between hospitals using CXR datasets from multiple
sources, the proposed framework was able to attain performance comparable to
data-centralized training. In addition, the proposed framework along with heterogeneous multi-task clients also improves individual task performances including
the diagnosis of COVID-19, eliminating the need for sharing large weights with
innumerable parameters. Our results affirm the suitability of Transformer for
collaborative learning in medical imaging and pave the way forward for future
real-world implementations.

1

Introduction

After its earlier success in many fields, deep neural networks have found a pervasive suite of
applications in healthcare research including medical imaging, becoming a new de facto standard
[54, 19, 13, 49, 17, 63, 6, 58, 24]. Training these networks requires a vast amount of data to achieve
robust performance [8, 11, 47]. Despite the fact that multi-center collaboration is mandatory due
to the shortage of labeled data in a single institution, collaboration in healthcare research is heavily
∗

Authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

