Rethinking Neural Operations for Diverse Tasks

Nicholas Roberts∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
nick11roberts@cs.wisc.edu
Liam Li
Hewlett Packard Enterprise
me@liamcli.com

Mikhail Khodak∗
Carnegie Mellon University
khodak@cmu.edu

Tri Dao
Stanford University
trid@stanford.edu

Christopher Ré
Stanford University
chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University & Hewlett Packard Enterprise
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
An important goal of AutoML is to automate-away the design of neural networks on
new tasks in under-explored domains. Motivated by this goal, we study the problem
of enabling users to discover the right neural operations given data from their
specific domain. We introduce a search space of operations called XD-Operations
that mimic the inductive bias of standard multi-channel convolutions while being
much more expressive: we prove that it includes many named operations across
multiple application areas. Starting with any standard backbone such as ResNet,
we show how to transform it into a search space over XD-operations and how to
traverse the space using a simple weight-sharing scheme. On a diverse set of tasks—
solving PDEs, distance prediction for protein folding, and music modeling—our
approach consistently yields models with lower error than baseline networks and
often even lower error than expert-designed domain-specific approaches.

1

Introduction

Automated machine learning (AutoML) and neural architecture search (NAS) are often motivated by
a vision of democratizing ML by reducing the need for expert design on a variety of tasks. While
NAS has grown rapidly with developments such as weight-sharing [36] and “NAS-benches” [47, 49],
most efforts focus on search spaces that glue together established primitives for well-studied tasks like
vision and text [32, 26, 45, 25] or on issues such as latency [8, 13]. In this work, we revisit the broader
vision of NAS and propose to move towards much more general search spaces while still exploiting
successful network topologies. To do so we focus on expanding the set of operations, which is usually
fairly small; for example, that of the well-studied DARTS space has eight elements: a few types of
convolution and pooling layers [32]. The baseline approach for expanding this set—adding operations
one-by-one—scales poorly and will not result in new operations when faced with new types of data.
Our core contribution is a re-imagining of NAS operation spaces that drastically expands this set in a
principled fashion to include both standard operations as well as a wide range of new ones. To do
so we exploit the fact that most standard operations used in modern NAS return linear transforms
diagonalized by the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Replacing the DFT matrices in the diagonal
decomposition by a more expressive family of efficient linear transforms known as Kaleidoscope or
∗ denotes equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

