Bellman-consistent Pessimism for
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Tengyang Xie
UIUC
tx10@illinois.edu

Ching-An Cheng
Microsoft Research
chinganc@microsoft.com

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft Research
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Nan Jiang
UIUC
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Alekh Agarwal
Google Research
alekhagarwal@google.com

Abstract
The use of pessimism, when reasoning about datasets lacking exhaustive exploration, has recently gained prominence in offline reinforcement learning. Despite
the robustness it adds to the algorithm, overly pessimistic reasoning can be equally
damaging in precluding the discovery of good policies, which is an issue for the
popular bonus-based pessimism. In this paper, we introduce the notion of Bellmanconsistent pessimism for general function approximation: instead of calculating
a point-wise lower bound for the value function, we implement pessimism at the
initial state over the set of functions consistent with the Bellman equations. Our theoretical guarantees only require Bellman closedness as standard in the exploratory
setting, in which case bonus-based pessimism fails to provide guarantees. Even
in the special case of linear function approximation where stronger expressivity
assumptions hold, our result improves upon a recent bonus-based approach by O(d)
in its sample complexity when the action space is finite and small. Remarkably, our
algorithms automatically adapt to the best bias-variance tradeoff in the hindsight,
whereas most prior approaches require tuning extra hyperparameters a priori.

1

Introduction

Using past experiences to learn improved behavior for future interactions is a critical capability for a
Reinforcement Learning (RL) agent. However, robustly extrapolating knowledge from a historical
dataset for sequential decision making is highly challenging, particularly in settings where function
approximation is employed to generalize across related observations. In this paper, we provide a
systematic treatment of such scenarios with general function approximation, and devise algorithms
that can provably leverage an arbitrary historical dataset to discover the policy that obtains the largest
guaranteed rewards, amongst all possible scenarios consistent with the dataset.
The problem of learning a good policy from historical datasets, typically called batch or offline RL,
has a long history [see e.g., Precup et al., 2000; Antos et al., 2008; Levine et al., 2020, and references
therein]. Many prior works [e.g., Precup et al., 2000; Antos et al., 2008; Chen and Jiang, 2019]
make the so-called coverage assumptions on the dataset, requiring the dataset to contain any possible
state, action pair or trajectory with a lower bounded probability. These assumptions are evidently
prohibitive in practice, particularly for problems with large state and/or action spaces. Furthermore,
the methods developed under these assumptions routinely display unstable behaviors such as lack
of convergence or error amplification, when coverage assumptions are violated [Wang et al., 2020,
2021].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

