CROCS: Clustering and Retrieval of Cardiac Signals
Based on Patient Disease Class, Sex, and Age

Dani Kiyasseh, Tingting Zhu, & David Clifton
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
{dani.kiyasseh,tingting.zhu,david.clifton}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The process of manually searching for relevant instances in, and extracting information from, clinical databases underpin a multitude of clinical tasks. Such tasks
include disease diagnosis, clinical trial recruitment, and continuing medical education. This manual search-and-extract process, however, has been hampered by the
growth of large-scale clinical databases and the increased prevalence of unlabelled
instances. To address this challenge, we propose a supervised contrastive learning
framework, CROCS, where representations of cardiac signals associated with a set
of patient-specific attributes (e.g., disease class, sex, age) are attracted to learnable
embeddings entitled clinical prototypes. We exploit such prototypes for both the
clustering and retrieval of unlabelled cardiac signals based on multiple patient
attributes. We show that CROCS outperforms the state-of-the-art method, DTC,
when clustering and also retrieves relevant cardiac signals from a large database.
We also show that clinical prototypes adopt a semantically meaningful arrangement
based on patient attributes and thus confer a high degree of interpretability.

1

Introduction

Clinical databases can comprise instances that are either unlabelled or labelled with patient attribute
information, such as disease class, sex, and age. The process of manually searching for relevant
instances in, and extracting information from, such databases underpin a multitude of tasks [1]. For
example, clinicians extract a disease diagnosis from patient data, researchers involved in clinical trials
search for and recruit patients satisfying specific inclusion criteria [2], and educators retrieve relevant
information as part of the continuing medical education scheme [3]. This manual search-and-extract
process, however, is hampered by the rapid growth of large-scale clinical databases and the increased
prevalence of unlabelled instances; those for which patient attribute information is unavailable.
Given such a setting, in this paper, we are interested in addressing two questions: given a large,
unlabelled clinical database, (1) how do we extract attribute information from such unlabelled
instances? and (2) how do we reliably search for and retrieve relevant instances? To address the
former, the task of clustering holds value. In this setting, a centroid groups together instances that
share some similarities. Recent research has focused on exploiting existing clustering algorithms,
such as k-means, to group similar patients from electronic heath record (EHR) data [4, 5]. Such
methods, however, are exclusively unsupervised; they do not exploit patient attribute information.
To address the second question, the task of information retrieval holds promise. In this setting, a
query associated with a set of desired attributes is exploited to retrieve a relevant instance. Recent
research has focused predominantly on retrieving medical images [6], clinical text [7], and EHR data
[8], with minimal emphasis on medical time-series data [9]. These methods do not extend to cardiac
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

