Few-Round Learning for Federated Learning
Younghyun Park∗
dnffkf369@kaist.ac.kr

Dong-Jun Han∗
djhan93@kaist.ac.kr

Jun Seo
tjwns0630@kaist.ac.kr

Do-Yeon Kim
dy.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Jaekyun Moon
jmoon@kaist.edu

School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
In federated learning (FL), a number of distributed clients targeting the same task
collaborate to train a single global model without sharing their data. The learning
process typically starts from a randomly initialized or some pretrained model. In
this paper, we aim at designing an initial model based on which an arbitrary group
of clients can obtain a global model for its own purpose, within only a few rounds
of FL. The key challenge here is that the downstream tasks for which the pretrained
model will be used are generally unknown when the initial model is prepared.
Our idea is to take a meta-learning approach to construct the initial model so that
any group with a possibly unseen task can obtain a high-accuracy global model
within only R rounds of FL. Our meta-learning itself could be done via federated
learning among willing participants and is based on an episodic arrangement to
mimic the R rounds of FL followed by inference in each episode. Extensive
experimental results show that our method generalizes well for arbitrary groups
of clients and provides large performance improvements given the same overall
communication/computation resources, compared to other baselines relying on
known pretraining methods.

1

Introduction

Today, valuable data are being collected increasingly at distributed edge nodes such as mobile phones,
wearable client devices and smart vehicles/drones. Directly sending these local data to the central
server for model training raises significant privacy concerns. To address this issue, an emerging trend
known as federated learning (FL) [13, 9, 1, 11, 20, 16, 15], where server uploading of local data is
not necessary, has been actively researched. In FL, a large group of distributed clients interested in
solving the same task (e.g., classification on given categories of images) collaborate in training a
single global model without sharing their data. While standard supervised learning uses some dataset
D to find the model φ that would minimize a loss function f (φ, D), FL in comparison seeks the
model φ that minimizes the averaged version of the local losses f (φ, Dk ), computed at each node
k using local data Dk . The learning process typically starts from a randomly initialized or some
pretrained model and is carried out through iterative aggregation of the local model updates.
1.1

Backgrounds and Main Contributions

Motivation. Unfortunately, FL generally requires a large number of communication rounds between
the server and the clients for model exchange, to achieve a desired level of performance. This makes
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

