Efficient Algorithms for Learning Depth-2 Neural
Networks with General ReLU Activations
Pranjal Awasthi

Google Research
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Alex Tang

Northwestern University
alextang@u.northwestern.edu

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Northwestern University
aravindv@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We present polynomial time and sample efficient algorithms for learning an unknown depth-2 feedforward neural network with general ReLU activations, under
mild non-degeneracy assumptions. In particular, we consider learning an unknown
network of the form f (x) = aT (W T x + b), where x is drawn from the Gaussian
distribution, and (t) := max(t, 0) is the ReLU activation. Prior works for learning networks with ReLU activations assume that the bias b is zero. In order to deal
with the presence of the bias terms, our proposed algorithm consists of robustly
decomposing multiple higher order tensors arising from the Hermite expansion of
the function f (x). Using these ideas we also establish identifiability of the network
parameters under minimal assumptions.

1

Introduction

The empirical success of deep learning in recent years has led to a flurry of recent works exploring
various theoretical aspects of deep learning such as learning, optimization and generalization. A
fundamental question in the theory of deep learning is to identify conditions under which one can
design provably time-efficient and sample-efficient learning algorithms for neural networks. Perhaps
surprisingly, even for the simplest case of a depth-2 feedforward neural network, the learning question
remains unresolved. In this work we make progress on this front by studying the problem of learning
an unknown neural network of the form
y = f (x) = aT (W T x + b).

(1)

We are given access to a finite amount of samples of the form (xi , yi ) drawn i.i.d. from the data
distribution, where each xi is comes from the standard Gaussian distribution N (0, I), and yi = f (xi ).
The goal is to design an algorithm that outputs an approximation of the function f up to an arbitrary
error measured in the expected mean squared metric (squared `2 loss). An efficient learning algorithm
has running time and sample complexity that are polynomial in the different problem parameters
such as the input dimensionality, number of hidden units, and the desired error.
Without any further assumptions on the depth-2 network, efficient learning algorithms are unlikely.
The recent work of [DKKZ20] provides evidence by proving exponential statistical query lower
bounds (even when x is Gaussian) that rule out a broad class of algorithms.
Several recent works have designed efficient algorithms for depth-2 neural networks in the special
setting when the bias term b = 0. One prominent line of work [GLM18, BJW19] give polynomial time
algorithms under the non-degeneracy assumption that the matrix W has full-rank. Another body of
work relaxes the full-rank assumption by designing algorithms that incur an exponential dependence
on the number of hidden units [DKKZ20, CKM20, GK19], or a quasipolynomial dependence when
the coefficients {ai : i 2 [m]} are all non-negative [DK20]. There is little existing literature on
learning neural networks in the presence of the bias term. A notable exception is an approach based
on computing “score functions” [JSA15] that applies to certain activations with bias and requires
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

