Learning on Random Balls is Sufficient
for Estimating (Some) Graph Parameters

Takanori Maehara
Facebook AI
London, United Kingdom
tmaehara@fb.com

Hoang NT
Tokyo Tech & RIKEN AIP
Tokyo, Japan
hoangnt@net.c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Theoretical analyses for graph learning methods often assume a complete observation of the input graph. Such an assumption might not be useful for handling
any-size graphs due to the scalability issues in practice. In this work, we develop a
theoretical framework for graph classification problems in the partial observation
setting (i.e., subgraph samplings). Equipped with insights from graph limit theory,
we propose a new graph classification model that works on a randomly sampled
subgraph and a novel topology to characterize the representability of the model.
Our theoretical framework contributes a theoretical validation of mini-batch learning on graphs and leads to new learning-theoretic results on generalization bounds
as well as size-generalizability without assumptions on the input.

1

Introduction

Going beyond regular structural inputs such as grids (images), sequences (time series, sentences),
or general feature vectors is an important research direction of machine learning and computational
sciences. Arguably, most interesting objects and problems in nature can be described as graphs [37].
For such reason, graph learning methods, especially Graph Neural Networks (GNN) [60], have
recently proven to be a useful solution to many problems in computer vision [10, 12, 24, 63], complex
network analyses [22, 30, 73], molecule modeling [17, 32, 41, 45], and physics simulations [3, 31, 54].
The significant value of graph learning models in practice has inspired a large amount of theoretical
work dedicated to exploring their representational limits and the possibilities of improving them.
Most notably, the representational capability of GNNs has been in the spotlight of recent years.
To answer the question “Can GNNs approximate all functions on graphs?”, researchers discussed
universal invariant and equivariant neural networks [27, 40, 43, 51] as theoretical upper limits for
neural architectures or showed the correspondence between message-passing GNNs (MP-GNNs) to
the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) algorithm [68] as practical upper limits [46, 70].
Given an extremely large graph as an input, it is often impractical to keep the whole graph in
the working memory. Therefore, practical graph learning methods often utilize neighborhood
samplings [22, 73] or random walks [53] to handle this scalability issue. Because existing analyses
assumed a complete observation of the input graphs [27, 51, 57], it is unclear what can be learned
if we combine graph learning models with random samplings. Thus, the relevant question in this
scenario is “What graph functions are representable by GNNs when we can only observe random
neighborhoods?.” This question adds another dimension to the discussion of GNN expressivity; even
if we have a powerful GNN (in both theoretical and practical senses), what kind of graph functions
can we learn if the input graphs are too large to be computed as a whole?
Contributions This study proposes a theoretical approach to address graph learning problems on
large graphs by identifying a novel topology of the graph space. We discuss the graph classification
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

