Learning to Learn Graph Topologies
Xingyue Pu
University of Oxford
xpu@robots.ox.ac.uk

Tianyue Cao Xiaoyun Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{vanessa_,xiaoyun.zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Xiaowen Dong
University of Oxford
xdong@robots.ox.ac.uk

Siheng Chen⇤
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning a graph topology to reveal the underlying relationship between data
entities plays an important role in various machine learning and data analysis
tasks. Under the assumption that structured data vary smoothly over a graph, the
problem can be formulated as a regularised convex optimisation over a positive
semidefinite cone and solved by iterative algorithms. Classic methods require an
explicit convex function to reflect generic topological priors, e.g. the `1 penalty
for enforcing sparsity, which limits the flexibility and expressiveness in learning
rich topological structures. We propose to learn a mapping from node data to the
graph structure based on the idea of learning to optimise (L2O). Specifically, our
model first unrolls an iterative primal-dual splitting algorithm into a neural network.
The key structural proximal projection is replaced with a variational autoencoder
that refines the estimated graph with enhanced topological properties. The model
is trained in an end-to-end fashion with pairs of node data and graph samples.
Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate that our model is
more efficient than classic iterative algorithms in learning a graph with specific
topological properties.

1

Introduction

Graphs are an effective modelling language for revealing relational structure in high-dimensional
complex domains and may assist in a variety of machine learning tasks. However, in many practical
scenarios an explicit graph structure may not be readily available or easy to define. Graph learning
aims at learning a graph topology from observation on data entities and is therefore an important
problem studied in the literature.
Model-based graph learning from the perspectives of probabilistic graphical models [24] or graph
signal processing [32, 30, 28] solves an optimisation problem over the space of graph candidates
whose objective function reflects the inductive graph-data interactions. The data are referred as to the
observations on nodes, node features or graph signals in literature. The convex objective function
often contains a graph-data fidelity term and a structural regulariser. For example, by assuming that
data follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution, the graphical Lasso [2] maximises the `1 regularised
log-likelihood of the precision matrix which corresponds to a conditional independence graph. Based
on the convex formulation, the problem of learning an optimal graph can be solved by many iterative
algorithms, such as proximal gradient descent [15], with convergence guarantees.
These classical graph learning approaches, despite being effective, share several common limitations. Firstly, handcrafted convex regularisers may not be expressive enough for representing the
⇤

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

