Attention over learned object embeddings enables
complex visual reasoning

David Ding

Felix Hill

Adam Santoro
Malcolm Reynolds
Matt Botvinick
DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
{fding, felixhill, adamsantoro, mareynolds, botvinick}@google.com

Abstract
Neural networks have achieved success in a wide array of perceptual tasks but often
fail at tasks involving both perception and higher-level reasoning. On these more
challenging tasks, bespoke approaches (such as modular symbolic components, independent dynamics models or semantic parsers) targeted towards that specific type
of task have typically performed better. The downside to these targeted approaches,
however, is that they can be more brittle than general-purpose neural networks,
requiring significant modification or even redesign according to the particular
task at hand. Here, we propose a more general neural-network-based approach to
dynamic visual reasoning problems that obtains state-of-the-art performance on
three different domains, in each case outperforming bespoke modular approaches
tailored specifically to the task. Our method relies on learned object-centric representations, self-attention and self-supervised dynamics learning, and all three
elements together are required for strong performance to emerge. The success
of this combination suggests that there may be no need to trade off flexibility
for performance on problems involving spatio-temporal or causal-style reasoning.
With the right soft biases and learning objectives in a neural network we may be
able to attain the best of both worlds.

1

Introduction

Despite the popularity of artificial neural networks, a body of recent work has focused on their
limitations as models of cognition and reasoning. Experiments with dynamical reasoning datasets
such as CLEVRER [41], CATER [12], and ACRE [44] show that neural networks can fail to
adequately reason about the spatio-temporal, compositional or causal structure of visual scenes. On
CLEVRER, where models must answer questions about the dynamics of colliding objects, previous
experiments show that neural networks can adequately describe the video, but fail when asked to
predict, explain, or consider counterfactual possibilities. Similarly, on CATER, an object-tracking
task, models have trouble tracking the movement of objects when they are hidden in a container.
Finally, on ACRE, a dataset testing for causal inference, popular models only learned correlations
between visual scenes and not the deeper causal logic.
Failures such as these on reasoning (rather than perception) problems have motivated the adoption of
pipeline-style approaches that combine a general purpose neural network (such as a convolutional
block) with a task-specific module that builds in the core logic of the task. For example, on
CLEVRER the NS-DR method [41] applies a hand-coded symbolic logic engine (that has the core
logic of CLEVRER built-in) to the outputs of a “perceptual” neural front-end, achieving better
results than neural network baselines, particularly on counterfactual and explanatory problems. One
Model Code:
https://github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/master/
object_attention_for_reasoning.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

