An analysis of Ermakov-Zolotukhin quadrature
using kernels

Ayoub Belhadji
Univ Lyon, ENS de Lyon
Inria, CNRS, UCBL
LIP UMR 5668, Lyon, France
ayoub.belhadji@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
We study a quadrature, proposed by Ermakov and Zolotukhin in the sixties, through
the lens of kernel methods. The nodes of this quadrature rule follow the distribution
of a determinantal point process, while the weights are defined through a linear
system, similarly to the optimal kernel quadrature. In this work, we show how
these two classes of quadrature are related, and we prove a tractable formula of the
expected value of the squared worst-case integration error on the unit ball of an
RKHS of the former quadrature. In particular, this formula involves the eigenvalues
of the corresponding kernel and leads to improving on the existing theoretical
guarantees of the optimal kernel quadrature with determinantal point processes.

1

Introduction

Integrals appear in many scientific fields as quantities of interest per se. For example, in statistics,
they represent expectations [27], while in mathematical finance, they represent the prices of financial
products [17]. Unfortunately, integrals that can be written in closed form are exceptional. In general,
their values are only known through approximations. For this reason, numerical integration is at the
heart of many tasks in applied mathematics and statistics. Among all the possible approximation
schemes, quadratures are the most practical since they approximate the integral of a function by a
finite mixture of its evaluations. In this work, we focus on quadrature rules that take the form
Z
X
f (x)g(x)dω(x) ≈
wi f (xi ),
(1)
X

i∈[N ]

where the nodes xi are independent of f and g, while the weights wi depend only on g. The nodes and
the weights of a quadrature may be seen as degrees of freedom that the practitioner may tune in order
to achieve a given level of approximation error. The design of quadratures gave birth to a rich literature
from Gaussian quadrature [15] to Monte Carlo methods [25] to quadratures based on determinantal
point processes (DPPs) [1]. These latter form a large class of probabilistic models of repulsive random
subsets that make numerical integration possible in a variety of domains with strong theoretical
guarantees. In particular, central limit theorems with asymptotic convergence rates that scale better
than the typical Monte Carlo rate O(N −1/2 ) were proven for several DPP based quadratures: when
the integrand is a C 1 function [1] or even when the integrand is non-differentiable [10]. Moreover,
it is possible to design quadrature rules based on DPPs with non-asymptotic guarantees and with
rates of convergence that adapt to the smoothness of the integrand. This is the case of the quadrature
proposed by Ermakov and Zolotukhin in [14] and recently revisited in [16], and the optimal kernel
quadrature [3].
In this work, we study the quadrature rule proposed by Ermakov and Zolotukhin (EZQ) through the
lens of kernel methods. We start by comparing the weights of EZQ to the weights of the optimal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

