Iterative Amortized Policy Optimization

Joseph Marino∗
California Institute of Technology
Alessandro Davide Ialongo
University of Cambridge

Alexandre Piché
Mila, Université de Montréal
Yisong Yue
California Institute of Technology

Abstract
Policy networks are a central feature of deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for continuous control, enabling the estimation and sampling of high-value
actions. From the variational inference perspective on RL, policy networks, when
used with entropy or KL regularization, are a form of amortized optimization, optimizing network parameters rather than the policy distributions directly. However,
direct amortized mappings can yield suboptimal policy estimates and restricted
distributions, limiting performance and exploration. Given this perspective, we consider the more flexible class of iterative amortized optimizers. We demonstrate that
the resulting technique, iterative amortized policy optimization, yields performance
improvements over direct amortization on benchmark continuous control tasks.
Accompanying code: github.com/joelouismarino/variational_rl.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms involve policy evaluation and policy optimization [73].
Given a policy, one can estimate the value for each state or state-action pair following that policy,
and given a value estimate, one can improve the policy to maximize the value. This latter procedure,
policy optimization, can be challenging in continuous control due to instability and poor asymptotic
performance. In deep RL, where policies over continuous actions are often parameterized by deep
networks, such issues are typically tackled using regularization from previous policies [67, 68] or
by maximizing policy entropy [57, 23]. These techniques can be interpreted as variational inference
[51], using optimization to infer a policy that yields high expected return while satisfying prior policy
constraints. This smooths the optimization landscape, improving stability and performance [3].
However, one subtlety arises: when used with entropy or KL regularization, policy networks perform
amortized optimization [26]. That is, rather than optimizing the action distribution, e.g., mean and
variance, many deep RL algorithms, such as soft actor-critic (SAC) [31, 32], instead optimize a
network to output these parameters, learning to optimize the policy. Typically, this is implemented
as a direct mapping from states to action distribution parameters. While such direct amortization
schemes have improved the efficiency of variational inference as “encoder” networks [44, 64, 56],
they also suffer from several drawbacks: 1) they tend to provide suboptimal estimates [20, 43, 55],
yielding a so-called “amortization gap” in performance [20], 2) they are restricted to a single estimate
[27], thereby limiting exploration, and 3) they cannot generalize to new objectives, unlike, e.g.,
gradient-based [36] or gradient-free optimizers [66].
Inspired by techniques and improvements from variational inference, we investigate iterative amortized policy optimization. Iterative amortization [55] uses gradients or errors to iteratively update
the parameters of a distribution. Unlike direct amortization, which receives gradients only after
∗

Now at DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to josephmarino@deepmind.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

