For high-dimensional hierarchical models, consider
exchangeability of effects across covariates instead of
across datasets
Brian L. Trippe
MIT CSAIL
btrippe@mit.edu

Hilary K. Finucane
Broad Institute
finucane@broadinstitute.org
Tamara Broderick
MIT CSAIL
tbroderick@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Hierarchical Bayesian methods enable information sharing across regression problems on multiple groups of data. While standard practice is to model regression
parameters (effects) as (1) exchangeable across the groups and (2) correlated to
differing degrees across covariates, we show that this approach exhibits poor statistical performance when the number of covariates exceeds the number of groups.
For instance, in statistical genetics, we might regress dozens of traits (defining
groups) for thousands of individuals (responses) on up to millions of genetic variants (covariates). When an analyst has more covariates than groups, we argue that
it is often preferable to instead model effects as (1) exchangeable across covariates
and (2) correlated to differing degrees across groups. To this end, we propose a
hierarchical model expressing our alternative perspective. We devise an empirical
Bayes estimator for learning the degree of correlation between groups. We develop
theory that demonstrates that our method outperforms the classic approach when
the number of covariates dominates the number of groups, and corroborate this result empirically on several high-dimensional multiple regression and classification
problems.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical modeling is a mainstay of Bayesian inference. For instance, in (generalized) linear
models, the unknown parameters are effects, each of which describes the association of a particular
covariate with a response of interest. Often covariates are shared across multiple related groups, but
the effects are typically allowed to vary both by group and by covariate. A classic methodology, dating
back to Lindley and Smith (1972) [44], models the effects as conditionally independent across groups,
with a latent (and learnable) degree of relatedness across covariates. From a practical standpoint,
the model is motivated by the understanding that it “borrows strength” across different groups
[24, Chapter 5.6]. Mathematically, the model is motivated by assuming effects are exchangeable
across groups and applying a de Finetti theorem [44, 35]. The methodology of Lindley and Smith
is ubiquitous when the number of groups is larger than the number of covariates. It is a standard
component of Bayesian pedagogy [[23, Chapter 13.3]; [24, Chapter 15.4]] and software; e.g. it is
used in the mixed modeling package lme4 [5], which has over 16 million downloads at the time of
writing.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

