Hash Layers For Large Sparse Models

Stephen Roller

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar

Arthur Szlam

Jason Weston

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We investigate the training of sparse layers that use different parameters for different
inputs based on hashing in large Transformer models. Specifically, we modify the
feedforward layer to hash to different sets of weights depending on the current token,
over all tokens in the sequence. We show that this procedure either outperforms or
is competitive with learning-to-route mixture-of-expert methods such as Switch
Transformers and BASE Layers, while requiring no routing parameters or extra
terms in the objective function such as a load balancing loss, and no sophisticated
assignment algorithm. We study the performance of different hashing techniques,
hash sizes and input features, and show that balanced and random hashes focused
on the most local features work best, compared to either learning clusters or using
longer-range context. We show our approach works well both on large language
modeling and dialogue tasks, and on downstream fine-tuning tasks.

1

Introduction

Recent studies of Transformer models have shown a clear trend towards improvements with scale in
data and model size [1], mirroring the same trend in Machine Learning more generally. However,
when architected naively, larger (in terms of parameter count) models are slower to train and to
evaluate; and at extreme scale, with current computer systems, necessitate complex engineering to
facilitate communication between workers. To address these challenges, researchers have studied
Mixtures-of-Experts (MoE) models [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], where a “gater” routes computation through
a sparse subset of the weights of the model (the “expert modules”). Specifically in the setting of
Transformers for Natural Language Processing (NLP), recent approaches have led to state of the art
performance in language modeling [8]. MoE models allow increasing the number of parameters in
the model while holding steady the number of computations that affect a given sample.
A key component to a MoE model is the routing (gating) strategy. While MoE models can be
computationally advantageous per parameter compared to a dense model, they might be functionally
less powerful per parameter. A poor routing strategy might lead to expert modules that are not
properly specialized (essentially making a stochastic ensemble model); or overly specialized, using
the data assignment function to overfit. Meanwhile, the routing strategy itself must be efficient.
A standard approach is to train a layer of weights that makes the routing decision based upon the input
to the layer to be routed. Classically, this may have been implemented with a softmax over the choice
of expert modules, and fitted via backpropagation. However, a dense softmax requires all expert
modules to run on all data points at train time, which negates the computational savings. Several
works have shown that sparsity can be maintained during training, e.g. [9, 7, 8, 10]. In particular,
Switch Transformers [8] select the top expert per token using a softmax over the token’s hidden
state, but require a load balancing term in the objective function or they can become imbalanced or
degenerate, giving poor results. BASE Layers [10] employ a linear assignment algorithm to try to
resolve the same problem.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

