Necessary and sufficient graphical conditions for
optimal adjustment sets in causal graphical models
with hidden variables
Jakob Runge
German Aerospace Center
Institute of Data Science
07745 Jena, Germany
and
Technische Universität Berlin
10623 Berlin, Germany
jakob.runge@dlr.de

Abstract
The problem of selecting optimal backdoor adjustment sets to estimate causal
effects in graphical models with hidden and conditioned variables is addressed.
Previous work has defined optimality as achieving the smallest asymptotic estimation variance and derived an optimal set for the case without hidden variables. For
the case with hidden variables there can be settings where no optimal set exists and
currently only a sufficient graphical optimality criterion of limited applicability
has been derived. In the present work optimality is characterized as maximizing a
certain adjustment information which allows to derive a necessary and sufficient
graphical criterion for the existence of an optimal adjustment set and a definition
and algorithm to construct it. Further, the optimal set is valid if and only if a valid
adjustment set exists and has higher (or equal) adjustment information than the
Adjust-set proposed in Perković et al. [Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18:
1–62, 2018] for any graph. The results translate to minimal asymptotic estimation
variance for a class of estimators whose asymptotic variance follows a certain
information-theoretic relation. Numerical experiments indicate that the asymptotic
results also hold for relatively small sample sizes and that the optimal adjustment
set or minimized variants thereof often yield better variance also beyond that estimator class. Surprisingly, among the randomly created setups more than 90%
fulfill the optimality conditions indicating that also in many real-world scenarios
graphical optimality may hold.

1

Introduction

A standard problem setting in causal inference is to estimate the causal effect between two variables
given a causal graphical model that specifies qualitative causal relations among observed variables
[Pearl, 2009], including a possible presence of hidden confounding variables. The graphical model
then allows to employ graphical criteria to identify valid adjustment sets, the most well-known
being the backdoor criterion [Pearl, 1993] and the generalized adjustment criterion [Shpitser et al.,
2010, Perković et al., 2015, 2018], providing a complete identification of all valid adjustment sets.
Estimators of causal effects based on such a valid adjustment set as a covariate are then unbiased,
but for different adjustment sets the estimation variance may strongly vary. An optimal adjustment
set may be characterized as one that has minimal asymptotic estimation variance. In current work,
following Kuroki and Cai [2004] and Kuroki and Miyakawa [2003], Henckel et al. [2019] (abbreviated
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

