R ETRIEVE: Coreset Selection for Efficient and
Robust Semi-Supervised Learning

Krishnateja Killamsetty Xujiang Zhao Feng Chen Rishabh Iyer
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, Texas, USA
{krishnateja.killamsetty,xujiang.zhao,feng.chen,rishabh.iyer}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms have had great success in recent years in
limited labeled data regimes. However, the current state-of-the-art SSL algorithms
are computationally expensive and entail significant compute time and energy
requirements. This can prove to be a huge limitation for many smaller companies
and academic groups. Our main insight is that training on a subset of unlabeled
data instead of entire unlabeled data enables the current SSL algorithms to converge faster, significantly reducing computational costs. In this work, we propose
R ETRIEVE1 , a coreset selection framework for efficient and robust semi-supervised
learning. R ETRIEVE selects the coreset by solving a mixed discrete-continuous
bi-level optimization problem such that the selected coreset minimizes the labeled
set loss. We use a one-step gradient approximation and show that the discrete
optimization problem is approximately submodular, enabling simple greedy algorithms to obtain the coreset. We empirically demonstrate on several real-world
datasets that existing SSL algorithms like VAT, Mean-Teacher, FixMatch, when
used with R ETRIEVE, achieve a) faster training times, b) better performance when
unlabeled data consists of Out-of-Distribution (OOD) data and imbalance. More
specifically, we show that with minimal accuracy degradation, R ETRIEVE achieves
a speedup of around 3× in the traditional SSL setting and achieves a speedup
of 5× compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA) robust SSL algorithms in the case of
imbalance and OOD data. R ETRIEVE is available as a part of the CORDS toolkit:
https://github.com/decile-team/cords.

1

Introduction

Deep learning algorithms have had great success over the past few years, often achieving human or
superhuman performance in various tasks like computer vision [10], speech recognition [18], natural
language processing [5], and video games [45]. One of the significant factors attributing to the recent
success of deep learning is the availability of large amounts of labeled data [55]. However, creating
large labeled datasets is often time-consuming and expensive in terms of costs. Moreover, some
domains like medical imaging require a domain expert for labeling, making it nearly impossible
to create a large labeled set. In order to reduce the dependency on the availability of labeled data,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms [7] were proposed to train models using large amounts
of unlabeled data along with the available labeled data. Recent works [42, 56, 4, 53] show that
semi-supervised learning algorithms can achieve similar performance to standard supervised learning
using significantly fewer labeled data instances.
1

coResets for EfficienT and Robust semI-supErVised lEarning

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

