GradInit: Learning to Initialize Neural Networks for
Stable and Efficient Training
Chen Zhu
University of Maryland
chenzhu@cs.umd.edu

Renkun Ni
University of Maryland
rn9zm@cs.umd.edu

Zheng Xu
Google Research
xuzheng@google.com

Kezhi Kong
University of Maryland
kong@cs.umd.edu

W. Ronny Huang
Google Research
wrh@google.com

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Innovations in neural architectures have fostered significant breakthroughs in language modeling and computer vision. Unfortunately, novel architectures often
result in challenging hyper-parameter choices and training instability if the network
parameters are not properly initialized. A number of architecture-specific initialization schemes have been proposed, but these schemes are not always portable
to new architectures. This paper presents GradInit, an automated and architecture
agnostic method for initializing neural networks. GradInit is based on a simple
heuristic; the norm of each network layer is adjusted so that a single step of SGD or
Adam with prescribed hyperparameters results in the smallest possible loss value.
This adjustment is done by introducing a scalar multiplier variable in front of each
parameter block, and then optimizing these variables using a simple numerical
scheme. GradInit accelerates the convergence and test performance of many convolutional architectures, both with or without skip connections, and even without
normalization layers. It also improves the stability of the original Transformer architecture for machine translation, enabling training it without learning rate warmup
using either Adam or SGD under a wide range of learning rates and momentum
coefficients. Code is available at https://github.com/zhuchen03/gradinit.

1

Introduction

The initialization of network parameters has a strong impact on the training stability and performance
of deep neural networks. Initializations that prevent gradient explosion/vanishing in back propagation
played a key role in early successes with feed-forward networks [1, 2]. Even with cleverly designed
initialization rules, complex models with many layers or multiple branches can still suffer from
instability. For example, the original Transformer model [3] does not converge without learning
rate warmup using the default initialization [4–6]; RoBERTa [7] and GPT-3 [8] have to tune the 2
parameter of Adam for stability when the batch size is large. Recent innovations have shown that
architecture-specific initializations, which are carefully derived to maintain stability, can promote
convergence without needing normalization layers [5, 9–12]. Unfortunately, the reliance on analytically derived initializations makes it difficult to realize the benefits of these methods when performing
architecture search, training networks with branched or heterogeneous components, or proposing
altogether new architectures.
In this work, we propose a simple method for learning the initialization of a network with any
architecture. Typically, initialization schemes draw parameters independently from a zero-mean
distribution, with the variance of each distribution set to pre-determined values depending on the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

