How Powerful are Performance Predictors
in Neural Architecture Search?
Colin White1∗, Arber Zela2 , Binxin Ru3 , Yang Liu1 , Frank Hutter2,4
1
Abacus.AI, 2 University of Freiburg, 3 University of Oxford,
4
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Early methods in the rapidly developing field of neural architecture search (NAS)
required fully training thousands of neural networks. To reduce this extreme
computational cost, dozens of techniques have since been proposed to predict the
final performance of neural architectures. Despite the success of such performance
prediction methods, it is not well-understood how different families of techniques
compare to one another, due to the lack of an agreed-upon evaluation metric and
optimization for different constraints on the initialization time and query time. In
this work, we give the first large-scale study of performance predictors by analyzing
31 techniques ranging from learning curve extrapolation, to weight-sharing, to
supervised learning, to zero-cost proxies. We test a number of correlation- and
rank-based performance measures in a variety of settings, as well as the ability of
each technique to speed up predictor-based NAS frameworks. Our results act as
recommendations for the best predictors to use in different settings, and we show
that certain families of predictors can be combined to achieve even better predictive
power, opening up promising research directions. Our code, featuring a library of 31
performance predictors, is available at https://github.com/automl/naslib.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) is a popular area of machine learning, which aims to automate
the process of developing neural architectures for a given dataset. Since 2017, a wide variety
of NAS techniques have been proposed [78, 45, 32, 49]. While the first NAS techniques trained
thousands of architectures to completion and then evaluated the performance using the final validation
accuracy [78], modern algorithms use more efficient strategies to estimate the performance of
partially-trained or even untrained neural networks [11, 2, 54, 34, 38].
Recently, many performance prediction methods have been proposed based on training a model to
predict the final validation accuracy of an architecture just from an encoding of the architecture.
Popular choices for these models include Gaussian processes [60, 17, 51], neural networks [36, 54,
65, 69], tree-based methods [33, 55], and so on. However, these methods often require hundreds
of fully-trained architectures to be used as training data, thus incurring high initialization time. In
contrast, learning curve extrapolation methods [11, 2, 20] need little or no initialization time, but
each individual prediction requires partially training the architecture, incurring high query time. Very
recently, a few techniques have been introduced which are fast both in query time and initialization
time [38, 1], computing predictions based on a single minibatch of data. Finally, using shared
weights [45, 4, 32] is a popular paradigm for NAS [73, 25], although the effectiveness of these
methods in ranking architectures is disputed [53, 74, 76].
Despite the widespread use of performance predictors, it is not known how methods from different
families compare to one another. While there have been some analyses on the best predictors within
∗

{colin, yang}@abacus.ai, {zelaa, fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de, robin@robots.ox.ac.uk

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

