KALE Flow: A Relaxed KL Gradient Flow for
Probabilities with Disjoint Support
Pierre Glaser
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
pierreglaser@gmail.com

Michael Arbel
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LJK,38000 Grenoble, France⇤
michael.n.arbel@gmail.com

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the gradient flow for a relaxed approximation to the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between a moving source and a fixed target distribution. This
approximation, termed the KALE (KL Approximate Lower bound Estimator),
solves a regularized version of the Fenchel dual problem defining the KL over
a restricted class of functions. When using a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) to define the function class, we show that the KALE continuously interpolates between the KL and the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD). Like the
MMD and other Integral Probability Metrics, the KALE remains well-defined for
mutually singular distributions. Nonetheless, the KALE inherits from the limiting
KL a greater sensitivity to mismatch in the support of the distributions, compared
with the MMD. These two properties make the KALE gradient flow particularly
well suited when the target distribution is supported on a low-dimensional manifold.
Under an assumption of sufficient smoothness of the trajectories, we show the
global convergence of the KALE flow. We propose a particle implementation of
the flow given initial samples from the source and the target distribution, which we
use to empirically confirm the KALE’s properties.

1 Introduction
We consider the problem of transporting probability mass from a source distribution P to a target
distribution Q using a Wasserstein gradient flow in probability space. When the density of the target
is well-defined and available, the Wasserstein gradient flow of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
provides a simple way to transport mass towards the target through the Fokker-Planck equation
as established in the seminal work of [31]. Its time discretization yields a practical algorithm, the
Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA), which comes with strong convergence guarantees [22, 19]. A
more recent gradient flow approach, Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) [36], also leverages
the analytic expression of the density and constructs a gradient flow of the KL, albeit using a metric
different from the Wasserstein metric.
The KL divergence is of particular interest due to its information theoretical interpretation [56] and its
use in Bayesian Inference [13]. The KL defines a strong notion of convergence between probability
distributions, and as such is often widely used for learning generative models, through Maximum
Likelihood Estimation [20]. Using the KL as a loss requires knowledge of the density of the target,
however; moreover, this loss is well-defined only when the distributions share the same support.
Consequently, we cannot use the KL in settings where the probability distributions are mutually
singular, or when they are only accessible through samples. In particular, the Wasserstein gradient
flow of the KL in these settings is ill-defined.
⇤

Work mostly completed at the Gatsby Unit.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

