Class-Disentanglement and Applications in
Adversarial Detection and Defense
Kaiwen Yang1 , Tianyi Zhou2,3 , Yonggang Zhang1 , Xinmei Tian1 , Dacheng Tao4
University of Science and Technology of China1 ; University of Washington, Seattle2
University of Maryland, College Park3 ; JD Explore Academy4
{kwyang, yonggang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn,
tianyizh@uw.edu, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
What is the minimum necessary information required by a neural net D(·)
from an image x to accurately predict its class? Extracting such information
in the input space from x can allocate the areas D(·) mainly attending to and
shed novel insights to the detection and defense of adversarial attacks. In this
paper, we propose “class-disentanglement” that trains a variational autoencoder
G(·) to extract this class-dependent information as x − G(x) via a trade-off
between reconstructing x by G(x) and classifying x by D(x − G(x)), where
the former competes with the latter in decomposing x so the latter retains only
necessary information for classification in x − G(x). We apply it to both clean
images and their adversarial images and discover that the perturbations generated
by adversarial attacks mainly lie in the class-dependent part x − G(x). The
decomposition results also provide novel interpretations to classification and
attack models. Inspired by these observations, we propose to conduct adversarial
detection and adversarial defense respectively on x − G(x) and G(x), which
consistently outperform the results on the original x. In experiments, this simple
approach substantially improves the detection and defense against different types of
adversarial attacks. Code is available: https://github.com/kai-wen-yang/CD-VAE.

1

Introduction

Deep learning provides an end-to-end solution to challenging tasks with data of complicated
structures and have achieved breakthrough across different domains in recent years. However,
what essential information the neural nets extract from the input and mainly rely on in producing
predictions for the targeted tasks still remains mysterious. Moreover, the trained models are known to
be fragile and sensitive to adversarial perturbations on the input, but how to explain this failure is still
an open problem. Given entangled raw features as input, the inference of neural nets tend to remove
task-redundant information and compress task-essential information to abstract concepts. On the
one hand, identifying the task-essential information in the input can allocate the areas that the neural
nets mainly attend to and explain the model prediction. On the other hand, this information can also
be the main target of adversarial attacks, while the removed task-redundant information may suffer
less distortion under attacks and still preserve clues to correct the prediction. Hence, disentanglement
of these two types of information in the input (termed “task-disentanglement”) may shed critical
insights to address aforementioned problems.
Disentangled representations [3] have been extensively studied in unsupervised learning when
training a generative model, where each dimension of the representation controls a single generative
factor of data variations and changing it does not affect other factors. Probably the most studied
disentanglement model is β-variational autoencoder (VAE) [20], whose objective aims to reconstruct
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

