Adversarial Teacher-Student Representation
Learning for Domain Generalization

Fu-En Yang1,2
Yuan-Chia Cheng1
Zu-Yun Shiau1
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{f07942077, r08942154, r09942069, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) aims to transfer the learning task from a single or
multiple source domains to unseen target domains. To extract and leverage the
information which exhibits sufficient generalization ability, we propose a simple
yet effective approach of Adversarial Teacher-Student Representation Learning,
with the goal of deriving the domain generalizable representations via generating
and exploring out-of-source data distributions. Our proposed framework advances
Teacher-Student learning in an adversarial learning manner, which alternates between knowledge-distillation based representation learning and novel-domain data
augmentation. The former progressively updates the teacher network for deriving
domain-generalizable representations, while the latter synthesizes data out-ofsource yet plausible distributions. Extensive image classification experiments on
benchmark datasets in multiple and single source DG settings confirm that, our
model exhibits sufficient generalization ability and performs favorably against
state-of-the-art DG methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved promising performance on a wide variety of tasks. However,
these networks assume the training and testing samples fall in the same data distribution. Such a
strong assumption would limit the applicability of the learned models in real-world scenarios (e.g.,
cross-city autonomous driving or multi-cite medical imaging task), in which training and testing
data are typically observed under different conditions. In other words, the generalizability of the
model at unseen target domains might be poor due to unexpected domain shifts. To tackle the domain
discrepancy, domain generalization (DG) has been proposed and drawn increasing attention recently.
The aim of DG is to train models using data observed from single or multiple source domains,
while expecting that the model would be generalized to unseen target domains. Most existing
DG approaches focus on deriving domain-invariant features [1] among multiple source domains
or adopting meta-learning techniques [2, 3, 4, 5], which would simulate domain shifts during the
meta-training stage. However, the features derived by the above methods are generally guaranteed
to be invariant to the seen source domains, not the generalizability of the learned representation to
describe unseen domain data. To overcome the limitation, [6, 7, 8, 9] turn to leverage data generation
techniques for diversifying the source distributions, and thus avoid overfitting on source domains
yet improve the generalization ability of models. Specifically, several works [6, 7, 8] choose to
generate novel-domain images by either perturbing the style of source data to confuse the domain
classifier [6, 7], or transporting the source data to novel styles via optimal transport based objective [8].
[9] adopts Mixup [10] to interpolate the feature statistics between samples from different domains.
While the above methods perform well, designing an objective for generating samples with DG
guarantees remains a challenging and open problem.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

