Contrastively Disentangled
Sequential Variational Autoencoder

Junwen Bai
Cornell University
jb2467@cornell.edu

Weiran Wang
Google
weiranwang@google.com

Carla Gomes
Cornell University
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised disentangled representation learning is a critical task in sequence
modeling. The learnt representations contribute to better model interpretability
as well as the data generation, and improve the sample efficiency for downstream
tasks. We propose a novel sequence representation learning method, named Contrastively Disentangled Sequential Variational Autoencoder (C-DSVAE), to extract
and separate the static (time-invariant) and dynamic (time-variant) factors in the
latent space. Different from previous sequential variational autoencoder methods,
we use a novel evidence lower bound which maximizes the mutual information
between the input and the latent factors, while penalizes the mutual information
between the static and dynamic factors. We leverage contrastive estimations of the
mutual information terms in training, together with simple yet effective augmentation techniques, to introduce additional inductive biases. Our experiments show
that C-DSVAE significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods on
multiple metrics.

1

Introduction

The goal of self-supervised learning methods is to extract useful and general representations without
any supervision, and to further facilitate downstream tasks such as generation and prediction [1].
Despite the difficulty of this task, many existing works have shed light on this field across different
domains such as computer vision [2, 3, 4, 5], natural language processing [6, 7, 8] and speech
processing [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] (also see a huge number of references in these papers). While the
quality of the learnt representations improves gradually, recent research starts to put more emphasis
on learning disentangled representations. This is because disentangled latent variables may capture
separate variations of the data generation process, which could contain semantic meanings, provide
the opportunity to remove unwanted variations for a lower sample complexity of downstream learning
[14, 15], and allow more controllable generations [16, 17, 18]. These advantages lead to a rapidly
growing research area, studying various principles and algorithmic techniques for disentangled
representation learning [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. One concern raised in [24] is that without any
inductive bias, it would be extremely hard to learn meaningful disentangled representations. On the
other hand, this concern could be much alleviated in the scenarios where the known structure of the
data can be exploited.
In this work, we are concerned with the representation learning for sequence data, which has a unique
structure to utilize for disentanglement learning. More specifically, for many sequence data, the
variations can be explained by a dichotomy of a static (time-invariant) factor and dynamic (timevariant) factors, each varies independently from the other. For example, representations of a video
recording the movements of a cartoon character could be disentangled into the character identity
(static) and the actions (dynamic). For audio data, the representations shall be able to separate the
speaker information (static) from the linguistic information (dynamic).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

