Learnability of Linear Thresholds
from Label Proportions

Rishi Saket
Google Research, India
rishisaket@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of properly learning linear threshold functions (LTFs) in
the learning from label proportions (LLP) framework. In this, the learning is on a
collection of bags of feature-vectors with only the proportion of labels available
for each bag.
First, we provide an algorithm that, given a collection of such bags each of size at
most two whose label proportions are consistent with (i.e., the bags are satisfied by)
an unknown LTF, efficiently produces an LTF that satisfies at least (2/5)-fraction
of the bags. If all the bags are non-monochromatic (i.e., bags of size two with
differently labeled feature-vectors) the algorithm satisfies at least (1/2)-fraction of
them. For the special case of OR over the d-dimensional boolean vectors, we give
an algorithm which computes an LTF achieving an additional Ω(1/d) in accuracy
for the two cases.
Our main result provides evidence that these algorithmic bounds cannot be significantly improved, even for learning monotone ORs using LTFs. We prove that it
is NP-hard, given a collection of non-monochromatic bags which are all satisfied
by some monotone OR, to compute any function of constantly many LTFs that
satisfies (1/2 + ε)-fraction of the bags for any constant ε > 0. This bound is tight
for the non-monochromatic bags case.
The above is in contrast to the usual supervised learning setup (i.e., unit-sized
bags) in which LTFs are efficiently learnable to arbitrary accuracy using linear
programming, and even a trivial algorithm (any LTF or its complement) achieves
an accuracy of 1/2. These techniques however, fail in the LLP setting. Indeed, we
show that the LLP learning of LTFs (even for the special case of monotone ORs)
using LTFs dramatically increases in complexity as soon as bags of size two are
allowed. Our work gives the first inapproximability for LLP learning LTFs, and a
strong complexity separation between LLP and traditional supervised learning.

1

Introduction

A linear threshold function (LTF) over the d-dimensional feature-vectors x is given by pos(g(x)) for
Pd
some linear function g(x1 , . . . , xd ) = i=1 ci xi + cd+1 , where pos(z) := 1{z>0} . Also known as
linear classifiers or halfspaces, LTFs are one of the most fundamental classes studied in computational
learning and lie at the core of several machine learning algorithms such as Perceptron [25, 21] and
SVM [7]. It is known [4] that LTFs are properly learnable in the supervised learning setup: given a
training set of labeled feature-vectors which are consistent with some LTF, using polynomial-time
linear programming one can efficiently find one such LTF.
In this work we initiate an investigation into the proper learnability of LTFs in the framework of
learning from label proportions (LLP). In this, instead of labels for each feature-vector, the training
data consists of bags (subsets) of feature-vectors along with the proportion of labels in each bag.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

