Closing the Gap: Tighter Analysis of Alternating
Stochastic Gradient Methods for Bilevel Problems
Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
chentianyi19@gmail.com

Yuejiao Sun
UCLA
sunyj@math.ucla.edu

Wotao Yin
UCLA
wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Stochastic nested optimization, including stochastic bilevel, min-max, and compositional optimization, is gaining popularity in many machine learning applications.
While the three problems share a nested structure, existing works often treat them
separately, thus developing problem-specific algorithms and analyses. Among
various exciting developments, simple SGD-type updates (potentially on multiple
variables) are still prevalent in solving this class of nested problems, but they are
believed to have a slower convergence rate than non-nested problems. This paper
unifies several SGD-type updates for stochastic nested problems into a single SGD
approach that we term ALternating Stochastic gradient dEscenT (ALSET) method.
By leveraging the hidden smoothness of the problem, this paper presents a tighter
analysis of ALSET for stochastic nested problems. Under the new analysis, to
achieve an -stationary point of the nested problem, it requires O(−2 ) samples
in total. Under certain regularity conditions, applying our results to stochastic
compositional, min-max, and reinforcement learning problems either improves or
matches the best-known sample complexity in the respective cases. Our results
explain why simple SGD-type algorithms in stochastic nested problems all work
very well in practice without the need for further modifications.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods [1] are prevalent in solving large-scale machine learning
problems. Often, SGD is applied to solve stochastic problems with a relatively simple structure.
Specifically, applying SGD to minimize the function Eξ [f (x; ξ)] over the variable x ∈ Rd , we have
the iterative update xk+1 = xk − α∇f (xk ; ξ k ), where α > 0 is the stepsize and ∇f (xk ; ξ k ) is the
stochastic gradient at the iterate xk and the sample ξ k . However, many problems in machine learning
today, such as meta learning, deep learning, hyper-parameter optimization, and reinforcement learning,
go beyond the above simple minimization structure (termed the non-nested problem thereafter).
For example, the objective function may be the compositions of multiple functions, where each
composition may introduce an additional expectation [2]; and, the objective function may depend
on the solution of another optimization problem [3]. In these problems, how to apply SGD and the
efficiency of running SGD are not fully understood.
To answer these questions, in this paper, we consider the following form of stochastic nested
optimization problems, which is a generalization of the non-nested problems, given by
min

F (x) := Eξ [f (x, y ∗ (x); ξ)]

(upper)

(1a)

s.t.

y ∗ (x) = arg min Eφ [g(x, y; φ)]

(lower)

(1b)

x∈Rd

y∈Rd0

where f and g are differentiable functions; and, ξ and φ are random variables. In the optimization
literature [4–6], the problem (1) is referred to as the stochastic bilevel problem, where the upper-level
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

