Are My Deep Learning Systems Fair?
An Empirical Study of Fixed-Seed Training

Shangshu Qian
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
shangshu@purdue.edu

Hung Viet Pham
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
hvpham@uwaterloo.ca

Thibaud Lutellier
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
tlutelli@uwaterloo.ca

Zeou Hu
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
z97hu@uwaterloo.ca

Jungwon Kim
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
kim3241@purdue.edu

Lin Tan
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
lintan@purdue.edu

Yaoliang Yu
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Jiahao Chen∗
J. P. Morgan AI Research
New York, NY, USA
jiahao@getparity.ai

Sameena Shah
J. P. Morgan AI Research
New York, NY, USA
sameena.shah@jpmorgan.com

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) systems have been gaining popularity in critical tasks such
as credit evaluation and crime prediction. Such systems demand fairness. Recent
work shows that DL software implementations introduce variance: identical DL
training runs (i.e., identical network, data, configuration, software, and hardware)
with a fixed seed produce different models. Such variance could make DL models
and networks violate fairness compliance laws, resulting in negative social impact.
In this paper, we conduct the first empirical study to quantify the impact of software
implementation on the fairness and its variance of DL systems. Our study of 22
mitigation techniques and five baselines reveals up to 12.6% fairness variance
across identical training runs with identical seeds. In addition, most debiasing
algorithms have a negative impact on the model such as reducing model accuracy,
increasing fairness variance, or increasing accuracy variance. Our literature survey
shows that while fairness is gaining popularity in artificial intelligence (AI) related
conferences, only 34.4% of the papers use multiple identical training runs to evaluate
their approach, raising concerns about their results’ validity. We call for better
fairness evaluation and testing protocols to improve fairness and fairness variance
of DL systems as well as DL research validity and reproducibility at large.

1

Introduction

DL systems, which consist of DL models and DL software (for example libraries such as TensorFlow) [71], are widely used; and enrusing their fairness is of paramount importance [47, 59, 97, 98].
Biases in DL systems have been identified as a major concern for civil rights by the U.S. government [27]. Yet, fairness testing for DL systems is still an open challenge.
Although the DL community is aware of the nondeterminism caused by using different random
seeds [72, 90] , such algorithmic factors are not the sole source of DL nondeterminism. Even with the
∗

Jiahao Chen has since moved to Parity Technologies.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

