Learning Collaborative Policies to Solve NP-hard
Routing Problems

Minsu Kim†
Jinkyoo Park‡
Joungho Kim†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
†
School of Electrical Engineering, ‡ Dept. Industrial & Systems Engineering
{min-su, jinkyoo.park, joungho}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) frameworks have shown potential for
solving NP-hard routing problems such as the traveling salesman problem (TSP)
without problem-specific expert knowledge. Although DRL can be used to solve
complex problems, DRL frameworks still struggle to compete with state-of-the-art
heuristics showing a substantial performance gap. This paper proposes a novel
hierarchical problem-solving strategy, termed learning collaborative policies (LCP),
which can effectively find the near-optimum solution using two iterative DRL
policies: the seeder and reviser. The seeder generates as diversified candidate
solutions as possible (seeds) while being dedicated to exploring over the full
combinatorial action space (i.e., sequence of assignment action). To this end, we
train the seeder’s policy using a simple yet effective entropy regularization reward
to encourage the seeder to find diverse solutions. On the other hand, the reviser
modifies each candidate solution generated by the seeder; it partitions the full
trajectory into sub-tours and simultaneously revises each sub-tour to minimize its
traveling distance. Thus, the reviser is trained to improve the candidate solution’s
quality, focusing on the reduced solution space (which is beneficial for exploitation).
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed two-policies collaboration
scheme improves over single-policy DRL framework on various NP-hard routing
problems, including TSP, prize collecting TSP (PCTSP), and capacitated vehicle
routing problem (CVRP).

1

Introduction

Routing is a combinatorial optimization problem, one of the prominent fields in discrete mathematics
and computational theory. Among routing problems, the traveling salesman problem (TSP) is a
canonical example. TSP can be applied to real-world problems in various engineering fields, such as
robot routing, biology, and electrical design automation (EDA) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] by expanding constraints
and objectives to real-world settings : coined TSP variants are expanded version of TSP. However,
TSP and its variants are NP-hard, making it challenging to design an exact solver [6].
Due to NP-hardness, solvers of TSP-like problems rely on mixed-integer linear programming (MILP)
solvers [7] and handcrafted heuristics [8, 9]. Although they often provide a remarkable performance
on target problems, the conventional approaches have several limitations. Firstly, in the case of
MILP solvers, the objective functions and constraints must be formulated into linear forms, but many
real-world routing applications, including biology and EDA, have a non-linear objective. Secondly,
handcrafted heuristics rely on expert knowledge on target problems, thus hard to solve other problems.
That is, whenever the target problem changes, the algorithm must also be re-designed.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-routing frameworks [10, 11, 12] is proposed to tackle the
limitation of conventional approaches. One of the benefits of DRL is that reward of DRL can be any
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

