Machine Learning for Variance Reduction in Online
Experiments

Yongyi Guo
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
yongyig@princeton.edu
Dominic Coey
Facebook
1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA 94025
coey@fb.com

Mikael Konutgan
Facebook
1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA 94025
kmikael@fb.com

Wenting Li
Facebook
1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA 94025
wentingli@fb.com

Chris Schoener
Facebook
1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA 94025
chrissc@fb.com

Matt Goldman
Facebook
1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA 94025
mattgoldman@fb.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of variance reduction in randomized controlled trials,
through the use of covariates correlated with the outcome but independent of the
treatment. We propose a machine learning regression-adjusted treatment effect
estimator, which we call MLRATE. MLRATE uses machine learning predictors of
the outcome to reduce estimator variance. It employs cross-fitting to avoid overfitting biases, and we prove consistency and asymptotic normality under general
conditions. MLRATE is robust to poor predictions from the machine learning
step: if the predictions are uncorrelated with the outcomes, the estimator performs
asymptotically no worse than the standard difference-in-means estimator, while
if predictions are highly correlated with outcomes, the efficiency gains are large.
In A/A tests, for a set of 48 outcome metrics commonly monitored in Facebook
experiments the estimator has over 70% lower variance than the simple differencein-means estimator, and about 19% lower variance than the common univariate
procedure which adjusts only for pre-experiment values of the outcome.

1

Introduction

While sample sizes are typically larger for online experiments than traditional field experiments, the
desired minimum detectable effect sizes may be small, and the outcome variables of interest may
be heavy-tailed. Even with quite large samples, statistical power may be low. Variance reduction
methods play a key role in these settings, allowing for precise inferences with less data [12, 32, 38].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

