Gradual Domain Adaptation
without Indexed Intermediate Domains
Hong-You Chen
The Ohio State University, USA
chen.9301@osu.edu

Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University, USA
chao.209@osu.edu

Abstract
The effectiveness of unsupervised domain adaptation degrades when there is a
large discrepancy between the source and target domains. Gradual domain adaption
(GDA) is one promising way to mitigate such an issue, by leveraging additional unlabeled data that gradually shift from the source to the target. Through sequentially
adapting the model along the “indexed” intermediate domains, GDA substantially
improves the overall adaptation performance. In practice, however, the extra unlabeled data may not be separated into intermediate domains and indexed properly,
limiting the applicability of GDA. In this paper, we investigate how to discover
the sequence of intermediate domains when it is not already available. Concretely,
we propose a coarse-to-fine framework, which starts with a coarse domain discovery step via progressive domain discriminator training. This coarse domain
sequence then undergoes a fine indexing step via a novel cycle-consistency loss,
which encourages the next intermediate domain to preserve sufficient discriminative
knowledge of the current intermediate domain. The resulting domain sequence can
then be used by a GDA algorithm. On benchmark data sets of GDA, we show that
our approach, which we name Intermediate DOmain Labeler (IDOL), can lead to
comparable or even better adaptation performance compared to the pre-defined domain sequence, making GDA more applicable and robust to the quality of domain
sequences. Codes are available at https://github.com/hongyouc/IDOL.

1

Introduction

The distributions of real-world data change dynamically due to many factors like time, locations,
environments, etc. Such a fact poses a great challenge to machine-learned models, which implicitly
assume that the test data distribution is covered by the training data distribution. To resolve this
generalization problem, unsupervised domain adaption (UDA), which aims to adapt a learned model
to the test domain given its unlabeled data [13, 15], has been an active sub-field in machine learning.
Typically, UDA assumes that the “source” domain, in which the model is trained, and the “target”
domain, in which the model is deployed, are discrepant but sufficiently related. Concretely, Ben-David
et al. [1], Zhao et al. [75] show that the generalization error of UDA is bounded by the discrepancy of
the marginal or conditional distributions between domains. Namely, the effectiveness of UDA may
degrade along with the increase in domain discrepancy. Take one popular algorithm, self-training [38,
48, 49], for example. Self-training adapts the source model by progressively labeling the unlabeled
target data (i.e., pseudo-labels) and using them to fine-tune the model [2, 28, 30, 31, 41, 44, 77, 78].
Self-training works if the pseudo-labels are accurate (as it essentially becomes supervised learning),
but is vulnerable if they are not, which occurs when there exists a large domain gap [35].
To address this issue, several recent works investigate gradual domain adaption (GDA) [12, 25, 35,
71], in which beyond the source and target domains, the model can access additional unlabeled
data from the intermediate domains that shift gradually from the source to the target. By adapting
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

