Open-set Label Noise Can Improve Robustness
Against Inherent Label Noise

1

Hongxin Wei1 Lue Tao2,3 Renchunzi Xie1∗ Bo An1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
College of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
3
MIIT key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, China
{hongxin001,xier0002}@e.ntu.edu.sg

tlmichael@nuaa.edu.cn

boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels is a practically challenging problem in weakly supervised learning. In the existing literature, open-set noises are always considered
to be poisonous for generalization, similar to closed-set noises. In this paper, we
empirically show that open-set noisy labels can be non-toxic and even benefit the
robustness against inherent noisy labels. Inspired by the observations, we propose a
simple yet effective regularization by introducing Open-set samples with Dynamic
Noisy Labels (ODNL) into training. With ODNL, the extra capacity of the neural
network can be largely consumed in a way that does not interfere with learning
patterns from clean data. Through the lens of SGD noise, we show that the noises
induced by our method are random-direction, conflict-free and biased, which may
help the model converge to a flat minimum with superior stability and enforce
the model to produce conservative predictions on Out-of-Distribution instances.
Extensive experimental results on benchmark datasets with various types of noisy
labels demonstrate that the proposed method not only enhances the performance
of many existing robust algorithms but also achieves significant improvement on
Out-of-Distribution detection tasks even in the label noise setting.

1

Introduction

The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) heavily relies on a large number of training instances
with fully accurate labels [16]. In real-world applications, it is expensive and time-consuming to
collect such large-scale datasets. To alleviate this problem, some surrogate methods are commonly
used to improve labelling efficiency, such as online queries [3] and crowdsourcing [74]. These cheap
but imperfect methods usually suffer from unavoidable noisy labels that can be easily memorized
by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), leading to poor generalization performance [2, 79]. Therefore,
designing robust algorithms against noisy labels is of great practical importance.
Label noise can be separated into two categories: 1) closed-set noise, where instances with noisy
labels have true class labels within the noisy label set [15, 24, 50, 51, 60, 63]. 2) open-set noise, where
instances with noisy labels have some true class labels outside the noisy label set [30, 54, 61, 67]. In
the existing literature, open-set noises are always considered to be harmful to the training of DNNs
like closed-set noises [30, 61, 54, 67]. For example, ILON [61] reduces the effect of open-set noises
by using noisy label detector and contrastive loss to pull away noisy samples from clean samples.
Extended T [67] uses an extended transition matrix to mitigate the impacts of open-set noises and
EvidentialMix [54] filters out the open-set examples by modelling the loss distribution. Therefore,
there arises a question to be answered: Do open-set noises always play a negative role in the training?
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

