Rates of Estimation of Optimal Transport Maps using
Plug-in Estimators via Barycentric Projections

Nabarun Deb
Columbia University

Promit Ghosal
MIT

Bodhisattva Sen
Columbia University

Abstract
Optimal transport maps between two probability distributions µ and ν on Rd have
found extensive applications in both machine learning and statistics. In practice,
these maps need to be estimated from data sampled according to µ and ν. Plugin estimators are perhaps most popular in estimating transport maps in the field
of computational optimal transport. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive
analysis of the rates of convergences for general plug-in estimators defined via
barycentric projections. Our main contribution is a new stability estimate for
barycentric projections which proceeds under minimal smoothness assumptions and
can be used to analyze general plug-in estimators. We illustrate the usefulness of
this stability estimate by first providing rates of convergence for the natural discretediscrete and semi-discrete estimators of optimal transport maps. We then use the
same stability estimate to show that, under additional smoothness assumptions of
Sobolev type or Besov type, kernel smoothed or wavelet based plug-in estimators
respectively speed up the rates of convergence and significantly mitigate the curse
of dimensionality suffered by the natural discrete-discrete/semi-discrete estimators.
As a by-product of our analysis, we also obtain faster rates of convergence for
plug-in estimators of W2 (µ, ν), the Wasserstein distance between µ and ν, under
the aforementioned smoothness assumptions, thereby complementing recent results
in Chizat et al. (2020). Finally, we illustrate the applicability of our results in
obtaining rates of convergence for Wasserstein barycenter between two probability
distributions and obtaining asymptotic detection thresholds for some recent optimaltransport based tests of independence.

1

Introduction

Given two random variables X ∼ µ and Y ∼ ν, where µ, ν are probability measures on Rd ,
d ≥ 1, the problem of finding a “nice" map T0 (·) such that T0 (X) ∼ ν has numerous applications
in machine learning such as domain adaptation and data integration [34, 35, 38, 48, 61, 112],
dimension reduction [12, 66, 90], generative models [60, 81, 88, 110], to name a few. Of particular
interest is the case when T0 (·) is obtained by minimizing a cost function, a line of work initiated by
Gaspard Monge [97] in 1781 (see (1.1) below), in which case T0 (·) is termed an optimal transport
(OT) map and has applications in shape matching/transfer problems [29, 47, 107, 121], Bayesian
statistics [46, 75, 80, 108], econometrics [15, 28, 45, 50, 54], nonparametric statistical inference [39–
41, 113, 114]; also see [111, 128, 129] for book-length treatments on the subject. In this paper, we
will focus on the OT map obtained using the standard squared Euclidean cost function, i.e.,
T0 := argmin EkX − T (X)k2 ,

(1.1)

T :T #µ=ν

where T #µ = ν means T (X) ∼ ν for X ∼ µ. The estimation of T0 has attracted a lot of interest in
recent years due to its myriad applications (as stated above) and interesting geometrical properties
(see [19, 56, 91] and Definition 1.1 below). In practice, the main hurdle in constructing estimators for
T0 is that the explicit forms of the measures µ, ν are unknown; instead only random samples
X1 , . . . , Xm ∼ µ

and

Y1 , . . . , Yn ∼ ν

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

