Provable Model-based Nonlinear Bandit and
Reinforcement Learning: Shelve Optimism, Embrace
Virtual Curvature
Kefan Dong
Stanford University
kefandong@stanford.edu

Jiaqi Yang
Tsinghua University
yangjq17@gmail.com

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper studies model-based bandit and reinforcement learning (RL) with nonlinear function approximations. We propose to study convergence to approximate
local maxima because we show that global convergence is statistically intractable
even for one-layer neural net bandit with a deterministic reward. For both nonlinear bandit and RL, the paper presents a model-based algorithm, Virtual Ascent
with Online Model Learner (ViOlin), which provably converges to a local maximum with sample complexity that only depends on the sequential Rademacher
complexity of the model class. Our results imply novel sample complexity bounds
on several concrete settings such as linear bandit with finite or sparse model class,
and two-layer neural net bandit. A key algorithmic insight is that optimism may
lead to over-exploration even for two-layer neural net model class. On the other
hand, for convergence to local maxima, it suffices to maximize the virtual return if
the model can also reasonably predict the gradient and Hessian of the real return.

1

Introduction

Recent progresses demonstrate many successful applications of deep reinforcement learning (RL)
in robotics [49], games [7, 66], computational biology [56], etc. However, theoretical understanding
of deep RL algorithms is limited. Last few years witnessed a plethora of results on linear function
approximations in RL [80, 65, 40, 73, 71, 19, 3, 32], but the analysis techniques appear to strongly
rely on (approximate) linearity and hard to generalize to neural networks.
The goal of this paper is to theoretically analyze model-based nonlinear bandit and RL with neural
net approximation, which achieves amazing sample-efficiency in practice (see e.g., [37, 10, 30, 31,
12]). We focus on the setting where the state and action spaces are continuous.
Past theoretical work on model-based RL studies families of dynamics with restricted complexity
measures such as Eluder dimension [60], witness rank [68], the linear dimensionality [77], and
others [58, 42, 17]. Implications of these complexity measures have been studied, e.g., finite mixture
of dynamics [6] and linear models [64] have bounded Eluder dimensions. However, it turns out that
none of the complexity measures apply to the family of MDPs with even barely nonlinear dynamics,
e.g., MDPs with dynamics parameterized by all one-layer neural network with a single activation
unit (and with bounded weight norms). For example, in Theorem 5.2, we will prove that one-layer
neural nets do not have polynomially-bounded Eluder dimension.1 (See more evidence below.)
The limited progress on neural net approximation is to some extent not surprising. Given a deterministic dynamics with known neural net parameters, finding the best parameterized policy still involves
optimizing a complex non-concave function, which is in general computationally intractable. More
1

This result is also proved by the concurrent Li et al. [50, Theorem 8] independently.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

