Constrained Robust Submodular Partitioning
Shengjie Wang⇤,1 ,Tianyi Zhou⇤,1,2 , Chandrashekhar Lavania1 & Jeff A. Bilmes1
University of Washington, Seattle1 ; University of Maryland, College Park2
{wangsj,tianyizh,lavaniac,bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract
In the robust submodular partitioning problem, we aim to allocate a set of items
into m blocks, so that the evaluation of the minimum block according to a
submodular function is maximized. Robust submodular partitioning promotes
the diversity of every block in the partition. It has many applications in machine
learning, e.g., partitioning data for distributed training so that the gradients
computed on every block are consistent. We study an extension of the robust
submodular partition problem with additional constraints (e.g., cardinality, multiple
matroids, and/or knapsack) on every block. For example, when partitioning data
for distributed training, we can add a constraint that the number of samples of each
class is the same in each partition block, ensuring data balance. We present two
classes of algorithms, i.e., Min-Block Greedy based algorithms (with an ⌦(1/m)
bound), and Round-Robin Greedy based algorithms (with a constant bound) and
show that under various constraints, they still have good approximation guarantees.
Interestingly, while normally the latter runs in only weakly polynomial time, we
show that using the two together yields strongly polynomial running time while
preserving the approximation guarantee. Lastly, we apply the algorithms on a
real-world machine learning data partitioning problem showing good results.

1

Introduction

The problem of partitioning a given set V of items into m blocks, where any two blocks share no
items in common, arises in many real-world scenarios and machine learning applications. As an
optimization problem, partitioning aims to generate the blocks so that the utilities of the blocks, as
measured by a given set function, are good. Submodular functions are a rich family of set functions
that naturally captures diversity of a given set of items. They have been applied in many realworld problems [26, 30, 21, 17, 13, 18, 28]. By maximizing a submodular utility function for each
partitioned block, we encourage each block to be representative of the ground set V . Many algorithms
have been proposed for various submodular partitioning problems with approximation guarantees.
For the submodular welfare problem [24], we aim to find a partition such that the sum of the
submodular evaluations of every block is maximized. Such an objective promotes the overall utility
of the entire partition but some blocks may still have small function values. The robust submodular
partitioning problem [12, 29] (often called “submodular fair allocation with indivisible goods”) aims
to find the partition such that the minimum-valued block in the partition is maximized according
to the submodular function. The robust objective optimizes the worst block in the partition so that
all blocks are minimally “good.” In the general setting, every block in the partition may have a
different submodular function (the heterogeneous case) although for this work, we study only the
restricted setting where all blocks share the same submodular function (the homogeneous case). The
robust submodular partitioning problem has many applications. Given V as the training dataset for
a machine learning task, Wei et al. [29] finds a partition of V for distributed training: every block
of partitioned data is sent to a single machine for parallel gradient computations, and the gradients
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

