Efficient Training of Visual Transformers with Small
Datasets
Yahui Liu ∗
University of Trento
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
yahui.liu@unitn.it
Nicu Sebe
University of Trento
niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Enver Sangineto
University of Trento
enver.sangineto@unitn.it

Wei Bi
Tencent AI Lab
victoriabi@tencent.com

Bruno Lepri
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
lepri@fbk.eu

Marco De Nadai
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
work@marcodena.it

Abstract
Visual Transformers (VTs) are emerging as an architectural paradigm alternative to
Convolutional networks (CNNs). Differently from CNNs, VTs can capture global
relations between image elements and they potentially have a larger representation
capacity. However, the lack of the typical convolutional inductive bias makes these
models more data hungry than common CNNs. In fact, some local properties of the
visual domain which are embedded in the CNN architectural design, in VTs should
be learned from samples. In this paper, we empirically analyse different VTs,
comparing their robustness in a small training set regime, and we show that, despite
having a comparable accuracy when trained on ImageNet, their performance on
smaller datasets can be largely different. Moreover, we propose an auxiliary selfsupervised task which can extract additional information from images with only a
negligible computational overhead. This task encourages the VTs to learn spatial
relations within an image and makes the VT training much more robust when
training data is scarce. Our task is used jointly with the standard (supervised)
training and it does not depend on specific architectural choices, thus it can be
easily plugged in the existing VTs. Using an extensive evaluation with different
VTs and datasets, we show that our method can improve (sometimes dramatically)
the final accuracy of the VTs. Our code is available at: https://github.com/
yhlleo/VTs-Drloc.

1

Introduction

Visual Transformers (VTs) are progressively emerging architectures in computer vision as an alternative to standard Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), and they have already been applied to
many tasks, such as image classification [17, 53, 61, 35, 58, 60, 33, 59], object detection [4, 66, 14],
segmentation [50], tracking [36], image generation [30, 28] and 3D data processing [65], to mention
a few. These architectures are inspired by the well known Transformer [55], which is the de facto
standard in Natural Language Processing (NLP) [15, 45], and one of their appealing properties is
the possibility to develop a unified information-processing paradigm for both visual and textual
domains. A pioneering work in this direction is ViT [17], in which an image is split using a grid
of non-overlapping patches, and each patch is linearly projected in the input embedding space, so
obtaining a "token". After that, all the tokens are processed by a series of multi-head attention and
feed-forward layers, similarly to how (word) tokens are processed in NLP Transformers.
∗

Work done as intern at the Tencent AI Lab.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

