Multimodal Virtual Point 3D Detection
Tianwei Yin
UT Austin
yintianwei@utexas.edu

Xingyi Zhou
UT Austin
zhouxy@cs.utexas.edu

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin
philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Lidar-based sensing drives current autonomous vehicles. Despite rapid progress,
current Lidar sensors still lag two decades behind traditional color cameras in terms
of resolution and cost. For autonomous driving, this means that large objects close
to the sensors are easily visible, but far-away or small objects comprise only one
measurement or two. This is an issue, especially when these objects turn out to
be driving hazards. On the other hand, these same objects are clearly visible in
onboard RGB sensors. In this work, we present an approach to seamlessly fuse
RGB sensors into Lidar-based 3D recognition. Our approach takes a set of 2D
detections to generate dense 3D virtual points to augment an otherwise sparse 3D
point cloud. These virtual points naturally integrate into any standard Lidar-based
3D detectors along with regular Lidar measurements. The resulting multi-modal
detector is simple and effective. Experimental results on the large-scale nuScenes
dataset show that our framework improves a strong CenterPoint baseline by a
significant 6.6 mAP, and outperforms competing fusion approaches. Code and
more visualizations are available at https://tianweiy.github.io/mvp/.

1

Introduction

3D perception is a core component in safe autonomous driving [1, 55]. A 3D Lidar sensor provides
accurate depth measurements of the surrounding environment [23, 49, 75], but is costly and has
low resolution at long range. A top-of-the-line 64-lane Lidar sensor can easily cost more than a
small car with an input resolution that is at least two orders of magnitude lower than a $50 RGB
sensor. This Lidar sensor receives one or two measurements for small or far away objects, whereas a
corresponding RGB sensor sees hundreds of pixels. However, the RGB sensor does not perceive the
depth and cannot directly place its measurements into a scene.
In this paper, we present a simple and effective framework to fuse 3D Lidar and high-resolution
color measurements. We lift RGB measurements into 3D virtual points by mapping them into the
scene using close-by depth measurements of a Lidar sensor (See Figure 1 for an example). Our
Multi-modal Virtual Point detector, MVP, generates high-resolution 3D point-cloud near target
objects. A center-based 3D detector [66] then identifies all objects in the scene. Specifically, MVP
uses 2D object detections to crop the original point cloud into instance frustums. MVP then generates
dense 3D virtual points near these foreground points by lifting 2D pixels into 3D space. We use depth
completion in image space to infer the depth of each virtual point. Finally, MVP combines virtual
points with the original Lidar measurements as input to a standard center-based 3D detector [66].
Our multi-modal virtual point method has several key advantages: First, 2D object detections are
well optimized [17, 74] and highly accurate even for small objects. See Figure 2 for a comparison
of two state-of-the-art 2D and 3D detectors on the same scene. The 2D detector has a significantly
higher 2D detection accuracy but lacks the necessary 3D information used in the downstream driving
task. Secondly, virtual points reduce the density imbalance between close and faraway objects.
MVP augments objects at different distances with the same number of virtual points, making the
point cloud measurement of these objects more consistent. Finally, our framework is a plug-and35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

