Dissecting the Diffusion Process in
Linear Graph Convolutional Networks

Yifei Wang1 Yisen Wang2,3∗ Jiansheng Yang1 Zhouchen Lin2,3,4
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
yifei_wang@pku.edu.cn, yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn
yjs@math.pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have attracted more and more attentions
in recent years. A typical GCN layer consists of a linear feature propagation
step and a nonlinear transformation step. Recent works show that a linear GCN
can achieve comparable performance to the original non-linear GCN while being
much more computationally efficient. In this paper, we dissect the feature propagation steps of linear GCNs from a perspective of continuous graph diffusion,
and analyze why linear GCNs fail to benefit from more propagation steps. Following that, we propose Decoupled Graph Convolution (DGC) that decouples the
terminal time and the feature propagation steps, making it more flexible and capable of exploiting a very large number of feature propagation steps. Experiments
demonstrate that our proposed DGC improves linear GCNs by a large margin and
makes them competitive with many modern variants of non-linear GCNs. Code is
available at https://github.com/yifeiwang77/DGC.

1

Introduction

Recently, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have successfully extended the powerful representation learning ability of modern Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to the graph data [7].
A graph convolutional layer typically consists of two stages: linear feature propagation and nonlinear feature transformation. Simple Graph Convolution (SGC) [21] simplifies GCNs by removing
the nonlinearities between GCN layers and collapsing the resulting function into a single linear
transformation, which is followed by a single linear classification layer and then becomes a linear
GCN. SGC can achieve comparable performance to canonical GCNs while being much more computationally efficient and using significantly fewer parameters. Thus, we mainly focus on linear
GCNs in this paper.
Although being comparable to canonical GCNs, SGC still suffers from a similar issue as non-linear
GCNs, that is, more (linear) feature propagation steps K will degrade the performance catastrophically. This issue is widely characterized as the “over-smoothing” phenomenon. Namely, node
features become smoothed out and indistinguishable after too many feature propagation steps [10].
In this work, through a dissection of the diffusion process of linear GCNs, we characterize a fundamental limitation of SGC. Specifically, we point out that its feature propagation step amounts to a
very coarse finite difference with a fixed step size ∆t = 1, which results in a large numerical error.
∗

Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

