The Unbalanced Gromov Wasserstein Distance:
Conic Formulation and Relaxation
Thibault Séjourné
Ecole Normale Supérieure, DMA, PSL
thibault.sejourne@ens.fr

François-Xavier Vialard
Université Gustave Eiffel
francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

Gabriel Peyré
Ecole Normale Supérieure, DMA, CNRS, PSL
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Abstract
Comparing metric measure spaces (i.e. a metric space endowed with a probability
distribution) is at the heart of many machine learning problems. The most popular
distance between such metric measure spaces is the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW)
distance, which is the solution of a quadratic assignment problem. The GW distance is however limited to the comparison of metric measure spaces endowed with
a probability distribution. To alleviate this issue, we introduce two Unbalanced
Gromov-Wasserstein formulations: a distance and a more tractable upper-bounding
relaxation. They both allow the comparison of metric spaces equipped with arbitrary positive measures up to isometries. The first formulation is a positive
and definite divergence based on a relaxation of the mass conservation constraint
using a novel type of quadratically-homogeneous divergence. This divergence
works hand in hand with the entropic regularization approach which is popular
to solve large scale optimal transport problems. We show that the underlying
non-convex optimization problem can be efficiently tackled using a highly parallelizable and GPU-friendly iterative scheme. The second formulation is a distance
between mm-spaces up to isometries based on a conic lifting. Lastly, we provide
numerical experiments on synthetic examples and domain adaptation data with a
Positive-Unlabeled learning task to highlight the salient features of the unbalanced
divergence and its potential applications in ML.

1

Introduction

Comparing data distributions on different metric spaces is a basic problem in machine learning. This
class of problems is for instance at the heart of surfaces [Bronstein et al., 2006] or graph matching [Xu
et al., 2019] (equipping the surface or graph with its associated geodesic distance), regression problems
in quantum chemistry [Gilmer et al., 2017] (viewing the molecules as distributions of points in R3 )
and natural language processing [Grave et al., 2019, Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2018] (where texts
in different languages are embedded as points distributions in different vector spaces).
Metric measure spaces. The mathematical way to formalize these problems is to model the data
as metric measure spaces (mm-spaces). A mm-space is denoted as X = (X, d, µ) where X is a
complete separable set endowed with a distance d and aP
positive Borel measure µ ∈ M+ (X). For
instance, if X = (xi )i is a finite set of points, then µ = i mi δxi (here δxi is the Dirac mass at xi )
is simply a set of positive weights mi = µ({xi }) ≥ 0 associated to each point xi , which accounts for
its mass or importance. For instance, setting some mi to 0 is equivalent to removing the point xi . We
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

