Scaling Gaussian Processes with Derivative
Information Using Variational Inference

Misha Padidar 1 , Xinran Zhu1 Leo Huang1 ,
Jacob R. Gardner2 , David Bindel1
1
Cornell University, (map454, xz584, ah839, bindel)@cornell.edu
2
University of Pennsylvania, jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Gaussian processes with derivative information are useful in many settings where
derivative information is available, including numerous Bayesian optimization
and regression tasks that arise in the natural sciences. Incorporating derivative
observations, however, comes with a dominating O(N 3 D3 ) computational cost
when training on N points in D input dimensions. This is intractable for even
moderately sized problems. While recent work has addressed this intractability in
the low-D setting, the high-N , high-D setting is still unexplored and of great value,
particularly as machine learning problems increasingly become high dimensional.
In this paper, we introduce methods to achieve fully scalable Gaussian process
regression with derivatives using variational inference. Analogous to the use of
inducing values to sparsify the labels of a training set, we introduce the concept of
inducing directional derivatives to sparsify the partial derivative information of a
training set. This enables us to construct a variational posterior that incorporates
derivative information but whose size depends neither on the full dataset size N
nor the full dimensionality D. We demonstrate the full scalability of our approach
on a variety of tasks, ranging from a high dimensional stellarator fusion regression
task to training graph convolutional neural networks on Pubmed using Bayesian
optimization. Surprisingly, we find that our approach can improve regression
performance even in settings where only label data is available.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are a popular tool for probabilistic machine learning, widely used in
scenarios where uncertainty quantification for regression is necessary [27, 38, 14]. When used for
Bayesian optimization (BO) [18, 30], or in some regression settings found in the physical sciences like
estimation of arterial wall stiffness, derivative information may be available [37, 34]. In these settings,
we have not only noisy function values y = f (x) +  but also noisy gradients ∇y = ∇x f (x) +  at
some set of training points X ∈ RN ×D . On paper, GPs are ideal models in these settings, because
they allow for training on both labels y and gradients ∇y in closed form.
Though analytically convenient, Gaussian process inference with derivative information scales poorly:
computing the marginal log likelihood and predictive distribution for an exact GP in this setting
requires O(N 3 D3 ) time and O(N 2 D2 ) memory. Recent work has addressed this scalability in
certain settings, e.g. for many training points in a low-dimensional space [5] or for few training points
in a high-dimensional space [3]. Despite these advances, training and making predictions for a GP
with derivatives remains prohibitively expensive in regimes where both N and D are on the order of
hundreds or even thousands.
We introduce a novel method to scale Gaussian processes with derivative information using stochastic
variational approximations. We show that the expected log likelihood term of the Evidence Lower
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

