Multi-Step Budgeted Bayesian Optimization
with Unknown Evaluation Costs
Raul Astudillo
Cornell University
ra598@cornell.edu

Daniel R. Jiang
Facebook
drjiang@fb.com

Eytan Bakshy
Facebook
ebakshy@fb.com

Maximilian Balandat
Facebook
balandat@fb.com
Peter I. Frazier
Cornell University
pf98@cornell.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a sample-efficient approach to optimizing costly-toevaluate black-box functions. Most BO methods ignore how evaluation costs may
vary over the optimization domain. However, these costs can be highly heterogeneous and are often unknown in advance. This occurs in many practical settings,
such as hyperparameter tuning of machine learning algorithms or physics-based
simulation optimization. Moreover, those few existing methods that acknowledge
cost heterogeneity do not naturally accommodate a budget constraint on the total
evaluation cost. This combination of unknown costs and a budget constraint introduces a new dimension to the exploration-exploitation trade-off, where learning
about the cost incurs a cost itself. Existing methods do not reason about the various
trade-offs of this problem in a principled way, leading often to poor performance.
We formalize this claim by proving that the expected improvement and the expected
improvement per unit of cost, arguably the two most widely used acquisition functions in practice, can be arbitrarily inferior with respect to the optimal non-myopic
policy. To overcome the shortcomings of existing approaches, we propose the
budgeted multi-step expected improvement, a non-myopic acquisition function
that generalizes classical expected improvement to the setting of heterogeneous
and unknown evaluation costs. Finally, we show that our acquisition function
outperforms existing methods in a variety of synthetic and real problems.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018) is a family of algorithms for optimizing black-box functions that performs well when the number of evaluations is limited (Snoek et al.,
2012; Calandra et al., 2016; Griffiths and Hernández-Lobato, 2020). However, most BO algorithms
ignore the fact that the cost of evaluating the black-box objective function may vary substantially
across the optimization domain and is often unknown. Problems with this feature arise commonly in
practice. For instance, in the context of hyperparameter optimization of machine learning algorithms
(Swersky et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2020), certain values of hyperparameters such as the learning rate
may yield longer training times. Similarly, in materials design and robotics, simulation experiments
can take longer for certain parameter configurations (Field, 1999). Figure 1 illustrates heterogeneity
in evaluation costs from benchmark problems used in this paper, which can vary by an order of magnitude. Failing to account for these heterogeneous evaluation costs can lead to evaluating an expensive
point when another less expensive one would provide equal benefit towards finding the optimum.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

