A Unified Game-Theoretic Interpretation of
Adversarial Robustness
Jie Rena∗ , Die Zhanga∗ , Yisen Wangb,c∗, Lu Chena , Zhanpeng Zhoua ,
Yiting Chena , Xu Chenga , Xin Wanga , Meng Zhoua,d†, Jie Shie , Quanshi Zhanga‡
a

b

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
c
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
d
Carnegie Mellon University
e
Huawei technologies Inc.

Abstract
This paper provides a unified view to explain different adversarial attacks and
defense methods, i.e. the view of multi-order interactions between input variables
of DNNs. Based on the multi-order interaction, we discover that adversarial attacks
mainly affect high-order interactions to fool the DNN. Furthermore, we find
that the robustness of adversarially trained DNNs comes from category-specific
low-order interactions. Our findings provide a potential method to unify
adversarial perturbations and robustness, which can explain the existing defense
methods in a principle way. Besides, our findings also make a revision of
previous inaccurate understanding of the shape bias of adversarially learned
features. Our code is available online at https://github.com/Jie-Ren/
A-Unified-Game-Theoretic-Interpretation-of-Adversarial-Robustness.

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness of deep neural networks (DNNs) has received increasing attention in recent
years. Related studies include adversarial defense and attacks [48, 21]. In terms of defense, adversarial
training is an effective and the most widely-used method [34, 72, 54, 55, 60]. In spite of their fast
development, the essential mechanism of the adversarial robustness is still unclear. Thus, the
understanding of adversarial attacks and defense is an emerging direction in recent years. Ilyas
et al. [29] demonstrated adversarial examples could be attributed to the presence of non-robust yet
discriminative features. Some methods [20, 58] explored the mathematical bound for the model
robustness. Zhang and Zhu [73], Tsipras et al. [50] found adversarial training helped DNNs learn a
more interpretable (more shape-biased) representation. Besides the feature interpretability, Tsipras
et al. [50] further showed an inherent tension between the adversarial robustness and the generalization
power.
Unlike above perspectives for explanations, we aim to propose a unified view to explain the essential
reason why and how adversarial examples emerge, as well as essential mechanisms of various
adversarial defense methods. We rethink the adversarial robustness from the novel perspective of
∗

Equal contribution
This work was done when Meng Zhou was an undergraduate at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
‡
Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn. This work is supervised by Dr.
Quanshi Zhang. He is with the John Hopcroft Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

