Space-time Mixing Attention for Video Transformer

Adrian Bulat
Samsung AI Cambridge
adrian@adrianbulat.com
Swathikiran Sudhakaran
Samsung AI Cambridge
swathikir.s@samsung.com

Juan-Manuel Perez-Rua
Samsung AI Cambridge
j.perez-rua@samsung.com

Brais Martinez
Samsung AI Cambridge
brais.a@samsung.com

Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Samsung AI Cambridge
Queen Mary University of London
g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper is on video recognition using Transformers. Very recent attempts in
this area have demonstrated promising results in terms of recognition accuracy,
yet they have been also shown to induce, in many cases, significant computational
overheads due to the additional modelling of the temporal information. In this
work, we propose a Video Transformer model the complexity of which scales
linearly with the number of frames in the video sequence and hence induces
no overhead compared to an image-based Transformer model. To achieve this,
our model makes two approximations to the full space-time attention used in
Video Transformers: (a) It restricts time attention to a local temporal window
and capitalizes on the Transformer’s depth to obtain full temporal coverage of the
video sequence. (b) It uses efficient space-time mixing to attend jointly spatial and
temporal locations without inducing any additional cost on top of a spatial-only
attention model. We also show how to integrate 2 very lightweight mechanisms for
global temporal-only attention which provide additional accuracy improvements at
minimal computational cost. We demonstrate that our model produces very high
recognition accuracy on the most popular video recognition datasets while at the
same time being significantly more efficient than other Video Transformer models.
Code for our method is made available here.

1

Introduction

Video recognition – in analogy to image recognition – refers to the problem of recognizing events
of interest in video sequences such as human activities. Following the tremendous success of
Transformers in sequential data, specifically in Natural Language Processing (NLP) [39, 5], Vision
Transformers were very recently shown to outperform CNNs for image recognition too [48, 13, 35],
signaling a paradigm shift on how visual understanding models should be constructed. In light of
this, in this paper, we propose a Video Transformer model as an appealing and promising solution for
improving the accuracy of video recognition models.
A direct, natural extension of Vision Transformers to the spatio-temporal domain is to perform the
self-attention jointly across all S spatial locations and T temporal locations. Full space-time attention
though has complexity O(T 2 S 2 ) making such a model computationally heavy and, hence, impractical
even when compared with the 3D-based convolutional models. As such, our aim is to exploit the
temporal information present in video streams while minimizing the computational burden within the
Transformer framework for efficient video recognition.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

