Predicting Molecular Conformation via
Dynamic Graph Score Matching

Shitong Luo*1 , Chence Shi*2,3 , Minkai Xu2,3 , Jian Tang2,4,5
1
Peking University 2 Mila - Québec AI Institute
3
Université de Montréal 4 HEC Montréal 5 CIFAR AI Research Chair
luost@pku.edu.cn , chence.shi@umontreal.ca
minkai.xu@umontreal.ca , jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Predicting stable 3D conformations from 2D molecular graphs has been a longstanding challenge in computational chemistry. Recently, machine learning approaches have demonstrated very promising results compared to traditional experimental and physics-based simulation methods. These approaches mainly focus on
modeling the local interactions between neighboring atoms on the molecular graphs
and overlook the long-range interactions between non-bonded atoms. However,
these non-bonded atoms may be proximal to each other in 3D space, and modeling
their interactions is of crucial importance to accurately determine molecular conformations, especially for large molecules and multi-molecular complexes. In this
paper, we propose a new approach called Dynamic Graph Score Matching (DGSM)
for molecular conformation prediction, which models both the local and long-range
interactions by dynamically constructing graph structures between atoms according
to their spatial proximity during both training and inference. Specifically, the
DGSM directly estimates the gradient fields of the logarithm density of atomic
coordinates according to the dynamically constructed graphs using score matching
methods. The whole framework can be efficiently trained in an end-to-end fashion.
Experiments across multiple tasks show that the DGSM outperforms state-of-theart baselines by a large margin, and it is capable of generating conformations for a
broader range of systems such as proteins and multi-molecular complexes.

1

Introduction

Graph-based representations of molecules has become prevalent in a variety of tasks such as property
prediction [13, 31] and molecule generation [17, 33, 45]. However, a more natural and intrinsic
representation of a molecule is its 3D geometry or conformation, which represents a molecule as a set
of 3D coordinates. The 3D representation of molecules is central to many tasks, such as molecular
properties prediction and virtual screening. Nevertheless, determining the conformation of a molecule
remains a challenging task — both computational approaches, e.g., molecular dynamics (MD) [9],
and experimental approaches, e.g., crystallography, are expensive and time-consuming.
Recently, machine learning approaches have demonstrated promising performance for molecular
conformation generation. Pioneering methods such as G RAPH DG [36] and CGCF [43] first predict
interatomic distances between bonded atoms and then solve 3D coordinates from the predicted
distances via a post-processing algorithm. Very recently, Shi et al. proposed the C ONF GF [34],
which employs the score matching technique [38] to learn pseudo-forces between bonded atoms and
iteratively applies the forces to a randomly initialized 3D structure until convergence. C ONF GF gets
* Equal contribution. Work was done during Shitong’s internship at Mila.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

