Graph Neural Networks with Local Graph
Parameters
Pablo Barceló1,2 , Floris Geerts3 , Juan Reutter1,2 , Maksimilian Ryschkov3
1
Department of Computer Science, PUC, Chile
2
Millennium Institute for Foundational Research on Data, Chile
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Antwerp, Belgium
[pbarcelo,jreutter]@ing.puc.cl, [floris.geerts,maksimilian.ryschkov]@uantwerpen.be

Abstract
Various recent proposals increase the distinguishing power of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) by propagating features between k-tuples of vertices. The distinguishing power of these “higher-order” GNNs is known to be bounded by the
k-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test, yet their O(nk ) memory requirements
limit their applicability. Other proposals infuse GNNs with local higher-order graph
structural information from the start, hereby inheriting the desirable O(n) memory
requirement from GNNs at the cost of a one-time, possibly non-linear, preprocessing step. We propose local graph parameter enabled GNNs as a framework for
studying the latter kind of approaches. We precisely characterize their distinguishing power, in terms of a variant of the WL test, and in terms of the graph structural
properties that they can take into account. Local graph parameters can be added to
any GNN architecture, and are cheap to compute. In terms of expressive power, our
proposal lies in the middle of GNNs and their higher-order counterparts. Further,
we propose several techniques to aid in choosing the right local graph parameters.
Our results connect GNNs with deep results in finite model theory and finite variable logics. Our experimental evaluation shows that adding local graph parameters
often has a positive effect on a variety of GNNs, datasets and graph learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Context. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [Merkwirth and Lengauer, 2005, Scarselli et al., 2009],
and its important class of Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) [Gilmer et al., 2017], are one
of the most popular methods for graph learning tasks. Such MPNNs use an iterative message passing
scheme, based on the adjacency structure of the underlying graph, to compute vertex (and graph)
embeddings in some real Euclidean space.
The expressive (or distinguishing) power of MPNNs is, however, rather limited [Morris et al., 2019,
Xu et al., 2019]. Indeed, MPNNs will always identically embed two vertices (graphs) when these
vertices (graphs) cannot be distinguished by the one-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) algorithm.
Two graphs G1 and H1 and vertices v and w that cannot be distinguished by WL (and thus any
MPNN) are shown in Fig. 1. The expressive power of WL is well-understood [Cai et al., 1992, Dell
et al., 2018, Arvind et al., 2020] and basically can only use tree-based structural information in
the graphs to distinguish vertices. Hence, no MPNN can detect that vertex v in Fig. 1 is part of a
3-clique, whereas w is not. Similarly, MPNNs cannot detect that w is part of a 4-cycle, whereas v is
not. Further limitations of WL in terms of graph properties can be found, e.g., in Arvind et al. [2020],
Chen et al. [2020] and Tahmasebi and Jegelka [2020].
To remedy the weak expressive power of MPNNs, so-called higher-order MPNNs were proposed
[Maron et al., 2019a, Morris et al., 2019, 2020], whose expressive power is well-understood and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

