Interventional Sum-Product Networks:
Causal Inference with Tractable Probabilistic Models
Matej Zečević1

Devendra Singh Dhami1

Sriraam Natarajan2

Athresh Karanam2

Kristian Kersting1,3

1

Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt
Computer Science Department, The University of Texas at Dallas
3
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, and Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
{matej.zecevic, devendra.dhami, kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
{athresh.karanam,sriraam.natarajan}@utdallas.edu
2

Abstract
While probabilistic models are an important tool for studying causality, doing
so suffers from the intractability of inference. As a step towards tractable causal
models, we consider the problem of learning interventional distributions using sumproduct networks (SPNs) that are over-parameterized by gate functions, e.g., neural
networks. Providing an arbitrarily intervened causal graph as input, effectively
subsuming Pearl’s do-operator, the gate function predicts the parameters of the
SPN. The resulting interventional SPNs are motivated and illustrated by a structural
causal model themed around personal health. Our empirical evaluation against
competing methods from both generative and causal modelling demonstrates that
interventional SPNs indeed are both expressive and causally adequate.

1

Introduction

Identifying causal relationships between variables in observational data is one of the fundamental
and well-studied problem in machine learning. There have been several great strides in causality
[Granger, 1969, Pearl, 2009, Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016] over the years specifically characterized by
efforts that focused on reasoning about interventions [Hagmayer et al., 2007, Dasgupta et al., 2019]
and counterfactuals [Morgan and Winship, 2015, Oberst and Sontag, 2019].
The notion of causality has long been explored in the realm of probabilistic models [Oaksford
and Chater, 2017, Beckers and Halpern, 2019] with a special focus on graphical models, called
causal Bayesian networks (CBNs) [Heckerman et al., 1995, Neapolitan, 2004, Pearl, 1995, Acharya
et al., 2018]. CBNs have widely been applied to infer causal relationships in high-impact diverse
applications such as disease progression [Koch et al., 2017], ecological risk assessment [Carriger
and Barron, 2020] and more recently Covid-19 [Fenton et al., 2020, Feroze, 2020] to name a few.
Although successful, classical CBN models are difficult to scale and also suffer from the problem of
intractable inference. Recently, tractable probabilistic models such as probabilistic sentential decision
diagrams [Kisa et al., 2014] and sum-product networks [Poon and Domingos, 2011] have emerged,
which guarantee that conditional marginals can be computed in time linear in the size of the model.
While weaving in the notion of interpretability, the computational view on probabilistic models allows
one to exploit ideas from deep learning and can thus be very useful in modelling complex problems.
Recently, there has been an effort to take advantage of this tractability to reason for causality. Zhao
et al. [2015] showed how to compile back and forth between sum-product networks (SPNs) and
Bayesian networks (BNs). Although this opened up a whole range of possibilities for tractable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

