Parallel Bayesian Optimization of Multiple Noisy
Objectives with Expected Hypervolume Improvement

Samuel Daulton
Facebook, University of Oxford
sdaulton@fb.com

Maximilian Balandat
Facebook
balandat@fb.com

Eytan Bakshy
Facebook
ebakshy@fb.com

Abstract
Optimizing multiple competing black-box objectives is a challenging problem in
many fields, including science, engineering, and machine learning. Multi-objective
Bayesian optimization (MOBO) is a sample-efficient approach for identifying
the optimal trade-offs between the objectives. However, many existing methods
perform poorly when the observations are corrupted by noise. We propose a novel
acquisition function, NEHVI, that overcomes this important practical limitation by
applying a Bayesian treatment to the popular expected hypervolume improvement
(EHVI) criterion and integrating over this uncertainty in the Pareto frontier. We
argue that, even in the noiseless setting, generating multiple candidates in parallel
is an incarnation of EHVI with uncertainty in the Pareto frontier and therefore
can be addressed using the same underlying technique. Through this lens, we
derive a natural parallel variant, qNEHVI, that reduces computational complexity
of parallel EHVI from exponential to polynomial with respect to the batch size.
qNEHVI is one-step Bayes-optimal for hypervolume maximization in both noisy
and noiseless environments, and we show that it can be optimized effectively
with gradient-based methods via sample average approximation. Empirically, we
demonstrate not only that qNEHVI is substantially more robust to observation
noise than existing MOBO approaches, but also that it achieves state-of-the-art
optimization performance and competitive wall-times in large-batch environments.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization problems that involve multiple competing noisy objectives are ubiquitous
in science and engineering. For example, a real-time communications service may be interested in
tuning the parameters of a control policy to adapt video quality in real time in order to maximize
video quality and minimize latency [10, 17]. In robotics, scientists may seek to design hardware
components that maximize locomotive speed and minimize energy expended [8, 38]. In agriculture,
development agencies may seek to balance crop yield and environmental impact [28]. For such
multi-objective optimization (MOO) problems, there typically is no single solution that is best with
respect to all objectives. Rather, the goal is to identify the Pareto frontier: a set of optimal trade-offs
such that improving one objective means deteriorating another. In many cases, the objectives are
expensive to evaluate. For instance, randomized trials used in agriculture and the internet industry
may take weeks or months to conduct and incur opportunity costs, and manufacturing and testing
hardware is both costly and time-consuming. Therefore, it is imperative to be able to identify good
trade-offs with as few objective evaluations as possible.
Bayesian optimization (BO), a method for efficient global black-box optimization, is often used to
tackle such problems. BO employs a probabilistic surrogate model in conjunction with an acquisition
function to navigate the trade-off between exploration (evaluating designs with high uncertainty)
and exploitation (evaluating designs that are believed to be optimal). Although a significant number
of works have explored multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO), most available methods
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

