How Fine-Tuning Allows for Effective Meta-Learning

Kurtland Chua
Princeton University
kchua@princeton.edu

Qi Lei
Princeton University
qilei@princeton.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
Representation learning has served as a key tool for meta-learning, enabling rapid
learning of new tasks. Recent works like MAML learn task-specific representations by finding an initial representation requiring minimal per-task adaptation (i.e.
a fine-tuning-based objective). We present a theoretical framework for analyzing
a MAML-like algorithm, assuming all available tasks require approximately the
same representation. We then provide risk bounds on predictors found by finetuning via gradient descent, demonstrating that the method provably leverages the
shared structure. We illustrate these bounds in the logistic regression and neural
network settings. In contrast, we establish settings where learning one representation for all tasks (i.e. using a “frozen representation” objective) fails. Notably,
any such algorithm cannot outperform directly learning the target task with no
other information, in the worst case. This separation underscores the benefit of
fine-tuning-based over “frozen representation” objectives in few-shot learning.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning (Thrun & Pratt, 2012) has emerged as an essential tool for adapting prior knowledge
to new tasks under data and computational constraints. In this context, a meta-learner has access
to related source tasks from a shared environment. The learner aims to uncover inductive biases
from the source tasks to reduce the sample/computational complexity of learning new tasks from
the same environment. A common approach is representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013), i.e.
learning a feature extractor from the source tasks. At test time, a learner adapts to a new task by
fine-tuning the representation and retraining the final layer(s) (see, e.g., prototype networks (Snell
et al., 2017)). Substantial improvements over directly learning a single task has been shown in fewshot learning (Antoniou et al., 2018), a natural setting in many applications including reinforcement
learning (Mendonca et al., 2019; Finn et al., 2017), computer vision (Nichol et al., 2018), federated
learning (McMahan et al., 2017) and robotics (Al-Shedivat et al., 2017).
The empirical success of representation learning has led to an increased interest in theoretical analyses of underlying phenomena. Recent work assumes an explicitly shared representation across
tasks (Du et al., 2020; Tripuraneni et al., 2020b,a; Saunshi et al., 2020; Balcan et al., 2015). For
instance, Du et al. (2020) prove a generalization bound consisting of a representation error term and
an estimation error term. However, without fine-tuning the whole network, the representation error
accumulates to the target task and is irreducible, even with an infinitely large target task dataset.
This result is consistent with empirical findings, which suggest that fine-tuning the whole network
provides substantial performance gains, compared to just learning the final linear layer (Chen et al.,
2020; Salman et al., 2020). Due to the lack of (representation) fine-tuning while training on the
source tasks, we refer to methods above as making use of “frozen representation” objectives.
Linear separability of tasks on the same features poses additional problems, being an unrealistic
assumption when transferring knowledge to other domains (e.g. from ImageNet to medical images
(Raghu et al., 2019)). Therefore, we consider a more realistic setting where the available tasks only
approximately share the same representation. In this setting, we propose a theoretical framework for
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

