OpenMatch: Open-set Consistency Regularization for
Semi-supervised Learning with Outliers

Kuniaki Saito1 Donghyun Kim1 Kate Saenko1,2
1
Boston University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
[keisaito,donhk,saenko]@bu.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an effective means to leverage unlabeled data
to improve a model’s performance. Typical SSL methods like FixMatch assume
that labeled and unlabeled data share the same label space. However, in practice,
unlabeled data can contain categories unseen in the labeled set, i.e., outliers, which
can significantly harm the performance of SSL algorithms. To address this problem,
we propose a novel Open-set Semi-Supervised Learning (OSSL) approach called
OpenMatch. Learning representations of inliers while rejecting outliers is essential
for the success of OSSL. To this end, OpenMatch unifies FixMatch with novelty
detection based on one-vs-all (OVA) classifiers. The OVA-classifier outputs the
confidence score of a sample being an inlier, providing a threshold to detect
outliers. Another key contribution is an open-set soft-consistency regularization
loss, which enhances the smoothness of the OVA-classifier with respect to input
transformations and greatly improves outlier detection. OpenMatch achieves stateof-the-art performance on three datasets, and even outperforms a fully supervised
model in detecting outliers unseen in unlabeled data on CIFAR10. The code is
available at https://github.com/VisionLearningGroup/OP_Match.

1

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) leverages unlabeled data to improve a model’s performance [27, 38,
2, 1, 35, 22, 37]. An SSL model can propagate the class information of a small set of labeled data
to a large set of unlabeled data, which significantly improves the recognition accuracy without any
additional annotation cost. A common assumption of SSL is that the label spaces of labeled and
unlabeled data are identical, but, in practice, the assumption is easily violated. Depending on how it
was collected, the unlabeled data may contain novel categories unseen in the labeled training data,
i.e., outliers. Since these outliers can significantly harm the performance of SSL algorithms [14],
detecting them is necessary to make SSL more practical. Ideally, a model should classify samples of
known categories i.e., inliers, into correct classes while identifying samples of novel categories as
outliers. This task is called Open-set Semi-supervised Learning (OSSL) [44]. While OSSL is a more
realistic and practical scenario than standard SSL, it has not been as widely explored.
Existing strong SSL methods [35, 41] do not work well for OSSL. For example, FixMatch [35]
generates pseudo-labels using the model’s predictions on weakly augmented unlabeled images and
trains the model to match its predictions on strongly augmented images with the pseudo-labels. This
method exploits the advantage of pseudo-labeling as well as regularizing a model with the consistency
between differently augmented images. But, in OSSL, this risks assigning pseudo-labels of known
categories to outliers, which degrades the recognition accuracy. A possible solution is to compute the
SSL objective only for unlabeled samples considered to be inliers, where confidence thresholding is
used to pick inliers. For instance, MTC [44] regards some proportion of samples as outliers by using
Otsu thresholding [25]. However, this is not robust to varying proportions of outliers as discussed in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

