Refined Learning Bounds for Kernel and
Approximate k-Means

Yong Liu1,2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Kernel k-means is one of the most popular approaches to clustering and its theoretical properties have been investigated for√decades. However, the existing
state-of-the-art risk bounds
p are of order O(k/ n), which do not match with the
stated lower bound Ω( k/n) in terms of k, where k is the number of clusters and
n is the size of the training set. In this paper, we study the statistical properties of
kernel k-means and Nyström-based kernel k-means, and obtain optimal clustering
risk bounds, which improve the existing risk bounds. Particularly, based on a
refined upper bound
p of Rademacher complexity [21], we first derive an optimal risk
bound of rate O( k/n) for empirical risk minimizer (ERM), and further extend it
to general cases beyond ERM. Then, we analyze the statistical effect of computational approximations of Nyström kernel k-means, and prove that it achieves
√ the
same statistical accuracy as the original kernel k-means considering only Ω( nk)
Nyström
landmark points. We further relax the restriction of landmark points from
√
√
Ω( nk) to Ω( n) under a mild condition. Finally, we validate the theoretical
findings via numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Clustering, a fundamental data mining task, is used in numerous applications including web search,
medical imaging, gene expression analysis, social network analysis and recommendation systems
[56, 55, 23, 42]. k-means is arguably one of the most popular approaches to clustering, producing
clusters with piece-wise linear boundaries. Its kernel version, which employs a nonlinear distance
function, has the ability to find clusters of varying densities and distributions, greatly improving the
flexibility of the approach [18, 53, 38, 37, 39, 60, 29, 36, 35, 61].
To understand (kernel) k-means and guide the development of new clustering algorithms, researchers
have investigated its theoretical properties for decades. The consistency of the empirical minimizer
was demonstrated by [45, 47, 1]. Rates of convergence and non-asymptotic performance bounds
were considered by [46, 13, 33, 7, 32, 14, 20]. Most of the proposed risk bounds are dependent upon
the dimension of the hypothesis space. For example,
p Bartlett et al. [7] provided, under certain mild
assumptions, a clustering risk bound of order O( kd/n), where d is the dimension of the hypothesis
space and n is the size of the training set. However, the hypothesis space of kernel k-means is
typically an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space, such as the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
associated with Gaussian kernels [50]. Thus, the existing theoretical analysis of k-means are not
usually suitable for explaining its kernel version. Recently, [20, 16, 10, 41, 3, 27, 24, 9] extended
the previous results, and provided dimension-independent bounds for kernel k-means. As shown in
[16], if the feature map associated
with the kernel function satisfies kΦk ≤ 1, then the clustering risk
√
bounds are of order O(k/ n). These clustering risk bounds for kernel k-means are usually linearly
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

