Robust Compressed Sensing MRI with Deep
Generative Priors
Ajil Jalal∗
ECE, UT Austin
ajiljalal@utexas.edu

Marius Arvinte*
ECE, UT Austin
arvinte@utexas.edu

Eric Price
CS, UT Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
ECE, UT Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Giannis Daras
CS, UT Austin
giannisdaras@utexas.edu
Jonathan I. Tamir
ECE, UT Austin
jtamir@utexas.edu

Abstract
The CSGM framework (Bora-Jalal-Price-Dimakis’17) has shown that deep generative priors can be powerful tools for solving inverse problems. However, to
date this framework has been empirically successful only on certain datasets (for
example, human faces and MNIST digits), and it is known to perform poorly on
out-of-distribution samples. In this paper, we present the first successful application
of the CSGM framework on clinical MRI data. We train a generative prior on brain
scans from the fastMRI dataset, and show that posterior sampling via Langevin
dynamics achieves high quality reconstructions. Furthermore, our experiments
and theory show that posterior sampling is robust to changes in the ground-truth
distribution and measurement process. Our code and models are available at:
https://github.com/utcsilab/csgm-mri-langevin.

1

Introduction

Compressed sensing [23, 15] has enabled reductions to the number of measurements needed for
successful reconstruction in a variety of imaging inverse problems. In particular, it has led to shorter
scan times for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [62, 90], and most MRI vendors have released
products leveraging this framework to accelerate clinical workflows. Despite their successes, sparsitybased methods are limited by the achievable acceleration rates, as the sparsity assumptions are either
hand-crafted or are limited to simple learned sparse codes [72, 73].
More recently, deep learning techniques have been used as powerful data-driven reconstruction
methods for inverse problems [49, 68]. There are two broad families of deep learning inversion
techniques [68]: end-to-end supervised and distribution-learning approaches. End-to-end supervised
techniques use a training set of measured images and deploy convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and other architectures to learn the inverse mapping from measurements to image. Network architectures that include both CNN blocks and the imaging forward model have grown in popularity, as they
combine deep learning with the compressed sensing optimization framework, see e.g. [32, 3, 64].
End-to-end methods are trained for specific imaging anatomy and measurement models and show
excellent performance in these tasks. However, reconstruction quality is known to suffer when applied
out of distribution, and recently has been shown to severely degrade [4, 19] under certain types of
natural measurement and anatomy perturbations.
In this paper we study deep learning inversion techniques based on distribution learning. These models
are trained without reference to measurements, and so easily adapt to changes in the measurement
∗

Ajil Jalal and Marius Arvinte contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

