Dangers of Bayesian Model Averaging
under Covariate Shift
Pavel Izmailov
NYU

Patrick Nicholson
Covera Health

Sanae Lotfi
NYU

Andrew Gordon Wilson
NYU

Abstract
Approximate Bayesian inference for neural networks is considered a robust alternative to standard training, often providing good performance on out-of-distribution
data. However, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) with high-fidelity approximate
inference via full-batch Hamiltonian Monte Carlo achieve poor generalization
under covariate shift, even underperforming classical estimation. We explain this
surprising result, showing how a Bayesian model average can in fact be problematic
under covariate shift, particularly in cases where linear dependencies in the input
features cause a lack of posterior contraction. We additionally show why the same
issue does not affect many approximate inference procedures, or classical maximum a-posteriori (MAP) training. Finally, we propose novel priors that improve
the robustness of BNNs to many sources of covariate shift.

1

Introduction

The predictive distributions of deep neural networks are often deployed in critical applications such
as medical diagnosis [Gulshan et al., 2016, Esteva et al., 2017, Filos et al., 2019], and autonomous
driving [Bojarski et al., 2016, Al-Shedivat et al., 2017, Michelmore et al., 2020]. These applications
typically involve covariate shift, where the target data distribution is different from the distribution
used for training [Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019, Arjovsky, 2021]. Accurately reflecting uncertainty
is crucial for robustness to these shifts [Ovadia et al., 2019, Roy et al., 2021]. Since Bayesian methods
provide a principled approach to representing model (epistemic) uncertainty, they are commonly
benchmarked on out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization tasks [e.g., Kendall and Gal, 2017, Ovadia
et al., 2019, Chang et al., 2019, Dusenberry et al., 2020, Wilson and Izmailov, 2020].
However, Izmailov et al. [2021] recently showed that Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) with
high fidelity inference through Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) provide shockingly poor OOD
generalization performance, despite the popularity and success of approximate Bayesian inference in
this setting [Gal and Ghahramani, 2016, Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017, Ovadia et al., 2019, Maddox
et al., 2019, Wilson and Izmailov, 2020, Dusenberry et al., 2020, Benton et al., 2021].
In this paper, we seek to understand, further demonstrate, and help remedy this concerning behaviour.
We show that Bayesian neural networks perform poorly for different types of covariate shift, namely
test data corruption, domain shift, and spurious correlations. In Figure 1(a) we see that a ResNet-20
BNN approximated with HMC underperforms a maximum a-posteriori (MAP) solution by 25% on
the pixelate-corrupted CIFAR-10 test set. This result is particularly surprising given that on the
in-distribution test data, the BNN outperforms the MAP solution by over 5%.
Intuitively, we find that Bayesian model averaging (BMA) can be problematic under covariate shift
as follows. Due to linear dependencies in the features (inputs) of the training data distribution, model
parameters corresponding to these dependencies do not affect the predictions on the training data. As
an illustrative special case of this general setting, consider MNIST digits, which always have black
corner pixels (dead pixels, with intensity zero). The corresponding first layer weights are always
multiplied by zero and have no effect on the likelihood. Consequently, these weights are simply
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

