MAP Propagation Algorithm: Faster Learning with a
Team of Reinforcement Learning Agents

Stephen Chung
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
minghaychung@umass.edu

Abstract
Nearly all state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms rely on error backpropagation,
which is generally regarded as biologically implausible. An alternative way of
training an artificial neural network is through treating each unit in the network
as a reinforcement learning agent, and thus the network is considered as a team
of agents. As such, all units can be trained by REINFORCE, a local learning rule
modulated by a global signal that is more consistent with biologically observed
forms of synaptic plasticity. Although this learning rule follows the gradient of
return in expectation, it suffers from high variance and thus the low speed of
learning, rendering it impractical to train deep networks. We therefore propose a
novel algorithm called MAP propagation to reduce this variance significantly while
retaining the local property of the learning rule. Experiments demonstrated that
MAP propagation could solve common reinforcement learning tasks at a similar
speed to backpropagation when applied to an actor-critic network. Our work
thus allows for the broader application of teams of agents in deep reinforcement
learning.

1

Introduction

Error backpropagation algorithm (backprop) [1] efficiently computes the gradient of an objective
function with respect to parameters, by iterating backward from the last layer of a multi-layer
artificial neural network (ANN). However, backprop is generally regarded as being biologically
implausible [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. First, the learning rule given by backprop is non-local, as it relies on
information other than input and output of a neuron-like unit computed in the feedforward phase;
while biologically-observed synaptic plasticity depends mostly on local information (e.g. spike-timingdependent plasticity (STDP) [8]) and possibly some global signals (e.g. reward-modulated spiketiming-dependent plasticity (R-STDP) [8, 9, 10]). Second, backprop requires precise coordination
between feedforward and feedback connections, because the feedforward value has to be retained
until error signals arrive; while it is unclear how a biological system can coordinate an entire network
to alternate between feedforward and feedback phases precisely. Third, backprop requires synaptic
symmetry in the forward and backward paths, rendering it biologically implausible. Nonetheless,
recent work has demonstrated that this symmetry may not be necessary for backprop due to the
‘feedback alignment’ phenomenon [11, 12, 13].
Alternatively, REINFORCE [14] could be applied to all units in the network to train an ANN as a
more biologically plausible way of learning. It is shown that the learning rule gives an unbiased
estimate of the gradient of return [14]. Another interpretation of this relates to viewing each unit as a
reinforcement learning (RL) agent, with each agent trying to maximize the global reward. Such a
team of agents is also known as a coagent network [15]. However, coagent networks can only solve
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

