A Separation Result Between Data-oblivious and
Data-aware Poisoning Attacks

Samuel Deng
Columbia University
samdeng@cs.columbia.edu
Saeed Mahloujifar
Princeton
sfar@princeton.edu

Sanjam Garg
UC Berkeley and NTT Research
sanjamg@berkeley.edu
Mohammad Mahmoody
University of Virginia
mohammad@virginia.edu

Somesh Jha
University of Wisconsin
jha@cs.wisc.edu

Abhradeep Thakurta
Google Research - Brain Team
athakurta@google.com

Abstract
Poisoning attacks have emerged as a significant security threat to machine learning
algorithms. It has been demonstrated that adversaries who make small changes to
the training set, such as adding specially crafted data points, can hurt the performance of the output model. Some of the stronger poisoning attacks require the full
knowledge of the training data. This leaves open the possibility of achieving the
same attack results using poisoning attacks that do not have the full knowledge of
the clean training set. In this work, we initiate a theoretical study of the problem
above. Specifically, for the case of feature selection with LASSO, we show that
full information adversaries (that craft poisoning examples based on the rest of the
training data) are provably stronger than the optimal attacker that is oblivious to
the training set yet has access to the distribution of the data. Our separation result
shows that the two setting of data-aware and data-oblivious are fundamentally different and we cannot hope to always achieve the same attack or defense results in
these scenarios.

1

Introduction

Traditional approaches to supervised machine learning focus on a benign setting where honestly
sampled training data is given to a learner. However, the broad use of these learning algorithms
in safety-critical applications makes them targets for sophisticated attackers. Consequently, machine learning has gone through a revolution of studying the same problem, but this time under
so-called adversarial settings. Researchers have investigated several types of attacks, including testtime (a.k.a., evasion attacks to find adversarial examples) [62, 6, 32, 55], training-time attacks (a.k.a.,
poisoning or causative attacks) [3, 8, 51], backdoor attacks [67, 33], membership inference attacks
[57], etc. In response, other works have put forth several defenses [52, 43, 9] followed by adaptive
attacks [15, 2, 65] that circumvent some of the proposed defenses. Thus, developing approaches that
are based on solid theoretical foundations (that prevent further adaptive attacks) has stood out as an
important area of investigation.
Poisoning Attacks. In a poisoning attack, an adversary changes a training set S of examples into a
“close” training set S ′ (The difference is usually measured by Hamming distance; i.e., the number
of examples injected and/or removed.). Through these changes, the goal of the adversary, generally
speaking, is to degrade the “quality” of the learned model, where quality here could be interpreted
in different ways. In a recent industrial survey [39], poisoning attacks were identified as the most
important threat model against applications of machine learning. The main reason behind the importance of poisoning attacks are the feasibility of performing the attack for adversary. As the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

