Residual Relaxation for
Multi-view Representation Learning

Yifei Wang1 Zhengyang Geng2 Feng Jiang2 Chuming Li3
Yisen Wang2,4∗ Jiansheng Yang1 Zhouchen Lin2,4,5
1

2

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
School of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China

Abstract
Multi-view methods learn representations by aligning multiple views of the same
image and their performance largely depends on the choice of data augmentation.
In this paper, we notice that some other useful augmentations, such as image rotation, are harmful for multi-view methods because they cause a semantic shift
that is too large to be aligned well. This observation motivates us to relax the exact alignment objective to better cultivate stronger augmentations. Taking image
rotation as a case study, we develop a generic approach, Pretext-aware Residual Relaxation (Prelax), that relaxes the exact alignment by allowing an adaptive
residual vector between different views and encoding the semantic shift through
pretext-aware learning. Extensive experiments on different backbones show that
our method can not only improve multi-view methods with existing augmentations, but also benefit from stronger image augmentations like rotation.

1

Introduction

Without access to labels, self-supervised learning relies on surrogate objectives to extract meaningful
representations from unlabeled data, and the chosen surrogate objectives largely determine the quality and property of the learned representations [24, 19]. Recently, multi-view methods have become
a dominant approach for self-supervised representation learning that achieves impressive downstream performance, and many modern variants have been proposed [22, 14, 1, 23, 2, 12, 3, 4, 11, 5].
Nevertheless, most multi-view methods can be abstracted and summarized as the following pipeline:
for each input x, we apply several (typically two) random augmentations to it, and learn to align
these different “views” (x1 , x2 , . . . ) of x by minimizing their distance in the representation space.
In multi-view methods, the pretext, i.e., image augmentation, has a large effect on the final performance. Typical choices include image re-scaling, cropping, color jitters, etc [2]. However, we find
that some augmentations, for example, image rotation, is seldom utilized in state-of-the-art multiview methods. Among these augmentations, Figure 1a shows that rotation causes severe accuracy
drop in a standard supervised model. Actually, image rotation is a stronger augmentation that largely
affects the image semantics, and as a result, enforcing exact alignment of two different rotation angles could degrade the representation ability in existing multi-view methods. Nevertheless, it does
not mean that strong augmentations cannot provide useful semantics for representation learning.
In fact, rotation is known as an effective signal for predictive learning [10, 30, 21]. Differently,
predictive methods learn representations by predicting the pretext (e.g., rotation angle) from the cor∗

Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

