A Provably Efficient Sample Collection Strategy
for Reinforcement Learning

Jean Tarbouriech
Facebook AI Research Paris & Inria Lille
jean.tarbouriech@gmail.com

Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research Paris
pirotta@fb.com

Michal Valko
DeepMind Paris
valkom@deepmind.com

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research Paris
lazaric@fb.com

Abstract
One of the challenges in online reinforcement learning (RL) is that the agent
needs to trade off the exploration of the environment and the exploitation of
the samples to optimize its behavior. Whether we optimize for regret, sample
complexity, state-space coverage or model estimation, we need to strike a different exploration-exploitation trade-off. In this paper, we propose to tackle the
exploration-exploitation problem following a decoupled approach composed of:
1) An “objective-specific” algorithm that (adaptively) prescribes how many samples
to collect at which states, as if it has access to a generative model (i.e., a simulator
of the environment); 2) An “objective-agnostic” sample collection exploration strategy responsible for generating the prescribed samples as fast as possible. Building
on recent methods for exploration in the stochastic shortest path problem, we first
provide an algorithm that, given as input the number of samples b(s, a) needed

3/2 2
e
in each
Pstate-action pair, requires O BD + D S A time steps to collect the
B = s,a b(s, a) desired samples, in any unknown communicating MDP with
S states, A actions and diameter D. Then we show how this general-purpose exploration algorithm can be paired with “objective-specific” strategies that prescribe
the sample requirements to tackle a variety of settings — e.g., model estimation,
sparse reward discovery, goal-free cost-free exploration in communicating MDPs
— for which we obtain improved or novel sample complexity guarantees.

1

Introduction

One of the challenges in online reinforcement learning (RL) is that the agent needs to trade off
the exploration of the environment and the exploitation of the samples to optimize its behavior.
Whenever the agent needs to gather information about a specific region of the Markov decision
process (MDP), it must plan for a policy to reach the desired states, despite not having exact
knowledge of the environment dynamics. This makes solving the exploration-exploitation problem
in RL highly non-trivial and it requires designing a specific strategy depending on the learning
objective, such as PAC-MDP learning [e.g., 13, 47, 59], regret minimization [e.g., 28, 6, 29, 66] or
pure exploration [e.g., 30, 31, 39, 63, 64].
A simpler scenario considered in the literature is to assume access to a generative model or sampling
oracle (SO) [33]. Given any state-action pair (s, a), the SO returns a next state s0 drawn from the
transition probability p(·|s, a) and a reward r(s, a). In this case, it is possible to focus exclusively on
where and how many samples to collect, while disregarding the problem of finding a suitable policy
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

