Accurate Point Cloud Registration
with Robust Optimal Transport

Zhengyang Shen∗
UNC Chapel Hill

Jean Feydy∗
Imperial College London

Peirong Liu
UNC Chapel Hill

zyshen@cs.unc.edu

jfeydy@ic.ac.uk

peirong@cs.unc.edu

Ariel Hernán Curiale
Harvard Medical School

Ruben San José Estépar
Harvard Medical School

Raúl San José Estépar
Harvard Medical School

acuriale@bwh.harvard.edu

rubensanjose@bwh.harvard.edu

rjosest@bwh.harvard.edu

Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill
mn@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
This work investigates the use of robust optimal transport (OT) for shape matching.
Specifically, we show that recent OT solvers improve both optimization-based
and deep learning methods for point cloud registration, boosting accuracy at an
affordable computational cost. This manuscript starts with a practical overview
of modern OT theory. We then provide solutions to the main difficulties in using this framework for shape matching. Finally, we showcase the performance
of transport-enhanced registration models on a wide range of challenging tasks:
rigid registration for partial shapes; scene flow estimation on the Kitti dataset; and
nonparametric registration of lung vascular trees between inspiration and expiration. Our OT-based methods achieve state-of-the-art results on Kitti and for the
challenging lung registration task, both in terms of accuracy and scalability.
We also release PVT1010, a new public dataset of 1,010 pairs of lung vascular
trees with densely sampled points. This dataset provides a challenging use case for
point cloud registration algorithms with highly complex shapes and deformations.
Our work demonstrates that robust OT enables fast pre-alignment and fine-tuning
for a wide range of registration models, thereby providing a new key method
for the computer vision toolbox. Our code and dataset are available online at:
https://github.com/uncbiag/robot.

1

Introduction

Shape registration is a fundamental but difficult problem in computer vision. The task is to determine
plausible spatial correspondences between pairs of shapes, with use cases that range from pose
estimation for noisy point clouds [14] to the nonparametric registration of high-resolution medical
images [17]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, most existing approaches to this problem consist of a combination
of three steps, possibly fused together by some deep learning (DL) methods: (1) feature extraction;
(2) feature matching; and (3) regularization using a class of acceptable transformations that is
specified through a parametric or nonparametric model. This work discusses how tools derived from
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

