Fault-Tolerant Federated Reinforcement Learning
with Theoretical Guarantee
Flint Xiaofeng Fan1, 3 , Yining Ma2 , Zhongxiang Dai1 , Wei Jing4 ,
Cheston Tan3 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1

Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
2
Dept. of ISEM, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Republic of Singapore
4
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hangzhou, China
1
{xiaofeng,daizhongxiang,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg,2 yiningma@u.nus.edu
3
{stufanxf,cheston-tan}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,4 jw334405@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The growing literature of Federated Learning (FL) has recently inspired Federated
Reinforcement Learning (FRL) to encourage multiple agents to federatively build
a better decision-making policy without sharing raw trajectories. Despite its
promising applications, existing works on FRL fail to I) provide theoretical analysis
on its convergence, and II) account for random system failures and adversarial
attacks. Towards this end, we propose the first FRL framework the convergence
of which is guaranteed and tolerant to less than half of the participating agents
being random system failures or adversarial attackers. We prove that the sample
efficiency of the proposed framework is guaranteed to improve with the number of
agents and is able to account for such potential failures or attacks. All theoretical
results are empirically verified on various RL benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently been applied to many real-world decision-making problems
such as gaming, robotics, healthcare, etc. [1–3]. However, despite its impressive performances in
simulation, RL often suffers from poor sample efficiency, which hinders its success in real-world
applications [4, 5]. For example, when RL is applied to provide clinical decision support [3, 6, 7],
its performance is limited by the number (i.e., sample size) of admission records possessed by a
hospital, which cannot be synthetically generated [3]. As this challenge is usually faced by many
agents (e.g., different hospitals), a natural solution is to encourage multiple RL agents to share their
trajectories, to collectively build a better decision-making policy that one single agent can not obtain
by itself. However, in many applications, raw RL trajectories contain sensitive information (e.g., the
medical records contain sensitive information about patients) and thus sharing them is prohibited. To
this end, the recent success of Federated Learning (FL) [8–11] has inspired the setting of Federated
Reinforcement Learning (FRL) [12], which aims to federatively build a better policy from multiple
RL agents without requiring them to share their raw trajectories. FRL is practically appealing
for addressing the sample inefficiency of RL in real systems, such as autonomous driving [13],
fast personalization [14], optimal control of IoT devices [15], robots navigation [16], and resource
management in networking [17]. Despite its promising applications, FRL is faced by a number of
major challenges, which existing works are unable to tackle.
Firstly, existing FRL frameworks are not equipped with theoretical convergence guarantee, and thus
lack an assurance for the sample efficiency of practical FRL applications, which is a critical drawback
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

