Label Noise SGD Provably Prefers Flat Global
Minimizers
Alex Damian
Princeton University
ad27@princeton.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Jason Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
In overparametrized models, the noise in stochastic gradient descent (SGD) implicitly regularizes the optimization trajectory and determines which local minimum
SGD converges to. Motivated by empirical studies that demonstrate that training
with noisy labels improves generalization, we study the implicit regularization
effect of SGD with label noise. We show that SGD with label noise converges to a
stationary point of a regularized loss L(θ) + λR(θ), where L(θ) is the training loss,
λ is an effective regularization parameter depending on the step size, strength of
the label noise, and the batch size, and R(θ) is an explicit regularizer that penalizes
sharp minimizers. Our analysis uncovers an additional regularization effect of large
learning rates beyond the linear scaling rule that penalizes large eigenvalues of
the Hessian more than small ones. We also prove extensions to classification with
general loss functions, significantly strengthening the prior work of Blanc et al.
[3] to global convergence and large learning rates and of HaoChen et al. [12] to
general models.

1

Introduction

One of the central questions in modern machine learning theory is the generalization capability of
overparametrized models trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Recent work identifies the
implicit regularization effect due to the optimization algorithm as one key factor in explaining the
generalization of overparameterized models [27, 11, 19, 10]. This implicit regularization is controlled
by many properties of the optimization algorithm including search direction [11], learning rate [20],
batch size [26], momentum [21] and dropout [22].
The parameter-dependent noise distribution in SGD is a crucial source of regularization [16, 18].
Blanc et al. [3] initiated the study of the regularization effect of label noise SGD with square loss1
by characterizing the local stability of global minimizers of the training loss. By identifying a
data-dependent regularizer R(θ), Blanc et al. [3] proved that label noise SGD locally diverges from
the global minimizer θ∗ if and only if θ∗ is not a first-order stationary point of minθ R(θ) subject
to L(θ) = 0. The analysis is only able to demonstrate that with sufficiently small step size η, label
noise SGD initialized at θ∗ locally diverges by a distance of η 0.4 and correspondingly decreases the
regularizer by η 0.4 . This is among the first results that establish that the noise distribution alters the
local stability of stochastic gradient descent. However, the parameter movement of η 0.4 is required to
1
Label noise SGD computes the stochastic gradient by first drawing a sample (xi , yi ), perturbing yi0 = yi + 
with  ∼ {−σ, σ}, and computing the gradient with respect to (xi , yi0 ).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

