Grammar-Based Grounded Lexicon Learning

Jiayuan Mao
MIT

Haoyue Shi
TTIC

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Roger P. Levy
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Abstract
We present Grammar-Based Grounded Lexicon Learning (G2L2), a lexicalist
approach toward learning a compositional and grounded meaning representation of
language from grounded data, such as paired images and texts. At the core of G2L2
is a collection of lexicon entries, which map each word to a tuple of a syntactic
type and a neuro-symbolic semantic program. For example, the word shiny has a
syntactic type of adjective; its neuro-symbolic semantic program has the symbolic
form λx.filter(x, SHINY), where the concept SHINY is associated with a neural
network embedding, which will be used to classify shiny objects. Given an input
sentence, G2L2 first looks up the lexicon entries associated with each token. It
then derives the meaning of the sentence as an executable neuro-symbolic program
by composing lexical meanings based on syntax. The recovered meaning programs
can be executed on grounded inputs. To facilitate learning in an exponentiallygrowing compositional space, we introduce a joint parsing and expected execution
algorithm, which does local marginalization over derivations to reduce the training
time. We evaluate G2L2 on two domains: visual reasoning and language-driven
navigation. Results show that G2L2 can generalize from small amounts of data to
novel compositions of words.

1

Introduction

Human language learning suggests several desiderata for machines learning from language. Humans
can learn grounded and compositional representations for novel words from few examples. These
representations are grounded on contexts, such as visual perception. We also know how these words
relate with each other in composing the meaning of a sentence. Syntax—the structured, order-sensitive
relations among words in a sentence—is crucial in humans’ learning and compositional abilities for
language. According to lexicalist linguistic theories [30, 37, 9], syntactic knowledge involves a small
number of highly abstract and potentially universal combinatory rules, together with a large amount
of learned information in the lexicon: a rich syntactic type and meaning representation for each word.
Fig. 1 illustrates this idea in a visually grounded language acquisition setup. The language learner
looks at a few examples containing the novel word shiny (Fig. 1a). They also have a built-in, compact
but universal set of combinatory grammar rules (Fig. 1b) that describes how the semantic program of
words can be combined based on their syntactic types. The learner can recover the syntactic type of
the novel word and its semantic meaining. For example, shiny is an adjective and its meaning can be
grounded on visually shiny objects in images (Fig. 1c). This representation supports the interpretation
of novel sentences in a novel visual context (Fig. 1d).
In this paper, we present Grammar-Based Grounded Lexicon Learning (G2L2), a neuro-symbolic
framework for grounded language acquisition. At the core of G2L2 is a collection of grounded
lexicon entries. Each lexicon entry maps a word to (i) a syntactic type, and (ii) a neuro-symbolic
semantic program. For example, the lexicon entry for the English word shiny has a syntactic type of
objset/objset: it will compose with another constituent of type objset on its right, and produces a new
Correspondence to Jiayuan Mao: jiayuanm@mit.edu. Project page: http://g2l2.csail.mit.edu.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

