Extracting Deformation-Aware Local Features by
Learning to Deform

Guilherme Potje ∗
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Renato Martins
Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté

Felipe Cadar
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Erickson R. Nascimento
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Abstract
Despite the advances in extracting local features achieved by handcrafted and
learning-based descriptors, they are still limited by the lack of invariance to nonrigid transformations. In this paper, we present a new approach to compute features
from still images that are robust to non-rigid deformations to circumvent the
problem of matching deformable surfaces and objects. Our deformation-aware
local descriptor, named DEAL, leverages a polar sampling and a spatial transformer
warping to provide invariance to rotation, scale, and image deformations. We train
the model architecture end-to-end by applying isometric non-rigid deformations to
objects in a simulated environment as guidance to provide highly discriminative
local features. The experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
handcrafted, learning-based image, and RGB-D descriptors in different datasets
with both real and realistic synthetic deformable objects in still images. The
source code and trained model of the descriptor are publicly available at https:
//www.verlab.dcc.ufmg.br/descriptors/neurips2021.

1

Introduction

High-quality matching of images taken from cameras in different poses and conditions remains one
of the key challenges in several tasks. Tracking points as a camera or an object of interest is moving
is crucial for finding and reconstructing objects and scenes [29, 30, 31], camera localization and
mapping [18, 36], registration [43, 37], and image retrieval [26, 39], to name a few tasks. Extracting
invariant and compact representations to describe the vicinity of a pixel has been one of the key
forces in enabling high-quality matching on these tasks. Despite the importance of invariance to
varying illumination, viewpoint, and the distance to the object of interest, real-world scenes impose
additional challenges. After all, we live in a non-rigid world populated by objects that may have
different shapes over time due to deformations. Over the past few decades, many descriptors have
been proposed [19, 3, 6, 35, 42, 47, 44, 40, 23, 13]. These approaches can be roughly grouped
based on the type of input information, such as intensity and/or depth images, and can be further
divided into handcrafted and learning-based methods. While local learning-based approaches, such as
Log-Polar [13], hold state of the art regarding affine transformations and local illumination changes,
recent handcrafted techniques achieve better performance in the presence of non-rigid transformations
by using depth data [25] or by modeling the deformations from image intensity information, which
inevitably leads to an increase of the computational cost to compute the description [38]. Since
depth data is not available in many contexts and applications, and low processing time is highly
∗

Department of Computer Science, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.
VIBOT EMR CNRS 6000, ImViA, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, France.
Corresponding author’s e-mail: guipotje@dcc.ufmg.br

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

