Amortized Variational Inference in Simple
Hierarchical Models
Abhinav Agrawal
College of Information and Computer Science
Univeristy Of Massachusetts Amherst
aagrawal@cs.umass.edu

Justin Domke
College of Information and Computer Science
Univeristy Of Massachusetts Amherst
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
It is difficult to use subsampling with variational inference in hierarchical models
since the number of local latent variables scales with the dataset. Thus, inference
in hierarchical models remains a challenge at large scale. It is helpful to use a
variational family with structure matching the posterior, but optimization is still
slow due to the huge number of local distributions. Instead, this paper suggests an
amortized approach where shared parameters simultaneously represent all local
distributions. This approach is similarly accurate as using a given joint distribution
(e.g., a full-rank Gaussian) but is feasible on datasets that are several orders of
magnitude larger. It is also dramatically faster than using a structured variational
distribution.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical Bayesian models are a general framework where parameters of “groups” are drawn
from some shared distribution, and then observed data is drawn from a distribution specified by each
group’s parameters. After data is observed, the inference problem is to infer both the parameters for
each group and the shared parameters. These models have proven useful in various domains [13]
including hierarchical regression amd classification [12], topic models [4, 22, 3], polling [11, 24],
epidemiology [23], ecology [8], psychology [37], matrix-factorization [35], and collaborative filtering
[26, 33].
A proven technique for scaling variational inference (VI)
Q to large datasets is subsampling. The idea
is that if the target model has the form p(z, y) = p(z) i p(yi |z) then an unbiased gradient can be
estimated while only evaluating p(z) and p(yi |z) at a few i [29, 16, 20, 31, 30, 36, 15].
Q
This paper addresses hierarchical models of the form p(θ, z, y) = p(θ) i p(zi , yi |θ), where only y
is observed. There are two challenges. First, the number of local latent variables zi increases with
the dataset, meaning the posterior distribution increases in dimensionality. Second, there is often a
dependence between zi and θ which must be captured to get strong results [15, 18].
The aim of this paper is to develop a black-box variational inference scheme that can scale to large
hierarchical models without losing benefits of a joint approximation. Our solution takes three steps.
First, in the true posterior, the different latent variables zi are conditionally independent given θ, which
suggests using a variational family of the same form. We confirm this intuition by showing
Q that for
any joint variational family q(θ, z), one can define a corresponding "branch" family q(θ) i q(zi |θ)
such that inference will be equally accurate (theorem 2). We call inference using such a family the
"branch" approach.
Second, we observe that if using the branch approach, the optimal local variational parameters can be
computed only from θ and local data (eq. (12)). Thus, we propose to amortize the computation of
the local variational parameters by learning a network to approximately solve that optimization. We
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

