K-Net: Towards Unified Image Segmentation

Wenwei Zhang1

Jiangmiao Pang2,4 Kai Chen3,4 Chen Change Loy1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, the Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wenwei001, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg pangjiangmiao@gmail.com
chenkai@sensetime.com
1

Abstract
Semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentations have been addressed using different
and specialized frameworks despite their underlying connections. This paper
presents a unified, simple, and effective framework for these essentially similar
tasks. The framework, named K-Net, segments both instances and semantic
categories consistently by a group of learnable kernels, where each kernel is
responsible for generating a mask for either a potential instance or a stuff class.
To remedy the difficulties of distinguishing various instances, we propose a kernel
update strategy that enables each kernel dynamic and conditional on its meaningful
group in the input image. K-Net can be trained in an end-to-end manner with
bipartite matching, and its training and inference are naturally NMS-free and
box-free. Without bells and whistles, K-Net surpasses all previous published stateof-the-art single-model results of panoptic segmentation on MS COCO test-dev
split and semantic segmentation on ADE20K val split with 55.2% PQ and 54.3%
mIoU, respectively. Its instance segmentation performance is also on par with
Cascade Mask R-CNN on MS COCO with 60%-90% faster inference speeds. Code
and models will be released at https://github.com/ZwwWayne/K-Net/.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation aims at finding groups of coherent pixels [48]. There are different notions in
groups, such as semantic categories (e.g., car, dog, cat) or instances (e.g., objects that coexist in
the same image). Based on the different segmentation targets, the tasks are termed differently, i.e.,
semantic and instance segmentation, respectively. There are also pioneer attempts [19, 29, 50, 62] to
joint the two segmentation tasks for more comprehensive scene understanding.
Grouping pixels according to semantic categories can be formulated as a dense classification problem.
As shown in Fig. 1-(a), recent methods directly learn a set of convolutional kernels (namely semantic
kernels in this paper) of pre-defined categories and use them to classify pixels [40] or regions [22].
Such a framework is elegant and straightforward. However, extending this notion to instance
segmentation is non-trivial given the varying number of instances across images. Consequently,
instance segmentation is tackled by more complicated frameworks with additional steps such as
object detection [22] or embedding generation [44]. These methods rely on extra components, which
must guarantee the accuracy of extra components to a reasonable extent, or demand complex postprocessing such as Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) and pixel grouping. Recent approaches [34,
49, 55] generate kernels from dense feature grids and then select kernels for segmentation to simplify
the frameworks. Nonetheless, since they build upon dense grids to enumerate and select kernels,
these methods still rely on hand-crafted post-processing to eliminate masks or kernels of duplicated
instances.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

