Dynamic Resolution Network

Mingjian Zhu1,2,4,5∗ , Kai Han2,3∗, Enhua Wu3,6 , Qiulin Zhang7 , Ying Nie2 ,
Zhenzhong Lan4,5 , Yunhe Wang2†
1
Zhejiang University. 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
3
State Key Lab of Computer Science, ISCAS & University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
4
School of Engineering, Westlake University.
5
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study.
6
University of Macau. 7 BUPT.
zhumingjian@zju.edu.cn, {hankai,weh}@ios.ac.cn,
lanzhenzhong@westlake.edu.cn, yunhe.wang@huawei.com

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are often of sophisticated design with
numerous learnable parameters for the accuracy reason. To alleviate the expensive
costs of deploying them on mobile devices, recent works have made huge efforts for
excavating redundancy in pre-defined architectures. Nevertheless, the redundancy
on the input resolution of modern CNNs has not been fully investigated, i.e., the
resolution of input image is fixed. In this paper, we observe that the smallest resolution for accurately predicting the given image is different using the same neural
network. To this end, we propose a novel dynamic-resolution network (DRNet) in
which the input resolution is determined dynamically based on each input sample.
Wherein, a resolution predictor with negligible computational costs is explored
and optimized jointly with the desired network. Specifically, the predictor learns
the smallest resolution that can retain and even exceed the original recognition
accuracy for each image. During the inference, each input image will be resized
to its predicted resolution for minimizing the overall computation burden. We
then conduct extensive experiments on several benchmark networks and datasets.
The results show that our DRNet can be embedded in any off-the-shelf network
architecture to obtain a considerable reduction in computational complexity. For
instance, DR-ResNet-50 achieves similar performance with an about 34% computation reduction, while gaining 1.4% accuracy increase with 10% computation
reduction compared to the original ResNet-50 on ImageNet. Code will be available
at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/DRNet.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various computer
vision tasks, under the development of algorithms [6, 22, 37], computation power, and large-scale
datasets [2, 17]. However, the outstanding performance is accompanied by large computational costs,
which makes CNNs difficult to deploy on mobile devices. With the increasing demand for CNNs on
real-world applications, it is imperative to reduce the computational cost and meanwhile maintain the
performance of neural networks.
Recently, researchers have devoted much effort to model compression and acceleration methods,
including network pruning, low-bit quantization, knowledge distillation, and efficient model design.
∗
Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This research has been supported by the Key R&D program
of Zhejiang Province (Grant No. 2021C03139). This work was supported by NSFC (62072449, 61632003),
Guangdong-Hongkong-Macao Joint Research Grant (2020B1515130004), and Macao FDCT (0018/2019/ AKP).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

