Deep Reinforcement Learning at the Edge of the
Statistical Precipice

Rishabh Agarwal∗
Google Research, Brain Team
MILA, Université de Montréal

Max Schwarzer
MILA, Université de Montréal

Aaron Courville

Pablo Samuel Castro
Google Research, Brain Team

Marc G. Bellemare
Google Research, Brain Team

MILA, Université de Montréal

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are predominantly evaluated by comparing their relative performance on a large suite of tasks. Most published results
on deep RL benchmarks compare point estimates of aggregate performance such
as mean and median scores across tasks, ignoring the statistical uncertainty implied
by the use of a finite number of training runs. Beginning with the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE), the shift towards computationally-demanding benchmarks has
led to the practice of evaluating only a small number of runs per task, exacerbating
the statistical uncertainty in point estimates. In this paper, we argue that reliable
evaluation in the few-run deep RL regime cannot ignore the uncertainty in results
without running the risk of slowing down progress in the field. We illustrate this
point using a case study on the Atari 100k benchmark, where we find substantial
discrepancies between conclusions drawn from point estimates alone versus a more
thorough statistical analysis. With the aim of increasing the field’s confidence in
reported results with a handful of runs, we advocate for reporting interval estimates of aggregate performance and propose performance profiles to account for
the variability in results, as well as present more robust and efficient aggregate
metrics, such as interquartile mean scores, to achieve small uncertainty in results.
Using such statistical tools, we scrutinize performance evaluations of existing
algorithms on other widely used RL benchmarks including the ALE, Procgen, and
the DeepMind Control Suite, again revealing discrepancies in prior comparisons.
Our findings call for a change in how we evaluate performance in deep RL, for
which we present a more rigorous evaluation methodology, accompanied with an
open-source library rliable2 , to prevent unreliable results from stagnating the field.

1

Introduction

Research in artificial intelligence, and particularly deep reinforcement learning (RL), relies on
evaluating aggregate performance on a diverse suite of tasks to assess progress. Quantitative
evaluation on a suite of tasks, such as Atari games [5], reveals strengths and limitations of methods
while simultaneously guiding researchers towards methods with promising results. Performance of
RL algorithms is usually summarized with a point estimate of task performance measure, such as
mean and median performance across tasks, aggregated over independent training runs.
A small number of training runs (Figure 1) coupled with high variability in performance of deep
RL algorithms [16, 17, 41, 68, 70], often leads to substantial statistical uncertainty in reported point
∗
2

Outstanding Paper Award. Correspondence to Rishabh <rishabhagarwal@google.com>.
https://github.com/google-research/rliable

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

