FL-WBC: Enhancing Robustness against Model
Poisoning Attacks in Federated Learning from a
Client Perspective

Jingwei Sun1 , Ang Li1 , Louis DiValentin2 , Amin Hassanzadeh2 ,
Yiran Chen1 , Hai Li1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Security R&D, Accenture Labs, Accenture
1
{jingwei.sun, ang.li630, yiran.chen, hai.li}@duke.edu,
2
{louis.divalentin, amin.hassanzadeh}@accenture.com

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a popular distributed learning framework that trains
a global model through iterative communications between a central server and
edge devices. Recent works have demonstrated that FL is vulnerable to model
poisoning attacks. Several server-based defense approaches (e.g. robust aggregation) have been proposed to mitigate such attacks. However, we empirically
show that under extremely strong attacks, these defensive methods fail to guarantee the robustness of FL. More importantly, we observe that as long as the
global model is polluted, the impact of attacks on the global model will remain
in subsequent rounds even if there are no subsequent attacks. In this work, we
propose a client-based defense, named White Blood Cell for Federated Learning
(FL-WBC), which can mitigate model poisoning attacks that have already polluted
the global model. The key idea of FL-WBC is to identify the parameter space
where long-lasting attack effect on parameters resides and perturb that space during
local training. Furthermore, we derive a certified robustness guarantee against
model poisoning attacks and a convergence guarantee to FedAvg after applying our
FL-WBC. We conduct experiments on FasionMNIST and CIFAR10 to evaluate
the defense against state-of-the-art model poisoning attacks. The results demonstrate that our method can effectively mitigate model poisoning attack impact
on the global model within 5 communication rounds with nearly no accuracy
drop under both IID and non-IID settings. Our defense is also complementary
to existing server-based robust aggregation approaches and can further improve
the robustness of FL under extremely strong attacks. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/jeremy313/FL-WBC.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1, 2] is a popular distributed learning approach that enables a number of
edge devices to train a shared model in a federated fashion without transferring their local training
data. However, recent works [3–12] show that it is easy for edge devices to conduct model poisoning
attacks by manipulating local training process to pollute the global model through aggregation.
Depending on the adversarial goals, model poisoning attacks can be classified as untargeted model
poisoning attacks [3–6], which aim to make the global model indiscriminately have a high error rate
on any test input, or targeted model poisoning attacks [7–12], where the goal is to make the global
model generate attacker-desired misclassifications for some particular test samples. Our work focuses
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

