Episodic Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning with
Curiosity-driven Exploration

Lulu Zheng∗ 1 , Jiarui Chen∗ 2 3 , Jianhao Wang1 , Jiamin He4† , Yujing Hu3 , Yingfeng Chen3 ,
Changjie Fan3 , Yang Gao2 , Chongjie Zhang1
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase, China
4
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada
zll19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chenjiarui@smail.nju.edu.cn
wjh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jiamin12@ualberta.ca
{huyujing, chenyingfeng01, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com
gaoy@nju.edu.cn
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Efficient exploration in deep cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) still remains challenging in complex coordination problems. In this
paper, we introduce a novel Episodic Multi-agent reinforcement learning with
Curiosity-driven exploration, called EMC. We leverage an insight of popular factorized MARL algorithms that the “induced" individual Q-values, i.e., the individual
utility functions used for local execution, are the embeddings of local actionobservation histories, and can capture the interaction between agents due to reward
backpropagation during centralized training. Therefore, we use prediction errors
of individual Q-values as intrinsic rewards for coordinated exploration and utilize episodic memory to exploit explored informative experience to boost policy
training. As the dynamics of an agent’s individual Q-value function captures
the novelty of states and the influence from other agents, our intrinsic reward
can induce coordinated exploration to new or promising states. We illustrate the
advantages of our method by didactic examples, and demonstrate its significant
outperformance over state-of-the-art MARL baselines on challenging tasks in the
StarCraft II micromanagement benchmark.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has great promise to solve many real-world
multi-agent problems, such as autonomous cars [1] and robots [2]. These complex applications post
two major challenges for cooperative MARL: scalability, i.e., the joint-action space exponentially
grows as the number of agents increases, and partial observability, which requires agents to make
decentralized decisions based on their local action-observation histories due to communication
constraints. Luckily, a popular MARL paradigm, called centralized training with decentralized
execution (CTDE) [3], is adopted to deal with these challenges. With this paradigm, agents’ policies
are trained with access to global information in a centralized way and executed only based on local
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work performed while visiting Tsinghua Univeristy.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

