Understanding Partial Multi-label Learning via
Mutual Information
Xiuwen Gong †,‡ , Dong Yuan† , Wei Bao †
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
‡
Hunan Huishiwei Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd.
{xiuwen.gong, dong.yuan, wei.bao}@sydney.edu.au
†

Abstract
To deal with ambiguities in partial multi-label learning (PML), state-of-the-art
methods perform disambiguation by identifying ground-truth labels directly. However, there is an essential question:“Can the ground-truth labels be identified
precisely?". If yes, “How can the ground-truth labels be found?". This paper
provides affirmative answers to these questions. Instead of adopting hand-made
heuristic strategy, we propose a novel Mutual Information Label Identification
for Partial Multi-Label Learning (MILI-PML), which is derived from a clear
probabilistic formulation and could be easily interpreted theoretically from the
mutual information perspective, as well as naturally incorporates the feature/label
relevancy into consideration. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets clearly demonstrate the superiorities of the proposed MILI-PML.

1

Introduction

Partial multi-label learning (PML) [1, 2] is a weakly supervised learning problem, where each instance
is associated with a set of candidate labels, but only a part of them are the ground-truth labels while
others are false positive labels.
In recent years, many real-world applications are arising due to the growing demand for identifying
ground-truth labels from partially labeled data, which are easier and less costly to obtain. For example,
in crowdsourcing image annotation, a web image might be annotated online by a potential unreliable
annotator with many specific labels, but only some of them are accurate.
PML aims to train a classifier from partially labeled data so as to predict the ground-truth labels for
an unseen instance automatically. The main challenge is how to deal with the ambiguities caused by
false positive labels in candidate label set. One straightforward way is to simply treat all candidate
labels equally as the ground-truth labels, and then solve the PML problem by standard multi-label
classification methods [3, 4]. However, these methods can be easily misled by the noisy false-positive
labels in the candidate set, and fail to generalize well in testing. To deal with the problem, the
state-of-the-art PML research attempts to identify the ground-truth labels directly from the candidate
label set, which becomes a popular and effective disambiguation strategy.
However, there are two fundamental issues, “Can the ground-truth labels be identified precisely?". If
yes, “How can the ground-truth labels be found?". Moreover, the state-of-the-art PML methods are
constructed by hand-designed heuristic modeling under considerations like feature/label correlations
with no theoretical interpretation.
In this paper, instead of hand-made heuristic modeling, we propose a novel MILI-PML model, which
is derived from a clear probabilistic formulation and can be easily interpreted theoretically by information theory. Besides, MILI-PML naturally incorporates the feature/label relevancy considerations
rather than that of heuristic modeling.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

