Risk-Averse Bayes-Adaptive Reinforcement Learning

Bruno Lacerda
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
bruno@robots.ox.ac.uk

Marc Rigter
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
mrigter@robots.ox.ac.uk

Nick Hawes
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
nickh@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work, we address risk-averse Bayes-adaptive reinforcement learning. We
pose the problem of optimising the conditional value at risk (CVaR) of the total
return in Bayes-adaptive Markov decision processes (MDPs). We show that a policy
optimising CVaR in this setting is risk-averse to both the epistemic uncertainty
due to the prior distribution over MDPs, and the aleatoric uncertainty due to the
inherent stochasticity of MDPs. We reformulate the problem as a two-player
stochastic game and propose an approximate algorithm based on Monte Carlo tree
search and Bayesian optimisation. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach
significantly outperforms baseline approaches for this problem.

1

Introduction

In standard model-based reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with an unknown environment to maximise the expected reward [42]. However, for any given episode the total reward received
by the agent is uncertain. There are two sources of this uncertainty: the epistemic (or parametric)
uncertainty due to imperfect knowledge about the underlying MDP model, and aleatoric (or internal)
uncertainty due to the inherent stochasticity of the underlying MDP [20]. In many domains, we wish
to find policies which are risk-averse to both sources of uncertainty.
As an illustrative example, consider a navigation system for an automated taxi service. The system
attempts to minimise travel duration subject to uncertainty due to the traffic conditions, and traffic
lights and pedestrian crossings. For each new day of operation, the traffic conditions are initially
unknown. This corresponds to epistemic uncertainty over the MDP model. This uncertainty is
reduced as the agent collects experience and learns which roads are busy or not busy. Traffic lights
and pedestrian crossings cause stochasticity in the transition durations corresponding to aleatoric
uncertainty. The aleatoric uncertainty remains even as the agent learns about the environment. A
direct route, i.e. through the centre of the city, optimises the expected journey duration. However,
occasionally this route incurs extremely long durations due to some combination of poor traffic
conditions and getting stuck at traffic lights and pedestrian crossings. Thus, bad outcomes can be
caused by a combination of both sources of uncertainty. These rare outcomes may result in unhappy
customers for the taxi service. Therefore, we wish to be risk-averse and prioritise greater certainty of
avoiding poor outcomes rather than expected performance. To ensure that the risk of a bad journey is
avoided, the navigation system must consider both the epistemic and the aleatoric uncertainties.
In model-based Bayesian RL, a belief distribution over the underlying MDP is maintained. This
quantifies the epistemic uncertainty over the underlying MDP given the transitions observed so far.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

