Catch-A-Waveform: Learning to Generate Audio
from a Single Short Example

Gal Greshler
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
galgreshler@gmail.com

Tamar Rott Shaham
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
stamarot@campus.technion.ac.il

Tomer Michaeli
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Models for audio generation are typically trained on hours of recordings. Here, we
illustrate that capturing the essence of an audio source is typically possible from as
little as a few tens of seconds from a single training signal. Specifically, we present
a GAN-based generative model that can be trained on one short audio signal from
any domain (e.g. speech, music, etc.) and does not require pre-training or any
other form of external supervision. Once trained, our model can generate random
samples of arbitrary duration that maintain semantic similarity to the training
waveform, yet exhibit new compositions of its audio primitives. This enables a
long line of interesting applications, including generating new jazz improvisations
or new a-cappella rap variants based on a single short example, producing coherent
modifications to famous songs (e.g. adding a new verse to a Beatles song based
solely on the original recording), filling-in of missing parts (inpainting), extending
the bandwidth of a speech signal (super-resolution), and enhancing old recordings
without access to any clean training example. We show that in most cases, no more
than 20 seconds of training audio suffice for our model to achieve state-of-the-art
results. This is despite its complete lack of prior knowledge about the nature of
audio signals in general.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep models for audio generation have had an immense impact on a wide range of
applications, including text-to-speech synthesis [12, 38, 15, 7], voice-to-voice translation [8, 53],
music generation [33, 11], singing voice conversion [8, 53], timbre transfer [16, 40], bandwidthextension [29, 6], and audio inpainting [37]. Existing generative models require large datasets of
training signals from the domain of interest. However, there are practical scenarios in which such
datasets are extremely hard to collect, or are even nonexistent. Examples include a speaker that has
only recorded a few sentences, an artist that had the chance to record only a few songs, or a unique
jazz improvisation appearing in one particular recording. A natural question to ask, then, is whether
large amounts of training data are a necessity for training a generative model.
Here, we take this question to the extreme. We illustrate that capturing the essence of an audio source
is possible from as little as a few tens of seconds from a single training recording. Specifically, we
present a generative adversarial network (GAN) based model that can be trained on one short raw
waveform and does not require pre-training or any other type of external supervision 1 . Once the
1

code is available at https://github.com/galgreshler/Catch-A-Waveform

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

