Revisiting 3D Object Detection From
an Egocentric Perspective

Boyang Deng† ∗

Charles R. Qi†

Mahyar Najibi†

Thomas Funkhouser‡

Yin Zhou†

Dragomir Anguelov†

†

‡

Waymo LLC

Google Research

Abstract
3D object detection is a key module in safety-critical robotics applications such
as autonomous driving. For such applications, we care the most about how the
detections impact the ego-agent’s behavior and safety (the egocentric perspective).
Intuitively, we seek more accurate descriptions of object geometry when it’s more
likely to interfere with the ego-agent’s motion trajectory. However, current detection metrics, based on box Intersection-over-Union (IoU), are object-centric and are
not designed to capture the spatio-temporal relationship between objects and the
ego-agent. To address this issue, we propose a new egocentric measure to evaluate
3D object detection: Support Distance Error (SDE). Our analysis based on SDE
reveals that the egocentric detection quality is bounded by the coarse geometry of
the bounding boxes. Given the insight that SDE can be improved by more accurate geometry descriptions, we propose to represent objects as amodal contours,
specifically amodal star-shaped polygons, and devise a simple model, StarPoly, to
predict such contours. Our experiments on the large-scale Waymo Open Dataset
show that SDE better reflects the impact of detection quality on the ego-agent’s
safety compared to IoU; and the estimated contours from StarPoly consistently
improve the egocentric detection quality over recent 3D object detectors.

1

Introduction

3D object detection is a key problem in robotics, including popular applications such as autonomous
driving. Common evaluation metrics for this problem, e.g. mean Average Precision (mAP) based
on box Intersection-over-Union (IoU), follow an object-centric approach, where errors on different
objects are computed and aggregated without taking their spatiotemporal relationships with the egoagent into account. While these metrics provide a good proxy for downstream performance in general
scene understanding applications, they have limitations for egocentric applications, e.g. autonomous
driving, where detections are used to assist navigation of the ego-agent. In these applications,
detecting potential collisions on the ego-agent’s trajectory is critical. Accordingly, evaluation metrics
should focus more on the objects closer to the planned trajectory and to the parts/boundaries of those
objects that are closer to the trajectory.
Recent works have introduced a few modifications to evaluation protocols to address these issues,
e.g., breaking down the metrics into different distance buckets [53] or using learned planning models
to reflect detection quality [34]. However, they are either very coarse [53] or rely on optimized
neural networks [34], making it difficult to interpret and compare results in different settings. In this
∗

Correspondence to bydeng@waymo.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

