Scalable Inference of Sparsely-changing Gaussian
Markov Random Fields
Salar Fattahi
Department of Industrial & Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
fattahi@umich.edu
Andrés Gómez
Department of Industrial & System Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
gomezand@usc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of inferring time-varying Gaussian Markov random fields,
where the underlying graphical model is both sparse and changes sparsely over
time. Most of the existing methods for the inference of time-varying Markov random fields (MRFs) rely on the regularized maximum likelihood estimation (MLE),
that typically suffer from weak statistical guarantees and high computational time.
Instead, we introduce a new class of constrained optimization problems for the
inference of sparsely-changing Gaussian MRFs (GMRFs). The proposed optimization problem is formulated based on the exact `0 regularization, and can be solved
in near-linear time and memory. Moreover, we show that the proposed estimator
enjoys a provably small estimation error. We derive sharp statistical guarantees in
the high-dimensional regime, showing that such problems can be learned with as
few as one sample per time period. Our proposed method is extremely efficient in
practice: it can accurately estimate sparsely-changing GMRFs with more than 500
million variables in less than one hour.

1

Introduction

Contemporary systems are comprised of massive numbers of interconnected components that interact
according to a hierarchy of complex, unknown, and time-varying topologies. For example, with
billions of neurons and hundreds of thousands of voxels, the human brain is considered as one of
the most complex physiological networks [18, 22, 28, 30, 37]. The temporal behavior of today’s
interconnected systems can be captured via time-varying Markov random fields (MRF). Time-varying
MRFs are associated with a temporal sequence of undirected Markov graphs Gt (V, Et ), where V
and Et are the set of nodes and edges in the graph at time t. The node set V represents the random
variables in the model, while the edge set Et captures the conditional dependency between these
variables at time t. A popular approach for the inference of MRFs is based on the maximum-likelihood
estimation (MLE): to obtain a model based on which the observed data is most probable to occur [42].
Despite being known as theoretically powerful tools [20, 39], MLE-based methods suffer from several
fundamental drawbacks which render them impractical in realistic settings. First, they often suffer
from notoriously high computational cost in massive problems, where the number of variables to be
inferred is in the order of millions, or more. Second, they struggle to incorporate sparsity amongst
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

