Learning to Generate Realistic Noisy Images via
Pixel-level Noise-aware Adversarial Training

Yuanhao Cai 1,2 , Xiaowan Hu 1,2 , Haoqian Wang 1,2,∗ ,
Yulun Zhang 3 , Hanspeter Pfister 4 , Donglai Wei 5
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
2
Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology,
3
ETH Zürich, 4 Harvard University, 5 Boston College

Abstract
Existing deep learning real denoising methods require a large amount of noisyclean image pairs for supervision. Nonetheless, capturing a real noisy-clean dataset
is an unacceptable expensive and cumbersome procedure. To alleviate this problem,
this work investigates how to generate realistic noisy images. Firstly, we formulate
a simple yet reasonable noise model that treats each real noisy pixel as a random
variable. This model splits the noisy image generation problem into two subproblems: image domain alignment and noise domain alignment. Subsequently,
we propose a novel framework, namely Pixel-level Noise-aware Generative Adversarial Network (PNGAN). PNGAN employs a pre-trained real denoiser to map the
fake and real noisy images into a nearly noise-free solution space to perform image
domain alignment. Simultaneously, PNGAN establishes a pixel-level adversarial
training to conduct noise domain alignment. Additionally, for better noise fitting,
we present an efficient architecture Simple Multi-scale Network (SMNet) as the
generator. Qualitative validation shows that noise generated by PNGAN is highly
similar to real noise in terms of intensity and distribution. Quantitative experiments
demonstrate that a series of denoisers trained with the generated noisy images
achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on four real denoising benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Image denoising is an important yet challenging problem in low-level vision. It aims to restore a
clean image from its noisy counterpart. Traditional approaches concentrate on designing a rational
maximum a posteriori (MAP) model, containing regularization and fidelity terms, from a Bayesian
perspective [1]. Some image priors like low-rankness [2, 3, 4], sparsity [5], and non-local similarity [6,
7] are exploited to customize a better rational MAP model. However, these hand-crafted methods
are inferior in representing capacity. With the development of deep learning, image denoising has
witnessed significant progress. Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) applies a powerful learning
model to eliminate noise and has achieved promising performance [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. These
deep CNN denoisers rely on a large-scale dataset of real-world noisy-clean image pairs. Nonetheless,
collecting even small datasets is extremely tedious and labor-intensive. The process of acquiring
real-world noisy-clean image pairs is to take hundreds of noisy images of the same scene and average
them to get the clean image. To get more image pairs, researchers try to synthesize noisy images.
In particular, there are two common settings for synthesizing noisy images. As shown in Fig. 1 (a1),
setting1 directly adds the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with the clean RGB image. For a
long time, single image denoising [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 10] is performed with setting1. Nevertheless,
fundamentally different from AWGN, real camera noise is generally more sophisticated and signaldependent[20, 21]. The noise produced by photon sensing is further affected by the in-camera
signal processing (ISP) pipeline (e.g., Gama correction, compression, and demosaicing). Models
∗

Haoqian Wang is the corresponding author, email: wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

