QVH IGHLIGHTS: Detecting Moments and Highlights
in Videos via Natural Language Queries

Jie Lei
Tamara L. Berg
Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jielei, tlberg, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Detecting customized moments and highlights from videos given natural language
(NL) user queries is an important but under-studied topic. One of the challenges
in pursuing this direction is the lack of annotated data. To address this issue, we
present the Query-based Video Highlights (QVH IGHLIGHTS) dataset. It consists
of over 10,000 YouTube videos, covering a wide range of topics, from everyday
activities and travel in lifestyle vlog videos to social and political activities in
news videos. Each video in the dataset is annotated with: (1) a human-written
free-form NL query, (2) relevant moments in the video w.r.t. the query, and (3)
five-point scale saliency scores for all query-relevant clips. This comprehensive
annotation enables us to develop and evaluate systems that detect relevant moments
as well as salient highlights for diverse, flexible user queries. We also present a
strong baseline for this task, Moment-DETR, a transformer encoder-decoder model
that views moment retrieval as a direct set prediction problem, taking extracted
video and query representations as inputs and predicting moment coordinates
and saliency scores end-to-end. While our model does not utilize any human
prior, we show that it performs competitively when compared to well-engineered
architectures. With weakly supervised pretraining using ASR captions, MomentDETR substantially outperforms previous methods. Lastly, we present several
ablations and visualizations of Moment-DETR. Data and code is publicly available
at https://github.com/jayleicn/moment_detr.

1

Introduction

Internet videos are growing at an unprecedented rate. Enabling users to efficiently search and
browse these massive collections of videos is essential for improving user experience of online video
platforms. While a good amount of work has been done in the area of natural language query based
video search for complete videos (i.e., text-to-video retrieval [41, 42, 17]), returning the whole video
is not always desirable, since they can be quite long (e.g., from few minutes to hours). Instead,
users may want to locate precise moments within a video that are most relevant to their query or see
highlights at a glance so that they can skip to relevant portions of the video easily.
Many datasets [13, 7, 18, 16, 31] have been proposed for the first task of ‘moment retrieval’ –
localizing moments in a video given a user query. However, most of the datasets are reported [4, 18]
to have a strong temporal bias, where more moments appear at the beginning of the videos than at the
end. Meanwhile, for each video-query pair, all of the datasets provide annotations with only a single
moment. In reality, there are often multiple moments, i.e., several disjoint moments in a video, that
are related to a given query. For the second task of ‘highlight detection’, many datasets [38, 12, 36, 8]
are query-agnostic, where the detected highlights do not change for different input user queries.
[22, 43] are the two existing datasets that collect highlights based on user queries. However, only
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

