Global Filter Networks for Image Classification

Yongming Rao∗ Wenliang Zhao∗ Zheng Zhu Jiwen Lu†

Jie Zhou

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology

Abstract
Recent advances in self-attention and pure multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) models
for vision have shown great potential in achieving promising performance with
fewer inductive biases. These models are generally based on learning interaction
among spatial locations from raw data. The complexity of self-attention and MLP
grows quadratically as the image size increases, which makes these models hard
to scale up when high-resolution features are required. In this paper, we present
the Global Filter Network (GFNet), a conceptually simple yet computationally
efficient architecture, that learns long-term spatial dependencies in the frequency
domain with log-linear complexity. Our architecture replaces the self-attention
layer in vision transformers with three key operations: a 2D discrete Fourier
transform, an element-wise multiplication between frequency-domain features and
learnable global filters, and a 2D inverse Fourier transform. We exhibit favorable
accuracy/complexity trade-offs of our models on both ImageNet and downstream
tasks. Our results demonstrate that GFNet can be a very competitive alternative
to transformer-style models and CNNs in efficiency, generalization ability and
robustness. Code is available at https://github.com/raoyongming/GFNet.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture, originally designed for the natural language processing (NLP) tasks [42],
has shown promising performance on various vision problems recently [10, 40, 27, 49, 4, 47, 35, 5].
Different from convolutional neural networks (CNNs), vision transformer models use self-attention
layers to capture long-term dependencies, which are able to learn more diverse interactions between
spatial locations. The pure multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) models [38, 39] further simplify the vision
transformers by replacing the self-attention layers with MLPs that are applied across spatial locations.
Since fewer inductive biases are introduced, these two kinds of models have the potential to learn
more generic and flexible interactions among spatial locations from raw data.
One primary challenge of applying self-attention and pure MLP models to vision tasks is the
considerable computational complexity that grows quadratically as the number of tokens increases.
Therefore, typical vision transformer style models usually consider a relatively small resolution for
the intermediate features (e.g. 14 × 14 tokens are extracted from the input images in both ViT [10]
and MLP-Mixer [38]). This design may limit the applications of downstream dense prediction tasks
like detection and segmentation. A possible solution is to replace the global self-attention with
several local self-attention like Swin transformer [27]. Despite the effectiveness in practice, local
self-attention brings quite a few hand-made choices (e.g., window size, padding strategy, etc.) and
limits the receptive field of each layer.
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

