Towards Instance-Optimal Offline Reinforcement
Learning with Pessimism
Ming Yin 1,2 and Yu-Xiang Wang1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara
Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, UC Santa Barbara
ming_yin@ucsb.edu yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
We study the offline reinforcement learning (offline RL) problem, where the goal
is to learn a reward-maximizing policy in an unknown Markov Decision Process
(MDP) using the data coming from a policy µ. In particular, we consider the sample
complexity problems of offline RL for finite-horizon MDPs. Prior works study
this problem based on different data-coverage assumptions, and their learning
guarantees are expressed by the covering coefficients which lack the explicit
characterization of system quantities. In this work, we analyze the Adaptive
Pessimistic Value Iteration (APVI) algorithm and derive the suboptimality upper
bound that nearly matches

s
r 
H
?
X X ?
Var
(V
+
r
)
1
P
h
s
,a
h+1
h h
O
dπh (sh , ah )
.
(1)
µ
d
(s
,
a
)
n
h h h
s ,a
h=1

h

h

In complementary, we also prove a per-instance information-theoretical lower
?
bound under the weak assumption that dµh (sh , ah ) > 0 if dπh (sh , ah ) > 0. Different from the previous minimax lower bounds, the per-instance lower bound (via
local minimaxity) is a much stronger criterion as it applies to individual instances
separately. Here π ? is a optimal policy, µ is the behavior policy and dµh is the
marginal state-action probability. We call (1) the intrinsic offline reinforcement
learning bound since it directly implies all the existing optimal results: minimax
rate under uniform data-coverage assumption, horizon-free setting, single policy
concentrability, and the tight problem-dependent results. Later, we extend the result
to the assumption-free regime (where we make no assumption on µ) and obtain the
assumption-free intrinsic bound. Due to its generic form, we believe the intrinsic
bound could help illuminate what makes a specific problem hard and reveal the
fundamental challenges in offline RL.

1

Introduction

In offline reinforcement learning (offline RL Levine et al. [2020], Lange et al. [2012]), the goal
is to learn a reward-maximizing policy in an unknown environment (Markov Decision Process or
MDP) using the historical data coming from a (fixed) behavior policy µ. Unlike online RL, where
the agent can keep interacting with the environment and gain new feedback by exploring unvisited
state-action space, offline RL usually populates when such online interplays are expensive or even
unethical. Due to its nature of without the access to interact with the MDP model (which causes
the distributional mismatches), most of the literature that study the sample complexity / provable
efficiency of offline RL (e.g. Le et al. [2019], Chen and Jiang [2019], Xie and Jiang [2020, 2021],
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

