On Blame Attribution for Accountable Multi-Agent
Sequential Decision Making

Stelios Triantafyllou
MPI-SWS
strianta@mpi-sws.org

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Goran Radanovic
MPI-SWS
gradanovic@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Blame attribution is one of the key aspects of accountable decision making, as it
provides means to quantify the responsibility of an agent for a decision making
outcome. In this paper, we study blame attribution in the context of cooperative
multi-agent sequential decision making. As a particular setting of interest, we
focus on cooperative decision making formalized by Multi-Agent Markov Decision
Processes (MMDPs), and we analyze different blame attribution methods derived
from or inspired by existing concepts in cooperative game theory. We formalize
desirable properties of blame attribution in the setting of interest, and we analyze
the relationship between these properties and the studied blame attribution methods.
Interestingly, we show that some of the well known blame attribution methods,
such as Shapley value, are not performance-incentivizing, while others, such as
Banzhaf index, may over-blame agents. To mitigate these value misalignment and
fairness issues, we introduce a novel blame attribution method, unique in the set
of properties it satisfies, which trade-offs explanatory power (by under-blaming
agents) for the aforementioned properties. We further show how to account for
uncertainty about agents’ decision making policies, and we experimentally: a)
validate the qualitative properties of the studied blame attribution methods, and b)
analyze their robustness to uncertainty.
... a body of people1 , holding themselves accountable to nobody, ought not to be trusted by anybody.
—Thomas Paine, A philosopher and a political activist.

1

Introduction

With the widespread usage of artificial intelligence (AI) in everyday life [1, 2, 3], accountability has
become one of the central problems in the study of AI. Much recent research studied what constitutes
accountability in the context of AI and how to design accountable AI systems [4, 5, 6], and recent
policies and legislations [7] are increasingly highlighting the importance of accountability, aiming to
provide guidelines for developing and deploying accountable AI systems.
Accountability is a relatively broad term, and it typically involves an actor (or multiple actors)
justifying their decisions and facing consequences for actions taken [6, 8]. Hence, two critical aspects
of accountability are explainability and blame attribution. Recent work proposed various methods for
explaining, interpreting, understanding, and certifying algorithmic decision-making and its outcomes
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. In this paper we study the other critical aspect of accountability – blame
attribution.
1

Originally, and by modern standards outdated, Thomas Paine used phrasing with the word men.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

