Sample-Efficient Learning of Stackelberg Equilibria
in General-Sum Games
Yu Bai
Salesforce Research
yu.bai@salesforce.com

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Huan Wang
Salesforce Research
huan.wang@salesforce.com

Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
cxiong@salesforce.com

Abstract
Real world applications such as economics and policy making often involve solving multi-agent games with two unique features: (1) The agents are inherently
asymmetric and partitioned into leaders and followers; (2) The agents have different reward functions, thus the game is general-sum. The majority of existing
results in this field focuses on either symmetric solution concepts (e.g. Nash
equilibrium) or zero-sum games. It remains open how to learn the Stackelberg
equilibrium—an asymmetric analog of the Nash equilibrium—in general-sum
games efficiently from noisy samples. This paper initiates the theoretical study of
sample-efficient learning of the Stackelberg equilibrium, in the bandit feedback
setting where we only observe noisy samples of the reward. We consider three
representative two-player general-sum games: bandit games, bandit-reinforcement
learning (bandit-RL) games, and linear bandit games. In all these games, we
identify a fundamental gap between the exact value of the Stackelberg equilibrium
and its estimated version using finitely many noisy samples, which can not be
closed information-theoretically regardless of the algorithm. We then establish
sharp positive results on sample-efficient learning of Stackelberg equilibrium with
value optimal up to the gap identified above, with matching lower bounds in the
dependency on the gap, error tolerance, and the size of the action spaces. Overall,
our results unveil unique challenges in learning Stackelberg equilibria under noisy
bandit feedback, which we hope could shed light on future research on this topic.

1

Introduction

Real-world problems such as economic design and policy making can often be modeled as multiagent games that involves two levels of thinking: The policy maker—as a player in this game—
needs to reason about the other player’s optimal behaviors given her decision, in order to inform
her own optimal decision making. Consider for example the optimal taxation problem in the AI
Economist [53], a game modeling a real-world social-economic system involving a leader (e.g. the
government) and a group of interacting followers (e.g. citizens). The leader sets a tax rate which
determines an economics-like game for the followers; the followers then play in this game with
the objective to maximize their own reward (such as individual productivity). However, the goal
of the leader is to maximize her own reward (such as overall equality) which is in general different
from the followers’ rewards, making these games general-sum [38]. Such two-level thinking appears
broadly in other applications as well such as in automated mechanism design [11, 12], optimal
auctions [10, 14], security games [43], reward shaping [25], and so on.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

