No-regret Online Learning over Riemannian
Manifolds
Xi Wang
AMSS
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
wangxi14@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Zhipeng Tu
AMSS
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
tuzhipeng@amss.ac.cn

Yingyi Wu
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
wuyy@ucas.ac.cn

Yiguang Hong∗
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
yghong@iss.ac.cn

Guodong Shi
The University of Sydney
NSW, Australia
guodong.shi@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We consider online optimization over Riemannian manifolds, where a learner
attempts to minimize a sequence of time-varying loss functions defined on Riemannian manifolds. Though many Euclidean online convex optimization algorithms
have been proven useful in a wide range of areas, less attention has been paid to
their Riemannian counterparts. In this paper, we study Riemannian online gradient descent (R-OGD) on Hadamard manifolds for both geodesically convex and
strongly geodesically convex loss functions, and Riemannian bandit algorithm
(R-BAN) on Hadamard homogeneous manifolds for geodesically convex functions.
We establish upper bounds on the regrets of the problem with respect to time
horizon, manifold curvature, and manifold dimension. We also find a universal
lower bound for the achievable regret by constructing an online convex optimization problem on Hadamard manifolds. All the obtained regret bounds match the
corresponding results are provided in Euclidean spaces. Finally, some numerical
experiments validate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

The online optimization has been widely studied in the past decades in online routing, spam filtering,
and machine learning [4, 23, 8]. Without a prior knowledge of loss functions, an online convex
optimization algorithm predicts solutions before the loss function is revealed.
In this paper, we consider the following Riemannian online convex optimization (R-OCO) problem,
min

xt ∈K⊂M

ft (xt ), t = 1, 2, . . . , T,

(1)

where M is a complete Riemannian manifold equipped with a Riemannian metric g and K is a
geodesically convex (g-convex) subset of M. Here, {ft }t=1,2,...,T is a sequence of unknown loss
functions and every ft is a geodesically convex (g-convex) function with sufficient smoothness.
The R-OCO problem (1) extends the online convex optimization in Euclidean spaces with potential
applications in machine learning, such as online principal component analysis (PCA), dictionary
learning, and neural networks [28, 19, 25].
∗

Correspondence author (Y. Hong, +86-10-82541888 )

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

