Gauge Equivariant Transformer

1

Lingshen He1∗ Yiming Dong1∗ Yisen Wang1,2 Dacheng Tao4 Zhouchen Lin1,2,3†
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330,
4
JD Explore Academy, JD.com
lingshenhe@pku.edu.cn, yimingdong ml@outlook.com,
yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com, zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention mechanism has shown great performance and efficiency in a lot of
deep learning models, in which relative position encoding plays a crucial role.
However, when introducing attention to manifolds, there is no canonical local
coordinate system to parameterize neighborhoods. To address this issue, we
propose an equivariant transformer to make our model agnostic to the orientation of
local coordinate systems (i.e., gauge equivariant), which employs multi-head selfattention to jointly incorporate both position-based and content-based information.
To enhance expressive ability, we adopt regular field of cyclic groups as feature
fields in intermediate layers, and propose a novel method to parallel transport
the feature vectors in these fields. In addition, we project the position vector of
each point onto its local coordinate system to disentangle the orientation of the
coordinate system in ambient space (i.e., global coordinate system), achieving
rotation invariance. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to introduce
gauge equivariance to self-attention, thus name our model Gauge Equivariant
Transformer (GET), which can be efficiently implemented on triangle meshes.
Extensive experiments show that GET achieves state-of-the-art performance on
two common recognition tasks.

1

Introduction

Recently, Transformer has dominated the area of Natural Language Processing [48]. Its key advantage
over previous methods is its ability to attend to the most relevant part in a given context. This is
largely attributed to its self-attention operator, which computes the similarity between representations
of words in sequences in the form of attention scores. Because of the superiority, researchers start to
apply Transformer to other learning areas, including Computer Vision [26, 53, 16, 59] and Graphs
[49].
In this work, we aim at applying Transformer to manifolds. Unlike regular data, such as images, where
each neighbor owns a clearly quantified relative position to its center in a canonical coordinate system,
irregular data do not have a uniquely defined local coordinate system for the neighbors, resulting in
the problem of orientation ambiguity, which directly obstructs the Transformer to numerically intake
the relative position information.
Several works have been proposed to deal with the rotation ambiguity problem, in which a promising
way is to exploit gauge equivariance. While most of them are not rotation invariant to global
∗

Work was done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
Equal contribution. Sorted by tossing the coin.
†
Corresponding author.

∗

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

