Misspecified Gaussian Process Bandit Optimization
Ilija Bogunovic
ETH Zürich

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing a black-box function based on noisy
bandit feedback. Kernelized bandit algorithms have shown strong empirical and
theoretical performance for this problem. They heavily rely on the assumption
that the model is well-specified, however, and can fail without it. Instead, we
introduce a misspecified kernelized bandit setting where the unknown function can
be ✏–uniformly approximated by a function with a bounded norm in some Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). We design efficient and practical algorithms
whose performance degrades minimally in the presence of model misspecification.
Specifically, we present two algorithms based on Gaussian process (GP) methods:
an optimistic EC-GP-UCB algorithm that requires knowing the misspecification
error, and Phased GP Uncertainty Sampling, an elimination-type algorithm that
can adapt to unknown model misspecification. We provide upper bounds on
their cumulative regret in terms of ✏, the time horizon, and the underlying kernel,
and we show that our algorithm achieves optimal dependence on ✏ with no prior
knowledge of misspecification. In addition, in a stochastic contextual setting,
we show that EC-GP-UCB can be effectively combined with the regret bound
balancing strategy and attain similar regret bounds despite not knowing ✏.

1

Introduction

Bandit optimization has been successfully used in a great number of machine learning and
real-world applications, e.g., in mobile health [42], environmental monitoring [40], economics [27],
hyperparameter tuning [26], to name a few. To scale to large or continuous domains, modern bandit
approaches try to model and exploit the problem structure that is often manifested as correlations
in rewards of "similar" actions. Hence, the key idea of kernelized bandits is to consider only smooth
reward functions of a low norm belonging to a chosen Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS)
of functions. This permits the application of flexible nonparametric Gaussian process (GP) models
and Bayesian optimization methods via a well-studied link between RKHS functions and GPs (see,
e.g., [18] for a concise review).
A vast majority of previous works on nonparametric kernelized bandits have focused on designing
algorithms and theoretical bounds on the standard notions of regret (see, e.g., [40, 9, 35]). However,
they solely focus on the realizable (i.e., well-specified) case in which one assumes perfect knowledge
of the true function class. For example, the analysis of the prominent GP-UCB [40] algorithm
assumes the model to be well-specified and ignores potential misspecification issues. As the
realizability assumption may be too restrictive in real applications, we focus on the case where it
may only hold approximately. In practice, model misspecifications can arise due to various reasons,
such as incorrect choice of kernel, consideration of an overly smooth function class, hyperparameter
estimation errors, etc. Hence, an open question is to characterize the impact of model misspecification
in the kernelized setting, and to design robust algorithms whose performance degrades optimally
with the increasing level of misspecification.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

