Dynamic Inference with Neural Interpreters

Muhammad Waleed Gondal∗,1
Yoshua Bengio†,2

Nasim Rahaman∗,1,2,3,‡
Francesco Locatello†,3

Shruti Joshi1

Peter Gehler3

Bernhard Schölkopf†,1

Abstract
Modern neural network architectures can leverage large amounts of data to generalize well within the training distribution. However, they are less capable of
systematic generalization to data drawn from unseen but related distributions, a feat
that is hypothesized to require compositional reasoning and reuse of knowledge. In
this work, we present Neural Interpreters, an architecture that factorizes inference
in a self-attention network as a system of modules, which we call functions. Inputs
to the model are routed through a sequence of functions in a way that is end-to-end
learned. The proposed architecture can flexibly compose computation along width
and depth, and lends itself well to capacity extension after training. To demonstrate
the versatility of Neural Interpreters, we evaluate it in two distinct settings: image
classification and visual abstract reasoning on Raven Progressive Matrices. In the
former, we show that Neural Interpreters perform on par with the vision transformer
using fewer parameters, while being transferrable to a new task in a sample efficient
manner. In the latter, we find that Neural Interpreters are competitive with respect
to the state-of-the-art in terms of systematic generalization.

1

Introduction

Rule-based programming is the basis of computer science, and builds the foundation of symbolic-AI
based expert systems that attempt to emulate human decision-making to solve real-world problems.
The process of inference entails channeling information through a chain of computational units (e.g.,
logical primitives) and culminates in a conclusion that answers a given query. Such systems have
the advantage that they permit efficient reuse of computational units and enable iterative reasoning
over multiple cycles of computation. As a simple example, consider the relation parent_child(A,
B), which can be used to construct a new relation sibling(U, V) = parent_child(A, U) AND
parent_child(A, V), which in turn can be used to construct yet another relation cousin(U, V) =
parent_child(X, U) AND parent_child(Y, V) AND sibling(X, Y), and so on. However,
such systems are known to suffer from the knowledge acquisition problem, which is the inability to
leverage unstructured data to derive new computational units and improve existing ones [30].
In stark contrast to the symbolic paradigm, modern machine learning models excel at absorbing large
amounts of unstructured data and yield strong performance in many challenging domains, ranging
from large-scale image classification to language modelling. However, they are relatively rigid in how
they share and reuse computation in order to process information: convolutional neural networks, for
instance, process the content of an image at every location to arrive at the class label of a given image.
In doing so, they only reuse computational units (here, convolutional filters) laterally at a constant
depth i.e., amongst information being processed simultaneously. In the same spirit, recurrent neural
networks only reuse computational units (here, RNN cells) vertically, i.e., in depth. Such rigidity
∗,†

Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically by last name. 1 Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen. 2 Mila, Québec. 3 Amazon Web Services. ‡ Work partially done during an internship at Amazon Web
Services.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

