SLAPS: Self-Supervision Improves Structure
Learning for Graph Neural Networks

Bahare Fatemi∗
University of British Columbia
bfatemi@cs.ubc.ca
Layla El Asri
Borealis AI
layla.elasri@borealisai.com

Seyed Mehran Kazemi∗
Google Research
mehrankazemi@google.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) work well when the graph structure is provided.
However, this structure may not always be available in real-world applications.
One solution to this problem is to infer a task-specific latent structure and then
apply a GNN to the inferred graph. Unfortunately, the space of possible graph
structures grows super-exponentially with the number of nodes and so the taskspecific supervision may be insufficient for learning both the structure and the GNN
parameters. In this work, we propose the Simultaneous Learning of Adjacency and
GNN Parameters with Self-supervision, or SLAPS, a method that provides more
supervision for inferring a graph structure through self-supervision. A comprehensive experimental study demonstrates that SLAPS scales to large graphs with
hundreds of thousands of nodes and outperforms several models that have been
proposed to learn a task-specific graph structure on established benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Graph representation learning has grown rapidly and found applications in domains where a natural
graph of the data points is available [4, 25]. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [40] have been a key
component to the success of the research in this area. Specifically, GNNs have shown promising
results for semi-supervised classification when the available graph structure exhibits a high degree of
homophily (i.e. connected nodes often belong to the same class) [57].
We study the applicability of GNNs to (semi-supervised) classification problems where a graph
structure is not readily available. The existing approaches for this problem either fix a similarity
graph between the nodes or learn the GNN parameters and a graph structure simultaneously (see
Related Work). In both cases, one main goal is to construct or learn a graph structure with a high
degree of homophily with respect to the labels to aid the GNN classification. The latter approach is
sometimes called latent graph learning and often results in higher predictive performance compared
to the former approach (see, e.g., [12]).
We identify a supervision starvation problem in latent graph learning approaches in which the edges
between pairs of nodes that are far from labeled nodes receive insufficient supervision; this results
in learning poor structures away from labeled nodes and hence poor generalization. We propose a
solution for this problem by adopting a multi-task learning framework in which we supplement the
classification task with a self-supervised task. The self-supervised task is based on the hypothesis
∗

Work was done when authors were at Borealis AI.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

