Deep learning is adaptive to intrinsic dimensionality
of model smoothness in anisotropic Besov space

Taiji Suzuki
Department of Mathematical Informatics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Atsushi Nitanda
Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

Abstract
Deep learning has exhibited superior performance for various tasks, especially
for high-dimensional datasets, such as images. To understand this property,
we investigate the approximation and estimation ability of deep learning on
anisotropic Besov spaces. The anisotropic Besov space is characterized by
direction-dependent smoothness and includes several function classes that have
been investigated thus far. We demonstrate that the approximation error and estimation error of deep learning only depend on the average value of the smoothness parameters in all directions. Consequently, the curse of dimensionality can
be avoided if the smoothness of the target function is highly anisotropic. Unlike existing studies, our analysis does not require a low-dimensional structure of
the input data. We also investigate the minimax optimality of deep learning and
compare its performance with that of the kernel method (more generally, linear
estimators). The results show that deep learning has better dependence on the input dimensionality if the target function possesses anisotropic smoothness, and it
achieves an adaptive rate for functions with spatially inhomogeneous smoothness.

1

Introduction

Based on the recent literature pertaining to machine learning, deep learning has exhibited superior
performance in several tasks such as image recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), natural language
processing (Devlin et al., 2018), and image synthesis (Radford et al., 2015). In particular, its superiority is remarkable for complicated and high-dimensional data like images. This is mainly due to its
high flexibility and superior feature-extraction ability for effectively extracting the intrinsic structure
of data. Its theoretical analysis also has been extensively developed considering several aspects such
as expressive ability, optimization, and generalization error.
Amongst representation ability analysis of deep neural networks such as universal approximation
ability (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik, 1991; Sonoda & Murata, 2017), approximation theory of deep
neural networks on typical function classes such as Hölder, Sobolev, and Besov spaces have been
extensively studied. In particular, analyses of deep neural networks with the ReLU activation (Nair
& Hinton, 2010; Glorot et al., 2011) have been recently developed. Schmidt-Hieber (2020) showed
that the deep learning with ReLU activations can achieve the minimax optimal estimation accuracy
to estimate composite functions in Hölder spaces by using the approximation theory of Yarotsky
(2017). Suzuki (2019) generalized this analysis to those on the Besov space and the mixed smooth
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

