Scaling Ensemble Distribution Distillation to Many
Classes with Proxy Targets
Max Ryabinin⇤
Yandex, HSE University
Moscow, Russia
mryabinin0@gmail.com

Andrey Malinin ⇤
Yandex, HSE University
Moscow, Russia
am969@yandex-team.ru

Mark Gales
Cambridge-ALTA Institute
Cambridge, United Kingdom
mjfg@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Ensembles of machine learning models yield improved system performance as well
as robust and interpretable uncertainty estimates; however, their inference costs can
be prohibitively high. Ensemble Distribution Distillation (EnD2 ) is an approach
that allows a single model to efficiently capture both the predictive performance
and uncertainty estimates of an ensemble. For classification, this is achieved by
training a Dirichlet distribution over the ensemble members’ output distributions
via the maximum likelihood criterion. Although theoretically principled, this work
shows that the criterion exhibits poor convergence when applied to large-scale
tasks where the number of classes is very high. Specifically, we show that for
the Dirichlet log-likelihood criterion classes with low probability induce larger
gradients than high-probability classes. Hence during training the model focuses on
the distribution of the ensemble tail-class probabilities rather than the probability of
the correct and closely related classes. We propose a new training objective which
minimizes the reverse KL-divergence to a Proxy-Dirichlet target derived from the
ensemble. This loss resolves the gradient issues of EnD2 , as we demonstrate both
theoretically and empirically on the ImageNet, LibriSpeech, and WMT17 En-De
datasets containing 1000, 5000, and 40,000 classes, respectively.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models are being deployed ever more widely into production, especially in safetycritical applications such as self-driving cars or medical diagnostics, obtaining reliable estimates
of uncertainty in their predictions becomes increasingly important to guaranteeing their safety and
reliability [1]. Ensemble methods are known to yield both improved predictive performance and
reliable uncertainty estimates [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Furthermore, ensembles allow separating out total
uncertainty into data and knowledge uncertainty2 . The former is the intrinsic uncertainty due to
class overlap and noise inherent in the data, while the latter is the model’s uncertainty due to lack
of understanding of the test data [7]. Estimates of knowledge uncertainty are often used to detect
anomalous and unfamiliar inputs [8, 9, 10, 7] as well as in active learning [11].
Despite their numerous advantages, using ensembles can be computationally prohibitive. Obtaining
predictions in real time is often expensive even for a single model, and the hardware requirements
for serving an ensemble scale linearly with size. As a result, over the past several years the area of
ensemble distillation has gained increasing attention. Broadly speaking, distillation methods aim to
train a single model which can approximate the behavior of an ensemble, but at low computational
cost. In the simplest and most frequently used form of distillation [12], the student model is trained
to capture the average prediction of the ensemble: for example, in case of classification this reduces
⇤

2

Equal contribution, order decided by coin toss.
Data and Knowledge Uncertainty are also known as Aleatoric and Epistemic uncertainty.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

