On component interactions in
two-stage recommender systems

Jiri Hron
University of Cambridge

Karl Krauth
UC Berkeley

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley

Niki Kilbertus
Technical University of Munich
Helmholtz AI, Munich

Abstract
Thanks to their scalability, two-stage recommenders are used by many of today’s
largest online platforms, including YouTube, LinkedIn, and Pinterest. These
systems produce recommendations in two steps: (i) multiple nominators—tuned for
low prediction latency—preselect a small subset of candidates from the whole item
pool; (ii) a slower but more accurate ranker further narrows down the nominated
items, and serves to the user. Despite their popularity, the literature on two-stage
recommenders is relatively scarce, and the algorithms are often treated as mere
sums of their parts. Such treatment presupposes that the two-stage performance is
explained by the behavior of the individual components in isolation. This is not
the case: using synthetic and real-world data, we demonstrate that interactions
between the ranker and the nominators substantially affect the overall performance.
Motivated by these findings, we derive a generalization lower bound which shows
that independent nominator training can lead to performance on par with uniformly
random recommendations. We find that careful design of item pools, each assigned
to a different nominator, alleviates these issues. As manual search for a good pool
allocation is difficult, we propose to learn one instead using a Mixture-of-Experts
based approach. This significantly improves both precision and recall at K.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems play a central role in online ecosystems, affecting what media we consume,
which products we buy, or even with whom we interact. A key technical challenge is ensuring these
systems can sift through billions of items to deliver a personalized experience to millions of users
with low response latency. A widely adopted solution to this problem are two-stage recommender
systems [12, 20, 28, 98, 101] where (i) a set of computationally efficient nominators (or candidate
generators) preselects a small number of candidates, which are then (ii) further narrowed down,
reranked, and served to the user by a slower but more statistically accurate ranker.
Nominators are often heterogeneous, ranging from associative rules to recurrent neural networks [18].
A popular choice are matrix factorization [56, 72] and two-tower [98] architectures which model user
feedback by the dot product between user and item embeddings. While user embeddings often evolve
with the changing context of user interactions, item embeddings can typically be precomputed before
deployment. The cost of candidate generation is thus dominated by the (approximate) computation of
the embedding dot products. In contrast, the ranker often takes both the user and item features as
input, making the computational cost linear in the number of items even at deployment [20, 67].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

