Low-Rank Extragradient Method for Nonsmooth and
Low-Rank Matrix Optimization Problems

Dan Garber
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
dangar@technion.ac.il

Atara Kaplan
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
ataragold@campus.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Low-rank and nonsmooth matrix optimization problems capture many fundamental
tasks in statistics and machine learning. While significant progress has been made
in recent years in developing efficient methods for smooth low-rank optimization
problems that avoid maintaining high-rank matrices and computing expensive
high-rank SVDs, advances for nonsmooth problems have been slow paced.
In this paper we consider standard convex relaxations for such problems. Mainly,
we prove that under a natural generalized strict complementarity condition and
under the relatively mild assumption that the nonsmooth objective can be written
as a maximum of smooth functions, the extragradient method, when initialized
with a “warm-start” point, converges to an optimal solution with rate O(1/t) while
requiring only two low-rank SVDs per iteration. We give a precise trade-off
between the rank of the SVDs required and the radius of the ball in which we
need to initialize the method. We support our theoretical results with empirical
experiments on several nonsmooth low-rank matrix recovery tasks, demonstrating
that using simple initializations, the extragradient method produces exactly the
same iterates when full-rank SVDs are replaced with SVDs of rank that matches
the rank of the (low-rank) ground-truth matrix to be recovered.

1

Introduction

Low-rank and nonsmooth matrix optimization problems have many important applications in statistics,
machine learning, and related fields, such as sparse PCA [21, 34], robust PCA [28, 33, 2, 9, 38],
phase synchronization [41, 6, 29], community detection and stochastic block models [1]1 , low-rank
and sparse covariance matrix recovery [35], robust matrix completion [22, 10], and more. For many
of these problems, convex relaxations, in which one replaces the nonconvex low-rank constraint with
a trace-norm constraint, have been demonstrated in numerous papers to be highly effective both in
theory (under suitable assumptions) and empirically (see references above). These convex relaxations
can be formulated as the following general nonsmooth optimization problem:
min g(X),

X∈Sn

(1)

where g : Sn → R is convex but nonsmooth, and Sn = {X ∈ Sn | Tr(X) = 1, X  0} is the
spectrahedron in Sn , Sn being the space of n × n real symmetric matrices.
Problem (1), despite being convex, is notoriously difficult to solve in large scale. The simplest and
most general approach applicable to it is the projected subgradient method [3, 7], which requires on
1

in [41, 6, 29] and [1] the authors consider SDPs with linear objective function and affine constraints of the
form A(X) = b. By incorporating the linear constraints into the objective function via a `2 penalty term of the
form λkA(X) − bk2 , λ > 0, we obtain a nonsmooth objective function.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

