Generalization Error Bounds for Graph Embedding
Using Negative Sampling: Linear vs Hyperbolic

Atsushi Suzuki
University of Greenwich
London, United Kingdom
atsushi.suzuki.rd@gmail.com
Jing Wang∗
University of Greenwich
London, United Kingdom
jing.wang@greenwich.ac.uk

Atsushi Nitanda
Kyushu Institute of Technology
Fukuoka, Japan
nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp
Linchuan Xu
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong SAR, China
linch.xu@polyu.edu.hk

Kenji Yamanishi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
yamanishi@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Marc Cavazza
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan
marc.cavazza@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph embedding, which represents real-world entities in a mathematical space,
has enabled numerous applications such as analyzing natural languages, social
networks, biochemical networks, and knowledge bases. It has been experimentally
shown that graph embedding in hyperbolic space can represent hierarchical tree-like
data more effectively than embedding in linear space, owing to hyperbolic space’s
exponential growth property. However, since the theoretical comparison has been
limited to ideal noiseless settings, the potential for the hyperbolic space’s property
to worsen the generalization error for practical data has not been analyzed. In this
paper, we provide a generalization error bound applicable for graph embedding
both in linear and hyperbolic spaces under various negative sampling settings
that appear in graph embedding. Our bound states that error is polynomial and
exponential with respect to the embedding space’s radius in linear and hyperbolic
spaces, respectively, which implies that hyperbolic space’s exponential growth
property worsens the error. Using our bound, we clarify the data size condition
on which graph embedding in hyperbolic space can represent a tree better than in
Euclidean space by discussing the bias-variance trade-off. Our bound also shows
that imbalanced data distribution, which often appears in graph embedding, can
worsen the error.

1

Introduction

Graphs are a fundamental formulation of real-world entities and their relations, such as words in
natural languages, people in social network, and objects in knowledge bases. Here, the vertices and
edges of a graph correspond to the entities and the relations among them, respectively. Based on the
formulation, graph embedding has enabled numerous applications for those data, such as machine
translation and sentiment analysis for natural language [1, 2, 3, 4], and community detection and
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

