Improving Deep Learning Interpretability by
Saliency Guided Training

Aya Abdelsalam Ismail, Soheil Feizi ∗ , Héctor Corrada Bravo ∗
{asalam,sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu, corradah@gene.com
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
Data Science and Statistical Computing, Genentech, Inc.

Abstract
Saliency methods have been widely used to highlight important input features in
model predictions. Most existing methods use backpropagation on a modified
gradient function to generate saliency maps. Thus, noisy gradients can result in
unfaithful feature attributions. In this paper, we tackle this issue and introduce a
saliency guided training† procedure for neural networks to reduce noisy gradients
used in predictions while retaining the predictive performance of the model. Our
saliency guided training procedure iteratively masks features with small and potentially noisy gradients while maximizing the similarity of model outputs for both
masked and unmasked inputs. We apply the saliency guided training procedure
to various synthetic and real data sets from computer vision, natural language
processing, and time series across diverse neural architectures, including Recurrent
Neural Networks, Convolutional Networks, and Transformers. Through qualitative
and quantitative evaluations, we show that saliency guided training procedure significantly improves model interpretability across various domains while preserving
its predictive performance.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely used in a variety of different tasks [31, 26, 43, 37];
yet interpreting complex networks remains a challenge. Reliable explanations are necessary for
critical domains like medicine, neuroscience, finance, and autonomous driving [9, 34]. Explanations
are also useful for model debugging [63, 35]. As a result, various interpretability methods were
developed to understand DNNs [5, 49, 22, 53, 52, 32, 51]. A common approach for understanding
model decisions is to identify features in the input that highly influenced the final classification
decision [6, 63, 53, 52, 47, 36, 64]. Such approaches, known as saliency maps, often use gradient
calculations to assign an importance score to individual features, reflecting their influences on the
model prediction.
Saliency methods aim to highlight meaningful input features in model predictions to humans; however,
the maps produced are often noisy (i.e., contain visual noise). To improve the faithfulness of saliency
maps, explanations methods that depend on more than one or higher-order gradient calculations
were developed. For example, SmoothGrad [52] reduces saliency noise by adding noise to the input
multiple times and then taking the average of the resulting saliency maps for each input. Integrated
gradients [53], DeepLIFT [47] and Layer-wise Relevance Propagation [5] backpropagate through a
modified gradient function [3] while Singla et al. [51] studies the use of higher-order gradients in
saliency maps.
∗

Authors contributed equally
Code: https://github.com/ayaabdelsalam91/saliency_guided_training

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

