Associating Objects with Transformers for
Video Object Segmentation

Zongxin Yang1,2 , Yunchao Wei3,4 , Yi Yang1
1

CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 2 Baidu Research
3
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
{zongxinyang1996, wychao1987, yee.i.yang}@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper investigates how to realize better and more efficient embedding learning to tackle the semi-supervised video object segmentation under challenging
multi-object scenarios. The state-of-the-art methods learn to decode features with
a single positive object and thus have to match and segment each target separately
under multi-object scenarios, consuming multiple times computing resources. To
solve the problem, we propose an Associating Objects with Transformers (AOT)
approach to match and decode multiple objects uniformly. In detail, AOT employs an identification mechanism to associate multiple targets into the same
high-dimensional embedding space. Thus, we can simultaneously process multiple
objects’ matching and segmentation decoding as efficiently as processing a single
object. For sufficiently modeling multi-object association, a Long Short-Term
Transformer is designed for constructing hierarchical matching and propagation.
We conduct extensive experiments on both multi-object and single-object benchmarks to examine AOT variant networks with different complexities. Particularly,
our R50-AOT-L outperforms all the state-of-the-art competitors on three popular benchmarks, i.e., YouTube-VOS (84.1% J &F), DAVIS 2017 (84.9%), and
DAVIS 2016 (91.1%), while keeping more than 3× faster multi-object run-time.
Meanwhile, our AOT-T can maintain real-time multi-object speed on the above
benchmarks. Based on AOT, we ranked 1st in the 3rd Large-scale VOS Challenge.

1

Introduction

Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is a fundamental task in video understanding with many potential
applications, including augmented reality [25] and self-driving cars [52]. The goal of semi-supervised
VOS, the main task in this paper, is to track and segment object(s) across an entire video sequence
based on the object mask(s) given at the first frame.
Thanks to the recent advance of deep neural networks, many deep learning based VOS algorithms
have been proposed recently and achieved promising performance. STM [26] and its following
works [34, 23] leverage a memory network to store and read the target features of predicted past frames
and apply a non-local attention mechanism to match the target in the current frame. FEELVOS [41]
and CFBI [50, 51] utilize global and local matching mechanisms to match target pixels or patches
from both the first and the previous frames to the current frame.
Even though the above methods have achieved significant progress, the above methods learn to decode
scene features that contain a single positive object. Thus under a multi-object scenario, they have to
match each object independently and ensemble all the single-object predictions into a multi-object
segmentation, as shown in Fig. 1a. Such a post-ensemble manner eases network architectures’ design
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

