Fast Bayesian Inference for Gaussian Cox Processes
via Path Integral Formulation

Hideaki Kim
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories
NTT Corporation
hideaki.kin.cn@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Gaussian Cox processes are widely-used point process models that use a Gaussian
process to describe the Bayesian a priori uncertainty present in latent intensity
functions. In this paper, we propose a novel Bayesian inference scheme for Gaussian Cox processes by exploiting a conceptually-intuitive path integral formulation. The proposed scheme does not rely on domain discretization, scales linearly
with the number of observed events, has a lower complexity than the state-of-theart variational Bayesian schemes with respect to the number of inducing points,
and is applicable to a wide range of Gaussian Cox processes with various types of
link functions. Our scheme is especially beneﬁcial under the multi-dimensional
input setting, where the number of inducing points tends to be large. We evaluate
our scheme on synthetic and real-world data, and show that it achieves comparable
predictive accuracy while being tens of times faster than reference methods.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Cox processes constitute a class of doubly-stochastic point process models in which a
ﬂexible prior over a latent intensity function is established by a Gaussian process through a positive
link function under which point events are generated. Gaussian Cox processes are the gold standard in analyzing event data in a Bayesian manner, and have a wide ranging list of applications in
neuroscience [10], ﬁnance [5], and spatio-temporal analysis [30].
The observation process, i.e., the likelihood function of the Gaussian Cox process, depends on the
functional form of the latent intensity function over a compact domain, which makes Bayesian
inference challenging as it imposes the intractable computation of inﬁnite-dimensional distributions. Many algorithms have been proposed to deal with this difﬁculty. They include Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, domain discretization, and variational Bayesian (VB) approximation. MCMC approaches [2, 22] provide exact inferencing for a speciﬁc link function, but they have
excessive computation costs. Although domain discretization [10, 43] achieves sub-linear computational scaling with discretization size, it suffers from poor scaling with data size and the dimension
of the domain. To overcome these limitations, state-of-the-art algorithms employ sparse VB approximation with inducing points [3, 31]; they achieve improved scaling with the dimension of the
domain as well as computation cost that is linear to data size. However, the computation costs of VB
approaches scale at the rate of O(N L2 + L3 ) where L and N are the number of inducing points and
data points, respectively, making them problematic in the multi-dimensional domain setting, where
L tends to be large. Also, VB approaches achieve good approximations by aggressively focusing on
the unique structures of individual kernel functions or link functions, and thus are not applicable to
a wide range of Gaussian Cox processes.
In this paper, we introduce a conceptually-intuitive path integral formulation of Gaussian processes,
by which we derive a novel inference scheme for tackling intractable Gaussian Cox processes. The
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

