Scalable Online Planning
via Reinforcement Learning Fine-Tuning
Arnaud Fickinger∗
Facebook AI Research
arnaudfickinger@fb.com

Hengyuan Hu∗
Facebook AI Research
hengyuan@fb.com

Brandon Amos
Facebook AI Research
bda@fb.com

Noam Brown
Facebook AI Research
noambrown@fb.com

Stuart Russell
UC Berkeley
russell@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Lookahead search has been a critical component of recent AI successes, such as
in the games of chess, go, and poker. However, the search methods used in these
games, and in many other settings, are tabular. Tabular search methods do not
scale well with the size of the search space, and this problem is exacerbated by
stochasticity and partial observability. In this work we replace tabular search with
online model-based ﬁne-tuning of a policy neural network via reinforcement learning, and show that this approach outperforms state-of-the-art search algorithms in
benchmark settings. In particular, we use our search algorithm to achieve a new
state-of-the-art result in self-play Hanabi, and show the generality of our algorithm
by also showing that it outperforms tabular search in the Atari game Ms. Pacman.

1

Introduction

Lookahead search has been a key component of successful AI systems in sequential decision-making
problems. For example, in order to achieve superhuman performance in go, chess and shogi, AlphaZero leveraged Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [38]. MuZero extended this even further to Atari
games, again using MCTS [32]. Without MCTS, AlphaZero performs below a top human level,
and more generally no superhuman Go bot has yet been developed that does not use some form of
MCTS. Similarly, search algorithms were a critical component of AI successes in backgammon [45],
chess [10], poker [27, 7, 8], and Hanabi [22]. However, even though different search algorithms were
used in each domain, all of them were tabular search algorithms, i.e., a distinct policy was computed
for each state encountered during search, without any function approximation to generalize between
similar states.
While tabular search has achieved great success, particularly in perfect-information deterministic
environments, its applicability is clearly limited. For example, in the popular partially observable stochastic AI benchmark game Hanabi [5], one-step lookahead search involves a search over
about 500 possible next states. However, searching over all two-step joint policies would require a
search over 2020 states, which is clearly intractable for tabular search. Additionally, unlike perfectinformation deterministic games where it is only necessary to search over a tiny fraction of the next
several moves, partial observability and stochasticity make it impossible to limit the search to a tiny
subset of all possible states. Fortunately, many of these states are extremely similar, so a search
algorithm can in theory beneﬁt by generalizing between similar states. This is the motivation for our
non-tabular search algorithm.
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

