Fast Axiomatic Attribution for Neural Networks
Robin Hesse1

Simone Schaub-Meyer1

Stefan Roth1,2

1
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt 2 hessian.AI
{robin.hesse, simone.schaub, stefan.roth}@visinf.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Mitigating the dependence on spurious correlations present in the training dataset
is a quickly emerging and important topic of deep learning. Recent approaches
include priors on the feature attribution of a deep neural network (DNN) into
the training process to reduce the dependence on unwanted features. However,
until now one needed to trade off high-quality attributions, satisfying desirable
axioms, against the time required to compute them. This in turn either led to
long training times or ineffective attribution priors. In this work, we break this
trade-off by considering a special class of efficiently axiomatically attributable
DNNs for which an axiomatic feature attribution can be computed with only a
single forward/backward pass. We formally prove that nonnegatively homogeneous
DNNs, here termed X -DNNs, are efficiently axiomatically attributable and show
that they can be effortlessly constructed from a wide range of regular DNNs by
simply removing the bias term of each layer. Various experiments demonstrate the
advantages of X -DNNs, beating state-of-the-art generic attribution methods on
regular DNNs for training with attribution priors.

1

Introduction

Many traditional machine learning (ML) approaches, such as linear models or decision trees, are
inherently explainable [4]. Therefore, an ML practitioner can comprehend why a method yields a
particular prediction and correct the method if the explanation for the result is flawed. The prevailing
ML architectures in use today [12, 25], namely deep neural networks (DNNs), unfortunately, do
not come with this inherent explainability. This can cause models to depend on dataset biases and
spurious correlations in the training data. For real-world applications, e.g., credit score or insurance
risk assignment, this can be highly problematic and potentially lead to models discriminating against
certain demographic groups [3, 20]. To mitigate the dependence on spurious correlations in DNNs,
attribution priors have been recently proposed [7, 22, 23]. By enforcing priors on the feature
attribution of a DNN at training time, they allow actively controlling its behavior. As it turns out,
attribution priors are a very flexible tool, allowing even complex model interventions such as making
an object recognition model focus on shape [22] or less sensitive to high-frequency noise [7]. However,
their use brings new challenges over regular training. First, computing the feature attribution of a
DNN is a nontrivial task. It is critical to use an attribution method that faithfully reflects the true
behavior of the deep network and ideally satisfies the axioms proposed by Sundararajan et al. [34].
Otherwise, spurious correlations may go undetected and the attribution prior would be ineffective.
Second, since the feature attribution is used in each training step, it needs to be efficiently computable.
Existing work incurs a trade-off between high-quality attributions for which formal axioms hold [34]
and the time required to compute them [7]. Prior work on attribution priors thus had to choose
whether to rely on high-quality feature attributions or allow for efficient training. In this work, we
obviate this trade-off.
Code and additional resources at https://visinf.github.io/fast-axiomatic-attribution/.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

