Covariance-Aware Private Mean Estimation
Without Private Covariance Estimation
Gavin Brown
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
grbrown@bu.edu

Marco Gaboardi
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
gaboardi@bu.edu

Adam Smith
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Jonathan Ullman
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Lydia Zakynthinou
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
zakynthinou.l@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We present two sample-efficient differentially private mean estimators for ddimensional (sub)Gaussian distributions with unknown covariance. Informally,
given n & d/α2 samples from such a distribution with mean µ and covariance Σ,
our estimators output µ̃ such that kµ̃ − µkΣ ≤ α, where k · kΣ is the Mahalanobis
distance. All previous estimators with the same guarantee either require strong a
priori bounds on the covariance matrix or require Ω(d3/2 ) samples.
Each of our estimators is based on a simple, general approach to designing differentially private mechanisms, but with novel technical steps to make the estimator
private and sample-efficient. Our first estimator samples a point with approximately
maximum Tukey depth using the exponential mechanism, but restricted to the set
of points of large Tukey depth. Proving that this mechanism is private requires a
novel analysis. Our second estimator perturbs the empirical mean of the data set
with noise calibrated to the empirical covariance, without releasing the covariance
itself. Its sample complexity guarantees hold more generally for subgaussian distributions, albeit with a slightly worse dependence on the privacy parameter. For
both estimators, careful preprocessing of the data is required to satisfy differential
privacy.

1

Introduction

Although the goal of statistics and machine learning is to infer properties of a population, there is a
growing awareness that many statistical estimators and trained models reveal a concerning amount
of information about their data set, which leads to significant concerns about the privacy of the
individuals who have contributed sensitive information to that data set. These privacy violations
have been demonstrated repeatedly via reconstruction attacks [21, 30, 27, 46], membership-inference
attacks [37, 52, 10, 32, 53, 59], and instances of unwanted memorization of training data [13, 14, 34,
7]. In order to realize the benefits of analyzing sensitive data sets, it is crucial to develop statistical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

