Not All Images are Worth 16x16 Words: Dynamic
Transformers for Efficient Image Recognition

Yulin Wang1∗ Rui Huang1∗ Shiji Song1 Zeyi Huang2 Gao Huang1,3†
1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Huawei Technologies Ltd., China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{wang-yl19, hr20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, huangzeyi2@huawei.com.
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViT) have achieved remarkable success in large-scale image
recognition. They split every 2D image into a fixed number of patches, each
of which is treated as a token. Generally, representing an image with more tokens would lead to higher prediction accuracy, while it also results in drastically
increased computational cost. To achieve a decent trade-off between accuracy
and speed, the number of tokens is empirically set to 16x16 or 14x14. In this
paper, we argue that every image has its own characteristics, and ideally the token number should be conditioned on each individual input. In fact, we have
observed that there exist a considerable number of “easy” images which can be
accurately predicted with a mere number of 4x4 tokens, while only a small fraction of “hard” ones need a finer representation. Inspired by this phenomenon,
we propose a Dynamic Transformer to automatically configure a proper number of tokens for each input image. This is achieved by cascading multiple
Transformers with increasing numbers of tokens, which are sequentially activated in an adaptive fashion at test time, i.e., the inference is terminated once
a sufficiently confident prediction is produced. We further design efficient feature reuse and relationship reuse mechanisms across different components of the
Dynamic Transformer to reduce redundant computations. Extensive empirical
results on ImageNet, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms the competitive baselines in terms of both theoretical
computational efficiency and practical inference speed. Code and pre-trained models (based on PyTorch and MindSpore) are available at https://github.com/
blackfeather-wang/Dynamic-Vision-Transformer and https://github.
com/blackfeather-wang/Dynamic-Vision-Transformer-MindSpore.

1

Introduction

Transformers, the dominant self-attention-based models in natural language processing (NLP) [10,
40, 3], have been successfully adapted to image recognition problems [11, 55, 38, 17] recently. In
particular, vision Transformers achieve state-of-the-art performance on the large scale ImageNet
benchmark [9], while exhibit excellent scalability with the further growing dataset size (e.g., on JFT300M [11]). These models split each image into a fixed number of patches and embed them into 1D
tokens as inputs. Typically, representing the data using more tokens contributes to higher prediction
accuracy, but leads to intensive computational cost, which grows quadratically with respect to the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

