Perturb-and-max-product: Sampling and learning
in discrete energy-based models

Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Antoine Dedieu, Dileep George
Vicarious AI
SF Bay Area, CA
{miguel, antoine, dileep}@vicarious.com

Abstract
Perturb-and-MAP offers an elegant approach to approximately sample from an
energy-based model (EBM) by computing the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) configuration of a perturbed version of the model. Sampling in turn enables learning.
However, this line of research has been hindered by the general intractability of the
MAP computation. Very few works venture outside tractable models, and when
they do, they use linear programming approaches, which as we show, have several
limitations. In this work, we present perturb-and-max-product (PMP), a parallel
and scalable mechanism for sampling and learning in discrete EBMs. Models
can be arbitrary as long as they are built using tractable factors. We show that (a)
for Ising models, PMP is orders of magnitude faster than Gibbs and Gibbs-withGradients (GWG) at learning and generating samples of similar or better quality;
(b) PMP is able to learn and sample from RBMs; (c) in a large, entangled graphical
model in which Gibbs and GWG fail to mix, PMP succeeds.

1

Introduction

In this work, we concern ourselves with the problem of black-box parameter estimation for a very
general class of discrete energy-based models (EBMs), possibly with hidden variables. The golden
measure of estimation quality is the likelihood of the parameters given the data, according to the
model. However, the likelihood of EBMs is not computable in polynomial time due to the partition
function, which in turn makes its optimization (parameter estimation) difficult.
This is an active research problem, with multiple approaches having been proposed over the last
decades [37, 29, 33, 2, 13, 14, 12, 37, 17, 38, 19]. These methods typically fall into one or more of the
following categories (a) they depart from the maximum likelihood (ML) criterion to obtain a tractable
objective, but in doing so they fail when the data does not match the model (e.g., pseudolikelihood
[13]); (b) they can only be applied to fully observed models (e.g., piecewise training [29]); (c) they
fail catastrophically for simple models (e.g., Bethe approximation [12]); (d) they require additional
designs (such as a custom encoder) for new models, i.e., they are not black-box (e.g, Advil [19]).
A general approach to discrete EBM learning that does not fall in any of those pitfalls is sampling:
as we review in Section 2.1, sampling from an EBM results in efficient learning. Exact sampling
is unfeasible in general, but approximate sampling works well enough in multiple models. Gibbs
sampling is the most popular because it is simple, general, and can be applied in a black-box manner:
the sampler can be generated directly from the model, even automatically [5]. Its main limitation is
that for some models, mixing can be too slow to be usable. Recently the Gibbs-with-gradients (GWG)
[8] sampler was proposed, which significantly improves mixing speed, enabling tractability of more
models. A completely different approach to learning is Perturb-and-MAP [22], but this approach has
not seen widespread adoption because the general MAP problem could not be solved fast enough or
with good enough quality, see Section 2.4.1.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

