Learning Tree Interpretation from Object
Representation for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Guiliang Liu1,3 , Xiangyu Sun2 , Oliver Schulte2 , Pascal Poupart1,3
1
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
2
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
3
Vector Institute
g233liu@uwaterloo.ca, xiangyu_sun@sfu.ca
oschulte@cs.sfu.ca, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca.

Abstract
Interpreting Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) models is important to enhance
trust and comply with transparency regulations. Existing methods typically explain
a DRL model by visualizing the importance of low-level input features with superpixels, attentions, or saliency maps. Our approach provides an interpretation based
on high-level latent object features derived from a disentangled representation. We
propose a Represent And Mimic (RAMi) framework for training 1) an identifiable
latent representation to capture the independent factors of variation for the objects
and 2) a mimic tree that extracts the causal impact of the latent features on DRL
action values. To jointly optimize both the fidelity and the simplicity of a mimic
tree, we derive a novel Minimum Description Length (MDL) objective based on
the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle. Based on this objective, we describe a
Monte Carlo Regression Tree Search (MCRTS) algorithm that explores different
splits to find the IB-optimal mimic tree. Experiments show that our mimic tree
achieves strong approximation performance with significantly fewer nodes than
baseline models. We demonstrate the interpretability of our mimic tree by showing
latent traversals, decision rules, causal impacts, and human evaluation results.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have enabled Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents to extract relevant features
from image observations and achieve human-level control [1, 2, 3] by modeling action-value functions.
Despite their promising performance, the learned knowledge remains implicit in these black-box
neural structures, which hinders understanding the importance of input features and how they
influence decisions. Most previous DRL interpretations aimed to visualize attention masks [4, 5] or
saliency maps [6, 7] for input states. These interpretations are commonly based on entangled raw
features in high-dimensional input space, and some recent studies [8, 9, 10] showed that the generated
attention masks are inconsistent for local samples in that very different attention distributions can yield
equivalent predictions. Moreover, these point-wise importance maps do not identify the underlying
causal relationships between target variables and complex inputs.
An alternative approach for generating post-hoc global explanations is mimic learning [11], which
allows distilling the knowledge from an opaque DRL model to a transparent tree model. Some recent
works [12, 13] built linear model trees to imitate the DRL action-value functions. These trees are
learned for the high-dimensional input space; therefore they require numerous splits for building a
tree with promising regression performance. The large tree size increases the complexity of their
interpretations and makes it difficult to generate human-understandable decision rules. Previous
models [14, 15] constrained the tree complexity by empirically setting some hyper-parameters (e.g,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

