Change Point Detection via
Multivariate Singular Spectrum Analysis
Arwa Alanqary
Computational Science and Engineering
MIT
alanqary@mit.edu

Abdullah Alomar
EECS
MIT
aalomar@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
EECS
MIT
devavrat@mit.edu

Abstract
The objective of change point detection (CPD) is to detect significant and abrupt changes
in the dynamics of the underlying system of interest through multivariate time series
observations. In this work, we develop and analyze an algorithm for CPD that is inspired
by a variant of the classical singular spectrum analysis (SSA) approach for time series by
combining it with the classical cumulative sum (CUSUM) statistic from sequential hypothesis testing. In particular, we model the underlying dynamics of multivariate time series observations through the spatio-temporal model introduced recently in the multivariate SSA (mSSA) literature. The change point in such a setting corresponds to a change in
the underlying spatio-temporal model. As the primary contributions of this work, we develop an algorithm based on CUSUM-statistic to detect such change points in an online
fashion. We extend the analysis of CUSUM statistics, traditionally done for the setting of
independent observations, to the dependent setting of (multivariate) time series under the
spatio-temporal model. Specifically, for a given parameter h>0, our method achieves
the following desirable trade-off: when a change happens, it detects it within O(h) time
delay on average, while in the absence of change, it does not declare false detection for
at least exp(⌦(h)) time length on average. We conduct empirical experiments using
benchmark and synthetic datasets. We find that the proposed method performs competitively or outperforms the state-of-the-art change point detection methods across datasets.

1 Introduction
The task of change point detection (CPD) is concerned with detecting significant changes in the temporal
evolution of a system from noisy observations. This task has attracted considerable attention in the statistics
and machine learning communities as it has a broad range of applications including quality control [5],
climate research [35], and speech recognition [36]. This interest resulted in many methods and algorithmswe refer to [3] for a thorough review.
Despite the relatively simple setup of the CPD problem, different variations of the problem have been
studied and analyzed. We contrast two general settings characterized by the assumptions on the data
generating process.The first is the classical view that aims to detect distribution changes from independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations, cf. [34] and more recently [7, 23]. The second deals with the
more intricate time series dynamics by assuming the data to be dependent and following a specific temporal
structure. Therein, the aim is to detect changes in this temporal structure of the observations. Some of
the time series models considered include auto-regressive models [4, 46] and state-space models [20].
An important model comes from the singular spectrum analysis (SSA) literature, where the data is assumed
to follow an underlying function associated with a low-dimensional subspace. This time series model
has inspired algorithms for different inference tasks in time series, including imputation, forecasting, and
CPD [13]. The key idea behind using SSA for CPD is that the subspace spanned by the columns of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

