Controllable and Compositional Generation
with Latent-Space Energy-Based Models

Weili Nie
NVIDIA
wnie@nvidia.com

Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA
avahdat@nvidia.com

Anima Anandkumar
Caltech, NVIDIA
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
Controllable generation is one of the key requirements for successful adoption
of deep generative models in real-world applications, but it still remains as a
great challenge. In particular, the compositional ability to generate novel concept
combinations is out of reach for most current models. In this work, we use energybased models (EBMs) to handle compositional generation over a set of attributes.
To make them scalable to high-resolution image generation, we introduce an
EBM in the latent space of a pre-trained generative model such as StyleGAN. We
propose a novel EBM formulation representing the joint distribution of data and
attributes together, and we show how sampling from it is formulated as solving an
ordinary differential equation (ODE). Given a pre-trained generator, all we need
for controllable generation is to train an attribute classifier. Sampling with ODEs
is done efficiently in the latent space and is robust to hyperparameters. Thus, our
method is simple, fast to train, and efficient to sample. Experimental results show
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art in both conditional sampling and
sequential editing. In compositional generation, our method excels at zero-shot
generation of unseen attribute combinations. Also, by composing energy functions
with logical operators, this work is the first to achieve such compositionality in
generating photo-realistic images of resolution 1024⇥1024.

1

Introduction

Deep generative learning has made tremendous progress in image synthesis. High-quality and
photorealistic images can now be generated with generative adversarial networks (GANs) [17,
28, 29], score-based models [23, 51], and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [32, 54]. However, a
key requirement for the success of these generative models in many real-world applications is the
controllability of the generation process. Controllable generation, in particular the compositional
ability to generate novel concept combinations, still remains a great challenge to current methods.
A common approach for achieving controllable generation is to train a conditional model [36, 31,
10, 41, 38], where the conditional information, such as semantic attributes, is specified during
training to guide the generation. There are two major drawbacks with this approach: (i) Since the
set of attributes is fixed and pre-defined, it is difficult to introduce new attributes to an existing
model. This, in turn, limits the model’s compositional ability for unseen attributes and their novel
combinations [12]. (ii) Training conditional generative models from scratch for new attributes is
computationally expensive, and it can be challenging to reach to the same image quality of the
uncontrollable counterparts [10, 41].
Recent works have attempted to overcome these issues by first training an unconditional generator,
and then converting it to a conditional model with a small cost [26, 20, 1, 42]. This is often achieved
by discovering semantically meaningful directions in the latent space of the unconditional model.
This way, one would pay the most computational cost only once for training the unconditional model.
However, these approaches often struggle with compositional generation, in particular with rare
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

