K-level Reasoning for Zero-Shot Coordination in
Hanabi
Brandon Cui
Facebook AI Research
bcui@fb.com

Hengyuan Hu
Facebook AI Research
hengyuan@fb.com

Luis Pineda
Facebook AI Research
lep@fb.com

Jakob N. Foerster ∗
University of Oxford
Jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The standard problem setting in cooperative multi-agent settings is self-play (SP),
where the goal is to train a team of agents that works well together. However,
optimal SP policies commonly contain arbitrary conventions (“handshakes”) and
are not compatible with other, independently trained agents or humans. This latter
desiderata was recently formalized by [18] as the zero-shot coordination (ZSC)
setting and partially addressed with their Other-Play (OP) algorithm, which showed
improved ZSC and human-AI performance in the card game Hanabi. OP assumes
access to the symmetries of the environment and prevents agents from breaking
these in a mutually incompatible way during training. However, as the authors
point out, discovering symmetries for a given environment is a computationally
hard problem. Instead, we show that through a simple adaption of k-level reasoning
(KLR) [7], synchronously training all levels, we can obtain competitive ZSC and
ad-hoc teamplay performance in Hanabi, including when paired with a humanlike proxy bot. We also introduce a new method, synchronous-k-level reasoning
with a best response (SyKLRBR), which further improves performance on our
synchronous KLR by co-training a best response.

1

Introduction

Research into multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently seen a flurry of activity,
ranging from large-scale multiplayer zero-sum settings such as StarCraft [35] to partially observable,
fully cooperative settings, such as Hanabi [1]. The latter (cooperative) setting is of particular interest,
as it covers human-AI coordination, one of the longstanding goals of AI research [10, 6]. However,
most work in the cooperative setting—typically modeled as a Dec-POMDPs—has approached the
problem in the self-play (SP) setting, where the only goal is to find a team of agents that works well
together. Unfortunately, optimal SP policies in Dec-POMDPs commonly communicate information
through arbitrary handshakes (or conventions), which fail to generalize to other, independently
trained, AI agents or humans at test time.
To address this, the zero-shot coordination setting [18] was recently introduced, where the goal is
to find training strategies that allow independently trained agents to coordinate at test time. The
main idea of this line of work is to develop learning algorithms that can use the structure of the DecPOMDP itself to independently find mutually compatible policies, a necessary step towards human-AI
coordination. Related coordination problems have also been studied by different communities, in
∗

Work done while at Facebook AI Research

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

