Mirror Langevin Monte Carlo: the Case Under
Isoperimetry
Qijia Jiang⇤
UT Austin
qjiang@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the connection between sampling and optimization, we study a mirror
descent analogue of Langevin dynamics and analyze three different discretization
schemes, giving nonasymptotic convergence rate under functional inequalities such
as Log-Sobolev in the corresponding metric. Compared to the Euclidean setting, the
result reveals intricate relationship between the underlying geometry and the target
distribution and suggests that care might need to be taken in order for the discretized
algorithm to achieve vanishing bias with diminishing stepsize for sampling from
potentials under weaker smoothness/convexity regularity conditions.

1

Introduction

It has been widely recognized that optimization and sampling are deeply connected. One one hand,
optimization can be viewed as performing sampling in the limit, and on the other, since the influential
work of Jordan-Kinderlehrer-Otto [12], Langevin dynamics takes on the interpretation as performing
deterministic optimization (gradient flow) in the space of probability measures. This profoundly
shapes the way we view and understand traditional MCMC sampling algorithms, deviating from
the Markov semigroup path. While huge amount of progress has been made on the optimization
front in the past few decades, its sampling counterpart, finding far-reaching applications in Bayesian
statistical inference and inverse problems, hasn’t been fully explored to leverage the advancements
offered by the optimization toolbox. In this paper, we draw inspiration from mirror descent [17] and
ask the question if there’s an analog of it that can adapt to geometries beyond the Euclidean case for
Langevin diffusion, under isoperimetric inequalities such as Log-Sobolev for the target distribution,
rather than Strong-Log-Concavity, where we recall the celebrated result of Bakry and Émery [3]
prescribes that the latter implies the former.
1.1

Mirror Flow and Mirror Descent

In optimization, the extension to arbitrary geometry through the choice of a mirror map can
often give better smoothness/strong convexity parameter dependence, or even handle cases where
strong-convexity and Lipschitz gradient of f do not hold in the Euclidean geometry. The continuous
limit of mirror descent can be written as
dYt =

rf (Xt )dt,

Xt = r ⇤ (Yt )

(1)

which is equivalent to dYt /dt = d[r (Xt )]/dt = r2 (Xt )dXt /dt = rf (Xt ), therefore the
mirror flow can be recast in the primal variable as dXt = (r2 (Xt )) 1 rf (Xt )dt, akin to natural
gradient flow, which preconditions the update to adapt to local geometry. Equation (1) makes it clear
that the mirror descent update
xk+1 = r ⇤ (r (xk )
⇤

1
hk+1 rf (xk )) = arg min hx, rf (xk )i + hk+1
D (x, xk )
x

Work done while at Stanford University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

