Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
in Stochastic Networked Systems
Yiheng Lin
CMS, Caltech
yihengl@caltech.edu
Longbo Huang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Guannan Qu
CMS, Caltech
gqu@caltech.edu
Adam Wierman
CMS, Caltech
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in a stochastic network of
agents. The objective is to find localized policies that maximize the (discounted)
global reward. In general, scalability is a challenge in this setting because the size
of the global state/action space can be exponential in the number of agents. Scalable
algorithms are only known in cases where dependencies are static, fixed and local,
e.g., between neighbors in a fixed, time-invariant underlying graph. In this work,
we propose a Scalable Actor Critic framework that applies in settings where the
dependencies can be non-local and stochastic, and provide a finite-time error bound
that shows how the convergence rate depends on the speed of information spread
in the network. Additionally, as a byproduct of our analysis, we obtain novel
finite-time convergence results for a general stochastic approximation scheme and
for temporal difference learning with state aggregation, which apply beyond the
setting of MARL in networked systems.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has achieved impressive performance in a wide
array of applications including multi-player game play [42, 31], multi-robot systems [13], and
autonomous driving [25]. In comparison to single-agent reinforcement learning (RL), MARL poses
many challenges, chief of which is scalability [57]. Even if each agent’s local state/action spaces are
small, the size of the global state/action space can be large, potentially exponentially large in the
number of agents, which renders many RL algorithms such as Q-learning not applicable.
A promising approach for addressing the scalability challenge that has received attention in recent
years is to exploit application-specific structures, e.g., [18, 35, 38]. A particularly important example
of such a structure is a networked structure, e.g., applications in multi-agent networked systems
such as social networks [7, 27], communication networks [60, 51], queueing networks [34], and
smart transportation networks [59]. In these networked systems, it is often possible to exploit static,
local dependency structures [16, 17, 1, 32], e.g., the fact that agents only interact with a fixed set of
neighboring agents throughout the game. This sort of dependency structure often leads to scalable,
distributed algorithms for optimization and control [16, 1, 32], and has proven effective for designing
scalable and distributed MARL algorithms, e.g. [35, 38].
This work was supported by NSF grants CNS-2106403 and NGSDI-2105648, with additional support
from Amazon AWS, PIMCO, and the Resnick Sustainability Insitute. Yiheng Lin was supported by Kortschak
Scholars program. The work of Longbo Huang was supported by the Technology and Innovation Major Project
of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China under Grants 2020AAA0108400 and 2020AAA0108403.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

