Prototypical Cross-Attention Networks for
Multiple Object Tracking and Segmentation

Lei Ke1,2

Xia Li1 Martin Danelljan1 Yu-Wing Tai3 Chi-Keung Tang2
1
2
3
ETH Zürich
HKUST
Kuaishou Technology

Fisher Yu1

{lkeab,cktang}@cse.ust.hk, {xia.li,martin.danelljan}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
yuwing@gmail.com, i@yf.io

Abstract
Multiple object tracking and segmentation requires detecting, tracking, and segmenting objects belonging to a set of given classes. Most approaches only exploit
the temporal dimension to address the association problem, while relying on single frame predictions for the segmentation mask itself. We propose Prototypical
Cross-Attention Network (PCAN), capable of leveraging rich spatio-temporal information for online multiple object tracking and segmentation. PCAN first distills
a space-time memory into a set of prototypes and then employs cross-attention to
retrieve rich information from the past frames. To segment each object, PCAN
adopts a prototypical appearance module to learn a set of contrastive foreground
and background prototypes, which are then propagated over time. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PCAN outperforms current video instance tracking and
segmentation competition winners on both Youtube-VIS and BDD100K datasets,
and shows efficacy to both one-stage and two-stage segmentation frameworks.
Code and video resources are available at http://vis.xyz/pub/pcan.

1

Introduction

Multiple object tracking and segmentation (MOTS), also known as Video Instance Segmentation
(VIS), is an important problem with many real-world applications, including autonomous driving [10,
26] and video analysis [4, 46]. The task involves tracking and segmenting all objects within a video
from a given set of semantic classes. We are witnessing rapidly growing research interest on MOTS
thanks to the introduction of large scale benchmarks [46, 50, 37]. State-of-the-art methods [46, 5, 37,
29] for MOTS mainly follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm, where objects are first detected and
segmented in individual frames and then associated over time.
Although methods based on the popular tracking-by-detection philosophy have shown promising
results, temporal modeling is limited to the object association phase [46, 5, 22] and only between
two adjacent frames [37, 18]. On the other hand, the temporal dimension carries rich information
about the scene. The information encoded in multiple temporal views of an object has the potential
of improving the quality of predicted segmentation, localization, and categories. However, effectively
and efficiently leveraging the rich temporal information remains a challenge. While sequential
modeling has been applied for video processing [40, 41, 9, 28, 12], these methods generally operate
directly on the high-resolution deep features, requiring large computational and memory consumption,
which greatly limits their use.
We propose a Prototypical Cross-Attention Module, termed PCAM, to leverage temporal information
for multiple object tracking and segmentation. As illustrated in Figure 1, the module first distills spatiotemporal information into condensed prototypes using clustering based on Expectation Maximization.
The resulting prototypes, composed of Gaussian Components, yield a rich and generalizable yet
compact representation of the past visual features. Given a deep feature embedding of the current
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

