Characterizing Generalization under
Out-Of-Distribution Shifts in Deep Metric Learning

Timo Milbich∗
LMU Munich & IWR, Heidelberg University

Karsten Roth∗,x
IWR, Heidelberg University

timo.milbich@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

karsten.rh1@gmail.com

Samarth Sinha
University of Toronto, Vector

Ludwig Schmidt
University of Washington

Marzyeh Ghassemi†
MIT, University of Toronto, Vector

sinhasam@fb.com

schmidt@cs.uw.edu

mghassem@mit.edu

Björn Ommer†
LMU Munich & IWR, Heidelberg University
ommer@uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) aims to find representations suitable for zero-shot
transfer to a priori unknown test distributions. However, common evaluation
protocols only test a single, fixed data split in which train and test classes are
assigned randomly. More realistic evaluations should consider a broad spectrum
of distribution shifts with potentially varying degree and difficulty. In this work,
we systematically construct train-test splits of increasing difficulty and present
the ooDML benchmark to characterize generalization under out-of-distribution
shifts in DML. ooDML is designed to probe the generalization performance on
much more challenging, diverse train-to-test distribution shifts. Based on our new
benchmark, we conduct a thorough empirical analysis of state-of-the-art DML
methods. We find that while generalization tends to consistently degrade with
difficulty, some methods are better at retaining performance as the distribution shift
increases. Finally, we propose few-shot DML as an efficient way to consistently
improve generalization in response to unknown test shifts presented in ooDML1 .

1

Introduction

Image representations that generalize well are the foundation of numerous computer vision tasks,
such as image and video retrieval [61, 71, 54, 38, 1], face (re-)identification [57, 34, 8] and image
classification [65, 4, 19, 40, 37]. Ideally, these representations should not only capture data within the
training distribution, but also transfer to new, out-of-distribution (OOD) data. However, in practice,
achieving effective OOD generalization is more challenging than in-distribution [28, 12, 21, 49, 31,
55]. In the case of zero-shot generalization, where train and test classes are completely distinct, Deep
Metric Learning (DML) is used to learn metric representation spaces that capture and transfer visual
similarity to unseen classes, constituting a priori unknown test distributions with unspecified shift.
To approximate such a setting, current DML benchmarks use single, predefined and fixed data splits
of disjoint train and test classes, which are assigned arbitrarily [71, 8, 61, 24, 11, 33, 74, 51, 54, 42,
26, 64, 58]. This means that (i) generalization is only evaluated on a fixed problem difficulty, (ii)
1

Code available here: https://github.com/CompVis/Characterizing_Generalization_in_DML
∗
Equal contribution, alphabetical order, † equal supervision, x now at University of Tuebingen.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

