Escaping Saddle Points with Compressed SGD

Grigory Yaroslavtsev
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
grigory@grigory.us

Dmitrii Avdiukhin
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
davdyukh@iu.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a prevalent optimization technique for largescale distributed machine learning. While SGD computation can be efficiently
divided between multiple machines, communication typically becomes a bottleneck
in the distributed setting. Gradient compression methods can be used to alleviate
this problem, and a recent line of work shows that SGD augmented with gradient
compression converges to an ε-first-order stationary point. In this paper we extend
these results to convergence to an ε-second-order stationary point (ε-SOSP), which
is to the best of our knowledge the first result of this type. In addition, we show
that, when the stochastic gradient is not Lipschitz, compressed SGD with R AN DOM K compressor converges to an ε-SOSP with the same number of iterations as
uncompressed
SGD [25], while improving the total communication by a factor of
√
Θ̃( dε−3/4 ), where d is the dimension of the optimization problem. We present
additional results for the cases when the compressor is arbitrary and when the
stochastic gradient is Lipschitz.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variants are the main workhorses of modern machine
learning. Distributed implementations of SGD on a cluster of machines with a central server and
a large number of workers are frequently used in practice due to the massive size of the data. In
distributed SGD each machine holds a copy of the model and the computation proceeds in rounds.
In every round, each worker finds a stochastic gradient based on its batch of examples, the server
averages these stochastic gradients to obtain the gradient of the entire batch, makes an SGD step,
and broadcasts the updated model parameters to the workers. With a large number of workers,
computation parallelizes efficiently while communication becomes the main bottleneck [12, 38],
since each worker needs to send its gradients to the server and receive the updated model parameters.
Common solutions for this problem include: local SGD and its variants, when each machine performs
multiple local steps before communication [36]; decentralized architectures which allow pairwise
communication between the workers [30] and gradient compression, when a compressed version of
the gradient is communicated instead of the full gradient [6, 37, 27]. In this work, we consider the
latter approach, which we refer to as compressed SGD.
Most machine learning models can be described by a d-dimensional vector of parameters x and the
model quality can be estimated as a function f (x). Hence optimization of the model parameters can
be cast a minimization problem minx f (x), where f : Rd → R is a continuous function, which can be
optimized using continuous optimization techniques, such as SGD. Fast convergence of compressed
SGD to a first-order stationary point (FOSP, k∇f (x)k < ε) was shown recently for various gradient
compression schemes [6, 37, 27, 23, 2]. However, even an exact FOSP can be either a local minimum,
a saddle point or a local maximum. While local minima often correspond to good solutions in
machine learning applications [21, 39, 7], saddle points and local maxima are always suboptimal and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

