Remember What You Want to Forget:
Algorithms for Machine Unlearning
Ayush Sekhari
Cornell University

Jayadev Acharya⇤
Cornell University

Gautam Kamath⇤
University of Waterloo

as3663@cornell.edu

acharya@cornell.edu

g@csail.mit.edu

Ananda Theertha Suresh⇤
Google Research, NY
theertha@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of unlearning datapoints from a learnt model. The learner first
receives a dataset S drawn i.i.d. from an unknown distribution, and outputs a model
w
b that performs well on unseen samples from the same distribution. However, at
some point in the future, any training datapoint z 2 S can request to be unlearned,
thus prompting the learner to modify its output model while still ensuring the same
accuracy guarantees. We initiate a rigorous study of generalization in machine
unlearning, where the goal is to perform well on previously unseen datapoints. Our
focus is on both computational and storage complexity.
For the setting of convex losses, we provide an unlearning algorithm that can
unlearn up to O(n/d1/4 ) samples, where d is the problem dimension. In comparison, in general, differentially private learning (which implies unlearning) only
guarantees deletion of O(n/d1/2 ) samples. This demonstrates a novel separation
between differential privacy and machine unlearning.

1

Introduction

Many organizations and companies employ user data to train machine learning models for a wide
array of applications, ranging from movie recommendations to health care. While some of these
organizations allow users to withdraw their consent from their data being used (at which point the
organization will delete the user’s data), less savory businesses might covertly retain user data. Given
the potential for misuse, legislators worldwide have wisely introduced laws that mandate user data
deletion upon request. These include the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR), the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and Canada’s proposed Consumer Privacy
Protection Act (CPPA).
There is some natural ambiguity present in these guidelines. Is it sufficient to simply delete the
user’s data, or must one also take action on machine learning systems that used this data for training?
Indeed, by now, privacy researchers are well-aware that user data may be extracted from trained
machine learning models (e.g., Shokri et al. [2017], Carlini et al. [2019]). In a potentially landmark
decision, the Federal Trade Commission recently ordered a company to delete not only data from
users who deleted their accounts, but also models and algorithms derived from this data [Federal
Trade Commission, 2021]. This suggests that organizations have an obligation to retrain any machine
learning models after excluding users whose data has been deleted.
⇤

Authors in alphabetical order.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

