Leveraging Distribution Alignment via Stein Path for
Cross-Domain Cold-Start Recommendation
Weiming Liu, Jiajie Su, Chaochao Chen, and Xiaolin Zheng∗
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{21831010,sujiajie,zjuccc,xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) has been popularly studied to utilize different domain knowledge to solve the cold-start problem in recommender systems. In
this paper, we focus on the Cross-Domain Cold-Start Recommendation (CDCSR)
problem. That is, how to leverage the information from a source domain, where
items are ‘warm’, to improve the recommendation performance of a target domain,
where items are ‘cold’. Unfortunately, previous approaches on cold-start and CDR
cannot reduce the latent embedding discrepancy across domains efficiently and lead
to model degradation. To address this issue, we propose DisAlign, a cross-domain
recommendation framework for the CDCSR problem, which utilizes both rating
and auxiliary representations from the source domain to improve the recommendation performance of the target domain. Specifically, we first propose Stein path
alignment for aligning the latent embedding distributions across domains, and then
further propose its improved version, i.e., proxy Stein path, which can reduce the
operation consumption and improve efficiency. Our empirical study on Douban
and Amazon datasets demonstrates that DisAlign significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art models under the CDCSR setting.

1

Introduction

Data sparsity and cold-start are long-standing problems in recommender systems [15, 19]. With the
development of internet techniques, most users always participant in many platforms or domains for
different purposes. Therefore, Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) has emerged to utilise the
relatively richer information from a source domain to improve the recommendation accuracy in a
target domain [52, 53]. Most existing CDR models can tackle the data sparsity problem in the target
domain by assuming the existence of overlapped users or items with similar tastes or attributions
across domains [5].
Instead of focusing on solving the data sparsity problem, we consider cold-start item recommendation
under the CDR setting. Specifically, we concentrate on the Cross-Domain Cold-Start Recommendation (CDCSR) problem, that is, two domains share the same user set but different items, and both
domains have auxiliary representations such as item profiles or descriptions. The prime challenge is
how to leverage the information from the source domain, where the items are ‘warm’, to improve the
recommendation performance of the target domain, where the items are ‘cold’. The CDCSR problem
popularly exists in practice, for instance, a movie marketing platform newly launches a book renting
service where there is no user-book interaction yet, as shown in Figure 1.
Existing researches on cold-start recommendation and CDR cannot solve the above problem well. On
the one hand, existing cold-start recommendation models assume that the distributions of cold items
should be consistent with the warm ones as they are homogeneous [54, 18, 12]. On the other hand,
∗

Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

