Towards Unifying Behavioral and Response Diversity
for Open-ended Learning in Zero-sum Games
Xiangyu Liu1 , Hangtian Jia2 , Ying Wen1⇤, Yujing Hu2 ,
Yingfeng Chen2 , Changjie Fan2 , Zhipeng Hu2 , Yaodong Yang3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Netease Fuxi AI Lab, 3 Institute for AI, Peking University
liuxiangyu999@sjtu.edu.cn, ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Measuring and promoting policy diversity is critical for solving games with strong
non-transitive dynamics where strategic cycles exist, and there is no consistent
winner (e.g., Rock-Paper-Scissors). With that in mind, maintaining a pool of diverse
policies via open-ended learning is an attractive solution, which can generate
auto-curricula to avoid being exploited. However, in conventional open-ended
learning algorithms, there are no widely accepted definitions for diversity, making
it hard to construct and evaluate the diverse policies. In this work, we summarize
previous concepts of diversity and work towards offering a unified measure of
diversity in multi-agent open-ended learning to include all elements in Markov
games, based on both Behavioral Diversity (BD) and Response Diversity (RD).
At the trajectory distribution level, we re-define BD in the state-action space as
the discrepancies of occupancy measures. For the reward dynamics, we propose
RD to characterize diversity through the responses of policies when encountering
different opponents. We also show that many current diversity measures fall in one
of the categories of BD or RD but not both. With this unified diversity measure, we
design the corresponding diversity-promoting objective and population effectivity
when seeking the best responses in open-ended learning. We validate our methods
in both relatively simple games like matrix game, non-transitive mixture model,
and the complex Google Research Football environment. The population found
by our methods reveals the lowest exploitability, highest population effectivity in
matrix game and non-transitive mixture model, as well as the largest goal difference
when interacting with opponents of various levels in Google Research Football.

1

Introduction

Many zero-sum games have a strong non-transitive component [2, 4] in the policy space, and thus
each player must acquire a diverse set of winning strategies to achieve high unexploitability [36],
which has been widely validated by recent studies of constructing AIs with superhuman performance
in sophisticated tasks, such as StarCraft [30, 28] and DOTA2 [25, 39]. The non-transitivity in games
means there is not a dominating strategy and the set of strategies form a cycle (e.g., the endless cycles
among Rock, Paper and Scissors). It is the presence of this special structure in games that requires
players to maintain a diverse set of policies. Otherwise, we only need to seek the strongest one.
Formally, the necessity of diversity for zero-sum games lies in three ways: (1) policy evaluation: with
the presence of non-transitivity, one cannot justify the strength or weakness of a strategy through the
outcome of the interaction with a single type of opponent; (2) avoiding being exploited [24]: since in
non-transitive games a single strategy can be always beaten by another one, a diverse set of strategies
⇤
Correspondence to Ying Wen <ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn>. Code available at https://github.com/
sjtu-marl/bd_rd_psro

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

