Can we have it all? On the Trade-off between Spatial
and Adversarial Robustness of Neural Networks
Sandesh Kamath
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
K V Subrahmanyam
Chennai Mathematical Institue, Chennai

Amit Deshpande
Microsoft Research India

Vineeth N. Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad

Abstract
(Non-)robustness of neural networks to small, adversarial pixel-wise perturbations, and as more recently shown, to even random spatial transformations (e.g.,
translations, rotations) entreats both theoretical and empirical understanding. Spatial robustness to random translations and rotations is commonly attained via
equivariant models (e.g., StdCNNs, GCNNs) and training augmentation, whereas
adversarial robustness is typically achieved by adversarial training. In this paper,
we prove a quantitative trade-off between spatial and adversarial robustness in a
simple statistical setting. We complement this empirically by showing that: (a) as
the spatial robustness of equivariant models improves by training augmentation
with progressively larger transformations, their adversarial robustness worsens
progressively, and (b) as the state-of-the-art robust models are adversarially trained
with progressively larger pixel-wise perturbations, their spatial robustness drops
progressively. Towards achieving Pareto-optimality in this trade-off, we propose a
method based on curriculum learning that trains gradually on more difficult perturbations (both spatial and adversarial) to improve spatial and adversarial robustness
simultaneously.

1

Introduction

Neural network (NN) models have achieved state-of-the-art performance on several image tasks
over the last few years. However, they have been known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks that
make small, imperceptible pixel-wise perturbations to images [39, 5]. Most pixel-wise adversarial
perturbations studied in previous work are carefully constructed, model-dependent and, in most cases
also input-dependent, perturbations of small `∞ norm (and sometimes `1 or `2 norm). To achieve
adversarial robustness, a popular, principled, and effective defense against `∞ adversarial attacks
known at present is adversarial training [17, 29, 37, 49].
From another perspective, recent work has also shown natural, physical-world attacks on neural
network models using 2D and 3D spatial transformations such as translations, rotations and pose
[47, 14, 42, 1]. Even random spatial transformations such as random translations and random
rotations degrade the accuracy of neural network models considerably [12]. Recent benchmarks also
measure the robustness of NN models to the average-case, model-agnostic perturbations (e.g., noise,
blur, brightness, contrast) or natural distribution shifts, and not only to the worst-case adversarial
perturbations [21, 40]. Spatial robustness or robustness to spatial transformations (e.g., translations,
rotations) has been long studied as a problem of model invariance, and is generally addressed
using equivariant models or training augmentation. While standard Convolutional Neural Networks
(StdCNNs) are translation-equivariant, recent efforts have resulted in equivariant NN models for
other transformations such as rotation, flip [16, 8, 10, 45, 31, 26, 27, 13], and scaling [30, 46, 38].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

