Adversarial Reweighting for Partial
Domain Adaptation

Xiang Gu, Xi Yu, Yan Yang, Jian Sun∗, and Zongben Xu
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, P.R. China
{xianggu,ericayu,yangyan92}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{jiansun,zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Partial domain adaptation (PDA) has gained much attention due to its practical setting. The current PDA methods usually adapt the feature extractor by aligning the
target and reweighted source domain distributions. In this paper, we experimentally
find that the feature adaptation by the reweighted distribution alignment in some
state-of-the-art PDA methods is not robust to the “noisy” weights of source domain
data, leading to negative domain transfer on some challenging benchmarks. To
tackle the challenge of negative domain transfer, we propose a novel Adversarial
Reweighting (AR) approach that adversarially learns the weights of source domain
data to align the source and target domain distributions, and the transferable deep
recognition network is learned on the reweighted source domain data. Based on
this idea, we propose a training algorithm that alternately updates the parameters
of the network and optimizes the weights of source domain data. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art results on the benchmarks of
ImageNet-Caltech, Office-Home, VisDA-2017, and DomainNet. Ablation studies
also confirm the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved impressive success in image recognition [15, 20, 39]. However, deep learning models often rely on massive labeled training data, requiring an expensive and time-consuming
labeling process. To alleviate the dependency of deep learning models on a large number of labeled
data, domain adaptation (DA) [27] transfers the knowledge from a relevant source domain with
rich labeled data to the target domain. The core of DA is to build a predictive model for the target
domain using the training data of the source domain, and the model is expected to be robust to the
distribution discrepancy (a.k.a., domain shift) between source and target domains. Domain adaptation
methods often train the robust model by aligning distributions of different domains by moment
matching [17, 19, 24, 28, 40, 48] or adversarial training [8, 25, 38, 40, 41, 42, 50]. The conventional
closed-set DA methods generally assume that the source and target domains share the same label
space. However, this assumption is often not realistic in practice. It is usually difficult to find a
relevant source domain with identical label space as the target domain. This motivates the research
on the learning problem of partial domain adaptation [3, 49].
Partial domain adaptation (PDA) is an important subcategory of domain adaptation. PDA [3, 4, 49]
tackles the scenario that the label space of the target domain is a subset of that of the source domain.
Partial domain adaptation is more challenging than vanilla closed-set domain adaptation. Because,
besides the challenge of the domain shift, the existence of source-only classes that do not exist in the
target domain can cause class-wise feature mismatch when aligning distributions. This potentially
leads to negative transfer [27], i.e., the DA approaches hurt the performance of learning in the target
∗

The corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

