Particle Dual Averaging: Optimization of Mean Field
Neural Network with Global Convergence Rate Analysis
Atsushi Nitanda
Kyushu Institute of Technology
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

Denny Wu
University of Toronto
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
dennywu@cs.toronto.edu

Taiji Suzuki
University of Tokyo
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose the particle dual averaging (PDA) method, which generalizes the
dual averaging method in convex optimization to the optimization over probability
distributions with quantitative runtime guarantee. The algorithm consists of an inner
loop and outer loop: the inner loop utilizes the Langevin algorithm to approximately
solve for a stationary distribution, which is then optimized in the outer loop. The
method can thus be interpreted as an extension of the Langevin algorithm to
naturally handle nonlinear functional on the probability space. An important
application of the proposed method is the optimization of neural network in the
mean field regime, which is theoretically attractive due to the presence of nonlinear
feature learning, but quantitative convergence rate can be challenging to obtain. By
adapting finite-dimensional convex optimization theory into the space of measures,
we analyze PDA in regularized empirical / expected risk minimization, and establish
quantitative global convergence in learning two-layer mean field neural networks
under more general settings. Our theoretical results are supported by numerical
simulations on neural networks with reasonable size.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based optimization can achieve vanishing training error on neural networks, despite the
apparent non-convex landscape. Among various works that explains the global convergence, one
common ingredient is to utilize overparameterization to translate the training dynamics into function
spaces, and then exploit the convexity of the loss function with respect to the function. Such endeavors
usually consider models in one of the two categories: the mean field regime or the kernel regime.
On one hand, analysis in the kernel (lazy) regime connects gradient descent on wide neural network
to kernel regression with respect to the neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018), which leads to global
convergence at linear rate (Du et al., 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2020). However, key
to the analysis is the linearization of the training dynamics, which requires appropriate scaling of
the model such that distance traveled by the parameters vanishes (Chizat and Bach, 2018a). Such
regime thus fails to explain the feature learning of neural networks (Yang and Hu, 2020), which is
believed to be an important advantage of deep learning; indeed, it has been shown that deep learning
can outperform kernel models due to this adaptivity (Suzuki, 2018; Ghorbani et al., 2019a).
In contrast, the mean field regime describes the gradient descent dynamics as Wasserstein gradient
flow in the probability space (Nitanda and Suzuki, 2017; Mei et al., 2018; Chizat and Bach, 2018b),
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

