Dynamics of Stochastic Momentum Methods on
Large-scale, Quadratic Models
Courtney Paquette ⇤
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec H2Y 2M5
courtney.paquette@mcgill.ca

Elliot Paquette †
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec H2Y 2M5
elliot.paquette@mcgill.ca

Abstract
We analyze a class of stochastic gradient algorithms with momentum on a highdimensional random least squares problem. Our framework, inspired by random
matrix theory, provides an exact (deterministic) characterization for the sequence
of loss values produced by these algorithms which is expressed only in terms of
the eigenvalues of the Hessian. This leads to simple expressions for nearly-optimal
hyperparameters, a description of the limiting neighborhood, and average-case
complexity.
As a consequence, we show that (small-batch) stochastic heavy-ball momentum
with a fixed momentum parameter provides no actual performance improvement
over SGD when step sizes are adjusted correctly. For contrast, in the non-strongly
convex setting, it is possible to get a large improvement over SGD using momentum.
By introducing hyperparameters that depend on the number of samples, we propose
a new algorithm SDANA (stochastic dimension adjusted Nesterov acceleration)
which obtains an asymptotically optimal average-case complexity while remaining
linearly convergent in the strongly convex setting without adjusting parameters.
Methods that incorporate momentum and acceleration play an integral role in machine learning where
they are often combined with stochastic gradients. Two of the most popular methods in this category
are the heavy-ball method (HB) [Polyak, 1964] and Nesterov’s accelerated method (NAG) [Nesterov,
2004]. These methods are known to achieve optimal convergence guarantees when employed with
exact gradients (computed on the full training data set), but in practice, these momentum methods are
typically implemented with stochastic gradients. In the influential work Sutskever et al. [2013], the
authors demonstrated empirical advantages of augmenting stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
the momentum machinery and, as a result, momentum methods are widely used for training deep
neural networks. Yet despite the popularity of these stochastic momentum methods, the theoretical
understanding of these algorithms remains rather limited.
In this paper, we study the dynamics of stochastic momentum methods (with batch size 1 and constant
step size) rooted in heavy-ball momentum and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient algorithms on a least
squares problem. Our approach uses a framework inspired by the phenomenology of random matrix
theory (see Paquette et al. [2021]), which gains explanatory power when the number of samples
(n) and features (d) are large. A key contribution of this work is a simple description of the exact
dynamics for a class of stochastic momentum methods in the high-dimensional limit; we construct a
smooth, deterministic function (t) such that f (xk ) ! (k/n) as n ! 1. This function solves
⇤
†

Website courtneypaquette.github.io .
Website elliotpaquette.github.io .

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

