Successor Feature Landmarks for Long-Horizon
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
Christopher Hoang 1
Sungryull Sohn 1 2
Jongwook Choi 1
1
Wilka Carvalho
Honglak Lee 1 2
1
2
University of Michigan
LG AI Research
{choang, srsohn, jwook, wcarvalh, honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
Operating in the real-world often requires agents to learn about a complex environment and apply this understanding to achieve a breadth of goals. This problem,
known as goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL), becomes especially
challenging for long-horizon goals. Current methods have tackled this problem
by augmenting goal-conditioned policies with graph-based planning algorithms.
However, they struggle to scale to large, high-dimensional state spaces and assume
access to exploration mechanisms for efficiently collecting training data. In this
work, we introduce Successor Feature Landmarks (SFL), a framework for exploring
large, high-dimensional environments so as to obtain a policy that is proficient for
any goal. SFL leverages the ability of successor features (SF) to capture transition
dynamics, using it to drive exploration by estimating state-novelty and to enable
high-level planning by abstracting the state-space as a non-parametric landmarkbased graph. We further exploit SF to directly compute a goal-conditioned policy
for inter-landmark traversal, which we use to execute plans to “frontier” landmarks
at the edge of the explored state space. We show in our experiments on MiniGrid
and ViZDoom that SFL enables efficient exploration of large, high-dimensional
state spaces and outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on long-horizon GCRL
tasks1 .

1

Introduction

Consider deploying a self-driving car to a new city. To be practical, the car should be able to explore
the city such that it can learn to traverse from any starting location to any destination, since the
destination may vary depending on the passenger. In the context of reinforcement learning (RL),
this problem is known as goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) [12, 13]. Previous works [31, 1, 24, 26, 17]
have tackled this problem by learning a goal-conditioned policy (or value function) applicable to any
reward function or “goal.” However, the goal-conditioned policy often fails to scale to long-horizon
goals [11] since the space of state-goal pairs grows intractably large over the horizon of the goal.
To address this challenge, the agent needs to (a) explore the state-goal space such that it is proficient
for any state-goal pair it might observe during test time and (b) reduce the effective goal horizon
for the policy learning to be tractable. Recent work [25, 11] has tackled long-horizon GCRL by
leveraging model-based approaches to form plans consisting of lower temporal-resolution subgoals.
The policy is then only required to operate for short horizons between these subgoals. One line of
work learned a universal value function approximator (UVFA) [31] to make local policy decisions
and to estimate distances used for building a landmark-based map, but assumed a low-dimensional
state space where the proximity between the state and goal could be computed by the Euclidean
distance [11]. Another line of research focused on visual navigation tasks conducted planning over
1

The demo video and code can be found at https://2016choang.github.io/sfl.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

