Sharp Impossibility Results for Hypergraph Testing

Jiashun Jin
Carnegie Mellon University
jiashun@stat.cmu.edu

Zheng Tracy Ke
Harvard University
zke@fas.harvard.edu

Jiajun Liang
Purdue University
liangjj@purdue.edu

Abstract
In a broad Degree-Corrected Mixed-Membership (DCMM) setting, we test whether
a non-uniform hypergraph has only one community or has multiple communities.
Since both the null and alternative hypotheses have many unknown parameters, the
challenge is, given an alternative, how to identify the null that is hardest to separate
from the alternative. We approach this by proposing a degree matching strategy
where the main idea is leveraging the theory for tensor scaling to create a least
favorable pair of hypotheses. We present a result on standard minimax lower bound
theory and a result on Region of Impossibility (which is more informative than the
minimax lower bound). We show that our lower bounds are tight by introducing a
new test that attains the lower bound up to a logarithmic factor. We also discuss
the case where the hypergraphs may have mixed-memberships.

1

Introduction

The hypergraph is a useful representation of social relationships beyond pairwise interactions [5, 11].
For example, the co-authorship hypergraph is often used to analyze the co-authorship topology of
authors, and it provides more information than a co-authorship graph (where an m-author paper is
treated as an m-clique). The community detection on a hypergraph [10] is a problem of great interest
(communities in a hypergraph are clusters of nodes that have more hyperedges within than across). It
has many applications in social network analysis [15] and machine learning [1, 17, 18, 23]. We are
interested in the problem of global testing, where we test whether the hypergraph has one community
or multiple communities. It has applications in measuring co-authorship and citation diversity [12]
and discovering non-obvious social groups and patterns [4]. It is also useful for understanding other
problems such as community detection and change-point detection in dynamic hypergraphs.
For instructional purpose only, we start with the 3-uniform hypergraphs (i.e., each hyperedge consists
of 3 nodes), but our results cover both higher-order hypergraphs and non-uniform hypergraphs. Let
A be the adjacency tensor of a uniform and symmetric order-3 hypergraph with n nodes, where
Ai1 i2 i3 equals 1 if i1 , i2 , i3 share a hyperedge and equals 0 otherwise,

(1.1)

for 1 ≤ i1 , i2 , i3 (distinct) ≤ n. Since the tensor is symmetric, Ai1 i2 i3 = Aj1 j2 j3 for two sets of
indices {i1 , i2 , i3 } and {j1 , j2 , j3 } if one is a permutation of the other. We do not consider self
hyperedges, hence, Ai1 i2 i3 = 0 whenever i1 , i2 , i3 are non-distinct.
Real world hypergraphs have several noteworthy features. First, there may be severe degree heterogeneity (i.e., the degree of one node is many times higher than that of another). Second, the
overall sparsity levels may vary significantly from one hypergraph to another. Last, a node may
have mixed-memberships across multiple communities (i.e., nonzero weights on more than one
community). To accommodate these features, we adopt the Degree-Corrected Mixed-Membership
(tensor-DCMM) model. The notations below are frequently used in tensor analysis.
Definition 1.1. (matricization, slicing, and slice aggregation). Let A be a 3-symmetric tensor of ndimension. First, we call the n × n2 matrix A the matricization of A, defined by Ai,j+n(k−1) = Aijk ,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

