Offline Model-based Adaptable Policy Learning

Xiong-Hui Chen1 , Yang Yu1,3,∗, Qingyang Li2 , Fan-Ming Luo1 , Zhiwei Qin2 ,
Wenjie Shang2 , Jieping Ye2
1
National Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing
3
Polixir.ai
chenxh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn, qingyangli@didiglobal.com
luofm@lamda.nju.edu.cn
{qinzhiwei,shangwenjie,yejieping}@didiglobal.com

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, a promising direction to avoid online trial-and-error
costs is learning from an offline dataset. Current offline reinforcement learning
methods commonly learn in the policy space constrained to in-support regions
by the offline dataset, in order to ensure the robustness of the outcome policies.
Such constraints, however, also limit the potential of the outcome policies. In
this paper, to release the potential of offline policy learning, we investigate the
decision-making problems in out-of-support regions directly and propose offline
Model-based Adaptable Policy LEarning (MAPLE). By this approach, instead
of learning in in-support regions, we learn an adaptable policy that can adapt its
behavior in out-of-support regions when deployed. We conduct experiments on
MuJoCo controlling tasks with offline datasets. The results show that the proposed
method can make robust decisions in out-of-support regions and achieve better
performance than SOTA algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have shown that reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach for real-world
applications, e.g., sequential recommendation systems [1, 2, 3, 4] and robotic locomotion skill
learning [5, 6]. However, the trial-and-error of RL in the real world [7] obstructs further applications
in cost-sensitive scenarios [8].
Offline (batch) RL learns a policy within a static dataset collected by a behavior policy without
additional interactions with the environment [8, 9, 10, 11]. Since it avoids costly trial-and-error in
real-world environments, offline RL is a promising way to handle the challenge in cost-sensitive
applications. A significant challenge of offline RL is in answering counterfactual queries, which
asks about how the performance (e.g., Q value) would have been if the agent were to execute an
unseen action sequence, then learning to make optimal decisions based on the performance [8].
Fujimoto et al. [10] have shown that the distributional shift of states and actions, which comes from
the discrepancy between evaluated policies and behavior policies, often leads to large extrapolation
error in value function estimation. In traditional model-free algorithms, the extrapolation error in
value function estimation hurts the generalization performance of the learned policies. Since the
additional samples, which can correct value estimation errors, are unavailable in the offline setting,
the performance of learned policies based on value function is unstable [10].
On the other hand, model-based RL techniques, which learn dynamics models from collected datasets
and learn the value function and policies based on the dynamics models, do not need to estimate
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

