Environment Generation for Zero-Shot
Compositional Reinforcement Learning
Izzeddin Gur, Natasha Jaques, Yingjie Miao, Jongwook Choi,
Manoj Tiwari, Honglak Lee, Aleksandra Faust
Google Research, Brain Team
Mountain View, California, 94043
{izzeddin, natashajaques, yingjiemiao, mjtiwari, sandrafaust}@google.com
{jwook, honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
Many real-world problems are compositional – solving them requires completing
interdependent sub-tasks, either in series or in parallel, that can be represented as a
dependency graph. Deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents often struggle to learn
such complex tasks due to the long time horizons and sparse rewards. To address
this problem, we present Compositional Design of Environments (CoDE), which
trains a Generator agent to automatically build a series of compositional tasks
tailored to the RL agent’s current skill level. This automatic curriculum not only
enables the agent to learn more complex tasks than it could have otherwise, but
also selects tasks where the agent’s performance is weak, enhancing its robustness
and ability to generalize zero-shot to unseen tasks at test-time. We analyze why
current environment generation techniques are insufficient for the problem of
generating compositional tasks, and propose a new algorithm that addresses these
issues. Our results assess learning and generalization across multiple compositional
tasks, including the real-world problem of learning to navigate and interact with
web pages. We learn to generate environments composed of multiple pages or
rooms, and train RL agents capable of completing wide-range of complex tasks in
those environments. We contribute two new benchmark frameworks for generating
compositional tasks, compositional MiniGrid and gMiniWoB for web navigation.
CoDE yields 4x higher success rate than the strongest baseline, and demonstrates
strong performance of real websites learned on 3500 primitive tasks.

1

Introduction

Consider purchasing an airline ticket, logging in to a website, or buying movie tickets. These tasks
can be completed by mastering a small set of basic manipulation skills (primitives), such as entering
an appropriate text in a fill-in field, or selecting a date, and combining them in different ways to form
complex, compositional tasks [42]. Humans can easily generalize between compositional tasks –
purchase a ticket on an airline or fill out a form that they have not seen before, even when the task
carries over several pages – but training autonomous agents to do this is far from straightforward.
Yet, unlocking generalization across related tasks would pave the way towards autonomous agents
that can automatically handle the details of completing wide variety of real-world user requests such
as, “Buy me a plane ticket to Los Angeles leaving on Friday”. The complexity and diversity of real
environments make this a formidable challenge, especially due to the exponentially exploding action
space and sparse rewards.
Generalizing across compositional tasks is challenging for several reasons, including the tractability
of training [42]. Many compositional tasks require planning over an excessively long horizon while
providing only sparse rewards, making it difficult for RL agents to learn. Presenting easy tasks
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

