Distributional Reinforcement Learning for
Multi-Dimensional Reward Functions
Pushi Zhang∗†
Tsinghua University
zpschang@gmail.com

Xiaoyu Chen∗†
Tsinghua University
chen-xy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Wei Xiong†
The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology
wxiongae@connect.ust.hk

Tao Qin
Microsoft Research Asia
taoqin@microsoft.com

Li Zhao‡
Microsoft Research Asia
lizo@microsoft.com
Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research Asia
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
A growing trend for value-based reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms is to
capture more information than scalar value functions in the value network. One of
the most well-known methods in this branch is distributional RL, which models
return distribution instead of scalar value. In another line of work, hybrid reward
architectures (HRA) in RL have studied to model source-specific value functions
for each source of reward, which is also shown to be beneficial in performance.
To fully inherit the benefits of distributional RL and hybrid reward architectures,
we introduce Multi-Dimensional Distributional DQN (MD3QN), which extends
distributional RL to model the joint return distribution from multiple reward sources.
As a by-product of joint distribution modeling, MD3QN can capture not only the
randomness in returns for each source of reward, but also the rich reward correlation
between the randomness of different sources. We prove the convergence for
the joint distributional Bellman operator and build our empirical algorithm by
minimizing the Maximum Mean Discrepancy between joint return distribution
and its Bellman target. In experiments, our method accurately models the joint
return distribution in environments with richly correlated reward functions, and
outperforms previous RL methods utilizing multi-dimensional reward functions in
the control setting.

1

Introduction

Making value network capture more information than scalar value functions is a growing trend in
value-based reinforcement learning, which helps the agent gain more knowledge about the environment and has great potentials to improve the sample efficiency of RL agents. In the early stage of
deep reinforcement learning, DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) uses the scalar output of the neural network
to represent value functions. As value-based RL algorithms evolve, distributional RL algorithms
start to use neural networks to approximate return distributions for each state-action pair, and take
action based on the expectation of return distributions. By capturing the randomness in return as
auxiliary tasks, distributional RL agents can gain more knowledge about the environment and learn
better representations to avoid state aliasing (Bellemare et al., 2017). Distributional RL algorithms
including C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017), QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b), IQN (Dabney et al., 2018a),
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

