Multi-task Learning of Order-Consistent Causal Graphs

Xinshi Chen∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
xinshi.chen@gatech.edu
Caleb Ellington
Carnegie Mellon University
cellingt@cs.cmu.edu

Haoran Sun
Georgia Institute of Technology
haoransun@gatech.edu

Eric Xing
Carnegie Mellon University
MBZUAI
eric.xing@mbzuai.ac.ae

Le Song
BioMap
MBZUAI
le.song@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
We consider the problem of discovering K related Gaussian directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs), where the involved graph structures share a consistent causal order and
sparse unions of supports. Under the multi-task learning setting, we propose a l1 /l2 regularized maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for learning K linear structural
equation models. We theoretically show that the joint estimator, by leveraging data
across related tasks, can achieve a better sample complexity for recovering the
causal order (or topological order) than separate estimations. Moreover, the joint
estimator is able to recover non-identifiable DAGs, by estimating them together
with some identifiable DAGs. Lastly, our analysis also shows the consistency of
union support recovery of the structures. To allow practical implementation, we
design a continuous optimization problem whose optimizer is the same as the joint
estimator and can be approximated efficiently by an iterative algorithm. We validate
the theoretical analysis and the effectiveness of the joint estimator in experiments.

1

Introduction

Estimating causal effects among a set of random variables is of fundamental importance in many
disciplines such as genomics, epidemiology, health care and finance [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Therefore,
designing and understanding methods for causal discovery is of great interests in machine learning.
Causal discovery from finite observable data is often formulated as a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
estimation problem in graphical models. A major class of DAG estimation methods are score-based,
which search over the space of all DAGs for the best scoring one. However, DAG estimation remains
a very challenging problem from both the computational and statistical aspects [7]. On the one hand,
the number of possible DAG structures grows super-exponentially in the number of random variables,
whereas the number of observational sample size is normally small. On the other hand, some DAGs
are non-identifiable from observational data even with infinitely many samples.
Fortunately, very often multiple related DAG structures need to be estimated from data, which
allows us to leverage their similarity to improve the estimator. For instance, in bioinformatics, gene
expression levels are often measured over patients with different subtypes [8, 9] or under various
experimental conditions [10]. In neuroinformatics, fMRI signals are often recorded for multiple
subjects for studying the brain connectivity network [11, 12]. In these scenarios, multiple datasets
will be collected, and their associated DAGs are likely to share similar characteristics. Intuitively, it
may be beneficial to estimate these DAGs jointly.
∗

Work done partially during the visit at MBZUAI (Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

