Heavy Tails in SGD and Compressibility of
Overparametrized Neural Networks

Melih Barsbey∗
Boğaziçi University
melih.barsbey@boun.edu.tr
Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Milad Sefidgaran∗
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
milad.sefidgaran@telecom-paris.fr
Gaël Richard
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
gael.richard@telecom-paris.fr

Umut Şimşekli
INRIA & ENS – PSL Research University
umut.simsekli@inria.fr

Abstract
Neural network compression techniques have become increasingly popular as
they can drastically reduce the storage and computation requirements for very
large networks. Recent empirical studies have illustrated that even simple pruning
strategies can be surprisingly effective, and several theoretical studies have shown
that compressible networks (in specific senses) should achieve a low generalization
error. Yet, a theoretical characterization of the underlying causes that make the
networks amenable to such simple compression schemes is still missing. In this
study, focusing our attention on stochastic gradient descent (SGD), our main
contribution is to link compressibility to two recently established properties of SGD:
(i) as the network size goes to infinity, the system can converge to a mean-field limit,
where the network weights behave independently [DBDFŞ20], (ii) for a large stepsize/batch-size ratio, the SGD iterates can converge to a heavy-tailed stationary
distribution [HM20, GŞZ21]. Assuming that both of these phenomena occur
simultaneously, we prove that the networks are guaranteed to be ‘`p -compressible’,
and the compression errors of different pruning techniques (magnitude, singular
value, or node pruning) become arbitrarily small as the network size increases. We
further prove generalization bounds adapted to our theoretical framework, which
are consistent with the observation that the generalization error will be lower for
more compressible networks. Our theory and numerical study on various neural
networks show that large step-size/batch-size ratios introduce heavy tails, which,
in combination with overparametrization, result in compressibility.

1

Introduction

With the increasing model sizes in deep learning and with its increasing use in low-resource environments, network compression is becoming ever more important. Among many network compression
techniques, network pruning has been arguably the most commonly used method [O’N20], and it
is rising in popularity and success [BOFG20]. Though various pruning methods are successfully
used in practice and their theoretical implications in terms of generalization are increasingly apparent
[AGNZ18], a thorough understanding of why and when neural networks are compressible is lacking.
* Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

