Increasing Liquid State Machine Performance with
Edge-of-Chaos Dynamics Organized by
Astrocyte-modulated Plasticity

Vladimir A. Ivanov
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ
vladimir.ivanov@rutgers.edu

Konstantinos P. Michmizos
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ
michmizos@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
The liquid state machine (LSM) combines low training complexity and biological plausibility, which has made it an attractive machine learning framework for
edge and neuromorphic computing paradigms. Originally proposed as a model of
brain computation, the LSM tunes its internal weights without backpropagation
of gradients, which results in lower performance compared to multi-layer neural
networks. Recent findings in neuroscience suggest that astrocytes, a long-neglected
non-neuronal brain cell, modulate synaptic plasticity and brain dynamics, tuning
brain networks to the vicinity of the computationally optimal critical phase transition between order and chaos. Inspired by this disruptive understanding of how
brain networks self-tune, we propose the neuron-astrocyte liquid state machine
(NALSM)1 that addresses under-performance through self-organized near-critical
dynamics. Similar to its biological counterpart, the astrocyte model integrates
neuronal activity and provides global feedback to spike-timing-dependent plasticity
(STDP), which self-organizes NALSM dynamics around a critical branching factor
that is associated with the edge-of-chaos. We demonstrate that NALSM achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy versus comparable LSM methods, without the need for
data-specific hand-tuning. With a top accuracy of 97.61% on MNIST, 97.51%
on N-MNIST, and 85.84% on Fashion-MNIST, NALSM achieved comparable
performance to current fully-connected multi-layer spiking neural networks trained
via backpropagation. Our findings suggest that the further development of braininspired machine learning methods has the potential to reach the performance of
deep learning, with the added benefits of supporting robust and energy-efficient
neuromorphic computing on the edge.

1

Introduction

With the recent rise of neuromorphic [1–4] and edge computing [5, 6], the liquid state machine (LSM)
learning framework [7] has become an attractive alternative [8–11] to deep neural networks owing to
its compatibility with energy-efficient neuromorphic hardware [12–14] and inherently low training
complexity. Originally proposed as a biologically plausible model of learning, LSMs avoid training
via backpropagation by using a sparse, recurrent, spiking neural network (liquid) with fixed synaptic
connection weights to project inputs into a high dimensional space from which a single neural layer
can learn the correct outputs. Yet, these advantages over deep networks come at the expense of 1)
sub-par accuracy and 2) extensive data-specific hand-tuning of liquid weights. Interestingly, these
1

Code and data available at https://github.com/combra-lab/NALSM

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

