SSMF: Shifting Seasonal Matrix Factorization

Koki Kawabata ∗
SANKEN Osaka University
koki@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Siddharth Bhatia ∗
National University of Singapore
siddharth@comp.nus.edu.sg

Rui Liu
National University of Singapore
xxliuruiabc@gmail.com

Mohit Wadhwa
mailmohitwadhwa@gmail.com

Bryan Hooi
National University of Singapore
bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Given taxi-ride counts information between departure and destination locations,
how can we forecast their future demands? In general, given a data stream of
events with seasonal patterns that innovate over time, how can we effectively and
efficiently forecast future events? In this paper, we propose Shifting Seasonal
Matrix Factorization approach, namely SSMF, that can adaptively learn multiple
seasonal patterns (called regimes), as well as switching between them. Our proposed method has the following properties: (a) it accurately forecasts future events
by detecting regime shifts in seasonal patterns as the data stream evolves; (b) it
works in an online setting, i.e., processes each observation in constant time and
memory; (c) it effectively realizes regime shifts without human intervention by
using a lossless data compression scheme. We demonstrate that our algorithm
outperforms state-of-the-art baseline methods by accurately forecasting upcoming
events on three real-world data streams.

1

Introduction

The ubiquity of multi-viewed data has increased the importance of advanced mining algorithms that aim at forecasting future events [Bai et al., 2019, Wu et al., 2019, Deng et al.,
2020], such as forecasting taxi-ride counts based on their departure and destination locations, and time information, where the events can be represented as a stream of tuples
(departure, destination, time; count). Infection spread rates during epidemics can also be represented in a similar form as (location, disease, time; count), and the task is to forecast the infection
count. Given such a large data stream produced by user events, how can we effectively forecast future
events? How can we extract meaningful patterns to improve forecasting accuracy? Intuitively, the
problem we wish to solve is as follows:
Problem 1 Given an event data stream that contains seasonal patterns, forecast the number of future
events between each pair of entities in a streaming setting.
As natural periodicity occurs in several types of data, one of the promising directions to understand the
vital dynamics of a data stream is to consider seasonal phenomena. However, high-dimensional data
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

