A Unified View of cGANs with and without Classifiers
Si-An Chen
National Taiwan University
d09922007@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Chun-Liang Li
Google Cloud AI
chunliang@google.com

Hsuan-Tien Lin
National Taiwan University
htlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs) are implicit generative
models which allow to sample from class-conditional distributions. Existing
cGANs are based on a wide range of different discriminator designs and training
objectives. One popular design in earlier works is to include a classifier during
training with the assumption that good classifiers can help eliminate samples generated with wrong classes. Nevertheless, including classifiers in cGANs often
comes with a side effect of only generating easy-to-classify samples. Recently,
some representative cGANs avoid the shortcoming and reach state-of-the-art performance without having classifiers. Somehow it remains unanswered whether the
classifiers can be resurrected to design better cGANs. In this work, we demonstrate
that classifiers can be properly leveraged to improve cGANs. We start by using
the decomposition of the joint probability distribution to connect the goals of
cGANs and classification as a unified framework. The framework, along with a
classic energy model to parameterize distributions, justifies the use of classifiers
for cGANs in a principled manner. It explains several popular cGAN variants, such
as ACGAN, ProjGAN, and ContraGAN, as special cases with different levels of
approximations, which provides a unified view and brings new insights to understanding cGANs. Experimental results demonstrate that the design inspired by the
proposed framework outperforms state-of-the-art cGANs on multiple benchmark
datasets, especially on the most challenging ImageNet. The code is available at
https://github.com/sian-chen/PyTorch-ECGAN.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks [GANs; 10] is a family of generative models that are trained from
the duel of a generator and a discriminator. The generator aims to generate data from a target
distribution, where the fidelity of the generated data is “screened” by the discriminator. Recent studies
on the objectives [2, 37, 29, 25, 36, 26, 38], backbone architectures [41, 50], and regularization
techniques [13, 35, 51] for GANs have achieved impressive progress on image generation, making
GANs the state-of-the-art approach to generate high fidelity and diverse images [3]. Conditional
GANs (cGANs) extend GANs to generate data from class-conditional distributions [33, 39, 34, 16].
The capability of conditional generation extends the application horizon of GANs to conditional
image generation based on labels [39] or texts [43], speech enhancement [32], and image style
transformation [18, 53].
One representative cGAN is Auxiliary Classifier GAN [ACGAN; 39], which decomposes the conditional discriminator to a classifier and an unconditional discriminator. The generator of ACGAN is
expected to generate images that convince the unconditional discriminator while being classified to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

