Robust Deep Reinforcement Learning
through Adversarial Loss

Tuomas Oikarinen∗
UC San Diego CSE

Wang Zhang
MIT MechE

Alexandre Megretski
MIT EECS

Luca Daniel
MIT EECS

Tsui-Wei Weng
UC San Diego HDSI

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that deep reinforcement learning agents are vulnerable
to small adversarial perturbations on the agent’s inputs, which raises concerns
about deploying such agents in the real world. To address this issue, we propose
RADIAL-RL, a principled framework to train reinforcement learning agents with
improved robustness against lp -norm bounded adversarial attacks. Our framework is compatible with popular deep reinforcement learning algorithms and we
demonstrate its performance with deep Q-learning, A3C and PPO. We experiment on three deep RL benchmarks (Atari, MuJoCo and ProcGen) to show the
effectiveness of our robust training algorithm. Our RADIAL-RL agents consistently outperform prior methods when tested against attacks of varying strength
and are more computationally efficient to train. In addition, we propose a new
evaluation method called Greedy Worst-Case Reward (GWC) to measure attack
agnostic robustness of deep RL agents. We show that GWC can be evaluated
efficiently and is a good estimate of the reward under the worst possible sequence of adversarial attacks. All code used for our experiments is available
at https://github.com/tuomaso/radial_rl_v2.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved enormous success on a variety of challenging domains, ranging from
computer vision [1], natural language processing [2] to reinforcement learning (RL) [3, 4]. Nevertheless, the existence of adversarial examples [5] indicates that deep neural networks (DNNs) are not
as robust and trustworthy as we would expect, as small and often imperceptible perturbations can
result in misclassifications of state-of-the-art DNNs. Unfortunately, adversarial attacks have also been
shown possible in deep reinforcement learning, where adversarial perturbations in the observation
space and/or action space can cause arbitrarily bad performance of deep RL agents [6, 7, 8]. As deep
RL agents are deployed in many safety critical applications such as self-driving cars and robotics, it
is of crucial importance to develop robust training algorithms (a.k.a. defense algorithms) such that
the resulting trained agents are robust against adversarial (and non-adversarial) perturbation.
Many heuristic defenses have been proposed to improve robustness of DNNs against adversarial
attacks for image classification tasks, but they often fail against stronger adversarial attack algorithms.
For example, [9] showed that 13 such defense methods (recently published at prestigious conferences)
can all be broken by more advanced attacks. One emerging alternative to heuristic defenses is
∗

correspondence to: toikarinen@ucsd.edu, lweng@ucsd.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

