EDGE: Explaining Deep Reinforcement Learning
Policies
Wenbo Guo
The Pennsylvania State University
wzg13@ist.psu.edu

Xian Wu∗
The Pennsylvania State University
xkw5132@psu.edu

Usmann Khan∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
ukhan35@gatech.edu
Xinyu Xing
Northwestern University
The Pennsylvania State University
xinyu.xing@northwestern.edu

Abstract
With the rapid development of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) techniques,
there is an increasing need to understand and interpret DRL policies. While recent
research has developed explanation methods to interpret how an agent determines
its moves, they cannot capture the importance of actions/states to a game’s final
result. In this work, we propose a novel self-explainable model that augments a
Gaussian process with a customized kernel function and an interpretable predictor.
Together with the proposed model, we also develop a parameter learning procedure
that leverages inducing points and variational inference to improve learning efficiency. Using our proposed model, we can predict an agent’s final rewards from its
game episodes and extract time step importance within episodes as strategy-level
explanations for that agent. Through experiments on Atari and MuJoCo games, we
verify the explanation fidelity of our method and demonstrate how to employ interpretation to understand agent behavior, discover policy vulnerabilities, remediate
policy errors, and even defend against adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has shown great success in automatic policy learning for various
sequential decision-making problems, such as training AI agents to defeat professional players in
sophisticated games [74, 65, 24, 37] and controlling robots to accomplish complicated tasks [33,
38]. However, existing DRL agents make decisions in an opaque fashion, taking actions without
accompanying explanations. This lack of transparency creates key barriers to establishing trust in an
agent’s policy and scrutinizing policy weakness. This issue significantly limits the applicability of
DRL techniques in critical application fields (e.g., finance [47] and self-driving cars [11]).
To tackle this limitation, prior research (e.g., [9, 13, 73]) proposes to derive an explanation for a target
agent’s action at a specific time step. Technically, this explanation can be obtained by pinpointing the
features within the agent’s observation of a particular state that contribute most to its corresponding
action at that state. Despite demonstrating great potential to help users understand a target agent’s
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

