Imitating Deep Learning Dynamics via Locally
Elastic Stochastic Differential Equations

Jiayao Zhang

Hua Wang

Weijie J. Su

University of Pennsylvania
{zjiayao,wanghua,suw}@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
Understanding the training dynamics of deep learning models is perhaps a necessary
step toward demystifying the effectiveness of these models. In particular, how do
data from different classes gradually become separable in their feature spaces when
training neural networks using stochastic gradient descent? In this study, we model
the evolution of features during deep learning training using a set of stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) that each corresponds to a training sample. As a
crucial ingredient in our modeling strategy, each SDE contains a drift term that
reflects the impact of backpropagation at an input on the features of all samples.
Our main finding uncovers a sharp phase transition phenomenon regarding the
intra-class impact: if the SDEs are locally elastic [19] in the sense that the impact
is more significant on samples from the same class as the input, the features
of the training data become linearly separable, meaning vanishing training loss;
otherwise, the features are not separable, regardless of how long the training time is.
Moreover, in the presence of local elasticity, an analysis of our SDEs shows that the
emergence of a simple geometric structure called the neural collapse of the features.
Taken together, our results shed light on the decisive role of local elasticity in the
training dynamics of neural networks. We corroborate our theoretical analysis with
experiments on a synthesized dataset of geometric shapes and CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have achieved significant empirical success over the past decade across a wide
spectrum of domains spanning computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement
learning [31, 43, 48]. Despite these remarkable achievements at the empirical level, there is still
much to learn about deep neural networks, as evidenced by the fact that almost all important advances
concerning architecture design and optimization for deep learning are based on heuristics, without
much input from a theoretical perspective [20, 11, 21, 27].
An important step toward opening these black-box models and unveiling their formidable details is
to quantitatively understand the impact of backpropagation in deep learning training. While there
has been a continued effort to demystify how simple optimization methods give rise to impressive
generalization performance, for example, [49, 26, 4], this is by no means an easy problem, perhaps
because of the daunting nonconvex nature of neural networks. Accordingly, for near-term purposes,
a more practical approach is to take a phenomenological viewpoint by relating simple empirical
patterns to the effectiveness of deep learning models.
In this spirit, we are interested in how data from different classes gradually become separable in
their feature space by repetitively calling backpropagation. From a phenomenological viewpoint, this
question can be addressed by first analyzing the impact of a single update using a stochastic gradient
on the performance of the neural networks. More precisely, imagine that the gradient is evaluated in
an image of a cat, how does the hidden representation of another image—say, an image of another
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

