Identifiable Generative Models for
Missing Not at Random Data Imputation

1

Chao Ma1,2 ∗ Cheng Zhang2
University of Cambridge 2 Microsoft Research Cambridge
cm905@cam.ac.uk
cheng.zhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Real-world datasets often have missing values associated with complex generative
processes, where the cause of the missingness may not be fully observed. This
is known as missing not at random (MNAR) data. However, many imputation
methods do not take into account the missingness mechanism, resulting in biased
imputation values when MNAR data is present. Although there are a few methods
that have considered the MNAR scenario, their model’s identifiability under MNAR
is generally not guaranteed. That is, model parameters can not be uniquely determined even with infinite data samples, hence the imputation results given by such
models can still be biased. This issue is especially overlooked by many modern
deep generative models. In this work, we fill in this gap by systematically analyzing
the identifiability of generative models under MNAR. Furthermore, we propose a
practical deep generative model which can provide identifiability guarantees under
mild assumptions, for a wide range of MNAR mechanisms. Our method demonstrates a clear advantage for tasks on both synthetic data and multiple real-world
scenarios with MNAR data.

1

Introduction

Missing data is an obstacle in many data analysis problems, which may seriously compromise the
performance of machine learning models, as well as downstream tasks based on these models. Being
able to successfully recover/impute missing data in an unbiased way is the key to understanding the
structure of real-world data. This requires us to identify the underlying data-generating process, as
well as the probabilistic mechanism that decides which data is missing.
In general, there are three types of missing mechanisms [44]. The first type is missing completely
at random (MCAR), where the probability of a data entry being missing is independent of both the
observed and unobserved data (Figure 1 (a)). In this case, no statistical bias is introduced by MCAR.
The second type is missing at random (MAR), which assumes that the missing data mechanism
is independent of the value of unobserved data (Figure 1 (b)). Under this assumption, maximum
likelihood learning methods without explicit modeling of the missingness mechanism can be applied
by marginalizing out the missing variables [3, 25, 28]. However, both MCAR and MAR do not hold
in many real-world applications, such as recommender systems [8, 14], healthcare [13], and surveys
[51]. For example, in a survey, participants with financial difficulties are more likely to refuse to
complete the survey about financial incomes. This is an example of missing not at random (MNAR),
where the cause of the missingness (financial income) can be unobserved. In this case, ignoring the
missingness mechanism will result in biased imputation, which will jeopardize down-stream tasks.
∗

This work was performed when the authors were (part-time) associated with Microsoft Research, Cambridge

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

