OSOA: One-Shot Online Adaptation of Deep
Generative Models for Lossless Compression

Chen Zhang†

Shifeng Zhang†

Fabio M. Carlucci∗ Zhenguo Li†

†

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{chenzhang10, zhangshifeng4, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
Explicit deep generative models (DGMs), e.g., VAEs and Normalizing Flows, have
shown to offer an effective data modelling alternative for lossless compression.
However, DGMs themselves normally require large storage space and thus contaminate the advantage brought by accurate data density estimation. To eliminate the
requirement of saving separate models for different target datasets, we propose a
novel setting that starts from a pretrained deep generative model and compresses
the data batches while adapting the model with a dynamical system for only one
epoch. We formalise this setting as that of One-Shot Online Adaptation (OSOA) of
DGMs for lossless compression and propose a vanilla algorithm under this setting.
Experimental results show that vanilla OSOA can save significant time versus
training bespoke models and space versus using one model for all targets. With
the same adaptation step number or adaptation time, it is shown vanilla OSOA can
exhibit better space efficiency, e.g., 47% less space, than fine-tuning the pretrained
model and saving the fine-tuned model. Moreover, we showcase the potential
of OSOA and motivate more sophisticated OSOA algorithms by showing further
space or time efficiency with multiple updates per batch and early stopping.

1

Introduction

Lossless compression has always been an important part in the information and communications
technology industry and has become more and more essential with the data explosion of the Big
Data era [10, 39, 40, 8]. Recently, a large number of machine learning approaches, predominantly
deep generative models (DGMs), have been proposed for lossless compression [34, 48, 19, 17,
51]. As indicated by Shannon’s source coding theorem, the compression limit is determined by
the entropy of the data’s ground truth distribution [30]; any mismatch between an approximate
distribution for coding and the unknown ground truth distribution will cause extra coding cost. It
is the powerful approximation ability of DGMs that enables more precise estimation of the ground
truth distribution [23, 41, 24, 29] and enables DGMs based compression algorithms to outperform
the conventional counter-parties in terms of the compression ratio.
However, in real production scenarios, both space and time efficiencies are desirable. While more
space efficiency is provided by higher compression ratio with DGMs based lossless compression
algorithms, training of the probabilistic models is time consuming. Training a separate model for
each different dataset to compress would scale the expensive time cost linearly. Moreover, to decode
the dataset, one has to store the probabilistic model together with the codeword of the data, which
requires additional space for local decoding and additional transmission cost for remote decoding.
Apart from one model per dataset, another extreme on the spectrum is using one probabilistic model
∗

Work done during employment at Huawei Technologies R&D UK

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

