No RL, No Simulation: Learning to Navigate without
Navigating

Meera Hahn ∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
Mustafa Mukadam
Facebook AI Research

Devendra Chaplot
Facebook AI Research

Shubham Tulsiani
Facebook AI Research

James M. Rehg
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abhinav Gupta
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Most prior methods for learning navigation policies require access to simulation
environments, as they need online policy interaction and rely on ground-truth maps
for rewards. However, building simulators is expensive (requires manual effort for
each and every scene) and creates challenges in transferring learned policies to
robotic platforms in the real-world, due to the sim-to-real domain gap. In this paper,
we pose a simple question: Do we really need active interaction, ground-truth maps
or even reinforcement-learning (RL) in order to solve the image-goal navigation
task? We propose a self-supervised approach to learn to navigate from only passive
videos of roaming. Our approach, No RL, No Simulator (NRNS), is simple and
scalable, yet highly effective. NRNS outperforms RL-based formulations by a
significant margin. We present NRNS as a strong baseline for any future imagebased navigation tasks that use RL or Simulation.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have seen significant advances in learning-based approaches for indoor navigation [1, 2]. Impressive performance gains have been obtained for a range of tasks, from non-semantic
point-goal navigation [3] to semantic tasks such as image-goal [4] and object-goal navigation [5, 6],
via methods that use reinforcement learning (RL). The effectiveness of RL for these tasks can be
attributed in part to the emergence of powerful new simulators such as Habitat [7], Matterport [8]
and AI2Thor [9]. These simulators have helped scale learning to billions of frames by providing
large-scale active interaction data and ground-truth maps for designing reward functions. But do we
actually need simulation and RL to learn to navigate? Is there an alternative way to formulate the
navigation problem, such that no ground-truth maps or active interaction are required? These are
valuable questions to explore because learning navigation in simulation constrains the approach to a
limited set of environments, since the creation of 3D assets remains costly and time-consuming.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised approach to learning how to navigate from passive
egocentric videos. Our novel method is simple and scalable (no simulator required for training), and
at the same time highly effective, as it outperforms RL-based formulations by a significant margin.
To introduce our approach, let us first examine the role of RL and simulation in standard navigation
learning methods. In the standard RL formulation, an agent gets a reward upon reaching the goal,
followed by a credit assignment stage to determine the most useful state-action pairs. But do we
actually need the reinforce function for action credit assignment? Going a step further, do we even
need to learn a policy explicitly? In navigation, we argue that the state space itself is highly structured
via a distance function, and the structure itself could be leveraged for credit assignment. Simply put,
states that help reduce the distance to the goal are better – and therefore predicted distance can be
∗

Correspondence: meerahahn@gatech.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

