Mitigating Forgetting in Online Continual Learning
with Neuron Calibration
Haiyan Yin, Peng Yang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{haiyanyin, pengyang01, liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
Inspired by human intelligence, the research on online continual learning aims to
push the limits of the machine learning models to constantly learn from sequentially
encountered tasks, with the data from each task being observed in an online fashion.
Though recent studies have achieved remarkable progress in improving the online
continual learning performance empowered by the deep neural networks-based
models, many of today’s approaches still suffer a lot from catastrophic forgetting,
a persistent challenge for continual learning. In this paper, we present a novel
method which attempts to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in online continual
learning from a new perspective, i.e., neuron calibration. In particular, we model
the neurons in the deep neural networks-based models as calibrated units under a
general formulation. Then we formalize a learning framework to effectively train
the calibrated model, where neuron calibration could give ubiquitous benefit to
balance the stability and plasticity of online continual learning algorithms through
influencing both their forward inference path and backward optimization path.
Our proposed formulation for neuron calibration is lightweight and applicable
to general feed-forward neural networks-based models. We perform extensive
experiments to evaluate our method on four benchmark continual learning datasets.
The results show that neuron calibration plays a vital role in improving online
continual learning performance and our method could substantially improve the
state-of-the-art performance on all the evaluated datasets.

1

Introduction

While humans and animals exhibit remarkable ability to deal with new tasks by effectively adapting
their acquired knowledge without forgetting the previously learned skills, in stark contrast, it is
challenging for artificial learning systems to effectively deal with continuously inquiring tasks.
When switching to a new task from some previously learned ones, there is sometimes a significant
drop in performance, where such a phenomenon is also referred to as catastrophic forgetting. To
overcome such an issue, the research on continual learning has emerged, which defines the learning
protocol for the scenarios when the training data of different tasks procedurally arrives in a sequential
order [20, 23, 28, 35]. The catastrophic forgetting problem is rooted in the model training process, as
the gradients to train the model parameters encode great amount of information about the dynamically
shifting data distribution seen by the model, which could keep changing throughout the entire
continual learning period.
In this paper, we consider a challenging task which poses a more restrictive requirement on the
conventional continual learning setting, i.e., online continual learning [1]. Inspired by many real life
scenarios, online continual learning requires the data for each training task to appear as a (one-pass)
stream of samples. To tackle such challenges, we focus on the replay-based approach [19, 34], which
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

