Discrete-Valued Neural Communication in
Structured Architectures Enhances Generalization
Dianbo Liu∗
Mila
Anirudh Goyal
Mila

Chen Sun
Mila

Alex Lamb∗
Mila

Kenji Kawaguchi
Harvard University

Michael C. Mozer
Google Research, Brain Team

Yoshua Bengio
Mila

Abstract
Deep learning has advanced from fully connected architectures to structured models
organized into components, e.g., the transformer composed of positional elements,
modular architectures divided into slots, and graph neural nets made up of nodes.
The nature of structured models is that communication among the components
has a bottleneck, typically achieved by restricted connectivity and attention. In
this work, we further tighten the bottleneck via discreteness of the representations
transmitted between components. We hypothesize that this constraint serves as a
useful form of inductive bias. Our hypothesis is motivated by past empirical work
showing the benefits of discretization in non-structured architectures as well as our
own theoretical results showing that discretization increases noise robustness and
reduces the underlying dimensionality of the model. Building on an existing technique for discretization from the VQ-VAE, we consider multi-headed discretization
with shared codebooks as the output of each architectural component. One motivating intuition is human language in which communication occurs through multiple
discrete symbols. This form of communication is hypothesized to facilitate transmission of information between functional components of the brain by providing a
common interlingua, just as it does for human-to-human communication. Our experiments show that discrete-valued neural communication (DVNC) substantially
improves systematic generalization in a variety of architectures—transformers,
modular architectures, and graph neural networks. We also show that the DVNC is
robust to the choice of hyperparameters, making the method useful in practice.

1

Introduction

In AI, there has long been a tension between subsymbolic and symbolic architectures. Subsymbolic
architectures, like neural networks, utilize continuous representations and statistical computation.
Symbolic architectures, like production systems (Laird et al., 1986) and traditional expert systems,
use discrete, structured representations and logical computation. Each architecture has its strengths:
subsymbolic computation is useful for perception and control, symbolic computation for higher
level, abstract reasoning. A challenge in integrating these approaches is developing unified learning
procedures.
As a step toward bridging the gap, recent work in deep learning has focused on constructing structured
architectures with multiple components that interact with one another. For instance, graph neural
networks are composed of distinct nodes (Kipf et al., 2019; Scarselli et al., 2008; Kipf et al., 2018;
∗
co-first author. Address correspondence to liudianbo@gmail.com, alex6200@gmail.com, and
kkawaguchi@fas.harvard.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

