L2ight: Enabling On-Chip Learning
for Optical Neural Networks via Efficient
in-situ Subspace Optimization

Jiaqi Gu, Hanqing Zhu, Chenghao Feng, Zixuan Jiang, Ray T. Chen, David Z. Pan
ECE Department, University of Texas at Austin
{jqgu, hqzhu,fengchenghao1996,zixuan}@utexas.edu, {chen, dpan}@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Silicon-photonics-based optical neural network (ONN) is a promising hardware
platform that could represent a paradigm shift in efficient AI with its CMOScompatibility, flexibility, ultra-low execution latency, and high energy efficiency.
In-situ training on the online programmable photonic chips is appealing but still encounters challenging issues in on-chip implementability, scalability, and efficiency.
In this work, we propose a closed-loop ONN on-chip learning framework L2 ight
to enable scalable ONN mapping and efficient in-situ learning. L2 ight adopts a
three-stage learning flow that first calibrates the complicated photonic circuit states
under challenging physical constraints, then performs photonic core mapping via
combined analytical solving and zeroth-order optimization. A subspace learning
procedure with multi-level sparsity is integrated into L2 ight to enable in-situ gradient evaluation and fast adaptation, unleashing the power of optics for real on-chip
intelligence. Extensive experiments demonstrate our proposed L2 ight outperforms
prior ONN training protocols with 3-order-of-magnitude higher scalability and
over 30× better efficiency, when benchmarked on various models and learning
tasks. This synergistic framework is the first scalable on-chip learning solution that
pushes this emerging field from intractable to scalable and further to efficient for
next-generation self-learnable photonic neural chips. From a co-design perspective,
L2 ight also provides essential insights for hardware-restricted unitary subspace
optimization and efficient sparse training. We open-source our framework at link.

1

Introduction

The escalating scales of deep learning models and datasets have brought increased demand for
computing capacities in electronic processors. Stringent performance and efficiency constraints
in practical applications raise a surging need to develop more efficient computing solutions. As a
promising substitute for conventional electronics, optical neural networks (ONNs) have attracted
extensive research interests owing to their sub-nanosecond latency and attojoule/multiply-accumulate
operation (MAC) energy efficiency [42, 6, 51, 41, 54, 14, 15], shown in Figure 1(a).
However, robustness and trainability are still critical issues for photonic AI engines [58, 22, 60].
Due to the analog computing nature of ONNs, the photonic DNN model inevitably suffer from
performance degradation or even complete malfunction [58, 60] with the existence of manufacturing
errors, non-ideal device controls, and undesired circuit noises, shown in Figure 1(b). Though non-ideal
effects can be simulated and considered during software training [58, 22] to improve noise tolerance,
the variation simulation is physically inaccurate (especially with unknown process variations) and
prohibitively expensive, shown in Figure 1(c).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

