Laplace Redux – Effortless Bayesian Deep Learning
Erik Daxberger⇤,c,m

Agustinus Kristiadi⇤,t
Matthias Bauerd

Alexander Immer⇤,e,p
Philipp Hennigt,m

Runa Eschenhagen⇤,t

c

University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
t
University of Tübingen
e
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
p
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
d
DeepMind, London
m

Abstract
Bayesian formulations of deep learning have been shown to have compelling theoretical properties and offer practical functional benefits, such as improved predictive
uncertainty quantification and model selection. The Laplace approximation (LA)
is a classic, and arguably the simplest family of approximations for the intractable
posteriors of deep neural networks. Yet, despite its simplicity, the LA is not as
popular as alternatives like variational Bayes or deep ensembles. This may be due
to assumptions that the LA is expensive due to the involved Hessian computation,
that it is difficult to implement, or that it yields inferior results. In this work we show
that these are misconceptions: we (i) review the range of variants of the LA including versions with minimal cost overhead; (ii) introduce laplace, an easy-to-use
software library for PyTorch offering user-friendly access to all major flavors of the
LA; and (iii) demonstrate through extensive experiments that the LA is competitive
with more popular alternatives in terms of performance, while excelling in terms
of computational cost. We hope that this work will serve as a catalyst to a wider
adoption of the LA in practical deep learning, including in domains where Bayesian
approaches are not typically considered at the moment.
laplace library: https://github.com/AlexImmer/Laplace
Experiments: https://github.com/runame/laplace-redux

1

Introduction

Despite their successes, modern neural networks (NNs) still suffer from several shortcomings that
limit their applicability in some settings. These include (i) poor calibration and overconfidence,
especially when the data distribution shifts between training and testing [1], (ii) catastrophic forgetting
of previously learned tasks when continuously trained on new tasks [2], and (iii) the difficulty of
selecting suitable NN architectures and hyperparameters [3]. Bayesian modeling [4, 5] provides a
principled and unified approach to tackle these issues by (i) equipping models with robust uncertainty
estimates [6], (ii) enabling models to learn continually by capturing past information [7], and (iii)
allowing for automated model selection by optimally trading off data fit and model complexity [8].
Even though this provides compelling motivation for using Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) [9],
they have not gained much traction in practice. Common criticisms include that BNNs are difficult
⇤
Equal contributors; author ordering sampled uniformly at random. Correspondence to:
ead54@cam.ac.uk, agustinus.kristiadi@uni-tuebingen.de, alexander.immer@inf.ethz.ch,
runa.eschenhagen@student.uni-tuebingen.de.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

