RIM: Reliable Influence-based Active Learning
on Graphs

Wentao Zhang1,2 , Yexin Wang1 , Zhenbang You1 , Meng Cao2 , Ping Huang2
Jiulong Shan2 , Zhi Yang1,3 , Bin Cui1,3,4
1
School of CS, Peking University 2 Apple
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications
4
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao), China
1
{wentao.zhang, yexinwang, zhenbangyou, liyang.cs, yangzhi, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn
2
{mengcao, Huang_ping, jlshan}@apple.com

Abstract
Message passing is the core of most graph models such as Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) and Label Propagation (LP), which usually require a large number
of clean labeled data to smooth out the neighborhood over the graph. However,
the labeling process can be tedious, costly, and error-prone in practice. In this
paper, we propose to unify active learning (AL) and message passing towards
minimizing labeling costs, e.g., making use of few and unreliable labels that can
be obtained cheaply. We make two contributions towards that end. First, we open
up a perspective by drawing a connection between AL enforcing message passing
and social influence maximization, ensuring that the selected samples effectively
improve the model performance. Second, we propose an extension to the influence
model that incorporates an explicit quality factor to model label noise. In this way,
we derive a fundamentally new AL selection criterion for GCN and LP–reliable
influence maximization (RIM)–by considering quantity and quality of influence
simultaneously. Empirical studies on public datasets show that RIM significantly
outperforms current AL methods in terms of accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous in the real world, such as social, academic, recommendation, and biological
networks [38, 30, 31, 10, 28]. Unlike the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) data, nodes
are connected by edges in the graph. Due to the ability to capture the graph information, message
passing is the core of many existing graph models assuming that labels and features vary smoothly
over the edges of the graph. Particularly in Graph Convolutional Neural Network (GCN) [16], the
feature of each node is propagated along edges and transformed through neural networks. In Label
Propagation (LP) [25], node labels are propagated and aggregated along edges in the graph.
The message passing typically requires a large amount of labeled data to achieve satisfactory performance. However, labeling data, be it by specialists or crowd-sourcing, often consumes too much
time and money. The process is also tedious and error-prone. As a result, it is desirable to achieve
good classification results with labeled data that is both few and unreliable. Active Learning (AL) [1]
is a promising strategy to tackle this challenge, which minimizes the labeling cost by prioritizing
the selection of data in order to improve the model performance as much as possible. Unfortunately,
conventional AL methods [3, 8, 20, 41, 21, 27] treat message passing and AL independently without
explicitly considering their impact on each other. In this paper, we advocate that a better AL method
should unify node selection and message passing towards minimizing labeling cost, and we make
two contributions towards that end.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

