On the Convergence of Prior-Guided Zeroth-Order
Optimization Algorithms

Shuyu Cheng, Guoqiang Wu, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Institute for AI,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China
chengsy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, guoqiangwu90@gmail.com, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization is widely used to handle challenging tasks, such
as query-based black-box adversarial attacks and reinforcement learning. Various
attempts have been made to integrate prior information into the gradient estimation
procedure based on finite differences, with promising empirical results. However,
their convergence properties are not well understood. This paper makes an attempt
to fill up this gap by analyzing the convergence of prior-guided ZO algorithms
under a greedy descent framework with various gradient estimators. We provide
a convergence guarantee for the prior-guided random gradient-free (PRGF) algorithms. Moreover, to further accelerate over greedy descent methods, we present
a new accelerated random search (ARS) algorithm that incorporates prior information, together with a convergence analysis. Finally, our theoretical results are
confirmed by experiments on several numerical benchmarks as well as adversarial
attacks. Our code is available at https://github.com/csy530216/pg-zoo.

1

Introduction

Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization [18] provides powerful tools to deal with challenging tasks, such as
query-based black-box adversarial attacks [7, 13], reinforcement learning [22, 17, 9], meta-learning
[1], and hyperparameter tuning [23], where the access to gradient information is either not available or
too costly. ZO methods only assume an oracle access to the function value at any given point, instead
of gradients as in first-order methods. The primary goal is to find a solution with as few queries to the
function value oracle as possible. Recently, various ZO methods have been proposed in two main
categories. One type is to obtain a gradient estimator and plug in some gradient-based methods. [21]
analyzes the convergence of such methods with a random gradient-free (RGF) estimator obtained
via finite difference along a random direction. The other type is directed search, where the update
only depends on comparison between function values at different points. Such methods are robust
against monotone transform of the objective function [24, 10, 3]. However, as they do not directly
utilize function values, their query complexity is often higher than that of finite difference methods.
Therefore, we focus on the first type of methods in this paper. Other methods exist such as CMA-ES
[11] which is potentially better on objective functions with a rugged landscape, but lacks a general
convergence guarantee.
ZO methods are usually less efficient than first-order algorithms, as they typically take O(d) queries
to reach a given precision, where d is the input dimension (see Table 1 in [10]). Specifically, for
the methods in [21], the oracle query count is O(d) times larger than that of their corresponding
schemes using gradients. This inefficiency stems from random search along uniformly distributed
directions. To improve, various attempts have been made to augment random search with (extra)
∗

J.Z. is the Corresponding Author. G.W. is now with School of Software, Shandong University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

