Online Learning in Periodic Zero-Sum Games

Tanner Fiez∗
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
fiezt@uw.edu
Stratis Skoulakis∗
SUTD
Singapore
efstratios@sutd.edu.sg

Ryann Sim∗
SUTD
Singapore
ryann_sim@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
Georgios Piliouras†
SUTD
Singapore
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Lillian Ratliff†
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Abstract
A seminal result in game theory is von Neumann’s minmax theorem, which states
that zero-sum games admit an essentially unique equilibrium solution. Classical
learning results build on this theorem to show that online no-regret dynamics
converge to an equilibrium in a time-average sense in zero-sum games. In the past
several years, a key research direction has focused on characterizing the day-today behavior of such dynamics. General results in this direction show that broad
classes of online learning dynamics are cyclic, and formally Poincaré recurrent,
in zero-sum games. We analyze the robustness of these online learning behaviors
in the case of periodic zero-sum games with a time-invariant equilibrium. This
model generalizes the usual repeated game formulation while also being a realistic
and natural model of a repeated competition between players that depends on
exogenous environmental variations such as time-of-day effects, week-to-week
trends, and seasonality. Interestingly, time-average convergence may fail even in
the simplest such settings, in spite of the equilibrium being fixed. In contrast, using
novel analysis methods, we show that Poincaré recurrence provably generalizes
despite the complex, non-autonomous nature of these dynamical systems.

1

Introduction

The study of learning dynamics in zero-sum games is arguably as old of a field as game theory
itself, dating back to the seminal work of Brown and Robinson [7, 27], which followed shortly
after the foundational minmax theorem of von Neumann [33]. The dynamics of online no-regret
learning algorithms [10, 29] are of particular interest in zero-sum games as they are designed with an
adversarial environment in mind. Moreover, well known results imply that such dynamics converge
in a time-average sense to a minmax equilibrium in zero-sum games [10, 15].
Despite the classical nature of the study of online no-regret learning dynamics in zero-sum games, the
actual transient behavior of such dynamics was historically not as understood. However, in the past
several years this topic has gained attention with a number of works studying such dynamics in zerosum games (and variants thereof) with a particular focus on continuous-time analysis [24, 25, 20, 6,
32, 23, 22]. The unifying emergent picture is that the dynamics are “approximately cyclic" in a formal
sense known as Poincaré recurrence. Moreover, these results have acted as fundamental building
blocks for understanding the limiting behavior of their discrete-time variants [2, 12, 21, 11, 3].
∗
†

Joint first authors
Joint last authors

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

