Image Generation using Continuous Filter Atoms
Ze Wang⇤ Seunghyun Hwang⇤ Zichen Miao
Purdue University

Qiang Qiu

{zewang, hwang229, miaoz, qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we model the subspace of convolutional filters with a neural ordinary
differential equation (ODE) to enable gradual changes in generated images. Decomposing convolutional filters over a set of filter atoms allows efficiently modeling
and sampling from a subspace of high-dimensional filters. By further modeling
filters atoms with a neural ODE, we show both empirically and theoretically that
such introduced continuity can be propagated to the generated images, and thus
achieves gradually evolved image generation. We support the proposed framework
of image generation with continuous filter atoms using various experiments, including image-to-image translation and image generation conditioned on continuous
labels. Without auxiliary network components and heavy supervision, the proposed
continuous filter atoms allow us to easily manipulate the gradual change of generated images by controlling integration intervals of neural ordinary differential
equation. This research sheds the light on using the subspace of network parameters
to navigate the diverse appearance of image generation.

1

Introduction

Conditional image generation has been widely studied in recent years due to its numerous applications
including image segmentation [12, 18], style transfer [57, 20], image inpainting [33, 52], image
super-resolution [54, 44], image registration [1], and image synthesis [31]. Despite extensive research
and applications in these fields, limited progress has been made on conditional image generation
using continuous or closely spaced labels due to the difficulties pointed out in [8], e.g., the absence
of real images for some labels. It is shown in [8] that the standard training with empirical risk
minimization does not apply well to continuous labels. Moreover, it remains challenging to encourage
the generation diversity, especially without heavy supervision, while maintaining output fidelity.
Previously, generation diversity is mainly encouraged using explicit regularization terms to convey
diversity with additional latent codes [26, 34]. However, explicit regularizations inevitably introduce
additional hyperparameters, and sub-optimal hyperparameters can often cause either poor diversity or
noticeable sacrifices in terms of generation quality and the correspondence to input conditions.
On the other hand, achieving generation diversity by modeling the deep network parameter space
has attracted limited attention [47]. This direction is mainly challenged by the prohibitive cost on
both modeling of and sampling from the very high-dimensional space of convolutional filters in
modern image generative networks. Motivated by the observation that a convolutional filter can be
well approximated by a linear combination of low-dimensional filter atoms, BasisGAN [47] shows in
image generation that, the high-dimensional filter space in each layer can be well approximated by a
low-dimensional filter subspace, which significantly reduces the cost of both parameter modeling and
sampling. In this way, each sampling of the modeled parameter subspace results in one deterministic
transformation from the input condition to the desired target domain, and the diverse outputs are
achieved by sampling multiple times. More importantly, it is empirically shown in [47] that without
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

