Uncertain Decisions Facilitate Better
Preference Learning

Cassidy Laidlaw
University of California, Berkeley
cassidy_laidlaw@cs.berkeley.edu

Stuart Russell
University of California, Berkeley
russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Existing observational approaches for learning human preferences, such as inverse
reinforcement learning, usually make strong assumptions about the observability
of the human’s environment. However, in reality, people make many important
decisions under uncertainty. To better understand preference learning in these
cases, we study the setting of inverse decision theory (IDT), a previously proposed
framework where a human is observed making non-sequential binary decisions
under uncertainty. In IDT, the human’s preferences are conveyed through their
loss function, which expresses a tradeoff between different types of mistakes.
We give the first statistical analysis of IDT, providing conditions necessary to
identify these preferences and characterizing the sample complexity—the number
of decisions that must be observed to learn the tradeoff the human is making to
a desired precision. Interestingly, we show that it is actually easier to identify
preferences when the decision problem is more uncertain. Furthermore, uncertain
decision problems allow us to relax the unrealistic assumption that the human is an
optimal decision maker but still identify their exact preferences; we give sample
complexities in this suboptimal case as well. Our analysis contradicts the intuition
that partial observability should make preference learning more difficult. It also
provides a first step towards understanding and improving preference learning
methods for uncertain and suboptimal humans.

1

Introduction

The problem of inferring human preferences has been studied for decades in fields such as inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL), preference elicitation, and active learning. However, there are still
several shortcomings in existing methods for preference learning. Active learning methods require
query access to a human; this is infeasible in many purely observational settings and may lead to
inaccuracies due to the description-experience gap [1]. IRL is an alternative preference learning tool
which requires only observations of human behavior. However, IRL suffers from underspecification,
i.e. preferences are not precisely identifiable from observed behavior [2]. Furthermore, nearly
all IRL methods require that the observed human is optimal or noisily optimal at optimizing for
their preferences. However, humans are often systematically suboptimal decision makers [3], and
accounting for this makes IRL even more underspecified, since it is hard to tell suboptimal behavior
for one set of preferences apart from optimal behavior for another set of preferences [4].
IRL and preference learning from observational data are generally applied in situations where a human
is acting under no uncertainty. Given the underspecification challenge, one might expect that adding
in the possibility of uncertainty in decision making (known as partial observability) would only make
preference learning more challenging. Indeed, Choi and Kim [5] and Chinaei and Chaib-Draa [6],
who worked to apply IRL to partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs, where agents
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

