Probabilistic Entity Representation Model for
Reasoning over Knowledge Graphs
Nurendra Choudhary1 , Nikhil Rao2 , Sumeet Katariya2 , Karthik Subbian2 , Chandan K. Reddy1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA
2
Amazon, Palo Alto, CA
nurendra@vt.edu, {nikhilsr, katsumee, ksubbian}@amazon.com, reddy@cs.vt.edu

Abstract
Logical reasoning over Knowledge Graphs (KGs) is a fundamental technique that
can provide efficient querying mechanism over large and incomplete databases.
Current approaches employ spatial geometries such as boxes to learn query representations that encompass the answer entities and model the logical operations
of projection and intersection. However, their geometry is restrictive and leads to
non-smooth strict boundaries, which further results in ambiguous answer entities.
Furthermore, previous works propose transformation tricks to handle unions which
results in non-closure and, thus, cannot be chained in a stream. In this paper, we
propose a Probabilistic Entity Representation Model (PERM) to encode entities as
a Multivariate Gaussian density with mean and covariance parameters to capture
its semantic position and smooth decision boundary, respectively. Additionally, we
also define the closed logical operations of projection, intersection, and union that
can be aggregated using an end-to-end objective function. On the logical query reasoning problem, we demonstrate that the proposed PERM significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on various public benchmark KG datasets on standard
evaluation metrics. We also evaluate PERM’s competence on a COVID-19 drugrepurposing case study and show that our proposed work is able to recommend
drugs with substantially better F1 than current methods. Finally, we demonstrate
the working of our PERM’s query answering process through a low-dimensional
visualization of the Gaussian representations.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are structured heterogeneous graphs where information is organized as
triplets of entity pair and the relation between them. This organization provides a fluid schema
with applications in several domains including e-commerce [1], web ontologies [2, 3], and medical
research [4, 5]. Chain reasoning is a fundamental problem in KGs, which involves answering a chain
of first-order existential (FOE) queries (translation, intersection, and union) using the KGs’ relation
paths. A myriad of queries can be answered using such logical formulation (some examples are given
in Figure 1). Current approaches [6, 7, 8] in the field rely on mapping the entities and relations onto a
representational latent space such that the FOE queries can be reduced to mathematical operations in
order to further retrieve the relevant answer entities.
Euclidean vectors [6, 9] provide a nice mechanism to encode the semantic position of the entities by
leveraging their neighborhood relations. They utilize a fixed threshold over the vector to query for
answer entities (such as a k-nearest neighbor search). However, queries differ in their breadth. Certain
queries would lead to a greater set of answers than others, e.g., query Canadians will result in a
higher number of answers than query Canadian Turing Award winners. To capture this query
behavior, spatial embeddings [7, 8, 10, 11] learn a border parameter that accounts for broadness of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

