Identification of the Generalized Condorcet Winner
in Multi-dueling Bandits

Björn Haddenhorst
Department of Computer Science
Paderborn University
Paderborn, Germany
bjoernha@mail.upb.de

Viktor Bengs
Institute of Informatics
University of Munich (LMU)
Munich, Germany
viktor.bengs@lmu.de

Eyke Hüllermeier
Institute of Informatics
University of Munich (LMU)
Munich, Germany
eyke@ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
The reliable identification of the “best” arm while keeping the sample complexity
as low as possible is a common task in the field of multi-armed bandits. In the
multi-dueling variant of multi-armed bandits, where feedback is provided in the
form of a winning arm among a set of k chosen ones, a reasonable notion of best
arm is the generalized Condorcet winner (GCW). The latter is an arm that has
the greatest probability of being the winner in each subset containing it. In this
paper, we derive lower bounds on the sample complexity for the task of identifying
the GCW under various assumptions. As a by-product, our lower bound results
provide new insights for the special case of dueling bandits (k = 2). We propose
the Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz tournament (DKWT) algorithm, which we prove
to be nearly optimal. In a numerical study, we show that DKWT empirically
outperforms current state-of-the-art algorithms, even in the special case of dueling
bandits or under a Plackett-Luce assumption on the feedback mechanism.

1

Introduction

The standard multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem describes a sequential decision scenario, in which
one of finitely many choice alternatives must be selected in each time step, resulting in the observation
of a numerical reward of stochastic nature. One important and extensively studied variant of the
MAB setting is the dueling bandits problem, where a duel consisting of two arms is chosen in each
time step and one of the duelling arms is observed as the winner [4]. Recently, the multi-dueling
bandits setting has been introduced [7, 40, 31] as a generalization with multiple practically relevant
applications, such as algorithm configuration [13] or online retrieval evaluation [36]. Instead of
pairs of arms, in this generalization a set consisting of k ≥ 2 arms can be chosen in each time
step. These arms compete against each other and determine a single winner, which is observed as
feedback by the learner. The outcomes of the (multi-)duels in the (multi-)dueling bandit scenario
are typically assumed to be of time-stationary stochastic nature in the sense that whenever arms
a1 , . . . , ak compete against each other, then ai wins with some underlying (unknown) ground-truth
probability P(ai |{a1 , . . . , ak }).
One often targeted learning task in the context of multi-armed bandits and its variants is the problem
of identifying the best among all arms. While for standard MABs, the canonical definition of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

