Proper Value Equivalence

Christopher Grimm
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
crgrimm@umich.edu

André Barreto, Gregory Farquhar,
David Silver, Satinder Singh
DeepMind
{andrebarreto,gregfar,
davidsilver,baveja}@google.com

Abstract
One of the main challenges in model-based reinforcement learning (RL) is to decide
which aspects of the environment should be modeled. The value-equivalence (VE)
principle proposes a simple answer to this question: a model should capture the
aspects of the environment that are relevant for value-based planning. Technically,
VE distinguishes models based on a set of policies and a set of functions: a model is
said to be VE to the environment if the Bellman operators it induces for the policies
yield the correct result when applied to the functions. As the number of policies and
functions increase, the set of VE models shrinks, eventually collapsing to a single
point corresponding to a perfect model. A fundamental question underlying the VE
principle is thus how to select the smallest sets of policies and functions that are
sufficient for planning. In this paper we take an important step towards answering
this question. We start by generalizing the concept of VE to order-k counterparts
defined with respect to k applications of the Bellman operator. This leads to a
family of VE classes that increase in size as k → ∞. In the limit, all functions
become value functions, and we have a special instantiation of VE which we call
proper VE or simply PVE. Unlike VE, the PVE class may contain multiple models
even in the limit when all value functions are used. Crucially, all these models
are sufficient for planning, meaning that they will yield an optimal policy despite
the fact that they may ignore many aspects of the environment. We construct a
loss function for learning PVE models and argue that popular algorithms such
as MuZero can be understood as minimizing an upper bound for this loss. We
leverage this connection to propose a modification to MuZero and show that it can
lead to improved performance in practice.

1

Introduction

It has long been argued that, in order for reinforcement learning (RL) agents to solve truly complex
tasks, they must build a model of the environment that allows for counterfactual reasoning [29]. Since
representing the world in all its complexity is a hopeless endeavor, especially under capacity constraints, the agent must be able to ignore aspects of the environment that are irrelevant for its purposes.
This is the premise behind the value equivalence (VE) principle, which provides a formalism for
focusing on the aspects of the environment that are crucial for value-based planning [17].
VE distinguishes models based on a set of policies and a set of real-valued scalar functions of state
(henceforth, just functions). Roughly, a model is said to be VE to the environment if the Bellman
operators it induces for the policies yield the same result as the environment’s Bellman operators
when applied to the functions. The policies and functions thus become a “language” to specify
which parts of the environment a model should capture. As the number of policies and functions
increase the requirements on the model become more stringent, which is to say that the class of VE
models shrinks. In the limit, the VE class collapses to a single point corresponding to a perfect model.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

