Learning Compact Representations of Neural
Networks using DiscriminAtive Masking (DAM)

Jie Bu∗
Virginia Tech
jayroxis@vt.edu

Arka Daw∗
Virginia Tech
darka@vt.edu

M. Maruf∗
Virginia Tech
marufm@vt.edu

Anuj Karpatne
Virginia Tech
karpatne@vt.edu

Abstract
A central goal in deep learning is to learn compact representations of features at
every layer of a neural network, which is useful for both unsupervised representation learning and structured network pruning. While there is a growing body of
work in structured pruning, current state-of-the-art methods suffer from two key
limitations: (i) instability during training, and (ii) need for an additional step of
fine-tuning, which is resource-intensive. At the core of these limitations is the lack
of a systematic approach that jointly prunes and refines weights during training in
a single stage, and does not require any fine-tuning upon convergence to achieve
state-of-the-art performance. We present a novel single-stage structured pruning
method termed DiscriminAtive Masking (DAM). The key intuition behind DAM is
to discriminatively prefer some of the neurons to be refined during the training process, while gradually masking out other neurons. We show that our proposed DAM
approach has remarkably good performance over a diverse range of applications in
representation learning and structured pruning, including dimensionality reduction,
recommendation system, graph representation learning, and structured pruning
for image classification. We also theoretically show that the learning objective of
DAM is directly related to minimizing the L0 norm of the masking layer.
All of our codes and datasets are available https://github.com/jayroxis/
dam-pytorch.

1

Introduction

A central goal in deep learning is to learn compact (or sparse) representations of features at every
layer of a neural network that are useful in a variety of machine learning tasks. For example,
in unsupervised representation learning problems [3], there is a long-standing goal to learn lowdimensional embeddings of input features that are capable of reconstructing the original data [44,
35, 24, 33]. Similarly, in supervised learning problems, there is a growing body of work in the
area of network pruning [4], where the goal is to reduce the size of modern-day neural networks
(that are known to be heavily over-parameterized [7, 51, 22, 45]) so that they can be deployed
in resource-constrained environments (e.g., over mobile devices) without compromising on their
accuracy. From this unified view of representation learning and network pruning, the generic problem
of “learning compact representations” has applications in several machine learning use-cases such as
dimensionality reduction, graph representation learning, matrix factorization, and image classification.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

