Agent Modelling under Partial Observability for
Deep Reinforcement Learning

Georgios Papoudakis

Filippos Christianos

Stefano V. Albrecht

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
{g.papoudakis, f.christianos, s.albrecht}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Modelling the behaviours of other agents is essential for understanding how agents
interact and making effective decisions. Existing methods for agent modelling
commonly assume knowledge of the local observations and chosen actions of
the modelled agents during execution. To eliminate this assumption, we extract
representations from the local information of the controlled agent using encoderdecoder architectures. Using the observations and actions of the modelled agents
during training, our models learn to extract representations about the modelled
agents conditioned only on the local observations of the controlled agent. The
representations are used to augment the controlled agent’s decision policy which is
trained via deep reinforcement learning; thus, during execution, the policy does
not require access to other agents’ information. We provide a comprehensive
evaluation and ablations studies in cooperative, competitive and mixed multi-agent
environments, showing that our method achieves higher returns than baseline
methods which do not use the learned representations.

1

Introduction

An important aspect of autonomous decision-making agents is the ability to reason about the unknown intentions and behaviours of other agents. Much research has been devoted to this agent
modelling problem [Albrecht and Stone, 2018], with recent works focused on learning informative
representations about another agent’s policy using deep learning architectures for agent modelling and
reinforcement learning (RL) [He et al., 2016, Raileanu et al., 2018, Grover et al., 2018, Rabinowitz
et al., 2018, Zintgraf et al., 2021].
A common assumption in existing methods is that the modelling agent has access to the local
trajectory of the modelled agents during execution [Albrecht and Stone, 2018], which may include
their local observations of the environment state and their past actions. While it is certainly desirable
to be able to observe the agents’ local contexts in order to reason about their past and future decisions,
in practice such an assumption may be too restrictive. Agents may only have a limited view of their
surroundings, communication with other agents may be infeasible or unreliable [Stone et al., 2010],
and knowledge of the perception system of other agents may be unavailable [Gmytrasiewicz and
Doshi, 2005]. In such cases, an agent must reason with only locally available information.
We consider the following question: Can effective agent modelling be achieved using only the
locally available information of the controlled agent during execution? A strength of deep learning
techniques is their ability to identify informative features in data. Here, we use deep learning
techniques to extract informative features about the trajectory of the modelled agent from a stream of
local observations for the purpose of agent modelling. Specifically, we consider a multi-agent setting
in which we control one agent which must learn to interact with a set of other agents. We assume a
set of possible policies for the non-learning agents and that these policies are fixed.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

