3D Pose Transfer with Correspondence Learning and
Mesh Refinement
Chaoyue Song1 , Jiacheng Wei2 , Ruibo Li1,3 , Fayao Liu4 and Guosheng Lin1,3∗
2

1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Institute for Inforcomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore

{chaoyue.song, gslin}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
3D pose transfer is one of the most challenging 3D generation tasks. It aims to
transfer the pose of a source mesh to a target mesh and keep the identity (e.g., body
shape) of the target mesh. Some previous works require key point annotations
to build reliable correspondence between the source and target meshes, while
other methods do not consider any shape correspondence between sources and
targets, which leads to limited generation quality. In this work, we propose a
correspondence-refinement network to achieve the 3D pose transfer for both human
and animal meshes. The correspondence between source and target meshes is first
established by solving an optimal transport problem. Then, we warp the source
mesh according to the dense correspondence and obtain a coarse warped mesh.
The warped mesh will be better refined with our proposed Elastic Instance Normalization, which is a conditional normalization layer and can help to generate highquality meshes. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed architecture
can effectively transfer the poses from source to target meshes and produce better
results with satisfied visual performance than state-of-the-art methods. Our code
and data are available at https://github.com/ChaoyueSong/3d-corenet.

1

Introduction

3D pose transfer has been drawing a lot of attention from the vision and graphics community. It has
potential applications in 3D animated movies and games by generating new poses for existing shapes
and animation sequences. 3D pose transfer is a learning-driven generation task which is similar to
style transfer on 2D images. As shown in Figure 1, pose transfer takes two inputs, one is identity
mesh that provides mesh identity (e.g., body shape), the other is pose mesh that provides the pose of
mesh. It aims at transferring the pose of a source pose mesh to a target identity mesh and keeping the
identity of the target identity mesh.
A fundamental problem for previous methods is to build reliable correspondence between source
and target meshes. It can be very challenging when the source and target meshes have significant
differences. Most of the previous methods try to solve it with the help of user effort or other additional
inputs, such as key point annotations [3, 34, 41], etc. Unfortunately, it is time-consuming to obtain
such additional inputs that will limit the usage in practice. In [37], they proposed to implement pose
transfer without correspondence learning. Their method is convenient but the performance will be
degraded since they do not consider the correspondence between meshes. In this work, we propose
a COrrespondence-REfinement Network (3D-CoreNet) to solve the pose transfer problem for both
the human and animal meshes. Like [37], our method does not need key point annotations or other
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

