Training Neural Networks with Fixed Sparse Masks

Yi-Lin Sung∗
UNC Chapel Hill
ylsung@cs.unc.edu

Varun Nair∗
Duke University
vn40@duke.edu

Colin Raffel
UNC Chapel Hill
craffel@gmail.com

Abstract
During typical gradient-based training of deep neural networks, all of the model’s
parameters are updated at each iteration. Recent work has shown that it is possible
to update only a small subset of the model’s parameters during training, which can
alleviate storage and communication requirements. In this paper, we show that it
is possible to induce a fixed sparse mask on the model’s parameters that selects
a subset to update over many iterations. Our method constructs the mask out of
the k parameters with the largest Fisher information as a simple approximation
as to which parameters are most important for the task at hand. In experiments
on parameter-efficient transfer learning and distributed training, we show that
our approach matches or exceeds the performance of other methods for training
with sparse updates while being more efficient in terms of memory usage and
communication costs. We release our code publicly to promote further applications
of our approach.2

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a vital component of the modern pipeline for training deep
neural networks. Along with the back-propagation algorithm, gradient descent allows for the efficient
minimization of a loss function by gradually updating a model’s parameters. SGD minimizes the loss
over a small random subset of the dataset at each training iteration, which allows training over large
datasets. In practice, minimizing a large neural network’s training loss using SGD often results in
models that generalize well to new data [3, 17, 27], making SGD an invaluable tool.
While effective, standard SGD requires that all model parameters are updated at every iteration of
training. As a result, communicating changes to the model requires communicating the updated value
of every parameter. Since modern neural networks often have millions or billions of parameters
[9, 7, 40], this communication can become excessively expensive. A concrete example of the negative
impacts of these costs arises in the setting of transfer learning. In transfer learning, a model’s
parameters are initialized from an existing pre-trained model before being fine-tuned (i.e. trained)
on a task of interest. Pre-trained models can be fine-tuned a huge number of times – for example,
the Hugging Face model repository3 has thousands of fine-tuned variants of the BERT model [12].
Each of these fine-tuned variants requires a unique copy of the model’s parameters, each of which
takes up around 500MB of disk space. Relatedly, in distributed training [11] and federated learning
[35], workers compute updates for a centralized model in parallel on different subsets of data. After a
certain number of updates, the workers each communicate the newly-computed parameter values
back to the centralized model. The communication step can cause a significant amount of overhead
(particularly when the model is large) since the workers must communicate the updated values of all
parameters when using standard SGD.
∗

Equal contribution.
Code for our work can be found at https://github.com/varunnair18/FISH.
3
https://huggingface.co/models
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

