Global Convergence of Online Optimization for
Nonlinear Model Predictive Control
Sen Na
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
senna@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We study a real-time iteration (RTI) scheme for solving online optimization problem
appeared in nonlinear optimal control. The proposed RTI scheme modifies the
existing RTI-based model predictive control (MPC) algorithm, by selecting the
stepsize of each Newton step at each sampling time using a differentiable exact
augmented Lagrangian. The scheme can adaptively select the penalty parameters of
augmented Lagrangian on the fly, which are shown to be stabilized after certain time
periods. We prove under generic assumptions that, by involving stepsize selection
instead of always using a full Newton step (like what most of the existing RTIs
do), the scheme converges globally: for any initial point, the KKT residuals
of the subproblems converge to zero. A key step is to show that augmented
Lagrangian keeps decreasing as horizon moves forward. We demonstrate the global
convergence behavior of the proposed RTI scheme in a numerical experiment.

1

Introduction

We consider the following time-varying nonlinear optimal control problem
P(x̄0 ) : min
x,u

N
−1
X

gk (xk , uk ) + gN (xN ),

k=0

s.t. xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), k ∈ [N − 1],
x0 = x̄0 ,

(1)

where xk ∈ Rnx are the state variables, uk ∈ Rnu are the control variables, gk : Rnx × Rnu → R+
(gN : Rnx → R+ ) are the nonnegative cost functions, fk : Rnx × Rnu → Rnx are the dynamical
constraint functions, x̄0 is the given initial state, and N is the horizon length. We suppose that gk , fk
are twice continuously differentiable and, without loss of generality, that the origin is a steady state,
i.e. fk (0, 0) = 0, and is also a stationary point with zero loss, i.e. gk (0, 0) = 0 and ∇gk (0, 0) = 0.
The well-known linear quadratic regulator (LQR) satisfies this setup and the same setup is commonly
used in the literature [8]. Problem (1) is also called dynamic program in control community, which has
a close relation to reinforcement learning (RL) (see [6]). The main difference is that the dynamic fk
in our paper is known, which is the case in many industrial applications and model-based RL studies.
In modern applications such as energy and autonomous control, N tends to be extremely large or even
infinity, which stimulates the interest of solving (1) in real time. Let fk (xk , uk ) = fk (xk , uk ; dk )
where dk is data at stage k, then a more realistic setting is to collect dk as a data stream. That is,
instead of knowing f0 all the way to fN −1 and solving (1) offline, we only know fk sequentially
and have to solve (1) online. Model predictive control (MPC), also known as receding horizon
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

