On the Power of Differentiable Learning
versus PAC and SQ Learning

Emmanuel Abbe ∗
EPFL
email

Pritish Kamath∗
Google Research
pritish@ttic.edu

Colin Sandon∗
MIT
csandon@mit.edu

Eran Malach∗
HUJI
email
Nathan Srebro∗
TTIC
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study the power of learning via mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
on the population loss, and batch Gradient Descent (GD) on the empirical loss,
of a differentiable model or neural network, and ask what learning problems can
be learnt using these paradigms. We show that SGD and GD can always simulate
learning with statistical queries (SQ), but their ability to go beyond that depends
on the precision ρ of the gradient calculations relative to the minibatch size b
(for SGD) and sample size m (for GD). With fine enough precision relative to
minibatch size, namely when bρ is small enough, SGD can go beyond SQ learning
and simulate any sample-based learning algorithm and thus its learning power is
equivalent to that of PAC learning; this extends prior work that achieved this result
for b = 1. Similarly, with fine enough precision relative to the sample size m, GD
can also simulate any sample-based learning algorithm based on m samples. In
particular, with polynomially many bits of precision (i.e. when ρ is exponentially
small), SGD and GD can both simulate PAC learning regardless of the mini-batch
size. On the other hand, when bρ2 is large enough, the power of SGD is equivalent
to that of SQ learning.

1

Introduction

A leading paradigm that has become the predominant approach to learning is that of differentiable
learning, namely using a parametric function class fw (x), and learning by performing mini-batch
Stochastic Gradient Descent (bSGD) updates (using gradients of the loss on a mini-batch of b independent samples per iteration) or full-batch Gradient Descent (fbGD) updates (full gradient descent
on the empirical loss, using the same m samples in all iterations). Feed-forward neural networks
are a particularly popular choice for the parametric model fw . One approach to understanding
differentiable learning is to think of it as a method for minimizing the empirical error of fw with
respect to w, i.e. as an empirical risk minimization (ERM). ERM is indeed well understood, and
is in a sense a universal learning rule, in that any hypothesis class that is PAC learnable is also
learnable using ERM. Furthermore, since poly-sized feed-forward neural networks can represent any
poly-time computable function, we can conclude that ERM on neural networks can efficiently learn
any tractable problem. But this view of differentiable learning ignores two things.
Firstly, many ERM problems, including ERM on any non-trivial neural network, are highly nonconvex and (stochastic) gradient descent might not find the global minimizer. As we just discussed,
∗

Authors in alphabetical order.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

