A Gaussian Process-Bayesian Bernoulli Mixture Model
for Multi-Label Active Learning

Weishi Shi∗
Dayou Yu ∗
Qi Yu
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
{ws7586,dy2507,qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
Multi-label classification (MLC) allows complex dependencies among labels, making it more suitable to model many real-world problems. However, data annotation for training MLC models becomes much more labor-intensive due to the
correlated (hence non-exclusive) labels and a potentially large and sparse label
space. We propose to conduct multi-label active learning (ML-AL) through a
novel integrated Gaussian Process-Bayesian Bernoulli Mixture model (GP-B2 M)
to accurately quantify a data sample’s overall contribution to a correlated label
space and choose the most informative samples for cost-effective annotation. In
particular, the B2 M encodes label correlations using a Bayesian Bernoulli mixture
of label clusters, where each mixture component corresponds to a global pattern
of label correlations. To tackle highly sparse labels under AL, the B2 M is further
integrated with a predictive GP to connect data features as an effective inductive
bias and achieve a feature-component-label mapping. The GP predicts coefficients
of mixture components that help to recover the final set of labels of a data sample.
A novel auxiliary variable based variational inference algorithm is developed to
tackle the non-conjugacy introduced along with the mapping process for efficient
end-to-end posterior inference. The model also outputs a predictive distribution
that provides both the label prediction and their correlations in the form of a label
covariance matrix. A principled sampling function is designed accordingly to
naturally capture both the feature uncertainty (through GP) and label covariance
(through B2 M) for effective data sampling. Experiments on real-world multi-label
datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art AL performance of the proposed model.

1

Introduction

In multi-label classification (MLC), each data instance may be associated with more than one label.
Such a rich representation of labels can encode more complex data-label distributions that arise in
many real-world problems [1, 2, 3, 4]. As a simple yet powerful tool, binary relevance machines
(BRMs) transform an MLC problem into multiple binary problems and train independent binary
classifiers for each label [5]. Such a transformation gives BRMs the flexibility to leverage state-of-art
binary classifiers (e.g., deep neural networks and SVMs). However, applying BRMs to a correlated
and potentially large label space poses key challenges. First, many real-world multi-label datasets
contain a large number of labels. Training one predictor per label incurs a prohibitive cost. Second,
despite an overall large label space, each data instance is usually assigned limited labels. Many labels
are relatively rare and their appearances depend not only on the features but also the occurrence
of other labels. Predicting these “complex” labels directly using independent binary classifiers is
fundamentally difficult due to the limited positive data instances and weaker direct dependency on the
features. Correlations among labels provide important auxiliary information to enhance multi-label
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

