Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Active
Voltage Control on Power Distribution Networks

Jianhong Wang ∗
Imperial College London
jianhong.wang16@imperial.ac.uk
Yunjie Gu†
University of Bath
yg934@bath.ac.uk

Wangkun Xu∗
Imperial College London
wangkun.xu18@imperial.ac.uk

Wenbin Song
Shanghaitech University
songwb@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Tim C. Green‡
Imperial College London
t.green@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents a problem in power networks that creates an exciting and yet
challenging real-world scenario for application of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). The emerging trend of decarbonisation is placing excessive stress on
power distribution networks. Active voltage control is seen as a promising solution
to relieve power congestion and improve voltage quality without extra hardware
investment, taking advantage of the controllable apparatuses in the network, such
as roof-top photovoltaics (PVs) and static var compensators (SVCs). These controllable apparatuses appear in a vast number and are distributed in a wide geographic
area, making MARL a natural candidate. This paper formulates the active voltage
control problem in the framework of Dec-POMDP and establishes an open-source
environment. It aims to bridge the gap between the power community and the
MARL community and be a drive force towards real-world applications of MARL
algorithms. Finally, we analyse the special characteristics of the active voltage
control problems that cause challenges (e.g. interpretability) for state-of-the-art
MARL approaches, and summarise the potential directions.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has demonstrated impressive performances on games
(e.g., Chess [1], StarCraft [2, 3], and etc.) and robotics [4]. There are now increasing interests and
thrusts to apply MARL in real-world problems. Power network is a natural test field for MARL
algorithms. There are many problems in power networks involving the collaborative or competitive
actions of a vast number of agents, such as market bidding [5], voltage control, frequency control,
and emergency handling [6]. One of the obstacles for applying MARL in power networks is the lack
of transparency and guarantee, which is unacceptable considering the importance of reliable power
supply for the whole society. Therefore, it is sensible to start with problems that are less sensitive to
reliability but hard to be solved by conventional methods.
Active voltage control in power distribution networks is such a candidate problem. The voltage
control problem has been studied for years but only comes under spot light recently due to the
increasing penetration of distributed resources, e.g. roof-top photovoltaics (PVs) [7]. The excessive
active power injection may cause voltage fluctuations beyond the threshold of grid standards [8]. The
voltage fluctuations can be relieved by exploiting the control flexibility of PV inverters themselves
∗
Equal contributions. † Correspondence to Yunjie Gu who is also an honorary lecturer at Imperial College
London. ‡ Tim C. Green is also the co-director of the Energy Futures Laboratory (EFL).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

