Disentangled Contrastive Learning on Graphs

Haoyang Li1 , Xin Wang1∗, Ziwei Zhang1 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Hang Li2 , Wenwu Zhu1∗
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Bytedance
lihy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin_wang, zwzhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{yuanzehuan, lihang.lh}@bytedance.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised learning for graph neural networks (GNNs) has attracted
considerable attention because of their notable successes in learning the representation of graph-structure data. However, the formation of a real-world graph
typically arises from the highly complex interaction of many latent factors. The
existing self-supervised learning methods for GNNs are inherently holistic and
neglect the entanglement of the latent factors, resulting in the learned representations suboptimal for downstream tasks and difficult to be interpreted. Learning
disentangled graph representations with self-supervised learning poses great challenges and remains largely ignored by the existing literature. In this paper, we
introduce the Disentangled Graph Contrastive Learning (DGCL) method, which
is able to learn disentangled graph-level representations with self-supervision. In
particular, we first identify the latent factors of the input graph and derive its factorized representations. Each of the factorized representations describes a latent
and disentangled aspect pertinent to a specific latent factor of the graph. Then
we propose a novel factor-wise discrimination objective in a contrastive learning
manner, which can force the factorized representations to independently reflect the
expressive information from different latent factors. Extensive experiments on both
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method against
several state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data is ubiquitous in the real world, e.g., social networks, biology networks, traffic
networks, etc. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become increasingly prevalent in
learning graph representations in a supervised manner, demonstrating their strength in a wide variety
of research fields [1, 2, 3, 4]. GNNs require task-dependent annotated labels to learn effective
representations, which are extremely scarce, or even unavailable in practice, thus motivating the
advent of self-supervised graph representation learning.
Contrastive learning, as a discriminative approach pulling similar samples close and pushing dissimilar
samples far away, has become a dominant strategy in self-supervised graph representation learning [5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Despite their notable successes, the existing graph contrastive learning methods
generally adopt a holistic scheme, i.e., the learned representations characterize graphs as a perceptual
whole, ignoring the nuances between different aspects of the graph. In fact, the formation of a graph
typically follows a relational process in the real world, driven by many complex latent factors. For
example, in social networks, a social group may have several communities originated from different
relations (e.g., friends, colleagues, etc.) or interests (e.g., sports, games, etc.) [12]. And a molecular
graph may consist of various groups of atoms and bonds representing different functional units [13].
The complex relations among the multiple latent factors bring an urge for disentangling these factors
∗

Corresponding authors

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

