Regularized Frank-Wolfe for Dense CRFs:
Generalizing Mean Field and Beyond
Ð.Khuê Lê-Huu
Karteek Alahari
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France
{khue.le,karteek.alahari}@inria.fr

Abstract
We introduce regularized Frank-Wolfe, a general and effective algorithm for inference and learning of dense conditional random fields (CRFs). The algorithm
optimizes a nonconvex continuous relaxation of the CRF inference problem using
vanilla Frank-Wolfe with approximate updates, which are equivalent to minimizing
a regularized energy function. Our proposed method is a generalization of existing
algorithms such as mean field or concave-convex procedure. This perspective not
only offers a unified analysis of these algorithms, but also allows an easy way of
exploring different variants that potentially yield better performance. We illustrate
this in our empirical results on standard semantic segmentation datasets, where
several instantiations of our regularized Frank-Wolfe outperform mean field inference, both as a standalone component and as an end-to-end trainable layer in a
neural network. We also show that dense CRFs, coupled with our new algorithms,
produce significant improvements over strong CNN baselines.

1

Introduction

Fully-connected or dense conditional random fields (CRFs) [34]—combined with strong pixel-level
classifiers such as a convolutional neural network (CNN) [25, 42]—have been a highly-successful
paradigm for semantic segmentation. Top-performing systems on the PASCAL VOC benchmark [22]
used to include a CRF as either a post-processing step [13, 14, 15, 20, 43, 44, 45] or a trainable
component [4, 49, 64, 68, 73, 76]. However, as CNNs got stronger, the improvements that CRFs
brought decreased over time, and as a result they fell out of favor since 2017 [45].
In this paper, we revisit dense CRFs with two contributions. First, on the theoretical side, we
propose regularized Frank-Wolfe, a new class of algorithms for inference and learning of CRFs that
perform better than the popular mean field [34, 35, 58]—the method of choice in the aforementioned
works. Regularized Frank-Wolfe optimizes a nonconvex continuous relaxation of the CRF inference
problem (§2) by performing approximate conditional-gradient updates (§3.1), which is equivalent to
minimizing a regularized energy using the generalized Frank-Wolfe method [53] (§3.2). Several of its
instantiations lead to new algorithms that have not been studied before in the MAP inference literature
(§3.3). Moreover, we show that it also includes several existing methods, including mean field and the
concave-convex procedure [75], as special cases (§3.4). This generalized perspective allows a unified
analysis of all these old and new algorithms in a single
p framework (§4). In particular, we show that
they achieve a sublinear rate of convergence O(1/ k) for suitable stepsize schemes, and in certain
cases (such as strongly-convex regularizer or concave energy) this can be improved to O(1/k) (§4.1).
Furthermore, we provide a tightness analysis for the resulting nonconvex relaxation of the regularized
energy, recovering some existing tightness results [10, 41, 61] as special cases (§4.2). The proposed
algorithms are easy to implement, converge quickly in practice, and have (sub)differentiable iterates.
Such properties are important for successful gradient-based learning via backpropagation [47, 62].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

