Scheduling jobs with stochastic holding costs

Dabeen Lee
Discrete Mathematics Group
Institute for Basic Science (IBS)
Daejeon, South Korea
dabeenl@ibs.re.kr

Milan Vojnovic
Department of Statistics
London School of Economics
London, United Kingdom
m.vojnovic@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper proposes a learning and scheduling algorithm to minimize the expected
cumulative holding cost incurred by jobs, where statistical parameters defining
their individual holding costs are unknown a priori. In each time slot, the server
can process a job while receiving the realized random holding costs of the jobs
remaining in the system. Our algorithm is a learning-based variant of the cµ rule
for scheduling: it starts with a preemption period of fixed length which serves
as a learning phase, and after accumulating enough data about individual jobs, it
switches to nonpreemptive scheduling mode. The algorithm is designed to handle
instances with large or small gaps in jobs’ parameters and achieves near-optimal
performance guarantees. The performance of our algorithm is captured by its regret,
where the benchmark is the minimum possible cost attained when the statistical
parameters of jobs are fully known. We prove upper bounds on the regret of our
algorithm, and we derive a regret lower bound that is almost matching the proposed
upper bounds. Our numerical results demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm
and show that our theoretical regret analysis is nearly tight.

1

Introduction

We consider the following algorithmic question: given a list of jobs, each of which requires a certain
number of time steps to be completed while incurring a random cost in every time step until finished,
learn the relative priorities of jobs and make scheduling decisions of which job to process in each
time step, with the objective of minimizing the expected total cumulative cost. Here, we need an
algorithm that seamlessly integrates learning and scheduling.
This question is motivated by several applications. Online social media platforms moderate content
items, and here, jobs correspond to reviewing content items while the jobs have random costs driven by
the number of accumulated views as views of harmful content items represent a community-integrity
cost. Then the content review jobs are prioritized based on popularity of content items [18]. More
generally, modern data processing platforms handle complex jobs whose characteristics are often
unknown in advance [10], but as a system learns more about the jobs’ features, it may flexibly adjust
scheduling decisions to serve jobs with high priority first. Another application is in optimizing energy
consumption of servers in data centers, where a job waiting to be served uses energy-consuming
resources [3, 7]. In emergency medical departments, patients undergo triage while being treated, and
schedules for serving patients are flexibly adjusted depending on their conditions [14, 15]. Note that
patients’ conditions may get worse while waiting, which corresponds to holding costs in our problem.
For aircraft maintenance, diagnosing the conditions of parts and applying the required measures to
repair them are conducted in a combined way [1].
We model and study the problem as a single-server scheduling system where job holding costs
are according to stochastic processes with independent and identically distributed increments with
unknown mean values, under the assumption that their mean service times are known. Recent works,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

