Visual Search Asymmetry:
Deep Nets and Humans Share Similar Inherent Biases
Shashi Kant Gupta1 , Mengmi Zhang2,3 , Chia-Chien Wu4 , Jeremy M. Wolfe4 , and Gabriel Kreiman2,3
1

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
3
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
4
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Address correspondence to gabriel.kreiman@tch.harvard.edu
2

Abstract
Visual search is a ubiquitous and often challenging daily task, exemplified by
looking for the car keys at home or a friend in a crowd. An intriguing property of
some classical search tasks is an asymmetry such that finding a target A among
distractors B can be easier than finding B among A. To elucidate the mechanisms
responsible for asymmetry in visual search, we propose a computational model
that takes a target and a search image as inputs and produces a sequence of eye
movements until the target is found. The model integrates eccentricity-dependent
visual recognition with target-dependent top-down cues. We compared the model
against human behavior in six paradigmatic search tasks that show asymmetry
in humans. Without prior exposure to the stimuli or task-specific training, the
model provides a plausible mechanism for search asymmetry. We hypothesized
that the polarity of search asymmetry arises from experience with the natural
environment. We tested this hypothesis by training the model on augmented
versions of ImageNet where the biases of natural images were either removed or
reversed. The polarity of search asymmetry disappeared or was altered depending
on the training protocol. This study highlights how classical perceptual properties
can emerge in neural network models, without the need for task-specific training,
but rather as a consequence of the statistical properties of the developmental
diet fed to the model. All source code and data are publicly available at https:
//github.com/kreimanlab/VisualSearchAsymmetry.

1

Introduction

Humans and other primates continuously move their eyes in search of objects, food, or friends.
Psychophysical studies have documented how visual search depends on the complex interplay between
the target objects, search images, and the subjects’ memory and attention [49, 29, 37, 44, 4, 18, 30].
There has also been progress in describing the neurophysiological steps involved in visual processing
[32, 39, 23] and the neural circuits that orchestrate attention and eye movements [14, 38, 31, 10, 3].
A paradigmatic and intriguing effect is visual search asymmetry: searching for an object, A, amidst
other objects, B, can be substantially easier than searching for object B amongst instances of A. For
example, detecting a curved line among straight lines is faster than searching for a straight line among
curved lines. Search asymmetry has been observed in a wide range of tasks [48, 22, 46, 47, 34, 50, 43].
Despite extensive phenomenological characterization [34, 43, 15, 8], the mechanisms underlying
how neural representations guide visual search and lead to search asymmetry remain mysterious.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

