Self-Supervised Learning
with Kernel Dependence Maximization

Yazhe Li∗
DeepMind and Gatsby Unit, UCL
yazhe@google.com

Roman Pogodin∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL
roman.pogodin.17@ucl.ac.uk

Danica J. Sutherland
UBC and Amii†
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit, UCL
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We approach self-supervised learning of image representations from a statistical
dependence perspective, proposing Self-Supervised Learning with the HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (SSL-HSIC). SSL-HSIC maximizes dependence
between representations of transformations of an image and the image identity,
while minimizing the kernelized variance of those representations. This framework
yields a new understanding of InfoNCE, a variational lower bound on the mutual
information (MI) between different transformations. While the MI itself is known
to have pathologies which can result in learning meaningless representations, its
bound is much better behaved: we show that it implicitly approximates SSLHSIC (with a slightly different regularizer). Our approach also gives us insight
into BYOL, a negative-free SSL method, since SSL-HSIC similarly learns local
neighborhoods of samples. SSL-HSIC allows us to directly optimize statistical
dependence in time linear in the batch size, without restrictive data assumptions or
indirect mutual information estimators. Trained with or without a target network,
SSL-HSIC matches the current state-of-the-art for standard linear evaluation on
ImageNet [1], semi-supervised learning and transfer to other classification and
vision tasks such as semantic segmentation, depth estimation and object recognition.
Code is available at https://github.com/deepmind/ssl_hsic.

1

Introduction

Learning general-purpose visual representations without human supervision is a long-standing goal of
machine learning. Specifically, we wish to find a feature extractor that captures the image semantics
of a large unlabeled collection of images, so that e.g. various image understanding tasks can be
achieved with simple linear models. One approach takes the latent representation of a likelihood-based
generative model [2–8]; such models, though, solve a harder problem than necessary since semantic
features need not capture low-level details of the input. Another option is to train a self-supervised
model for a “pretext task,” such as predicting the position of image patches, identifying rotations, or
image inpainting [9–14]. Designing good pretext tasks, however, is a subtle art, with little theoretical
guidance available. Recently, a class of models based on contrastive learning [15–22] has seen
substantial success: dataset images are cropped, rotated, color shifted, etc. into several views, and
features are then trained to pull together representations of the “positive” pairs of views of the same
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Work done in part while at the Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

