Do Input Gradients Highlight
Discriminative Features?
Harshay Shah∗
Microsoft Research India
harshay@google.com

Prateek Jain∗
Microsoft Research India
prajain@google.com

Praneeth Netrapalli∗
Microsoft Research India
pnetrapalli@google.com

Abstract
Post-hoc gradient-based interpretability methods [1, 2] that provide instancespecific explanations of model predictions are often based on assumption (A):
magnitude of input gradients—gradients of logits with respect to input—noisily
highlight discriminative task-relevant features. In this work, we test the validity of
assumption (A) using a three-pronged approach:
1. We develop an evaluation framework, DiffROAR, to test assumption (A) on four
image classification benchmarks. Our results suggest that (i) input gradients of
standard models (i.e., trained on original data) may grossly violate (A), whereas
(ii) input gradients of adversarially robust models satisfy (A) reasonably well.
2. We then introduce BlockMNIST, an MNIST-based semi-real dataset, that by
design encodes a priori knowledge of discriminative features. Our analysis
on BlockMNIST leverages this information to validate as well as characterize
differences between input gradient attributions of standard and robust models.
3. Finally, we theoretically prove that our empirical findings hold on a simplified
version of the BlockMNIST dataset. Specifically, we prove that input gradients
of standard one-hidden-layer MLPs trained on this dataset do not highlight
instance-specific “signal” coordinates, thus grossly violating (A).
Our findings motivate the need to formalize and test common assumptions in interpretability in a falsifiable manner [3]. We believe that the DiffROAR framework and
BlockMNIST datasets serve as sanity checks to audit interpretability methods; code
and data available at https://github.com/harshays/inputgradients.

1

Introduction

Interpretability methods that provide instance-specific explanations of model predictions are often
used to identify biased predictions [4], debug trained models [5], and aid decision-making in highstakes domains such as medical diagnosis [6, 7]. A common approach for providing instance-specific
explanations is feature attribution. Feature attribution methods rank or score input coordinates,
or features, in the order of their purported importance in model prediction; coordinates achieving
the top-most rank or score are considered most important for prediction, whereas those with the
bottom-most rank or score are considered least important.
Input gradient attributions. Ranking input coordinates based on the magnitude of input gradients
is a fundamental feature attribution technique [8, 1] that undergirds well-known methods such as
SmoothGrad [2] and Integrated Gradients [9]. Given instance x and a trained model θ with prediction
ŷ on x, the input gradient attribution scheme (i) computes the input gradient ∇x Logitθ (x, ŷ) of the
logit 2 of the predicted label ŷ and (ii) ranks the input coordinates in decreasing order of their input
gradient magnitude. Below we explicitly characterize the underlying intuitive assumption behind
input gradient attribution methods:
∗
2

Part of the work completed after joining Google Research India
In Appendix C, we show that our results also hold for input gradients taken w.r.t. the loss

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

