COMBO: Conservative Offline Model-Based
Policy Optimization

Tianhe Yu∗,1 , Aviral Kumar∗,2 , Rafael Rafailov1 , Aravind Rajeswaran3 ,
Sergey Levine2 , Chelsea Finn1
1
Stanford University, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 Facebook AI Research
(∗ Equal Contribution)
tianheyu@cs.stanford.edu, aviralk@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, which learn a dynamics
model from logged experience and perform conservative planning under the learned
model, have emerged as a promising paradigm for offline reinforcement learning
(offline RL). However, practical variants of such model-based algorithms rely on
explicit uncertainty quantification for incorporating conservatism. Uncertainty
estimation with complex models, such as deep neural networks, can be difficult and
unreliable. We empirically find that uncertainty estimation is not accurate and leads
to poor performance in certain scenarios in offline model-based RL. We overcome
this limitation by developing a new model-based offline RL algorithm, COMBO,
that trains a value function using both the offline dataset and data generated using
rollouts under the model while also additionally regularizing the value function on
out-of-support state-action tuples generated via model rollouts. This results in a
conservative estimate of the value function for out-of-support state-action tuples,
without requiring explicit uncertainty estimation. Theoretically, we show that
COMBO satisfies a policy improvement guarantee in the offline setting. Through
extensive experiments, we find that COMBO attains greater performance compared
to prior offline RL on problems that demand generalization to related but previously
unseen tasks, and also consistently matches or outperforms prior offline RL methods
on widely studied offline RL benchmarks, including image-based tasks.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (offline RL) [30, 34] refers to the setting where policies are trained
using static, previously collected datasets. This presents an attractive paradigm for data reuse
and safe policy learning in many applications, such as healthcare [62], autonomous driving [65],
robotics [25, 48], and personalized recommendation systems [59]. Recent studies have observed
that RL algorithms originally developed for the online or interactive paradigm perform poorly in the
offline case [14, 28, 26]. This is primarily attributed to the distribution shift that arises over the course
of learning between the offline dataset and the learned policy. Thus, development of algorithms
specialized for offline RL is of paramount importance to benefit from the offline data available in
aformentioned applications. In this work, we develop a principled model-based offline RL algorithm
that matches or exceeds the performance of prior offline RL algorithms in benchmark tasks.
A major paradigm for algorithm design in offline RL is to incorporate conservatism or regularization
into online RL algorithms. Model-free offline RL algorithms [15, 28, 63, 21, 29, 27] directly
incorporate conservatism into the policy or value function training and do not require learning a
dynamics model. However, model-free algorithms learn only on the states in the offline dataset,
which can lead to overly conservative algorithms. In contrast, model-based algorithms [26, 67] learn
a pessimistic dynamics model, which in turn induces a conservative estimate of the value function. By
generating and training on additional synthetic data, model-based algorithms have the potential for
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

