Multimodal Few-Shot Learning with
Frozen Language Models

Maria Tsimpoukelli∗
DeepMind
mrts@deepmind.com

Jacob Menick∗
DeepMind
University College London
jmenick@deepmind.com

Serkan Cabi∗
DeepMind
cabi@deepmind.com

S. M. Ali Eslami
DeepMind
aeslami@deepmind.com

Oriol Vinyals
DeepMind
vinyals@deepmind.com

Felix Hill
DeepMind
felixhill@deepmind.com

Abstract
When trained at sufficient scale, auto-regressive language models exhibit the
notable ability to learn a new language task after being prompted with just a few
examples. Here, we present a simple, yet effective, approach for transferring this
few-shot learning ability to a multimodal setting (vision and language). Using
aligned image and caption data, we train a vision encoder to represent each image
as a sequence of continuous embeddings, such that a pre-trained, frozen language
model prompted with this prefix generates the appropriate caption. The resulting
system is a multimodal few-shot learner, with the surprising ability to learn a variety
of new tasks when conditioned on examples, represented as a sequence of multiple
interleaved image and text embeddings. We demonstrate that it can rapidly learn
words for new objects and novel visual categories, do visual question-answering
with only a handful of examples, and make use of outside knowledge, by measuring
a single model on a variety of established and new benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Auto-regressive transformers have been shown to be very impressive models of natural language
[42]. Large-scale language transformers exhibit several surprising abilities beyond that of standard
text generation [4, 31]. Perhaps most notably, they are few-shot learners; they can learn to perform
a new task from a few examples without any further gradient updates. Equipped with this ability,
these models have been shown to rapidly adapt to new tasks and styles of generation via prompting
(e.g. switching from formal to informal language) [4], to retrieve relevant encyclopedic or general
knowledge when primed with a relevant context (e.g. answering questions such as ‘When did the
French Revolution begin?’) [34, 1, 28] and to use new words in appropriate ways straight after being
taught what those words mean (sometimes referred to as ‘fast binding’) [12, 4].
Despite these impressive capabilities, such large scale language models are ‘blind’ to modalities other
than text, preventing us from communicating visual tasks, questions or concepts to them. Indeed,
philosophers and linguists have questioned whether an un-grounded language model can ever achieve
true understanding of the language it processes [5, 2]. Here, we present Frozen, a method for giving a
pre-trained language model access to visual information in a way that extends its few-shot learning
capabilities to a multimodal setting, without changing its weights. Frozen consists of a neural network
trained to encode images into the word embedding space of a large pre-trained language model
such that the language model generates captions for those images. The weights of the language
model are kept frozen, but gradients are back-propagated through it to train the image encoder from
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

