Autonomous Reinforcement Learning via Subgoal
Curricula
Archit Sharma†‡ , Abhishek Gupta#‡ , Sergey Levine#‡ , Karol Hausman‡† , Chelsea Finn†‡
†
Stanford University, ‡ Google Brain, # UC Berkeley
{architsh,cbfinn}@stanford.edu
{abhishekunique,slevine,karolhausman}@google.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) promises to enable autonomous acquisition of complex behaviors for diverse agents. However, the success of current reinforcement
learning algorithms is predicated on an often under-emphasised requirement – each
trial needs to start from a fixed initial state distribution. Unfortunately, resetting the
environment to its initial state after each trial requires substantial amount of human
supervision and extensive instrumentation of the environment which defeats the
goal of autonomous acquisition of complex behaviors. In this work, we propose
Value-accelerated Persistent Reinforcement Learning (VaPRL), which generates a
curriculum of initial states such that the agent can bootstrap on the success of easier
tasks to efficiently learn harder tasks. The agent also learns to reach the initial
states proposed by the curriculum, minimizing the reliance on human interventions
into the learning. We observe that VaPRL reduces the interventions required by
three orders of magnitude compared to episodic RL while outperforming prior
state-of-the art methods for reset-free RL both in terms of sample efficiency and
asymptotic performance on a variety of simulated robotics problems1 .

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) offers an appealing opportunity to enable autonomous acquisition of
complex behaviors for interactive agents. Despite recent RL successes on robots [26, 34, 25, 28,
35, 22, 32, 23, 14], several challenges exist that inhibit wider adoption of reinforcement learning
for robotics [48]. One of the major challenges to the autonomy of current reinforcement learning
algorithms, particularly in robotics, is the assumption that each trial starts from an initial state
drawn from a specific state distribution in the environment. Conventionally, reinforcement learning
algorithms assume the ability to arbitrarily sample and reset to states drawn from this distribution,
making such algorithms impractical for most real-world setups.
Many prior examples of reinforcement learning on real robots have relied on extensive instrumentation
of the robotic setup and human supervision to enable environment resets to this initial state distribution.
This is accomplished through a human providing the environment reset themselves throughout the
training [8, 12, 4], scripted behaviors for the robot to reset the environment [28, 39], an additional
robot executing scripted behavior to reset the environment [32], or engineered mechanical contraptions
[46, 23]. The additional instrumentation of the environment and creating scripted behaviors are both
time-intensive and often require additional resources such as sensors or even robots. The scripted
reset behaviors are narrow in application, often designed for just a single task or environment, and
their brittleness mandates human oversight of the learning process. Eliminating or minimizing the
algorithmic reliance on the reset mechanisms can enable more autonomous learning, and in turn it
will allow agents to scale to broader and harder set of tasks.
1

Code and supplementary videos are available at https://sites.google.com/view/vaprl/home

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

