No Fear of Heterogeneity: Classifier Calibration for
Federated Learning with Non-IID Data

Mi Luo1 , Fei Chen2 , Dapeng Hu1 , Yifan Zhang1 , Jian Liang∗ 3 , Jiashi Feng∗ 1
1

2
National University of Singapore
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)

{romyluo7, liangjian92, jshfeng}@gmail.com
chen.f@huawei.com, {dapeng.hu, yifan.zhang}@u.nus.edu

Abstract
A central challenge in training classification models in the real-world federated
system is learning with non-IID data. To cope with this, most of the existing
works involve enforcing regularization in local optimization or improving the
model aggregation scheme at the server. Other works also share public datasets
or synthesized samples to supplement the training of under-represented classes or
introduce a certain level of personalization. Though effective, they lack a deep
understanding of how the data heterogeneity affects each layer of a deep classification model. In this paper, we bridge this gap by performing an experimental
analysis of the representations learned by different layers. Our observations are
surprising: (1) there exists a greater bias in the classifier than other layers, and (2)
the classification performance can be significantly improved by post-calibrating
the classifier after federated training. Motivated by the above findings, we propose
a novel and simple algorithm called Classifier Calibration with Virtual Representations (CCVR), which adjusts the classifier using virtual representations sampled
from an approximated gaussian mixture model. Experimental results demonstrate
that CCVR achieves state-of-the-art performance on popular federated learning
benchmarks including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and CINIC-10. We hope that our
simple yet effective method can shed some light on the future research of federated
learning with non-IID data.

1

Introduction

The rapid advances in deep learning have benefited a lot from large datasets like [1]. However,
in the real world, data may be distributed on numerous mobile devices and the Internet of Things
(IoT), requiring decentralized training of deep networks. Driven by such realistic needs, federated
learning [2, 3, 4] has become an emerging research topic where the model training is pushed to a
large number of edge clients and the raw data never leave local devices.
A notorious trap in federated learning is training with non-IID data. Due to diverse user behaviors,
large heterogeneity may be present in different clients’ local data, which has been found to result in
unstable and slow convergence [5] and cause suboptimal or even detrimental model performance [6, 7].
There have been a plethora of works exploring promising solutions to federated learning on non-IID
data. They can be roughly divided into four categories: 1) client drift mitigation [5, 8, 9, 10], which
modifies the local objectives of the clients, so that the local model is consistent with the global
model to a certain degree; 2) aggregation scheme [11, 12, 13, 14, 15], which improves the model
fusion mechanism at the server; 3) data sharing [6, 16, 17, 18], which introduces public datasets or
synthesized data to help construct a more balanced data distribution on the client or on the server;
∗

corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

