How Does a Neural Network’s Architecture Impact
Its Robustness to Noisy Labels?

Jingling Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740
jingling@cs.umd.edu

Mozhi Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740
mozhi@cs.umd.edu

Keyulu Xu
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Cambridge, MA 02139
keyulu@mit.edu
Jimmy Ba
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Canada
jba@cs.toronto.edu

John Dickerson
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740
john@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Noisy labels are inevitable in large real-world datasets. In this work, we explore an
area understudied by previous works — how the network’s architecture impacts
its robustness to noisy labels. We provide a formal framework connecting the
robustness of a network to the alignments between its architecture and target/noise
functions. Our framework measures a network’s robustness via the predictive
power in its representations — the test performance of a linear model trained on
the learned representations using a small set of clean labels. We hypothesize that
a network is more robust to noisy labels if its architecture is more aligned with
the target function than the noise. To support our hypothesis, we provide both
theoretical and empirical evidence across various neural network architectures
and different domains. We also find that when the network is well-aligned with
the target function, its predictive power in representations could improve upon
state-of-the-art (SOTA) noisy-label-training methods in terms of test accuracy and
even outperform sophisticated methods that use clean labels.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning starts with collecting labeled data. Yet, high-quality labels are often expensive.
To reduce annotation cost, we collect labels from non-experts [1–4] or online queries [5–7], which are
inevitably noisy. To learn from these noisy labels, previous works propose many techniques, including
modeling the label noise [8–10], designing robust losses [11–14], adjusting loss before gradient
updates [15–23], selecting trust-worthy samples [12, 22, 24–31], designing robust architectures [32–
39], applying robust regularization in training [40–45], using meta-learning to avoid over-fitting [46,
47], and applying semi-supervised learning [28, 48–51] to learn better representations.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

