Revenue maximization via machine learning with
noisy data

Ellen Vitercik
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
vitercik@berkeley.edu
Tom Yan
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
tyyan@cmu.edu

Abstract
Increasingly, copious amounts of consumer data are used to learn high-revenue
mechanisms via machine learning. Existing research on mechanism design via
machine learning assumes that there is a distribution over the buyers’ values for
the items for sale and that the learning algorithm’s input is a training set sampled
from this distribution. This setup makes the strong assumption that no noise
is introduced during data collection. In order to help place mechanism design
via machine learning on firm foundations, we investigate the extent to which
this learning process is robust to noise. Optimizing revenue using noisy data is
challenging because revenue functions are extremely volatile: an infinitesimal
change in the buyers’ values can cause a steep drop in revenue. Nonetheless, we
provide guarantees when arbitrarily correlated noise is added to the training set;
we only require that the noise has bounded magnitude or is sub-Gaussian. We
conclude with an application of our guarantees to multi-task mechanism design,
where there are multiple distributions over buyers’ values and the goal is to learn a
high-revenue mechanism per distribution. To our knowledge, we are the first to
study mechanism design via machine learning with noisy data as well as multi-task
mechanism design.

1

Introduction

Revenue maximization in multi-item settings is one of the most important, long-standing open
problems in mechanism design. In Bayesian Mechanism Design, there is a set of items for sale and an
underlying distribution defining a set of agents’ values for the items. A mechanism determines which
buyers receive which items and what they pay. For decades, research in economics has assumed
that the mechanism designer must know the exact distribution over buyers’ values. An explosion
of research [e.g., 1, 4, 19, 20, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31, 33, 37, 40, 44–48, 51] has relaxed this strong
assumption: instead, the distribution is unknown and the mechanism designer only has a training set
of i.i.d. samples. Using the training set, the goal is to learn a mechanism with high expected revenue.
Learning-based mechanism design is on the verge of taking over as the main tool for designing
high-revenue mechanisms for selling items—a cornerstone of many modern enterprises.
Motivated by recent literature on the brittleness of deep learning models in the face of imperceptible
noise [32, 41, 52], an important question is whether adversarial noise has the same effect in learningbased mechanism design. Learning methods deployed in real-world settings to design mechanisms
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

