Faster proximal algorithms for matrix optimization
using Jacobi-based eigenvalue methods

Hamza Fawzi
Harry Goulbourne
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge, UK
{hf323, hmg42}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider proximal splitting algorithms for convex optimization problems over
matrices. A significant computational bottleneck in many of these algorithms is the
need to compute a full eigenvalue or singular value decomposition at each iteration
for the evaluation of a proximal operator.
In this paper we propose to use an old and surprisingly simple method due to
Jacobi to compute these eigenvalue and singular value decompositions, and we
demonstrate that it can lead to substantial gains in terms of computation time
compared to standard approaches. We rely on three essential properties of this
method: (a) its ability to exploit an approximate decomposition as an initial point,
which in the case of iterative optimization algorithms can be obtained from the
previous iterate; (b) its parallel nature which makes it a great fit for hardware
accelerators such as GPUs, now common in machine learning, and (c) its simple
termination criterion which allows us to trade-off accuracy with computation
time. We demonstrate the efficacy of this approach on a variety of algorithms
and problems, and show that, on a GPU, we can obtain 5 to 10x speed-ups in
the evaluation of proximal operators compared to standard CPU or GPU linear
algebra routines. Our findings are supported by new theoretical results providing
guarantees on the approximation quality of proximal operators obtained using
approximate eigenvalue or singular value decompositions.

1

Introduction

Many problems in statistics and learning can be formulated as convex optimization over matrices. This
includes kernel learning [LCB+ 04], low-rank matrix recovery [RFP10, CR09], sparse covariance
selection [BGdN06, FHT08], community detection [BBV16], and many others. Proximal splitting
algorithms such as (accelerated) proximal gradient methods [Nes03, BT09], or the alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [EB92, BPC11], are among the most popular methods to
deal with large-scale instances of such problems. These methods solve generic convex optimization
problems of the form
min F (X) + G(X)
(1)
X∈E

via calls to the proximal operators of F and/or G. When the variable X is a symmetric or rectangular
matrix, it is often the case that the functions F and/or G are symmetric functions of the eigenvalues
or singular values of X; i.e., so-called
spectral or othogonally-invariant functions. Typical examples
Pn
are F (X) = I(X  0) =
(X) ≥ 0) the convex indicator function for the positive
i=1 I(λiP
n
semidefinite cone, or F (X) = kXk∗ = i=1 σi (X) the nuclear norm.
Computing the proximal operator of such spectral functions F requires a full eigenvalue/singular
value decomposition which contributes a large computational cost of at least n3 floating-point
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

