Non-convex Distributionally Robust Optimization:
Non-asymptotic Analysis
Jikai Jin1,∗ Bohang Zhang2,∗ Haiyang Wang3

Liwei Wang2,3,4,†

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Center of Data Science, Peking University 4 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking Unviersity
2

{jkjin,zhangbohang}@pku.edu.cn,

wanghaiyang6@stu.pku.edu.cn,

wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) is a widely-used approach to learn
models that are robust against distribution shift. Compared with the standard
optimization setting, the objective function in DRO is more difficult to optimize, and
most of the existing theoretical results make strong assumptions on the loss function.
In this work we bridge the gap by studying DRO algorithms for general smooth
non-convex losses. By carefully exploiting the specific form of the DRO objective,
we are able to provide non-asymptotic convergence guarantees even though the
objective function is possibly non-convex, non-smooth and has unbounded gradient
noise. In particular, we prove that a special algorithm called the mini-batch
normalized gradient descent with momentum, can find an -first-order stationary
point within O(−4 ) gradient complexity. We also discuss the conditional valueat-risk (CVaR) setting, where we propose a penalized DRO objective based on
a smoothed version of the CVaR that allows us to obtain a similar convergence
guarantee. We finally verify our theoretical results in a number of tasks and find
that the proposed algorithm can consistently achieve prominent acceleration.

1

Introduction

For a classical machine learning problem, the goal is typically to train a model over a training set
that achieves good performance on a test set, where both the training set and the test set are drawn
from the same distribution P . While such an assumption is reasonable and simple for theoretical
analysis, it is often not the case in real applications. For example, this setting may be improper when
there is a gap between training and test distribution (e.g. in domain adaptation tasks) [Zhang et al.,
2021], when there is severe class imbalance in the training set [Sagawa et al., 2020], when fairness in
minority groups is an important consideration [Hashimoto et al., 2018], or when the deployed model
is exposed to adversarial attacks [Sinha et al., 2018].
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO), as a popular approach to deal with the above situations,
has attracted great interest for the machine learning research communities in recent years. In contrast
to classic machine learning problems, for DRO it is desired that the trained model still has good
performance under distribution shift. Specifically, DRO proposes to minimize the worst-case loss over
a set of probability distributions Q around P . This can be formulated as the following constrained
optimization problem [Rahimian and Mehrotra, 2019, Shapiro, 2017]:
minimizex∈X

Ψ(x) :=

sup Eξ∼Q [`(x; ξ)]
Q∈U (P )

∗
†

Equal Contribution, alphabetical order.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(1)

