Graph Neural Networks with Adaptive Residual

Xiaorui Liu1
xiaorui@msu.edu
Han Xu1
xuhan1@msu.edu

Jiayuan Ding1
dingjia5@msu.edu

Yao Ma2
yao.ma@njit.edu

2

Wei Jin1
jinwei2@msu.edu

Zitao Liu3
liuzitao@100tal.com

Jiliang Tang1
tangjili@msu.edu

1
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA
3
TAL Education Group, Beijing, China

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown the power in graph representation
learning for numerous tasks. In this work, we discover an interesting phenomenon
that although residual connections in the message passing of GNNs help improve
the performance, they immensely amplify GNNs’ vulnerability against abnormal
node features. This is undesirable because in real-world applications, node features
in graphs could often be abnormal such as being naturally noisy or adversarially
manipulated. We analyze possible reasons to understand this phenomenon and aim
to design GNNs with stronger resilience to abnormal features. Our understandings
motivate us to propose and derive a simple, efficient, interpretable, and adaptive
message passing scheme, leading to a novel GNN with Adaptive residual, AirGNN1 .
Extensive experiments under various abnormal feature scenarios demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the great success of graph neural networks (GNNs) in representation
learning for graph structure data [1]. Essentially, GNNs generalize deep neural networks (DNNs) from
regular grids, such as image, video and text, to irregular data such as social, energy, transportation,
citation, and biological networks. Such data can be naturally represented as graphs with nodes and
edges. The key building block for such generalization is the neural message passing framework [2]:
(k) 
x(k+1)
= UPDATE(k) x(k)
(1)
u
u , mN (u)
(k)

where xu ∈ Rd denotes the feature vector of node u in the k-th iteration of message passing, and
(k)
mN (u) is the message aggregated from u’s neighborhood N (u). The specific design of message
passing scheme can be motivated from spectral domain [3, 4] or spatial domain [5, 6, 7, 2]. It usually
linearly smooths the features in a local neighborhood on the graph.
GNNs have achieved superior performance in a large number of benchmark datasets [8] where the
node features are assumed to be complete and informative. However, in real-world applications,
some node features could be abnormal from various aspects. For instance, in social networks,
new users might not have complete profile before they make connections with others, leading to
missing user features. In transportation networks, node features can be noisy since there exist certain
1

The implementation is available at https://github.com/lxiaorui/AirGNN.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

