The Limitations of Large Width in Neural Networks:
A Deep Gaussian Process Perspective

Geoff Pleiss
Columbia University
gmp2162@columbia.edu

John P. Cunningham
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Large width limits have been a recent focus of deep learning research: modulo computational practicalities, do wider networks outperform narrower ones? Answering
this question has been challenging, as conventional networks gain representational
power with width, potentially masking any negative effects. Our analysis in this
paper decouples capacity and width via the generalization of neural networks to
Deep Gaussian Processes (Deep GP), a class of nonparametric hierarchical models
that subsume neural nets. In doing so, we aim to understand how width affects
(standard) neural networks once they have sufficient capacity for a given modeling task. Our theoretical and empirical results on Deep GP suggest that large
width can be detrimental to hierarchical models. Surprisingly, we prove that even
nonparametric Deep GP converge to Gaussian processes, effectively becoming
shallower without any increase in representational power. The posterior, which
corresponds to a mixture of data-adaptable basis functions, becomes less datadependent with width. Our tail analysis demonstrates that width and depth have
opposite effects: depth accentuates a model’s non-Gaussianity, while width makes
models increasingly Gaussian. We find there is a “sweet spot” that maximizes test
performance before the limiting GP behavior prevents adaptability, occurring at
width = 1 or width = 2 for nonparametric Deep GP. These results make strong
predictions about the same phenomenon in conventional neural networks trained
with L2 regularization (analogous to a Gaussian prior on parameters): we show
that such neural networks may need up to 500 − 1000 hidden units for sufficient
capacity—depending on the dataset—but further width degrades performance.

1

Introduction

Research has shown that deeper neural networks tend to be more expressive and efficient than
wider networks under a variety of metrics [e.g. 21, 63, 67, 70, 74, 75, 78, 83]. Nevertheless, there
is resurgent interest in wide models due in part to empirical successes [e.g. 92] and theoretical
analyses of limiting behavior. When randomly initialized to create a distribution over functions,
neural networks converge to Gaussian processes (GP) as width increases. This result, first proved
for 2-layer networks [69], has been extended to deeper networks [56, 64], convolutional networks
[38, 71], and other architectures [50, 88]. A similar limit exists for gradient-trained networks, which
behave increasingly like kernel machines under the neural tangent kernel [e.g. 6, 8, 28, 39, 52, 57, 89].
While these limits simplify analyses, there is something unsettling about reducing neural networks
to kernel methods. Neal [69, p. 161] describes the GP limit as “disappointing,” noting that “infinite
networks do not have hidden units that represent ‘hidden features’. . . often seen [as the] interesting
aspect of neural network learning.” Recent work indeed shows that learned hierarchical features can
be exponentially more efficient than the fixed shallow representations of kernels [e.g. 4, 5, 8, 11, 13,
21, 41, 42, 60, 91]. At the same time, wider networks can more accurately model complex functions
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

