Privately Publishable Per-instance Privacy

Yu-Xiang Wang
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Rachel Redberg
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
rredberg@ucsb.edu

Abstract
We consider how to privately share the personalized privacy losses incurred by
objective perturbation, using per-instance differential privacy (pDP). Standard
differential privacy (DP) gives us a worst-case bound that might be orders of
magnitude larger than the privacy loss to a particular individual relative to a fixed
dataset. The pDP framework provides a more fine-grained analysis of the privacy
guarantee to a target individual, but the per-instance privacy loss itself might be a
function of sensitive data. In this paper, we analyze the per-instance privacy loss of
releasing a private empirical risk minimizer learned via objective perturbation, and
propose a group of methods to privately and accurately publish the pDP losses at
little to no additional privacy cost.

1

Introduction

An explosion of data has fueled innovation in machine learning applications and demanded, in equal
turn, privacy protection for the sensitive data with which machine learning practitioners train and
evaluate models.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006, 2014a) has become a mainstay of privacy-preserving
data analysis, replacing less robust privacy definitions such as k-anonymity which fail to protect
against sufficiently powerful de-anonymization attacks (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008). In contrast,
DP offers provable privacy guarantees that are robust against an arbitrarily strong adversary.
The data curator could trivially protect against privacy loss by reporting a constant function, or by
releasing only data-independent noise. The key challenge of DP is to release privatized output that
retains utility to the data analyst.
A desired level of utility in a machine learning application might necessitate a high value of , but the
privacy guarantees degrade quickly past  = 1. (Triastcyn & Faltings, 2020) construct an example
whereby a differentially private algorithm with  = 2 allows an attacker to use a maximum-likelihood
estimate to conclude with up to 88% accuracy that an individual is in a dataset. For  = 5, the
theoretical upper bound on the accuracy of an optimal attack is 99.3%.
Moreover, practical applications of differential privacy commonly use large values of . A study of
Apple’s deployment of differential privacy revealed that the overall daily privacy loss permitted by
the system was as high as  = 6 for Mac OS 10.12.3 and  = 14 for iOS 10.1.1 (Tang et al., 2017) –
offering only scant privacy protection!
Recent work (Yu et al., 2021) has empirically justified large privacy parameters by conducting
membership inference attacks to demonstrate that these seemingly tenuous privacy guarantees are
actually much stronger in practice. These results are unsurprising from the perspective that DP gives
a data-independent bound on the worst-case privacy loss which is likely to be a conservative estimate
of the risk to a particular individual when a DP algorithm is applied to a particular input dataset.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

