Scalable Rule-Based Representation Learning for
Interpretable Classification

Zhuo Wang1 , Wei Zhang3∗, Ning Liu4 , Jianyong Wang1,2∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Jiangsu Normal University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
4
School of Software, Shandong University
wang-z18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zhangwei.thu2011, victorliucs}@gmail.com,
jianyong@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Rule-based models, e.g., decision trees, are widely used in scenarios demanding
high model interpretability for their transparent inner structures and good model
expressivity. However, rule-based models are hard to optimize, especially on large
data sets, due to their discrete parameters and structures. Ensemble methods and
fuzzy/soft rules are commonly used to improve performance, but they sacrifice
the model interpretability. To obtain both good scalability and interpretability,
we propose a new classifier, named Rule-based Representation Learner (RRL),
that automatically learns interpretable non-fuzzy rules for data representation and
classification. To train the non-differentiable RRL effectively, we project it to a
continuous space and propose a novel training method, called Gradient Grafting,
that can directly optimize the discrete model using gradient descent. An improved
design of logical activation functions is also devised to increase the scalability of
RRL and enable it to discretize the continuous features end-to-end. Exhaustive
experiments on nine small and four large data sets show that RRL outperforms the
competitive interpretable approaches and can be easily adjusted to obtain a trade-off
between classification accuracy and model complexity for different scenarios. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/12wang3/rrl.

1

Introduction

Although Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive results in various machine
learning tasks (Goodfellow et al., 2016), rule-based models, benefiting from their transparent inner
structures and good model expressivity, still play an important role in domains demanding high model
interpretability, such as medicine, finance, and politics (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017). In practice,
rule-based models can easily provide explanations for users to earn their trust and help protect their
rights (Molnar, 2019; Lipton, 2016). By analyzing the learned rules, practitioners can understand the
decision mechanism of models and use their knowledge to improve or debug the models (Chu et al.,
2018). Moreover, even if post-hoc methods can provide interpretations for DNNs, the interpretations
from rule-based models are more faithful and specific (Murdoch et al., 2019). However, conventional
rule-based models are hard to optimize, especially on large data sets, due to their discrete parameters
and structures, which limit their application scope. To take advantage of rule-based models in more
scenarios, we urgently need to answer such a question: how to improve the scalability of rule-based
models while keeping their interpretability?
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

