Exploiting Local Convergence of Quasi-Newton
Methods Globally: Adaptive Sample Size Approach

Qiujiang Jin
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
qiujiang@austin.utexas.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the application of quasi-Newton methods for solving empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems defined over a large dataset. Traditional
deterministic and stochastic quasi-Newton methods can be executed to solve such
problems; however, it is known that their global convergence rate may not be better
than first-order methods, and their local superlinear convergence only appears
towards the end of the learning process. In this paper, we use an adaptive sample
size scheme that exploits the superlinear convergence of quasi-Newton methods
globally and throughout the entire learning process. The main idea of the proposed
adaptive sample size algorithms is to start with a small subset of data points and
solve their corresponding ERM problem within its statistical accuracy, and then
enlarge the sample size geometrically and use the optimal solution of the problem
corresponding to the smaller set as an initial point for solving the subsequent ERM
problem with more samples. We show that if the initial sample size is sufficiently
large and we use quasi-Newton methods to solve each subproblem, the subproblems
can be solved superlinearly fast (after at most three iterations), as we guarantee
that the iterates always stay within a neighborhood that quasi-Newton methods
converge superlinearly. Numerical experiments on various datasets confirm our
theoretical results and demonstrate the computational advantages of our method.

1

Introduction

In various machine learning problems, we aim to find an optimal model that minimizes the expected
loss with respect to the probability distribution that generates data points, which is often referred to
as expected risk minimization. In realistic settings, the underlying probability distribution of data
is unknown and we only have access to a finite number of samples (N samples) that are drawn
independently according to the data distribution. As a result, we often settle for minimizing the
sample average loss, which is also known as empirical risk minimization (ERM). The gap between
expected risk and empirical risk which is known as generalization error is deeply studied in the
statistical learning literature [1–5], and it is well-known that the gap between these two loss functions
vanishes as the number of samples N in the ERM problem becomes larger.
Several variance reduced first-order methods have been developed to efficiently solve the ERM
problem associated with a large dataset [6–13]. However, a common shortcoming of these first-order
methods is that their performance heavily depends on the problem condition number κ := L/µ, where
L is the risk function smoothness parameter and µ is the risk function strong convexity constant. As a
result, these first-order methods suffer from slow convergence when the problem has a large condition
number, which is often the case in datasets with thousands of features. In fact, the best-known bound
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

