Slice Sampling Reparameterization Gradients

Diana Cai
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
dcai@cs.princeton.edu

David M. Zoltowski
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
zoltowski@princeton.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
Many probabilistic modeling problems in machine learning use gradient-based
optimization in which the objective takes the form of an expectation. These
problems can be challenging when the parameters to be optimized determine the
probability distribution under which the expectation is being taken, as the naïve
Monte Carlo procedure is not differentiable. Reparameterization gradients make
it possible to efficiently perform optimization of these Monte Carlo objectives
by transforming the expectation to be differentiable, but the approach is typically
limited to distributions with simple forms and tractable normalization constants.
Here we describe how to differentiate samples from slice sampling to compute slice
sampling reparameterization gradients, enabling a richer class of Monte Carlo
objective functions to be optimized. Slice sampling is a Markov chain Monte Carlo
algorithm for simulating samples from probability distributions; it only requires a
density function that can be evaluated point-wise up to a normalization constant,
making it applicable to a variety of inference problems and unnormalized models.
Our approach is based on the observation that when the slice endpoints are known,
the sampling path is a deterministic and differentiable function of the pseudorandom variables, since the algorithm is rejection-free. We evaluate the method on
synthetic examples and apply it to a variety of applications with reparameterization
of unnormalized probability distributions.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling is a powerful approach to inferring latent structure in complex real-world
processes, but often presents computational challenges for inference and further downstream tasks.
In many modern probabilistic models, inference is recast as optimization of a probabilistic objective
that takes the form of an expectation of a loss function with respect to some distribution. A salient
example is variational inference [27, 3], where a simpler distribution is optimized to approximate a
posterior distribution by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the truth. In particular,
Monte Carlo methods for estimating the gradient of the KL with respect to the parameters have
extended the use of variational inference to non-conjugate Bayesian models [43, 44] and neural
networks [31]. Such probabilistic objectives also appear in a number of other applications in
machine learning and computational science, including the generator loss in generative adversarial
networks [15], computing the sensitivity of expectations under the posterior distribution to prior
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

