Taxonomizing local versus global structure
in neural network loss landscapes

Yaoqing Yang1 , Liam Hodgkinson1,2 , Ryan Theisen1 , Joe Zou1 ,
Joseph E. Gonzalez1 , Kannan Ramchandran1 , Michael W. Mahoney1,2
1
University of California, Berkeley
2
International Computer Science Institute
{yqyang, liam.hodgkinson, theisen, joezou, jegonzal, kannanr,
mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Viewing neural network models in terms of their loss landscapes has a long history
in the statistical mechanics approach to learning, and in recent years it has received
attention within machine learning proper. Among other things, local metrics
(such as the smoothness of the loss landscape) have been shown to correlate with
global properties of the model (such as good generalization performance). Here, we
perform a detailed empirical analysis of the loss landscape structure of thousands of
neural network models, systematically varying learning tasks, model architectures,
and/or quantity/quality of data. By considering a range of metrics that attempt
to capture different aspects of the loss landscape, we demonstrate that the best
test accuracy is obtained when: the loss landscape is globally well-connected;
ensembles of trained models are more similar to each other; and models converge
to locally smooth regions. We also show that globally poorly-connected landscapes
can arise when models are small or when they are trained to lower quality data;
and that, if the loss landscape is globally poorly-connected, then training to zero
loss can actually lead to worse test accuracy. Our detailed empirical results shed
light on phases of learning (and consequent double descent behavior), fundamental
versus incidental determinants of good generalization, the role of load-like and
temperature-like parameters in the learning process, different influences on the loss
landscape from model and data, and the relationships between local and global
metrics, all topics of recent interest.

1

Introduction

Among the many approaches to understanding the behavior of neural network (NN) models, the study
of their loss landscapes [1, 2] has proven to be particularly fruitful. Indeed, analyzing loss landscapes
has helped shed light on the workings of many popular techniques, including large-batch training
[3, 4], adversarial training [5], residual connections [6], and BatchNorm [7]. One particular concept
of recent interest is the so-called sharpness of local minima [3, 5, 8–10]. While sharpness can be
measured by first-order sensitivity measures, such as the Jacobian or Lipschitz constant, it is more
appropriately measured by second-order sensitivity measures, typically via the Hessian spectrum
[11]. It has been observed that in some cases NNs generalize well when they converge to a relatively
flat, i.e., non-sharp, local minimum [3].
While such local sharpness measures can provide insight, their focus on the local geometry of the loss
landscape neglects the global structure of the loss landscape (namely, precisely the sort of structure
that statistical mechanics approaches to learning aim to quantify [12, 13]). Indeed, it is well-known
that existing sharpness-based metrics can be altered (trivially) by reparameterization tricks or (more
interestingly) by taking algorithmic steps which have the effect of changing the local structures on the
loss landscape [5, 8, 14]. For example, [5] shows that adversarial training can decrease the magnitude
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

