Play to Grade: Testing Coding Games as Classifying
Markov Decision Process
Allen Nie∗
Computer Science
Stanford University

Emma Brunskill
Computer Science
Stanford University

Chris Piech
Computer Science
Stanford University

Abstract
Contemporary coding education often presents students with the task of developing programs that have user interaction and complex dynamic systems, such as
mouse based games. While pedagogically compelling, there are no contemporary
autonomous methods for providing feedback. Notably, interactive programs are impossible to grade by traditional unit tests. In this paper we formalize the challenge
of providing feedback to interactive programs as a task of classifying Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Each student’s program fully specifies an MDP where the
agent needs to operate and decide, under reasonable generalization, if the dynamics
and reward model of the input MDP should be categorized as correct or broken.
We demonstrate that by designing a cooperative objective between an agent and
an autoregressive model, we can use the agent to sample differential trajectories
from the input MDP that allows a classifier to determine membership: Play to
Grade. Our method enables an automatic feedback system for interactive code
assignments. We release a dataset of 711,274 anonymized student submissions to a
single assignment with hand-coded bug labels to support future research.

1

Introduction

The need for high quality education at scale is of critical importance [1]. While delivery of content
for millions of students is possible, providing feedback – a cornerstone of education – remains an
open challenge. The quality of an online education platform depends on the feedback it can provide
to its students. However contemporary coding education has a clear limitation. Students are able to
get automatic feedback only up until they start writing interactive programs. When a student authors
a program that requires user interaction, e.g. where a user interacts with the student’s program using
a mouse (such as a game), or by clicking on button (such as in a graphical user interface) it becomes
exceedingly difficult to grade automatically. Even for well defined challenges, if the user has any
creative discretion, or the problem involves any randomness, the task of automatically assessing the
work is daunting. This is especially true as coding has become more popular and feedback is required
for many students. One popular intro to programming platform, Code.org has over 61 million enrolled
students [2]. For their many interactive assignments they have no ability to even identify if a student
has a working solution.
Why is providing feedback to interactive programs so hard? The standard way to provide feedback
is through human labor. Teachers need to interact with each student’s program for 20 seconds to
10 minutes in order to grade. This may seem small, but for the quantity of unique programs on
a platform such as Code.org that amounts to approximately 9.5 years of human effort to provide
feedback for a single assignment. Code.org has tried crowdsourcing feedback from hundreds of
thousands of teachers which has fallen short for similar reasons: labelling is hard and undesirable
work [3]. Interactive assignments can not be auto graded as running the program requires dynamic
∗

anie@stanford.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

