Independent Prototype Propagation
for Zero-Shot Compositionality

Frank Ruis
University of Twente & TNO
research@frank-ruis.nl

Gertjan J. Burghouts
TNO
gertjan.burghouts@tno.nl

Doina Bucur
University of Twente
d.bucur@utwente.nl

Abstract
Humans are good at compositional zero-shot reasoning; someone who has never
seen a zebra before could nevertheless recognize one when we tell them it looks
like a horse with black and white stripes. Machine learning systems, on the other
hand, usually leverage spurious correlations in the training data, and while such
correlations can help recognize objects in context, they hurt generalization. To be
able to deal with underspecified datasets while still leveraging contextual clues
during classification, we propose ProtoProp, a novel prototype propagation graph
method. First we learn prototypical representations of objects (e.g., zebra) that
are independent w.r.t. their attribute labels (e.g., stripes) and vice versa. Next
we propagate the independent prototypes through a compositional graph, to learn
compositional prototypes of novel attribute-object combinations that reflect the
dependencies of the target distribution. The method does not rely on any external
data, such as class hierarchy graphs or pretrained word embeddings. We evaluate
our approach on AO-Clevr, a synthetic and strongly visual dataset with clean labels,
UT-Zappos, a noisy real-world dataset of fine-grained shoe types, and C-GQA, a
large-scale object detection dataset modified for compositional zero-shot learning.
We show that in the generalized compositional zero-shot setting we outperform
state-of-the-art results, and through ablations we show the importance of each part
of the method and their contribution to the final results. The code is available on
github1 .

1

Introduction

As humans, hearing the phrase ‘a tiny pink penguin reading a book’ can conjure up a vivid image,
even though we have likely never seen such a creature before. This is because humans can compose
their knowledge of a small number of visual primitives to recognize novel concepts [1], a property
which Lake et al. [2] argue is one of the key building blocks for human intelligence missing in current
artificial intelligence systems. Machines, on the other hand, are largely data-driven, and usually
require many labeled examples from various viewpoints and lighting conditions in order to recognize
novel concepts. Since visual concepts follow a long-tailed distribution [3, 4], such an approach makes
it near impossible to gather sufficient examples for all possible concepts. Compounded by that, in the
absence of sufficient data, vanilla convolutional neural networks will use any correlation they can
find to classify training samples, even when they are spurious [5]. In this work, we aim to tackle both
of these issues.
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) [6] is the problem of learning to model novel objects and
their attributes as a composition of visual primitives. Previous works in CZSL [6, 7, 8] largely ignore
the dependencies between classes with shared visual primitives, and the spurious correlations between
1

https://github.com/FrankRuis/protoprop

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

