Hamiltonian Dynamics with Non-Newtonian
Momentum for Rapid Sampling
Greg Ver Steeg
Aram Galstyan
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute
{gregv,galstyan}@isi.edu

Abstract
Sampling from an unnormalized probability distribution is a fundamental problem
in machine learning with applications including Bayesian modeling, latent factor
inference, and energy-based model training. After decades of research, variations
of MCMC remain the default approach to sampling despite slow convergence.
Auxiliary neural models can learn to speed up MCMC, but the overhead for
training the extra model can be prohibitive. We propose a fundamentally different
approach to this problem via a new Hamiltonian dynamics with a non-Newtonian
momentum. In contrast to MCMC approaches like Hamiltonian Monte Carlo,
no stochastic step is required. Instead, the proposed deterministic dynamics in
an extended state space exactly sample the target distribution, specified by an
energy function, under an assumption of ergodicity. Alternatively, the dynamics
can be interpreted as a normalizing flow that samples a specified energy model
without training. The proposed Energy Sampling Hamiltonian (ESH) dynamics
have a simple form that can be solved with existing ODE solvers, but we derive a
specialized solver that exhibits much better performance. ESH dynamics converge
faster than their MCMC competitors enabling faster, more stable training of neural
network energy models.

1

Introduction
Langevin Dynamics:

Random walk mixes
While probabilistic reasoning is crucial for scislowly between modes
ence and cognition [1], distributions that can be
directly sampled are rare. Without sampling it is
Sampling with
Nosé-Hoover
Deterministic,
difficult to measure likely outcomes, especially
Thermostat
Non-Newtonian
in high dimensional spaces. A general purpose
Deterministic, but
Momentum
method to sample any target distribution, the
slow thermalization
Metropolis algorithm for Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC), is considered one of the top
HMC + NUTS Adapts to traverse
algorithms of the 20th century [2]. The “Monte
long distance, but high overhead
Carlo” in MCMC refers to the essential role of
in gradient computation
stochasticity, or chance, in the approach: start
with any state, propose a random update, and
Figure 1: Sampling with 50 gradient evaluations
accept it according to a weighted coin flip.
per method. A special property of our proposed
The most widely used methods for sampling deterministic dynamics using a non-Newtonian momainly differ in their choice of proposals for mentum, proportional to line thickness, is that it
the next state of the Markov chain. The most ergodically samples from the target distribution.
prominent example, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(HMC), uses Hamiltonian dynamics to suggest
proposals that quickly move over large distances in the target space [3]. HMC using the No U-

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

