Understanding Interlocking Dynamics of
Cooperative Rationalization
Mo Yu1⇤
Yang Zhang1⇤
Shiyu Chang1,2⇤
Tommi S. Jaakkola3
1
2
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
UC Santa Barbara
CSAIL MIT
yum@us.ibm.com yang.zhang2@ibm.com chang87@ucsb.edu
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Selective rationalization explains the prediction of complex neural networks by
finding a small subset of the input that is sufficient to predict the neural model
output. The selection mechanism is commonly integrated into the model itself by
specifying a two-component cascaded system consisting of a rationale generator,
which makes a binary selection of the input features (which is the rationale), and
a predictor, which predicts the output based only on the selected features. The
components are trained jointly to optimize prediction performance. In this paper,
we reveal a major problem with such cooperative rationalization paradigm — model
interlocking. Interlocking arises when the predictor overfits to the features selected
by the generator thus reinforcing the generator’s selection even if the selected
rationales are sub-optimal. The fundamental cause of the interlocking problem is
that the rationalization objective to be minimized is concave with respect to the
generator’s selection policy. We propose a new rationalization framework, called
A2 R, which introduces a third component into the architecture, a predictor driven
by soft attention as opposed to selection. The generator now realizes both soft and
hard attention over the features and these are fed into the two different predictors.
While the generator still seeks to support the original predictor performance, it
also minimizes a gap between the two predictors. As we will show theoretically,
since the attention-based predictor exhibits a better convexity property, A2 R can
overcome the concavity barrier. Our experiments on two synthetic benchmarks
and two real datasets demonstrate that A2 R can significantly alleviate the interlock
problem and find explanations that better align with human judgments.2

1

Introduction

Selective rationalization [8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 27, 29, 46] explains the prediction of complex neural
networks by finding a small subset of the input – rationale – that suffices on its own to yield the same
outcome as to the original data. To generate high-quality rationales, existing methods often train a
cascaded system that consists of two components, i.e., a rationale generator and a predictor. The
generator selects a subset of the input explicitly (a.k.a., binarized selection), which is then fed to the
predictor. The predictor then predicts the output based only on the subset of features selected by the
generator. The rationale generator and the predictor are trained jointly to optimize the prediction
performance. Compared to many other interpretable methods [5, 23, 45, 38] that rely on attention
mechanism as a proxy of models’ explanation, selective rationalization offers a unique advantage:
certification of exclusion, i.e., any unselected input is guaranteed to have no contribution to prediction.
⇤

2

Authors contributed equally to this paper. Work was done when SC was at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.
We release our code at https://github.com/Gorov/Understanding_Interlocking.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

