Statistical Regeneration Guarantees of the
Wasserstein Autoencoder with Latent Space
Consistency

Anish Chakrabarty
Statistics and Mathematics Unit
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
chakrabarty.anish@gmail.com

Swagatam Das
Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
swagatam.das@isical.ac.in

Abstract
The introduction of Variational Autoencoders (VAE) has been marked as a breakthrough in the history of representation learning models. Besides having several
accolades of its own, VAE has successfully flagged off a series of inventions in the
form of its immediate successors. Wasserstein Autoencoder (WAE), being an heir
to that realm carries with it all of the goodness and heightened generative promises,
matching even the generative adversarial networks (GANs). Needless to say, recent
years have witnessed a remarkable resurgence in statistical analyses of the GANs.
Similar examinations for Autoencoders, however, despite their diverse applicability
and notable empirical performance, remain largely absent. To close this gap, in
this paper, we investigate the statistical properties of WAE. Firstly, we provide
statistical guarantees that WAE achieves the target distribution in the latent space,
utilizing the Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) theory. The main result, consequently
ensures the regeneration of the input distribution, harnessing the potential offered
by Optimal Transport of measures under the Wasserstein metric. This study, in turn,
hints at the class of distributions WAE can reconstruct after suffering a compression
in the form of a latent law.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised data generation has been a time-hallowed problem in machine learning theory. Though
not its strongest suit, Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [1] have been implemented for generative
purposes to a great extent. Once emerged as a crucial unsupervised method for representation
learning, its poor performances in this particular area somewhat depreciate its appeal. On the contrary,
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [2] have proven to be superior when it comes to the quality
of the generated image samples. The theoretical elegance of the adversarial training method can be
duly credited for this achievement. In an attempt to adopt this merit, such ‘adversarial loss’ functions
were incorporated into VAE objectives [3, 4]. The Wasserstein metric, also being used in GANs [5]
previously, was an inevitable choice, since it brings along the beckoning of Transportation Theory.
Using the same to measure the reconstruction loss in a VAE, Wasserstein Autoencoder (WAE) [6] was
conceived. By approaching generative modeling from an Optimal Transport (OT) point of view, it not
only achieved remarkable reconstruction standards but also strengthened the theoretical backbone.
An appropriate WAE framework consists of two components, namely an encoder (E) and a decoder
(D), which are represented by neural networks in practice. Samples from an input distribution
(PX ) are fed into the encoder, which aims at resulting in a target law (PZ ) in the latent space
(Z). The decoder deals with the reconstruction of the original distribution from this ‘encoded’
signal. Mathematically, the objective of WAEs is to minimize L = R(D, E) + Ω(E) over the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

