SQALER: Scaling Question Answering by Decoupling
Multi-Hop and Logical Reasoning

Mattia Atzeni
IBM Research, EPFL
Switzerland
atz@zurich.ibm.com

Jasmina Bogojeska
IBM Research
Switzerland
jbo@zurich.ibm.com

Andreas Loukas
EPFL
Switzerland
andreas.loukas@epfl.ch

Abstract
State-of-the-art approaches to reasoning and question answering over knowledge
graphs (KGs) usually scale with the number of edges and can only be applied
effectively on small instance-dependent subgraphs. In this paper, we address this
issue by showing that multi-hop and more complex logical reasoning can be accomplished separately without losing expressive power. Motivated by this insight, we
propose an approach to multi-hop reasoning that scales linearly with the number of
relation types in the graph, which is usually significantly smaller than the number
of edges or nodes. This produces a set of candidate solutions that can be provably refined to recover the solution to the original problem. Our experiments on
knowledge-based question answering show that our approach solves the multi-hop
MetaQA dataset, achieves a new state-of-the-art on the more challenging WebQuestionsSP, is orders of magnitude more scalable than competitive approaches, and
can achieve compositional generalization out of the training distribution.

1

Introduction

Reasoning, namely the ability to infer conclusions and draw predictions based on existing knowledge,
is a hallmark of human intelligence. Infusing the same ability into machine learning models has
been a major challenge [34, 29] and has historically required complex systems made of several
hand-crafted or learned components [47, 19]. Recently, the paradigm has shifted to deep learning
approaches [43, 42], where neural networks are used to reason over structured knowledge or a text
corpus. In this work, we assume that the source of knowledge is a structured knowledge graph (KG)
and we tackle the problem of knowledge-based question answering (KBQA), namely finding answers
to natural language queries involving multi-hop and logical reasoning over the KG.
Answering queries over a knowledge graph involves many challenges, among which scalability is
a major issue. Real-world KGs often contain millions of nodes and even a 2-hop neighborhood of
the entities mentioned in the query may comprise tens of thousands of nodes. Many state-of-the-art
approaches [41, 42, 39] address the challenge of scalability by building small query-dependent
subgraphs. To this end, they usually use simple heuristics [41] or, in some cases, iterative procedures
based on learned classifiers [42]. This preprocessing step is usually needed because each forward
pass in end-to-end neural networks for KBQA scales at least linearly with the number of edges in
the subgraph. Training neural networks involves repeated evaluation, which renders even a linear
complexity impractical for graphs of more than a few tens thousands of nodes.
In order to address this issue, we introduce a novel approach called SQALER (Scaling Question
Answering by Leveraging Edge Relations). The method first learns a model that generates a set of
candidate answers (entities in the KG) by multi-hop reasoning: the candidate solutions are obtained
by starting from the set of entities mentioned in the question and seeking those that provide an answer
by chained relational following operations. We refer to this module as the relation-level model.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

