Efficient Online Estimation of Causal Effects
by Deciding What to Observe

Shantanu Gupta, Zachary C. Lipton, David Childers
Carnegie Mellon University
{shantang,zlipton,dchilders}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Researchers often face data fusion problems, where multiple data sources are
available, each capturing a distinct subset of variables. While problem formulations
typically take the data as given, in practice, data acquisition can be an ongoing
process. In this paper, we aim to estimate any functional of a probabilistic model
(e.g., a causal effect) as efficiently as possible, by deciding, at each time, which
data source to query. We propose online moment selection (OMS), a framework
in which structural assumptions are encoded as moment conditions. The optimal
action at each step depends, in part, on the very moments that identify the functional
of interest. Our algorithms balance exploration with choosing the best action as
suggested by current estimates of the moments. We propose two selection strategies:
(1) explore-then-commit (OMS-ETC) and (2) explore-then-greedy (OMS-ETG),
proving that both achieve zero asymptotic regret as assessed by MSE. We instantiate
our setup for average treatment effect estimation, where structural assumptions
are given by a causal graph and data sources may include subsets of mediators,
confounders, and instrumental variables.

1

Introduction

Statistical and causal modeling typically proceed from the assumption that we already know which
variables are (and are not) observed. However, this perspective fails to address the difficult data
collection decisions that precede such modeling efforts. Doctors must select a set of tests to run.
Survey designers must select a slate of questions to ask. Companies must select which datasets
to purchase. Whether or not we model these decisions, they pervade the practice of data science,
influencing both what questions we can ask and how accurately we can answer them.
One might ask, why not collect everything? The answers are two-fold: First, data acquisition can
be expensive. In a medical setting, blood tests can cost anywhere from tens to thousands of dollars.
Running every test for every patient is infeasible. Likewise, space on surveys is limited, and asking
every conceivable question of every respondent is infeasible. Second, in many settings, we lack
complete control over the set of variables observed. Instead, we might have access to multiple
data sources, each capturing a different subset of variables. Such data fusion problems pervade
economic modeling and public health, and present interesting challenges: (i) efficiently estimating
(or even identifying) a population parameter of interest often requires intelligently combining data
from multiple sources; (ii) data collection is often iterative, with tentative conclusions at each stage
informing choices about what data to collect next.
In this paper, we formalize the sequential problem of deciding, at each time, which data source to
query (i.e., what to observe) in order to efficiently estimate a target parameter. We propose online
moment selection (OMS), a framework that applies the generalized method of moments (GMM) [17]
both to estimate the parameter and to decide which data sources to query. This framework can be
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

