Multi-Person 3D Motion Prediction with
Multi-Range Transformers

Jiashun Wang1

Huazhe Xu2 Medhini Narasimhan2 Xiaolong Wang1
1
2
UC San Diego
UC Berkeley
jiw077@ucsd.edu {huazhe_xu,medhini}@berkeley.edu xiw012@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for multi-person 3D motion trajectory prediction.
Our key observation is that a human’s action and behaviors may highly depend on
the other persons around. Thus, instead of predicting each human pose trajectory
in isolation, we introduce a Multi-Range Transformers model which contains of a
local-range encoder for individual motion and a global-range encoder for social
interactions. The Transformer decoder then performs prediction for each person by
taking a corresponding pose as a query which attends to both local and global-range
encoder features. Our model not only outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
long-term 3D motion prediction, but also generates diverse social interactions.
More interestingly, our model can even predict 15-person motion simultaneously
by automatically dividing the persons into different interaction groups. Project
page with code is available at https://jiashunwang.github.io/MRT/.

1

Introduction

Given a few time steps of human motion, we are able to forecast how the person will continue
to move and imagine the complex dynamics of their motion in the future. The ability to perform
such predictions allows us to react and plan our own behaviors. Similarly, a predictive model for
human motion is an essential component for many real world computer vision applications such as
surveillance systems, and collision avoidance for robotics and autonomous vehicles. The research
on 3D human motion prediction has caught a lot of attention in recent years [44, 43], where deep
models are designed to take a few steps of 3D motion trajectory as inputs and predict a long-term
future 3D motion trajectory as the outputs.
While encouraging results have been shown in previous work, most of the research focus on single
human 3D motion prediction. Our key observation is that, how a human acts and behaves may highly
depend on the people around. Especially during interactions with multiple agents, an agent will need
to predict the other agents’ intentions, and then respond accordingly [54]. Thus instead of predicting
each human motion in isolation, we propose to build a model to predict multi-person 3D motion and
interactions. Such a model needs the following properties: (i) understand each agent’s own motion
in previous time steps to obtain smooth and natural future motion; (ii) within a crowd of agents,
understand which agents are interacting with each other and learn to predict based on the social
interactions; (iii) the time scale for prediction needs to be long-term.
In this paper, we introduce Multi-Range Transformers for multi-person 3D motion trajectory prediction. The Transformer [63] has shown to be very effective in modeling long-term relations in
language modeling [16] and recently in visual recognition [17]. Inspired by these encouraging results,
we propose to explore Transformer models for predicting long-term human motion (3 seconds into
the future). Our Multi-Range Transformers contain a local-range Transformer encoder for each
individual person trajectory, a global-range Transformer encoder for modeling social interactions,
and a Transformer decoder for predicting each person’s future motion trajectory in 3D.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

