On the Role of Optimization in Double Descent:
A Least Squares Study

Ilja Kuzborskij
DeepMind

Csaba Szepesvári
University of Alberta
DeepMind Edmonton, Canada

Amal Rannen-Triki
DeepMind

Omar Rivasplata
University College London

Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind

Abstract
Empirically it has been observed that the performance of deep neural networks
steadily improves with increased model size, contradicting the classical view on
overfitting and generalization. Recently, the double descent phenomenon has been
proposed to reconcile this observation with theory, suggesting that the test error
has a second descent when the model becomes sufficiently overparameterized, as
the model size itself acts as an implicit regularizer. In this paper we add to the
growing body of work in this space, providing a careful study of learning dynamics
as a function of model size for the least squares scenario. We show an excess risk
bound for the gradient descent solution of the least squares objective. The bound
depends on the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of the sample covariance matrix of
the input features, via a functional form that has the double descent behaviour. This
gives a new perspective on the double descent curves reported in the literature, as
our analysis of the excess risk allows to decouple the effect of optimization and
generalization error. In particular, we find that in the case of noiseless regression,
double descent is explained solely by optimization-related quantities, which was
missed in studies focusing on the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse solution. We
believe that our derivation provides an alternative view compared to existing
works, shedding some light on a possible cause of this phenomenon, at least in the
considered least squares setting. We empirically explore if our predictions hold for
neural networks, in particular whether the spectrum of the sample covariance of
features at intermediary hidden layers has a similar behaviour as the one predicted
by our derivations in the least squares setting.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks optimized by Gradient Descent (GD) methods have shown amazing versatility
across a large range of domains. One of their most intriguing features is their ability to perform
better with scale. Indeed, some of the most impressive results [see e.g. Brock et al., 2021, Brown
et al., 2020, Senior et al., 2020, Schrittwieser et al., 2020, Silver et al., 2017, He et al., 2016 and
references therein] have been obtained often by exploiting this fact, leading to neural network models
that have at least as many parameters as the number of examples in the dataset they are trained on.
Empirically, the limitation on the model size seems to be mostly imposed by hardware or compute.
From a theoretical point of view, however, this property is quite surprising and counter-intuitive, as
one would expect that in such extremely overparameterized regimes the learning would be prone to
overfitting [Hastie et al., 2009, Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

