Can contrastive learning avoid shortcut solutions?
Joshua Robinson
MIT CSAIL & LIDS
joshrob@mit.edu
Kayhan Batmanghelich
University of Pittsburgh
kayhan@pitt.edu

Li Sun
University of Pittsburgh
lis118@pitt.edu

Ke Yu
University of Pittsburgh
yu.ke@pitt.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
MIT LIDS
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
The generalization of representations learned via contrastive learning depends
crucially on what features of the data are extracted. However, we observe that the
contrastive loss does not always sufficiently guide which features are extracted,
a behavior that can negatively impact the performance on downstream tasks via
“shortcuts”, i.e., by inadvertently suppressing important predictive features. We
find that feature extraction is influenced by the difficulty of the so-called instance
discrimination task (i.e., the task of discriminating pairs of similar points from
pairs of dissimilar ones). Although harder pairs improve the representation of
some features, the improvement comes at the cost of suppressing previously well
represented features. In response, we propose implicit feature modification (IFM),
a method for altering positive and negative samples in order to guide contrastive
models towards capturing a wider variety of predictive features. Empirically, we
observe that IFM reduces feature suppression, and as a result improves performance
on vision and medical imaging tasks. The code is available at: https://github.
com/joshr17/IFM.

1

Introduction

Representations trained with contrastive learning are adept at solving various vision tasks including
classification, object detection, instance segmentation, and more [5, 15, 44]. In contrastive learning,
encoders are trained to discriminate pairs of positive (similar) inputs from a selection of negative
(dissimilar) pairs. This task is called instance discrimination: It is often framed using the InfoNCE
loss [14, 33], whose minimization forces encoders to extract input features that are sufficient to
discriminate similar and dissimilar pairs.
However, learning features that are discriminative during training does not guarantee a model will
generalize. Many studies find inductive biases in supervised learning toward simple “shortcut” features
and decision rules [16, 21, 32] which result in unpredictable model behavior under perturbations
[22, 43] and failure outside the training distribution [2, 37]. Simplicity bias has various potential
sources [11] including training methods [8, 29, 41] and architecture design [10, 17]. Bias towards
shortcut decision rules also hampers transferability in contrastive learning [4], where it is in addition
influenced by the instance discrimination task. These difficulties lead us to ask: can the contrastive
instance discrimination task itself be modified to avoid learning shortcut solutions?
We approach this question by studying the relation between contrastive instance discrimination and
feature learning. First, we theoretically explain why optimizing the InfoNCE loss alone does not
guarantee avoidance of shortcut solutions that suppress (i.e., discard) certain input features [4, 11].
Second, despite this negative result, we show that it is still possible to trade off representation of
Correspondence to Joshua Robinson (joshrob@mit.edu).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

