Contrastive Learning for Neural Topic Model

Thong Nguyen
VinAI Research
v.thongnt66@vinai.io

Luu Anh Tuan ∗
Nanyang Technological University
anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent empirical studies show that adversarial topic models (ATM) can successfully capture semantic patterns of the document by differentiating a document with
another dissimilar sample. However, utilizing that discriminative-generative architecture has two important drawbacks: (1) the architecture does not relate similar
documents, which has the same document-word distribution of salient words; (2)
it restricts the ability to integrate external information, such as sentiments of the
document, which has been shown to benefit the training of neural topic model. To
address those issues, we revisit the adversarial topic architecture in the viewpoint
of mathematical analysis, propose a novel approach to re-formulate discriminative
goal as an optimization problem, and design a novel sampling method which facilitates the integration of external variables. The reformulation encourages the model
to incorporate the relations among similar samples and enforces the constraint on
the similarity among dissimilar ones; while the sampling method, which is based
on the internal input and reconstructed output, helps inform the model of salient
words contributing to the main topic. Experimental results show that our framework
outperforms other state-of-the-art neural topic models in three common benchmark
datasets that belong to various domains, vocabulary sizes, and document lengths in
terms of topic coherence.

1

Introduction

Topic models have been successfully applied in Natural Language Processing with various applications such as information extraction, text clustering, summarization, and sentiment analysis [1–6].
The most popular conventional topic model, Latent Dirichlet Allocation [7], learns document-topic
and topic-word distribution via Gibbs sampling and mean field approximation. To apply deep neural
network for topic model, Miao et al. [8] proposed to use neural variational inference as the training
method while Srivastava and Sutton [9] employed the logistic normal prior distribution. However,
recent studies [10, 11] showed that both Gaussian and logistic normal prior fail to capture multimodality aspects and semantic patterns of a document, which are crucial to maintain the quality of a
topic model.
To cope with this issue, Adversarial Topic Model (ATM) [10–13] was proposed with adversarial
mechanisms using a combination of generator and discriminator. By seeking the equilibrium between
the generator and discriminator, the generator is capable of learning meaningful semantic patterns
of the document. Nonetheless, this framework has two main limitations. First, ATM relies on
the key ingredient: leveraging the discrimination of the real distribution from the fake (negative)
distribution to guide the training. Since the sampling of the fake distribution is not conditioned
on the real distribution, it barely generates positive samples which largely preserves the semantic
content of the real sample. This limits the behavior concerning the mutual information in the positive
sample and the real one, which has been demonstrated as key driver to learn useful representations
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

