Twins: Revisiting the Design of Spatial Attention in
Vision Transformers
Xiangxiang Chu1 , Zhi Tian1,2 , Yuqing Wang1 , Bo Zhang1
Haibing Ren1 , Xiaolin Wei1 , Huaxia Xia1 , Chunhua Shen2∗
1
1

Meituan Inc.

2

The University of Adelaide, Australia

{chuxiangxiang,wangyuqing06,zhangbo97,renhaibing,weixiaolin02,xiahuaxia}@meituan.com
2
zhi.tian@outlook.com, chunhua@me.com

Abstract
Very recently, a variety of vision transformer architectures for dense prediction
tasks have been proposed and they show that the design of spatial attention is
critical to their success in these tasks. In this work, we revisit the design of the spatial attention and demonstrate that a carefully devised yet simple spatial attention
mechanism performs favorably against the state-of-the-art schemes. As a result, we
propose two vision transformer architectures, namely, Twins-PCPVT and TwinsSVT. Our proposed architectures are highly efficient and easy to implement, only
involving matrix multiplications that are highly optimized in modern deep learning
frameworks. More importantly, the proposed architectures achieve excellent performance on a wide range of visual tasks including image-level classification as
well as dense detection and segmentation. The simplicity and strong performance
suggest that our proposed architectures may serve as stronger backbones for many
vision tasks. Our code is available at: https://git.io/Twins.

1

Introduction

Recently, Vision Transformers [1–3] have received increasing research interest. Compared to the
widely-used convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in visual perception, Vision Transformers enjoy
great flexibility in modeling long-range dependencies in vision tasks, introduce less inductive bias,
and can naturally process multi-modality input data including images, videos, texts, speech signals,
and point clouds. Thus, they have been considered to be a strong alternative to CNNs. It is expected
that vision transformers are likely to replace CNNs and serve as the most basic component in the
next-generation visual perception systems.
One of the prominent problems when applying transformers to vision tasks is the heavy computational
complexity incurred by the spatial self-attention operation in transformers, which grows quadratically
in the number of pixels of the input image. A workaround is the locally-grouped self-attention (or
self-attention in non-overlapped windows as in the recent Swin Transformer [4]), where the input
is spatially grouped into non-overlapped windows and the standard self-attention is computed only
within each sub-window. Although it can significantly reduce the complexity, it lacks the connections
between different windows and thus results in a limited receptive field. As pointed out by many
previous works [5–7], a sufficiently large receptive field is crucial to the performance, particularly for
dense prediction tasks such as image segmentation and object detection. Swin [4] proposes a shifted
window operation to tackle the issue, where the boundaries of these local windows are gradually
moved as the network proceeds. Despite being effective, the shifted windows may have uneven sizes.
The uneven windows result in difficulties when the models are deployed with ONNX or TensorRT,
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

