On the Importance of Gradients for Detecting
Distributional Shifts in the Wild
Rui Huang
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
huangrui@cs.wisc.edu

Andrew Geng
Department of Computer Sciences⇤
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ageng@wisc.edu

Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) data has become a critical component in
ensuring the safe deployment of machine learning models in the real world. Existing OOD detection approaches primarily rely on the output or feature space
for deriving OOD scores, while largely overlooking information from the gradient space. In this paper, we present GradNorm, a simple and effective approach
for detecting OOD inputs by utilizing information extracted from the gradient
space. GradNorm directly employs the vector norm of gradients, backpropagated
from the KL divergence between the softmax output and a uniform probability
distribution. Our key idea is that the magnitude of gradients is higher for indistribution (ID) data than that for OOD data, making it informative for OOD
detection. GradNorm demonstrates superior performance, reducing the average
FPR95 by up to 16.33% compared to the previous best method. Code and data
available: https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/gradnorm_ood.

1

Introduction

When deploying machine learning models in the real world, there is an increasingly important
question to ask: “Is the model making a faithful prediction for something it was trained on, or
is the model making an unreliable prediction for something it has not been exposed to during
training?” We desire models that are not only accurate on their familiar data distribution, but
also aware of uncertainty outside the training distribution. This gives rise to the importance of
out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, which determines whether an input is in-distribution (ID) or
OOD. As of recently a plethora of literature has emerged to address the problem of OOD uncertainty
estimation [2, 13, 14, 16, 24, 26–29, 31, 32, 41].
The main challenge in OOD uncertainty estimation stems from the fact that modern deep neural
networks can easily produce overconfident predictions on OOD inputs [34]. This phenomenon makes
the separation between ID and OOD data a non-trivial task. Much of the prior work focused on
deriving OOD uncertainty measurements from the activation space of the neural network, e.g., using
model output [13, 14, 24, 27, 29] or feature representations [26]. Yet, this leaves an alternative
space—model parameter and its gradient space—largely unexplored. Will a model react to ID and
OOD inputs differently in its gradient space, and if so, can we discover distinctive signatures to
separate ID and OOD data from gradients?
⇤

Work done while A.G was working as an undergraduate research assistant with Li’s lab.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

