Coarse-to-fine Animal Pose and Shape Estimation

Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
{lic, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Most existing animal pose and shape estimation approaches reconstruct animal
meshes with a parametric SMAL model. This is because the low-dimensional pose
and shape parameters of the SMAL model makes it easier for deep networks to learn
the high-dimensional animal meshes. However, the SMAL model is learned from
scans of toy animals with limited pose and shape variations, and thus may not be
able to represent highly varying real animals well. This may result in poor fittings
of the estimated meshes to the 2D evidences, e.g. 2D keypoints or silhouettes. To
mitigate this problem, we propose a coarse-to-fine approach to reconstruct 3D
animal mesh from a single image. The coarse estimation stage first estimates the
pose, shape and translation parameters of the SMAL model. The estimated meshes
are then used as a starting point by a graph convolutional network (GCN) to predict
a per-vertex deformation in the refinement stage. This combination of SMAL-based
and vertex-based representations benefits from both parametric and non-parametric
representations. We design our mesh refinement GCN (MRGCN) as an encoderdecoder structure with hierarchical feature representations to overcome the limited
receptive field of traditional GCNs. Moreover, we observe that the global image
feature used by existing animal mesh reconstruction works is unable to capture
detailed shape information for mesh refinement. We thus introduce a local feature
extractor to retrieve a vertex-level feature and use it together with the global feature
as the input of the MRGCN. We test our approach on the StanfordExtra dataset and
achieve state-of-the-art results. Furthermore, we test the generalization capacity of
our approach on the Animal Pose and BADJA datasets. Our code is available at the
project website1 .

1

Introduction

Animals play an important role in our everyday life and the study of animals has many potential
applications in zoology, farming and ecology. Although great success has been achieved for modeling
humans, progress for the animals counterpart is relatively slow mainly due to the lack of labeled
data. It is almost impossible to collect large scale 3D pose data for animals, which prevents the direct
application of many existing human pose estimation techniques to animals. Some works solve this
problem by training their model with synthetic data [4, 13, 33]. However, generating realistic images
is challenging, and more importantly, the limited pose and shape variations of synthetic data may
result in performance drop when applied to real images. Other works avoid the requirement of 3D
ground truth by making use of 2D weak supervision. For example, [2, 12] render the estimated mesh
or project the 3D keypoints onto the 2D image space, and then compute the losses based on ground
truth silhouettes or 2D keypoints. This setting is more pragmatic since 2D animal annotations are
more accessible. In view of this, we focus on learning 3D animal pose and shape with only 2D weak
supervision in this work.
1

https://github.com/chaneyddtt/Coarse-to-fine-3D-Animal

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

