Your head is there to move you around: Goal-driven
models of the primate dorsal pathway

Patrick J Mineault
patrick.mineault@gmail.com

Shahab Bakhtiari
Mila, McGill University
bakhtias@mila.quebec

Blake A Richards
Mila, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University
blake.richards@mila.quebec
Christopher C Pack
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University
christopher.pack@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Neurons in the dorsal visual pathway of the mammalian brain are selective for
motion stimuli, with the complexity of stimulus representations increasing along the
hierarchy. This progression is similar to that of the ventral visual pathway, which
is well characterized by artificial neural networks (ANNs) optimized for object
recognition. In contrast, there are no image-computable models of the dorsal stream
with comparable explanatory power. We hypothesized that the properties of dorsal
stream neurons could be explained by a simple learning objective: the need for an
organism to orient itself during self-motion. To test this hypothesis, we trained a
3D ResNet to predict an agent’s self-motion parameters from visual stimuli in a
simulated environment. We found that the responses in this network accounted
well for the selectivity of neurons in a large database of single-neuron recordings
from the dorsal visual stream of non-human primates. In contrast, ANNs trained on
an action recognition dataset through supervised or self-supervised learning could
not explain responses in the dorsal stream, despite also being trained on naturalistic
videos with moving objects. These results demonstrate that an ecologically relevant
cost function can account for dorsal stream properties in the primate brain.

1

Introduction

The mammalian visual cortex is organized into two processing streams [1]: the ventral stream, where
neurons are selective for object class and identity; and the dorsal stream, where neurons are selective
for motion. Neurons in the ventral stream exhibit selectivity for increasingly complex stimulus
features at successive stages, from oriented lines in V1, to textures in V2, curved lines in V4, and
culminating in representations of natural objects in the inferotemporal (IT) cortex [2, 3, 4, 5]. The
myriad response properties within and across stages have been difficult to understand computationally
[6].
However, in recent years, a large body of work [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] has found that modern
convolutional neural networks trained on image classification develop representations that match
those found in the ventral stream. Early CNN layers match primary visual cortex (V1), while higherlevel layers better match higher-level ventral stream areas, both in terms of qualitative preferred
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

