Analyzing the Confidentiality of Undistillable
Teachers in Knowledge Distillation

Souvik Kundu, Qirui Sun, Yao Fu, Massoud Pedram, Peter A. Beerel
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
{souvikku, qiruisun, yaof, pedram, pabeerel}@usc.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has recently been identified as a method that can
unintentionally leak private information regarding the details of a teacher model
to an unauthorized student. Recent research in developing undistillable nasty
teachers that can protect model confidentiality has gained significant attention.
However, the level of protection these nasty models offer has been largely untested.
In this paper, we show that transferring knowledge to a shallow sub-section of a
student can largely reduce a teacher’s influence. By exploring the depth of the
shallow subsection, we then present a distillation technique that enables a skeptical
student model to learn even from a nasty teacher. To evaluate the efficacy of our
skeptical students, we conducted experiments with several models with KD under
both training data-available and data-free scenarios for various datasets. While
distilling from nasty teachers, compared to the normal student models, skeptical
students consistently provide superior classification performance of up to ∼59.5%.
Moreover, similar to normal students, skeptical students maintain high classification
accuracy when distilled from a normal teacher, showing their efficacy irrespective
of the teacher being nasty or not. We believe the ability of skeptical students to
largely diminish the KD-immunity of a potentially nasty teacher will motivate the
research community to create more robust mechanisms for model confidentiality.
We have open-sourced the code at github.com/ksouvik52/Skeptical2021.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation (KD) [10] aims to transfer the useful knowledge of a trained model (the
teacher) to another model (the student). KD has found success in various applications [1, 29, 3, 17]
and is particularly useful for resource-constrained IoT applications where the compute budget is
limited and compute-efficient models are required. Generally, KD requires the student model to be
trained over the same data-set that is used to train the teacher. However, recent research [31, 20, 2]
has shown the efficacy of KD even under the "data-free" scenario where the training data may not be
available for the student to get trained.
Over the past few years various forms of distillation have been proposed, including distillation from
the student itself [36] and via an ensemble of students [37]. However, recently, reference [18] has
highlighted the fact that many forms of distillation may unintentionally leak the IP of a teacher
model. In particular, some teacher models contain significant IP associated with the arduous effort
of both data collection and model training, which motivates their release as “black-box" executable
pieces of software. Moreover, these trained models may even enable safeguarding the training
data (for example, sensitive medical images [28] and company proprietary information [27, 30])
as well as their performance on the secure data. Use of KD under these circumstances, sometimes
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

