MEST: Accurate and Fast Memory-Economic Sparse
Training Framework on the Edge

Geng Yuan1,† , Xiaolong Ma1,† , Wei Niu2 , Zhengang Li1 , Zhenglun Kong1 , Ning Liu3 ,
Yifan Gong1 , Zheng Zhan1 , Chaoyang He4 , Qing Jin1 , Siyue Wang1 ,
Minghai Qin, Bin Ren2 , Yanzhi Wang1 , Sijia Liu5 , Xue Lin1
1

3

Northeastern University, 2 College of William and Mary,
Midea Group, 4 University of Southern California, 5 Michigan State University
{yuan.geng,xue.lin}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Recently, a new trend of exploring sparsity for accelerating neural network training
has emerged, embracing the paradigm of training on the edge. This paper proposes
a novel Memory-Economic Sparse Training (MEST) framework targeting for accurate and fast execution on edge devices. The proposed MEST framework consists
of enhancements by Elastic Mutation (EM) and Soft Memory Bound (&S) that
ensure superior accuracy at high sparsity ratios. Different from the existing works
for sparse training, this current work reveals the importance of sparsity schemes on
the performance of sparse training in terms of accuracy as well as training speed
on real edge devices. On top of that, the paper proposes to employ data efficiency
for further acceleration of sparse training. Our results suggest that unforgettable
examples can be identified in-situ even during the dynamic exploration of sparsity
masks in the sparse training process, and therefore can be removed for further
training speedup on edge devices. Comparing with state-of-the-art (SOTA) works
on accuracy, our MEST increases Top-1 accuracy significantly on ImageNet when
using the same unstructured sparsity scheme. Systematical evaluation on accuracy,
training speed, and memory footprint are conducted, where the proposed MEST
framework consistently outperforms representative SOTA works. Our codes are
publicly available at: https://github.com/boone891214/MEST.

1

Introduction

To promote the broader applications of deep learning on the edge, a surge of research efforts have
been devoted to removing the over-parameterization in neural networks for accelerated inference.
Specifically, existing works have explored various strategies such as heuristics-based pruning [1, 2],
regularization-based pruning [3, 4], and recently prevailing network architecture search [5, 6, 7, 8].
Recently, a new trend of exploring sparsity for training acceleration of neural networks has emerged
to embrace the promising training-on-the-edge paradigm. The first works in this direction use the
pruning-at-initialization approach such as SNIP [9] and GraSP [10] that first obtains a fixed sparse
model structure and then follows with a traditional training process. However, the whole process
is still computation- and memory-intensive, and therefore not compatible with the end-to-end edge
training paradigm. Such a sparse training methodology with the pre-fixed structure also faces the
problem of compromised accuracy.
† These authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

