Reverse-Complement Equivariant Networks
for DNA Sequences

Vincent Mallet
Structural Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Structural Biology and Chemistry,
Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR3528, C3BI, USR3756
Mines ParisTech, PSL University, Center for Computational Biology
vincent.mallet96@gmail.com
Jean-Philippe Vert
Google Research, Brain team, Paris
jpvert@google.com

Abstract
As DNA sequencing technologies keep improving in scale and cost, there is a
growing need to develop machine learning models to analyze DNA sequences,
e.g., to decipher regulatory signals from DNA fragments bound by a particular
protein of interest. As a double helix made of two complementary strands, a DNA
fragment can be sequenced as two equivalent, so-called Reverse Complement (RC)
sequences of nucleotides. To take into account this inherent symmetry of the data in
machine learning models can facilitate learning. In this sense, several authors have
recently proposed particular RC-equivariant convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
However, it remains unknown whether other RC-equivariant architectures exist,
which could potentially increase the set of basic models adapted to DNA sequences
for practitioners. Here, we close this gap by characterizing the set of all linear RCequivariant layers, and show in particular that new architectures exist beyond the
ones already explored. We further discuss RC-equivariant pointwise nonlinearities
adapted to different architectures, as well as RC-equivariant embeddings of k-mers
as an alternative to one-hot encoding of nucleotides. We show experimentally that
the new architectures can outperform existing ones.

1

Introduction

Incorporating prior knowledge about the structure of data in the architecture of neural networks is a
promising approach to design expressive models with good generalization properties. In particular,
exploiting natural symmetries in the data can lead to models with fewer parameters to estimate than
agnostic approaches. This is especially beneficial when the amount of available data is limited. A
famous example of such an architecture is the convolutional neural network (CNN) for 1D sequences
or 2D images, which is well adapted to problems which are invariant to translations in the data, while
exploiting multiscale and local information in the signals. Motivated by the success of CNNs, there
has been a fast-growing body of research in recent years to build the theoretical underpinnings and
design architectures and efficient algorithms to systematically exploit symmetries and structures in
the data [3].
A central idea that has emerged is to formalize the symmetries in data by a particular group action
(e.g., the group of translations or rotations on images), and to create multilayer neural networks which,
by design, “behave well” under the action of the group. This is captured formally by the concept of
equivariance, which states that each equivariant layer should be designed to be subject to the group
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

