Hessian Eigenspectra of
More Realistic Nonlinear Models
Zhenyu Liao∗†
School of Electronic Information and Communications
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
zhenyu_liao@hust.edu.cn
Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley, USA
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Given an optimization problem, the Hessian matrix and its eigenspectrum can be
used in many ways, ranging from designing more efficient second-order algorithms
to performing model analysis and regression diagnostics. When nonlinear models
and non-convex problems are considered, strong simplifying assumptions are often
made to make Hessian spectral analysis more tractable. This leads to the question
of how relevant the conclusions of such analyses are for realistic nonlinear models.
In this paper, we exploit tools from random matrix theory to make a precise
characterization of the Hessian eigenspectra for a broad family of nonlinear models
that extends the classical generalized linear models, without relying on strong
simplifying assumptions used previously. We show that, depending on the data
properties, the nonlinear response model, and the loss function, the Hessian can
have qualitatively different spectral behaviors: of bounded or unbounded support,
with single- or multi-bulk, and with isolated eigenvalues on the left- or right-hand
side of the main eigenvalue bulk. By focusing on such a simple but nontrivial
model, our analysis takes a step forward to unveil the theoretical origin of many
visually striking features observed in more realistic machine learning models.

1

Introduction

The Hessian is ubiquitous in applied mathematics, statistics, and machine learning (ML). Given a
(loss) function L(w) of some parameters w ∈ Rp , the Hessian H(w) ∈ Rp×p is defined as the second
derivative of the loss function with respect to the model parameter, i.e., H(w) = ∂L(w)/(∂w∂wT ).
When a ML model is being trained, it is common to parameterize that model by w, and then train that
model by minimizing some (smooth) loss function L(w), with the associated Hessian H(w), e.g., by
backpropagating the error to improve w [26]. Alternatively, once a ML model is trained, the Hessian
(and the related Fisher information matrix [66, 68]) can be examined to identify outliers, perform
diagnostics, and/or engage in other sorts of model validation [31, 79, 62].
For convex problems, the Hessian H(w) provides detailed information on how to adjust the gradient
to achieve improved convergence, e.g., in Newton-like methods. For non-convex problems, the
properties of the local loss “landscape” around a given point w in the parameter space is of central
∗
†

Work done at ICSI and Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
We refer the readers to an extended version of this article [43] for detailed proofs and more discussions.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

