Referring Transformer: A One-step Approach to
Multi-task Visual Grounding

Muchen Li1,2
muchenli@cs.ubc.ca

Leonid Sigal1,2,3,4
lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
3
4
Vector Institute for AI
CIFAR AI Chair
NSERC CRC Chair

Abstract
As an important step towards visual reasoning, visual grounding (e.g., phrase
localization, referring expression comprehension / segmentation) has been widely
explored. Previous approaches to referring expression comprehension (REC) or
segmentation (RES) either suffer from limited performance, due to a two-stage
setup, or require the designing of complex task-specific one-stage architectures.
In this paper, we propose a simple one-stage multi-task framework for visual
grounding tasks. Specifically, we leverage a transformer architecture, where two
modalities are fused in a visual-lingual encoder. In the decoder, the model learns to
generate contextualized lingual queries which are then decoded and used to directly
regress the bounding box and produce a segmentation mask for the corresponding
referred regions. With this simple but highly contextualized model, we outperform
state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on both REC and RES tasks. We also
show that a simple pre-training schedule (on an external dataset) further improves
the performance. Extensive experiments and ablations illustrate that our model
benefits greatly from contextualized information and multi-task training.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal grounding1 tasks (e.g., phrase localization [1, 3, 9, 41, 48], referring expression comprehension [17, 19, 24, 26, 29, 30, 37, 51, 52, 55, 56] and segmentation [6, 18, 20, 21, 29, 38, 53, 56])
aim to generalize traditional object detection and segmentation to localization of regions (rectangular
or at a pixel level) in images that correspond to free-form linguistic expressions. These tasks have
emerged as core problems in vision and ML due to the breadth of applications that can make use of
such techniques, spanning image captioning, visual question answering, visual reasoning and others.
The majority of multi-modal grounding architectures, to date, take the form of two-stage approaches,
inspired by Faster RCNN [44] and others, which first generate a set of image region proposals and
then associate/ground one, or more, of these regions to a phrase by considering how well the content
matches the query phrase. Context among the regions and multiple query phrases, which often come
parsed from a single sentence, has also been considered in various ways (e.g., using LSTM stacks
[9], graph neural networks [1] and others). More recent variants leverage pre-trained multi-modal
Transformers (e.g., ViLBERT [33, 34]) to fine-tune to the grounding tasks. Such models have an
added benefit of being able to learn sophisticated cross-modal feature representations from external
1

Grounding and referring expression comprehension have been used interchangeably in the literature. While
the two terms are indeed trying to characterize the same task of associating a lingual phrase with an image region,
there is a subtle difference in that referring expressions tend to be unique and hence need to be grounded to a
single region, e.g., “person in a red coat next to a bus". The grounding task, as originally defined in [41], is more
general where a lingual phrase may be ambiguous and therefore grounded to multiple regions, e.g., “a person".
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

