Posterior Collapse and
Latent Variable Non-identifiability
Yixin Wang
University of Michigan
yixinw@umich.edu

David M. Blei
Columbia University
david.blei@columbia.edu

John P. Cunningham
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Variational autoencoders model high-dimensional data by positing low-dimensional
latent variables that are mapped through a flexible distribution parametrized by a
neural network. Unfortunately, variational autoencoders often suffer from posterior
collapse: the posterior of the latent variables is equal to its prior, rendering the
variational autoencoder useless as a means to produce meaningful representations.
Existing approaches to posterior collapse often attribute it to the use of neural
networks or optimization issues due to variational approximation. In this paper,
we consider posterior collapse as a problem of latent variable non-identifiability.
We prove that the posterior collapses if and only if the latent variables are nonidentifiable in the generative model. This fact implies that posterior collapse is
not a phenomenon specific to the use of flexible distributions or approximate
inference. Rather, it can occur in classical probabilistic models even with exact
inference, which we also demonstrate. Based on these results, we propose a
class of latent-identifiable variational autoencoders, deep generative models which
enforce identifiability without sacrificing flexibility. This model class resolves
the problem of latent variable non-identifiability by leveraging bijective Brenier
maps and parameterizing them with input convex neural networks, without special
variational inference objectives or optimization tricks. Across synthetic and real
datasets, latent-identifiable variational autoencoders outperform existing methods in
mitigating posterior collapse and providing meaningful representations of the data.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAE) are powerful generative models for high-dimensional data [28, 46].
Their key idea is to combine the inference principles of probabilistic modeling with the flexibility of
neural networks. In a VAE, each datapoint is independently generated by a low-dimensional latent
variable drawn from a prior, then mapped to a flexible distribution parametrized by a neural network.
Unfortunately, VAE often suffer from posterior collapse, an important and widely studied phenomenon where the posterior of the latent variables is equal to prior [6, 8, 38, 62]. This phenomenon
is also known as latent variable collapse, KL vanishing, and over-pruning. Posterior collapse renders the VAE useless to produce meaningful representations, in so much as its per-datapoint latent
variables all have the exact same posterior.
Posterior collapse is commonly observed in the VAE whose generative model is highly flexible,
leading to the common speculation that posterior collapse occurs because VAE involve flexible neural
networks in the generative model [11], or because it uses variational inference [59]. Based on these
hypotheses, many of the proposed strategies for mitigating posterior collapse thus focus on modifying
the variational inference objective (e.g. [44]), designing special optimization schemes for variational
inference in VAE (e.g. [18, 25, 32]), or limiting the capacity of the generative model (e.g. [6, 16, 60].)
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

