Iteratively Reweighted Least Squares for Basis
Pursuit with Global Linear Convergence Rate

Christian Kümmerle∗§
Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Claudio Mayrink Verdun†§
Department of Mathematics and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technical University of Munich
Dominik Stöger‡§
Department of Mathematics
KU Eichstätt–Ingolstadt

Abstract
The recovery of sparse data is at the core of many applications in machine learning
and signal processing. While such problems can be tackled using `1 -regularization
as in the LASSO estimator and in the Basis Pursuit approach, specialized algorithms
are typically required to solve the corresponding high-dimensional non-smooth
optimization for large instances. Iteratively Reweighted Least Squares (IRLS) is a
widely used algorithm for this purpose due to its excellent numerical performance.
However, while existing theory is able to guarantee convergence of this algorithm
to the minimizer, it does not provide a global convergence rate. In this paper, we
prove that a variant of IRLS converges with a global linear rate to a sparse solution,
i.e., with a linear error decrease occurring immediately from any initialization, if
the measurements fulfill the usual null space property assumption. We support our
theory by numerical experiments showing that our linear rate captures the correct
dimension dependence. We anticipate that our theoretical findings will lead to new
insights for many other use cases of the IRLS algorithm, such as in low-rank matrix
recovery.

1

Introduction

The field of sparse recovery deals with the problem of recovering an (approximately) sparse vector
x from only few linear measurements, presented by an underdetermined system of linear equations
of the form y = Ax. One approach to solve this problem is to consider the `0 -minimization under
linear constraints, which is NP-hard in general [24, 54]. For computational reasons, instead of
`0 -minimization, it is common practice to consider its convex relaxation
min ||x||1

x∈RN

subject to Ax = y,

∗

kuemmerle@jhu.edu
verdun@ma.tum.de
‡
dominik.stoeger@ku.de
§
The name order of the authors is alphabetical.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(P1 )

