Online Robust Reinforcement Learning with Model
Uncertainty

Yue Wang
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14228
ywang294@buffalo.edu

Shaofeng Zou
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14228
szou3@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Robust reinforcement learning (RL) is to find a policy that optimizes the worstcase performance over an uncertainty set of MDPs. In this paper, we focus on
model-free robust RL, where the uncertainty set is defined to be centering at a
misspecified MDP that generates a single sample trajectory sequentially, and is
assumed to be unknown. We develop a sample-based approach to estimate the
unknown uncertainty set, and design robust Q-learning algorithm (tabular case) and
robust TDC algorithm (function approximation setting), which can be implemented
in an online and incremental fashion. For the robust Q-learning algorithm, we prove
that it converges to the optimal robust Q function, and for the robust TDC algorithm,
we prove that it converges asymptotically to some stationary points. Unlike the
results in [Roy et al., 2017], our algorithms do not need any additional conditions
on the discount factor to guarantee the convergence. We further characterize the
finite-time error bounds of the two algorithms, and show that both the robust Qlearning and robust TDC algorithms converge as fast as their vanilla counterparts
(within a constant factor). Our numerical experiments further demonstrate the
robustness of our algorithms. Our approach can be readily extended to robustify
many other algorithms, e.g., TD, SARSA, and other GTD algorithms.

1

Introduction

Existing studies on Markov decision process (MDP) and reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and
Barto, 2018] mostly rely on the crucial assumption that the environment on which a learned policy
will be deployed is the same one that was used to generate the policy, which is often violated in
practice – e.g., the simulator may be different from the true environment, and the MDP may evolve
over time. Due to such model deviation, the actual performance of the learned policy can significantly
degrade. To address this problem, the framework of robust MDP was formulated in [Bagnell et al.,
2001, Nilim and El Ghaoui, 2004, Iyengar, 2005], where the transition kernel of the MDP is not fixed
and lies in an uncertainty set, and the goal is to learn a policy that performs well under the worst-case
MDP in the uncertainty set. In [Bagnell et al., 2001, Nilim and El Ghaoui, 2004, Iyengar, 2005], it
was assumed that the uncertainty set is known beforehand, i.e., model-based approach, and dynamic
programming can be used to find the optimal robust policy.
The model-based approach, however, requires a model of the uncertainty set known beforehand, and
needs a large memory to store the model when the state and action spaces are large, which make it
less applicable for many practical scenarios. This motivates the study in this paper, model-free robust
RL with model uncertainty, which is to learn a robust policy using a single sample trajectory from a
misspecified MDP, e.g., a simulator and a similar environment in which samples are easier to collect
than in the target environment where the policy is going to be deployed. The major challenge lies in
that the transition kernel of the misspecified MDP is not given beforehand, and thus, the uncertainty
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

