Decrypting Cryptic Crosswords:
Semantically Complex Wordplay Puzzles as a Target
for NLP
Joshua Rozner
Stanford University
rozner@stanford.edu

Christopher Potts
Stanford University
cgpotts@stanford.edu

Kyle Mahowald
University of Texas at Austin
mahowald@utexas.edu

Abstract
Cryptic crosswords, the dominant crossword variety in the UK, are a promising
target for advancing NLP systems that seek to process semantically complex, highly
compositional language. Cryptic clues read like fluent natural language but are
adversarially composed of two parts: a definition and a wordplay cipher requiring
character-level manipulations. Expert humans use creative intelligence to solve
cryptics, flexibly combining linguistic, world, and domain knowledge. In this paper,
we make two main contributions. First, we present a dataset of cryptic clues as a
challenging new benchmark for NLP systems that seek to process compositional
language in more creative, human-like ways. After showing that three non-neural
approaches and T5, a state-of-the-art neural language model, do not achieve good
performance, we make our second main contribution: a novel curriculum approach,
in which the model is first fine-tuned on related tasks such as unscrambling words.
We also introduce a challenging data split, examine the meta-linguistic capabilities
of subword-tokenized models, and investigate model systematicity by perturbing
the wordplay part of clues, showing that T5 exhibits behavior partially consistent
with human solving strategies. Although our curricular approach considerably
improves on the T5 baseline, our best-performing model still fails to generalize to
the extent that humans can. Thus, cryptic crosswords remain an unsolved challenge
for NLP systems and a potential source of future innovation.

1

Introduction

Modern computational models have made great progress at handling a variety of natural language
tasks that require interpreting rich syntactic and semantic structures [6; 30; 25; 32]. However, in NLP
[2; 26; 3] as in other areas of AI [22], machines still lag humans on tasks that require flexible problem
solving, rapid learning of unseen tasks, and generalization to new domains. Just as complex games
mastered by human experts, such as chess, Go, and video games, have proved a fertile ground for
developing more flexible AI [36; 35; 27], we propose that creative language games are a rich area for
developing more flexible NLP models. In particular, we argue that linguistic tasks involving metalinguistic reasoning pose an important and significant challenge for state-of-the-art computational
language systems.
One such domain is cryptic crossword puzzles. Cryptics are the most popular style of crossword in
the United Kingdom and appear in major newspapers like The Times and The Guardian. Cryptic
clues have two parts: a definition and a wordplay cipher that, when placed adjacent to each other,
read like fluent natural language. For example, consider this NLP-centric cryptic crossword clue:
“But everything’s really trivial, initially, for a transformer model (4)” with answer “BERT”. “(4)”
is the enumeration and specifies the number of letters in the answer. Solvers must identify which
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

