Dynamic Trace Estimation

Prathamesh Dharangutte
Dept.of Computer Science & Engineering
New York University
ptd244@nyu.edu

Christopher Musco
Dept.of Computer Science & Engineering
New York University
cmusco@nyu.edu

Abstract
We study a dynamic version of the implicit trace estimation problem. Given
access to an oracle for computing matrix-vector multiplications with a dynamically
changing matrix A, our goal is to maintain an accurate approximation to A’s
trace using as few multiplications as possible. We present a practical algorithm
for solving this problem and prove that, in a natural setting, its complexity is
quadratically better than the standard solution of repeatedly applying Hutchinson’s
stochastic trace estimator. We also provide an improved algorithm assuming
slightly stronger assumptions on the dynamic matrix A. We support our theory
with empirical results, showing significant computational improvements on three
applications in machine learning and network science: tracking moments of the
Hessian spectral density during neural network optimization, counting triangles,
and estimating natural connectivity in a dynamically changing graph.

1

Introduction

Implicit or “matrix-free” trace estimation is a ubiquitous computational primitive in linear algebra,
which has become increasingly important in machine learning and data science. Given access to an
oracle for computing matrix-vector products Ax1 , . . . , Axm between an n × n matrix
and chosen
PA
n
vectors x1 , . . . , xm , the goal is to compute an approximation to A’s trace, tr(A) = i=1 Aii . This
problem arises when A’s diagonal entries cannot be accessed explicitly, usually because forming
A is computationally prohibitive. As an example, consider A which is the Hessian matrix of a loss
function involving a neural network. While forming the Hessian is infeasible when the network is
large, backpropagation can be used to efficiently compute Hessian-vector products [32].
In other applications, A is a matrix function of another matrix B. For example, if B is a graph
adjacency matrix, tr(B 3 ) equals six times the number of triangle in the graph [2]. Computing A = B 3
explicitly to evaluate the trace would require O(n3 ) time, while the matrix-vector multiplication
Ax = B · (B · (Bx)) only requires O(n2 ) time. Similarly, in log-determinant approximation, useful
in e.g. Bayesian log likelihood computation or determinantal point process (DPP) methods, we want
to approximate the trace of A = log(B) [5, 17, 36]. Again, A takes O(n3 ) time to form explicitly,
but Ax = log(B)x can be computed in roughly O(n2 ) time using iterative methods like the Lanczos
algorithm [21]. Dynamic versions of the log-determinant estimation problem have been studied due
to applications in greedy methods for DPP inference [15].
In data science and machine learning, other applications of implicit trace estimation include matrix
norm and spectral sum estimation [16, 41, 31], as well as methods for eigenvalue counting [9] and
spectral density estimation [45, 27]. Spectral density estimation methods typically use implicit trace
estimation to estimate moments of a matrix’s eigenvalue distribution – i.e., tr(A), tr(A2 ), tr(A3 ), etc.
– which can then be used to compute an approximation to that entire distribution. In deep learning,
spectral density estimation is used to quickly analyze the spectra of weight matrices [33, 28] or to
probe information about the Hessian matrix during optimization [13, 49]. Trace estimation has also
been used for neural networks weight quantization [10, 34] and to understand training dynamics [44].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

