Scaling Up Exact Neural Network Compression by
ReLU Stability

Thiago Serra
Bucknell University
Lewisburg, PA, United States
thiago.serra@bucknell.edu

Xin Yu
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT, United States
xin.yu@utah.edu

Abhinav Kumar
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, United States
kumarab6@msu.edu

Srikumar Ramalingam
Google Research
New York, NY, United States
rsrikumar@google.com

Abstract
We can compress a rectifier network while exactly preserving its underlying functionality with respect to a given input domain if some of its neurons are stable.
However, current approaches to determine the stability of neurons with Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) activations require solving or finding a good approximation to
multiple discrete optimization problems. In this work, we introduce an algorithm
based on solving a single optimization problem to identify all stable neurons. Our
approach is on median 183 times faster than the state-of-art method on CIFAR-10,
which allows us to explore exact compression on deeper (5 × 100) and wider
(2 × 800) networks within minutes. For classifiers trained under an amount of `1
regularization that does not worsen accuracy, we can remove up to 56% of the
connections on CIFAR-10 dataset. The code is available at the following link,
https://github.com/yuxwind/ExactCompression.

1

Introduction

For the past decade, the computing requirements associated with state-of-art machine learning models
have grown faster than typical hardware improvements [5]. Although those requirements are often
associated with training neural networks, they also translate into larger models, which are challenging
to deploy in modest computational environments, such as in mobile devices.
Meanwhile, we have learned that the expressiveness of the models associated with neural networks—
when measured in terms of their number of linear regions —grows polynomially on the number of
neurons and occasionally exponentially on the network depth [69, 65, 73, 81, 36, 37]. Hence, we
may wonder if the pressing need for larger models could not be countered by such gains in model
complexity. Namely, if we could not represent the same model using a smaller neural network. More
specifically, we consider the following definition of equivalence [49, 79]:
Definition 1. Two neural networks N1 and N2 with associated functions f1 : Rn0 → Rm and
f2 : Rn0 → Rm are local equivalent with respect to a domain D ⊆ Rn0 if f1 (x) = f2 (x) ∀x ∈ D.
There is an extensive literature on methods for compressing neural networks [18, 11], which is aimed
at obtaining smaller networks that are nearly as good as the original ones. These methods generally
produce networks that are not equivalent, and thus require retraining the neural network for better
accuracy. They may also lead to models in which the relative accuracy for some classes is more
affected than that of other classes [43].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

