DIB-R++: Learning to Predict Lighting and Material
with a Hybrid Differentiable Renderer

Wenzheng Chen1,2,3

Joey Litalien4,∗

Jun Gao1,2,3

Zian Wang1,2,3

Clement Fuji Tsang1

Sameh Khamis1

Or Litany1

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

NVIDIA1

University of Toronto2

Vector Institute3

McGill University4

{wenzchen, jung, zianw, cfujitsang, skhamis, olitany, sfidler}@nvidia.com, joey.litalien@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We consider the challenging problem of predicting intrinsic object properties from a
single image by exploiting differentiable renderers. Many previous learning-based
approaches for inverse graphics adopt rasterization-based renderers and assume
naive lighting and material models, which often fail to account for non-Lambertian,
specular reflections commonly observed in the wild. In this work, we propose DIBR++, a hybrid differentiable renderer which supports these photorealistic effects by
combining rasterization and ray-tracing, taking the advantage of their respective
strengths—speed and realism. Our renderer incorporates environmental lighting
and spatially-varying material models to efficiently approximate light transport,
either through direct estimation or via spherical basis functions. Compared to more
advanced physics-based differentiable renderers leveraging path tracing, DIB-R++
is highly performant due to its compact and expressive shading model, which
enables easy integration with learning frameworks for geometry, reflectance and
lighting prediction from a single image without requiring any ground-truth. We experimentally demonstrate that our approach achieves superior material and lighting
disentanglement on synthetic and real data compared to existing rasterization-based
approaches and showcase several artistic applications including material editing
and relighting.

1

Introduction

Inferring intrinsic 3D properties from 2D images is a long-standing goal of computer vision [3]. In
recent years, differentiable rendering has shown great promise in estimating shape, reflectance and
illumination from real photographs. Differentiable renderers have become natural candidates for
learning-based inverse rendering applications, where image synthesis algorithms and neural networks
can be jointly optimized to model physical aspects of objects from posed images, either by leveraging
strong data priors or by directly modeling the interactions between light and surfaces.
Not all differentiable renderers are made equal. On the one hand, recent physics-based differentiable
rendering techniques [31, 45, 2, 44, 59] try to model the full light transport with proper visibility
gradients, but they tend to require careful initialization of scene parameters and typically exhibit high
computational cost which limits their usage in larger end-to-end learning pipelines. On the other hand,
performance-oriented differentiable renderers [10, 27, 36, 25] trade physical accuracy for scalability
and speed by approximating scene elements through neural representations or by employing simpler
shading models. While the latter line of work has proven to be successful in 3D scene reconstruction,
∗
1

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Project page: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/DIBRPlus.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

