Bridging the Imitation Gap
by Adaptive Insubordination
Luca Weihs⇤,1 , Unnat Jain⇤,2,† , Iou-Jen Liu2 , Jordi Salvador1 ,
Svetlana Lazebnik2 , Aniruddha Kembhavi1 , Alexander Schwing2
1
Allen Institute for AI, 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{lucaw, jordis, anik}@allenai.org
{uj2, iliu3, slazebni, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In practice, imitation learning is preferred over pure reinforcement learning whenever it is possible to design a teaching agent to provide expert supervision. However,
we show that when the teaching agent makes decisions with access to privileged
information that is unavailable to the student, this information is marginalized during imitation learning, resulting in an “imitation gap” and, potentially, poor results.
Prior work bridges this gap via a progression from imitation learning to reinforcement learning. While often successful, gradual progression fails for tasks that
require frequent switches between exploration and memorization. To better address
these tasks and alleviate the imitation gap we propose ‘Adaptive Insubordination’
(ADVISOR). ADVISOR dynamically weights imitation and reward-based reinforcement learning losses during training, enabling on-the-fly switching between
imitation and exploration. On a suite of challenging tasks set within gridworlds,
multi-agent particle environments, and high-fidelity 3D simulators, we show that
on-the-fly switching with ADVISOR outperforms pure imitation, pure reinforcement learning, as well as their sequential and parallel combinations.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) can be remarkably successful in settings where reinforcement learning (RL)
struggles. For instance, IL has been shown to succeed in complex tasks with sparse rewards [8, 47, 44],
and when the observations are high-dimensional, e.g., in visual 3D environments [31, 54]. To succeed,
IL provides the agent with consistent expert supervision at every timestep, making it less reliant on
the agent randomly attaining success. To obtain this expert supervision, it is often convenient to use
“privileged information,” i.e., information that is unavailable to the student at inference time. This
privileged information takes many forms in practice. For instance, in navigational tasks, experts
are frequently designed using shortest path algorithms which access the environment’s connectivity
graph [e.g., 19]. Other forms of privilege include semantic maps [e.g., 60, 13], the ability to see into
“the future” via rollouts [61], and ground-truth world layouts [7]. The following example shows how
this type of privileged information can result in IL dramatically failing.
Example 1 (Poisoned Doors). Suppose an agent is presented with N
3 doors d1 , . . . , dN . As
illustrated in Fig. 1 (for N = 4), opening d1 requires entering an unknown fixed code of length M .
Successful code entry results in a reward of 1, otherwise the reward is 0. Since the code is unknown
to the agent, it would need to learn the code by trial and error. All other doors can be opened without
a code. For some randomly chosen 2  j  N (sampled each episode), the reward behind dj is 2 but
for all i 2 {2, . . . , N } \ {j} the reward behind di is 2. Without knowing j, the optimal policy is to
always enter the correct code to open d1 obtaining an expected reward of 1. In contrast, if the expert
⇤

denotes equal contribution by LW and UJ; † work done, in part, as an intern at Allen Institute for AI

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

