Distilling Object Detectors with Feature Richness

Zhixing Du 1,2,3
Rui Zhang 2,3 ∗
Ming Chang 3
2,3
3
Xishan Zhang
Shaoli Liu
Tianshi Chen 3
Yunji Chen 2,4
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
SKL of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
3
Cambricon Technologies, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
dzx1@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhangrui,zhangxishan,cyj}@ict.ac.cn
{changming,liushaoli,tchen}@cambricon.com

Abstract
In recent years, large-scale deep models have achieved great success, but the huge
computational complexity and massive storage requirements make it a great challenge to deploy them in resource-limited devices. As a model compression and
acceleration method, knowledge distillation effectively improves the performance
of small models by transferring the dark knowledge from the teacher detector. However, most of the existing distillation-based detection methods mainly imitating
features near bounding boxes, which suffer from two limitations. First, they ignore
the beneficial features outside the bounding boxes. Second, these methods imitate
some features which are mistakenly regarded as the background by the teacher
detector. To address the above issues, we propose a novel Feature-Richness Score
(FRS) method to choose important features that improve generalized detectability
during distilling. The proposed method effectively retrieves the important features outside the bounding boxes and removes the detrimental features within the
bounding boxes. Extensive experiments show that our methods achieve excellent performance on both anchor-based and anchor-free detectors. For example,
RetinaNet with ResNet-50 achieves 39.7% in mAP on the COCO2017 dataset,
which even surpasses the ResNet-101 based teacher detector 38.9% by 0.8%. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/duzhixing/FRS.

1

Introduction

Owe to the widespread use of deep learning, object detection method have developed relatively
rapidly. Large-scale deep models have achieved overwhelming success, but the huge computational
complexity and storage requirements limit their deployment in real-time applications, such as video
surveillance, autonomous vehicles. Therefore, how to find a better balance between accuracy and
efficiency has become a key issue. Knowledge Distillation [12] is a promising solution for the
above problem. It is a model compression and acceleration method that can effectively improve the
performance of small models under the guidance of the teacher model.
For object detection, distilling detectors through imitating all features is inefficient, because the objectirrelevant area would unavoidably introduce a lot of noises. Therefore, how to choose the important
features beneficial to distillation remains an unsolved issue. Most of the previous distillation-based
detection methods mainly imitate features that overlap with bounding boxes (i.e. ground truth objects),
because they believe the features of foreground which can be selected from bounding boxes are
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

