Bridging Non Co-occurrence with Unlabeled
In-the-wild Data for Incremental Object Detection

Na Dong1,2∗
Yongqiang Zhang2
Mingli Ding2
Gim Hee Lee1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
School of Instrument Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
{dongna1994, zhangyongqiang, dingml}@hit.edu.cn

gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep networks have shown remarkable results in the task of object detection.
However, their performance suffers critical drops when they are subsequently
trained on novel classes without any sample from the base classes originally
used to train the model. This phenomenon is known as catastrophic forgetting.
Recently, several incremental learning methods are proposed to mitigate catastrophic forgetting for object detection. Despite the effectiveness, these methods
require co-occurrence of the unlabeled base classes in the training data of the
novel classes. This requirement is impractical in many real-world settings since
the base classes do not necessarily co-occur with the novel classes. In view of
this limitation, we consider a more practical setting of complete absence of cooccurrence of the base and novel classes for the object detection task. We propose
the use of unlabeled in-the-wild data to bridge the non co-occurrence caused by
the missing base classes during the training of additional novel classes. To this
end, we introduce a blind sampling strategy based on the responses of the baseclass model and pre-trained novel-class model to select a smaller relevant dataset
from the large in-the-wild dataset for incremental learning. We then design a
dual-teacher distillation framework to transfer the knowledge distilled from the
base- and novel-class teacher models to the student model using the sampled inthe-wild data. Experimental results on the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets
show that our proposed method significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art
class-incremental object detection methods when there is no co-occurrence between the base and novel classes during training. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/dongnana777/Bridging-Non-Co-occurrence.

1

Introduction

Deep learning have shown remarkable performance in a wide variety of tasks, and even surpass
human experts in numerous tasks. However, humans are still better than machines in continually
acquiring, fine-tuning and transferring knowledge throughout their lifetime. This is because deep
networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting [18, 21], i.e. a phenomenon that causes a deep network to
forget previously acquired knowledge on the old base classes when trained on new novel classes. As
a result, this causes the performance of the deep networks to drop significantly on the base classes. In
the task of image-based object detection, object detectors are trained on large-scale datasets and then
deployed on real-world applications [9, 11, 8, 24, 5, 15, 23, 17, 16, 1, 2, 39, 33, 34, 38, 36, 37, 35, 32].
As these applications are often carried out in dynamic environments where novel object classes are
continually presented, the ability for the deep networks to learn novel object classes without forgetting
the base object classes becomes an imperative requirement. A naive approach to achieve this endeavor
∗

Work fully done while first author is a visiting PhD student at the National University of Singapore.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

