Contrastive Active Inference
Pietro Mazzaglia
IDLab
Ghent University
pietro.mazzaglia@ugent.be

Tim Verbelen
IDLab
Ghent University
tim.verbelen@ugent.be

Bart Dhoedt
IDLab
Ghent University
bart.dhoedt@ugent.be

Abstract
Active inference is a unifying theory for perception and action resting upon the
idea that the brain maintains an internal model of the world by minimizing free
energy. From a behavioral perspective, active inference agents can be seen as selfevidencing beings that act to fulfill their optimistic predictions, namely preferred
outcomes or goals. In contrast, reinforcement learning requires human-designed rewards to accomplish any desired outcome. Although active inference could provide
a more natural self-supervised objective for control, its applicability has been limited because of the shortcomings in scaling the approach to complex environments.
In this work, we propose a contrastive objective for active inference that strongly
reduces the computational burden in learning the agent’s generative model and
planning future actions. Our method performs notably better than likelihood-based
active inference in image-based tasks, while also being computationally cheaper
and easier to train. We compare to reinforcement learning agents that have access to
human-designed reward functions, showing that our approach closely matches their
performance. Finally, we also show that contrastive methods perform significantly
better in the case of distractors in the environment and that our method is able to
generalize goals to variations in the background.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has led to successful results in several domains, such as robotics,
video games and board games [42, 36, 2]. From a neuroscience perspective, the reward prediction
error signal that drives learning in deep RL closely relates to the neural activity of dopamine neurons
for reward-based learning [44, 3]. However, the reward functions used in deep RL typically require
domain and task-specific design from humans, spoiling the generalization capabilities of RL agents.
Furthermore, the possibility of faulty reward functions makes the application of deep RL risky in
real-world contexts, given the possible unexpected behaviors that may derive from it [10, 29, 38].
Active Inference (AIF) has recently emerged as a unifying framework for learning perception and
action. In AIF, agents operate according to one absolute imperative: minimize their free energy [15].
With respect to past experience, this encourages to update an internal model of the world to maximize
evidence with respect to sensory data. With regard to future actions, the inference process becomes
‘active’ and agents select behaviors that fulfill optimistic predictions of their model, which are
represented as preferred outcomes or goals [17]. Compared to RL, the AIF framework provides a more
natural way of encoding objectives for control. However, its applicability has been limited because of
the shortcomings in scaling the approach to complex environments, and current implementations have
focused on tasks with either low-dimensional sensory inputs and/or small sets of discrete actions [12].
Moreover, several experiments in the literature have replaced the agent’s preferred outcomes with
RL-like rewards from the environment, downplaying the AIF potential to provide self-supervised
objectives [13, 34, 49].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

