(Implicit)2 : Implicit Layers for Implicit
Representations

Zhichun Huang
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zhichunh@cs.cmu.edu

Shaojie Bai
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
shaojieb@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent research in deep learning has investigated two very different forms of
“implicitness”: implicit representations model high-frequency data such as images
or 3D shapes directly via a low-dimensional neural network (often using e.g.,
sinusoidal bases or nonlinearities); implicit layers, in contrast, refer to techniques
where the forward pass of a network is computed via non-linear dynamical systems,
such as fixed-point or differential equation solutions, with the backward pass
computed via the implicit function theorem. In this work, we demonstrate that
these two seemingly orthogonal concepts are remarkably well-suited for each
other. In particular, we show that by exploiting fixed-point implicit layer to model
implicit representations, we can substantially improve upon the performance of the
conventional explicit-layer-based approach. Additionally, as implicit representation
networks are typically trained in large-batch settings, we propose to leverage the
property of implicit layers to amortize the cost of fixed-point forward/backward
passes over training steps – thereby addressing one of the primary challenges
with implicit layers (that many iterations are required for the black-box fixedpoint solvers). We empirically evaluated our method on learning multiple implicit
representations for images, audios, videos, and 3D models, showing that our
(Implicit)2 approach substantially improve upon existing models while being both
faster to train and much more memory efficient.

1

Introduction

The concept of “implicitness” has recently been applied to various contexts of machine learning
research. One particular thread is implicit representations [19, 22, 28, 27], which aims to learn a
continuous representation of high-frequency, often discretely-measured signals such as large images.
Formally, given a spatial-temporal coordinate input x ∈ Rd , an implicit representation of it is a
function Φ : Rd → C, where C is the space of desired quantity (e.g. color, volume density, distance,
etc.) and Φ is usually parameterized with a neural network. Such implicitness has multiple benefits
over the conventional discrete (e.g., grid-based) representations; e.g., as Φ is defined on a continuous
domain, an implicitly represented input consumes much less storage than the original input; as
another example, Φ is differentiable, hence allowing for the computation of higher-order derivatives.
However, the training of these Φ networks themselves are usually quite memory-consuming, since we
usually deal with very high-resolution images and videos, and training is typically done in full-batch
mode (e.g., when training on a batch size of 512 × 512, a simple 4-layer MLP with 1024 hidden units
already requires > 16 GB memory just to store the intermediate activations).
A recent (orthogonal) usage of implicitness in deep learning comes from the notion of implicit
layers/models, where the word is used to characterize model architectures (rather than input representations). The nomenclature comes from the concept of implicit vs. explicit functions: instead of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

