Learning curves of generic features maps for
realistic datasets with a teacher-student model
Bruno Loureiro
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne
Hugo Cui
SPOC, EPFL, Lausanne

Cédric Gerbelot
Lab. de Physique de l’École Normale Supérieure, Paris
Sebastian Goldt
SISSA, Trieste

Marc Mézard
École Normale Supérieure, Paris

Florent Krzakala
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne
Lenka Zdeborová
SPOC, EPFL, Lausanne

Abstract
Teacher-student models provide a framework in which the typical-case performance
of high-dimensional supervised learning can be described in closed form. The
assumptions of Gaussian i.i.d. input data underlying the canonical teacher-student
model may, however, be perceived as too restrictive to capture the behaviour of
realistic data sets. In this paper, we introduce a Gaussian covariate generalisation
of the model where the teacher and student can act on different spaces, generated
with fixed, but generic feature maps. While still solvable in a closed form, this
generalization is able to capture the learning curves for a broad range of realistic
data sets, thus redeeming the potential of the teacher-student framework. Our
contribution is then two-fold: first, we prove a rigorous formula for the asymptotic
training loss and generalisation error. Second, we present a number of situations
where the learning curve of the model captures the one of a realistic data set
learned with kernel regression and classification, with out-of-the-box feature maps
such as random projections or scattering transforms, or with pre-learned ones such as the features learned by training multi-layer neural networks. We discuss
both the power and the limitations of the framework.

1

Introduction

Teacher-student models are a popular framework to study the high-dimensional asymptotic performance of learning problems with synthetic data, and have been the subject of intense investigations
spanning three decades [1–7]. In the wake of understanding the limitations of classical statistical
learning approaches [8–10], this direction is witnessing a renewal of interest [10–15]. However, this
framework is often assuming the input data to be Gaussian i.i.d., which is arguably too simplistic to
be able to capture properties of realistic data. In this paper, we redeem this line of work by defining a
Gaussian covariate model where the teacher and student act on different Gaussian correlated spaces
with arbitrary covariance. We derive a rigorous asymptotic solution of this model generalizing the
formulas found in the above mentioned classical works.
We then put forward a theory, supported by universality arguments and numerical experiments, that
this model captures learning curves, i.e. the dependence of the training and test errors on the number
of samples, for a generic class of feature maps applied to realistic datasets. These maps can be
deterministic, random, or even learnt from the data. This analysis thus gives a unified framework
to describe the learning curves of, for example, kernel regression and classification, the analysis of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

