Fast Training of Neural Lumigraph Representations
using Meta Learning

Alexander W. Bergman
Stanford University

Petr Kellnhofer
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

awb@stanford.edu

pkellnho@stanford.edu

gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

computationalimaging.org/publications/metanlr/

Abstract
Novel view synthesis is a long-standing problem in machine learning and computer
vision. Significant progress has recently been made in developing neural scene
representations and rendering techniques that synthesize photorealistic images
from arbitrary views. These representations, however, are extremely slow to
train and often also slow to render. Inspired by neural variants of image-based
rendering, we develop a new neural rendering approach with the goal of quickly
learning a high-quality representation which can also be rendered in real-time.
Our approach, MetaNLR++, accomplishes this by using a unique combination
of a neural shape representation and 2D CNN-based image feature extraction,
aggregation, and re-projection. To push representation convergence times down
to minutes, we leverage meta learning to learn neural shape and image feature
priors which accelerate training. The optimized shape and image features can then
be extracted using traditional graphics techniques and rendered in real time. We
show that MetaNLR++ achieves similar or better novel view synthesis results in a
fraction of the time that competing methods require.

1

Introduction

Learning 3D scene representations from partial observations captured by a sparse set of 2D images
is a fundamental problem in machine learning, computer vision, and computer graphics. Such a
representation can be used to reason about the scene or to render novel views. Indeed, the latter
application has recently received a lot of attention (e.g., [1]). For this problem setting, the key
questions are: (1) How do we parameterize the scene, and (2) how do we infer the parameters from
our observations efficiently? With our work, we offer new solutions to answer these questions.
Several classes of scene representation learning approaches have recently been proposed. One
popular approach consists of coordinate-based neural networks combined with volume rendering,
like NeRF [2]. Although these representations offer photorealistic quality for synthesized images,
they are slow to train and render. Coordinate-based networks that implicitly model surfaces combined
with sphere tracing–based rendering are another popular approach [3–6]. One benefit of an implict
surface is that, once trained, it can be extracted and rendered in real time [5]. However, training
these representations is equally slow as training volumetric representations. Finally, approaches
that use a proxy geometry with on-surface feature aggregation are also fast to render [7, 8], but the
quality and runtime of these methods is limited by the traditional 3D computer vision algorithms that
pre-compute the proxy shape, such as structure from motion (SfM) or multiview stereo (MVS).
Here, we develop a new framework for neural scene representation and rendering with the goal of
enabling both fast training and rendering times. To optimize the training time of our framework,
we do not learn a representation network for the view-dependent radiance, as other neural volume
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

