Gradient-based Editing of Memory Examples for
Online Task-free Continual Learning

Xisen Jin Arka Sadhu Junyi Du Xiang Ren
University of Southern California
{xisenjin, asadhu, junyidu, xiangren@usc.edu}

Abstract
We explore task-free continual learning (CL), in which a model is trained to avoid
catastrophic forgetting in the absence of explicit task boundaries or identities.
Among many efforts on task-free CL, a notable family of approaches are memorybased that store and replay a subset of training examples. However, the utility of
stored seen examples may diminish over time since CL models are continually
updated. Here, we propose Gradient based Memory EDiting (GMED), a framework
for editing stored examples in continuous input space via gradient updates, in order
to create more “challenging” examples for replay. GMED-edited examples remain
similar to their unedited forms, but can yield increased loss in the upcoming
model updates, thereby making the future replays more effective in overcoming
catastrophic forgetting. By construction, GMED can be seamlessly applied in
conjunction with other memory-based CL algorithms to bring further improvement.
Experiments validate the effectiveness of GMED, and our best method significantly
outperforms baselines and previous state-of-the-art on five out of six datasets1 .

1

Introduction

Learning from a continuous stream of data – referred to as continual learning (CL) or lifelong
learning – has recently seen a surge in interest, and many works have proposed ways to mitigate CL
models’ catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge [20, 32, 33]. Here, we study online
task-free CL [3], where task identifiers and boundaries are absent from the data stream. This setting
reflects many real-world data streams [6, 25] and offers a challenging testbed for online CL research.
Memory-based methods, a prominent class of approaches used for task-free continual learning, store
a small number of training examples (from the data stream) in a memory and replay them at the later
training iterations [33, 34]. Existing methods operate over the original examples in the data-stream
and focus on identifying samples to populate the memory [4, 9] and finding samples in the memory
to be replayed [2]. However, for continually updating models, using stored-seen examples in their
original form, may lead to diminishing utility over time — i.e., model may gradually memorize the
stored examples after runs of replay, as the memory refreshes slowly. An alternate approach is to use
generative models to create samples that suffers more from forgetting such as in GEN-MIR in [2].
In practice, training the generator network with limited data is challenging and leads to low-quality
generated examples. Further, in the online learning setup, the generative model itself suffers from
forgetting. As such, generative models perform worse than their memory counter-parts.
In this paper, we present a novel memory-based CL framework, Gradient based Memory EDiting
(GMED), which looks to directly “edit” (via a small gradient update) examples stored in the replay
memory. These edited examples are stored (replacing their unedited counterparts), replayed, and
further edited, thereby making the future replays more effective in overcoming catastrophic forgetting.
1

Code can be found at https://github.com/INK-USC/GMED.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

