Topographic VAEs learn Equivariant Capsules

T. Anderson Keller
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
t.anderson.keller@gmail.com

Max Welling
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
In this work we seek to bridge the concepts of topographic organization and equivariance in neural networks. To accomplish this, we introduce the Topographic VAE:
a novel method for efficiently training deep generative models with topographically
organized latent variables. We show that such a model indeed learns to organize its
activations according to salient characteristics such as digit class, width, and style
on MNIST. Furthermore, through topographic organization over time (i.e. temporal
coherence), we demonstrate how predefined latent space transformation operators
can be encouraged for observed transformed input sequences – a primitive form of
unsupervised learned equivariance. We demonstrate that this model successfully
learns sets of approximately equivariant features (i.e. "capsules") directly from
sequences and achieves higher likelihood on correspondingly transforming test
sequences. Equivariance is verified quantitatively by measuring the approximate
commutativity of the inference network and the sequence transformations. Finally,
we demonstrate approximate equivariance to complex transformations, expanding
upon the capabilities of existing group equivariant neural networks.

1

Introduction

Many parts of the brain are organized topographically. Famous examples are the ocular dominance
maps and the orientation maps in V1. What is the advantage of such organization and what can we
learn from it to develop better inductive biases for deep neural network architectures?

Figure 1: Overview of the Topographic VAE with shifting temporal coherence. The combined
color/rotation transformation in input space τg becomes encoded as a Roll within the capsule
dimension. The model is thus able decode unseen sequence elements by encoding a partial sequence
and Rolling activations within the capsules. We see this resembles a commutative diagram.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

