Center Smoothing: Certified Robustness for
Networks with Structured Outputs

Aounon Kumar
University of Maryland
aounon@umd.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
The study of provable adversarial robustness has mostly been limited to classification tasks and models with one-dimensional real-valued outputs. We extend
the scope of certifiable robustness to problems with more general and structured
outputs like sets, images, language, etc. We model the output space as a metric
space under a distance/similarity function, such as intersection-over-union, perceptual similarity, total variation distance, etc. Such models are used in many
machine learning problems like image segmentation, object detection, generative
models, image/audio-to-text systems, etc. Based on a robustness technique called
randomized smoothing, our center smoothing procedure can produce models with
the guarantee that the change in the output, as measured by the distance metric,
remains small for any norm-bounded adversarial perturbation of the input. We
apply our method to create certifiably robust models with disparate output spaces
– from sets to images – and show that it yields meaningful certificates without
significantly degrading the performance of the base model.

1

Introduction

The study of adversarial robustness in machine learning (ML) has gained a lot of attention ever since
deep neural networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. These
attacks are generated by making tiny perturbations of the input that can completely alter a model’s
predictions [56, 46, 23, 35]. They can significantly degrade the performance of a model, like an
image classifier, and make it output almost any class of the attacker’s choice. However, these attacks
are not limited just to classification problems. They have also been shown to exist for DNNs with
structured outputs like text, images, probability distributions, sets, etc. For instance, automatic speech
recognition systems can be attacked with 100% success rate to output any phrase of the attackers
choice [10]. Similar attacks can cause neural image captioning systems to produce specific target
captions with high success-rate [11]. Quality of image segmentation models have been shown to
degrade severely under adversarial attacks [2, 27, 30]. Facial recognition systems can be deceived
to evade detection, impersonate authorized individuals and even render them completely ineffective
[59, 55, 20]. Image reconstruction models have been targeted to introduce unwanted artefacts or
miss important details, such as tumors in MRI scans, through adversarial inputs [1, 50, 8, 12].
Super-resolution systems can be made to generate distorted images that can in turn deteriorate the
performance of subsequent tasks that rely on the high-resolution outputs [14, 63]. Deep neural
network based policies in reinforcement learning problems also have been shown to succumb to
imperceptible perturbations in the state observations [21, 29, 4, 48]. Such widespread presence of
adversarial attacks is concerning as it threatens the use of deep neural networks in critical systems,
such as facial recognition, self-driving vehicles, medical diagnosis, etc., where safety, security and
reliability are of utmost importance.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

