Graph Adversarial Self-Supervised Learning

Longqi Yang
Institute for Quantum Information & State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing,
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, China
Defense Innovation Institute, Beijing 100071, China
yanglongqi19@nudt.edu.cn
Liangliang Zhang∗
Institute of Systems Engineering,
AMS, Beijing, China
vermouthlove@hotmail.com

Wenjing Yang∗
Institute for Quantum Information &
State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing,
College of Computer Science and Technology,
National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, China
wenjing.yang@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies a long-standing problem of learning the representations of
a whole graph without human supervision. The recent self-supervised learning
methods train models to be invariant to the transformations (views) of the inputs.
However, designing these views requires the experience of human experts. Inspired
by adversarial training, we propose an adversarial self-supervised learning (GASSL)
framework for learning unsupervised representations of graph data without any
handcrafted views. GASSL automatically generates challenging views by adding
perturbations to the input and are adversarially trained with respect to the encoder.
Our method optimizes the min-max problem and utilizes a gradient accumulation
strategy to accelerate the training process. Experimental on ten graph classification datasets show that the proposed approach is superior to state-of-the-art
self-supervised learning baselines, which are competitive with supervised models.

1

Introduction

Learning effective representations of graph-structured data plays an essential role in a variety of
real-world applications, including social, biological, molecules, and financial networks [1]. Recently,
graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as powerful architectures for learning and analyzing
graph representations [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. GNNs typically learn graph representations in a supervised or
semi-supervised setting. In practice, obtaining a large number of labels is often difficult or even
impossible, especially in specific areas that are very costly, such as in biochemistry. The labeled
graphs may be limited, while unlabeled graphs are easy to collect. Self-supervised learning utilizing
unlabeled data has made significant progress in computer vision [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] and shows
great potential in exploring unlabeled data to enhance graph deep learning [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20].
Despite their success, existing self-supervised learning methods rely heavily on handcrafted view,
where the view here refers to human-defined data transformations to preserve the invariance of their
intrinsic properties. In recent years, researchers have designed views of graphs from various levels,
including nodes dropping, edge perturbation, attribute masking, subgraph [15], and graph diffusion
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

