Emergent Communication of Generalizations

Jesse Mu
Stanford University
muj@stanford.edu

Noah Goodman
Stanford University
ngoodman@stanford.edu

Abstract
To build agents that can collaborate effectively with others, recent research has
trained artificial agents to communicate with each other in Lewis-style referential
games. However, this often leads to successful but uninterpretable communication.
We argue that this is due to the game objective: communicating about a single
object in a shared visual context is prone to overfitting and does not encourage
language useful beyond concrete reference. In contrast, human language conveys
a rich variety of abstract ideas. To promote such skills, we propose games that
require communicating generalizations over sets of objects representing abstract
visual concepts, optionally with separate contexts for each agent. We find that these
games greatly improve systematicity and interpretability of the learned languages,
according to several metrics in the literature. Finally, we propose a method for
identifying logical operations embedded in the emergent languages by learning an
approximate compositional reconstruction of the language.

1

Introduction

The communication systems that emerge when two agents are trained to cooperate offer a window
on the evolution of human language, as well as a promising avenue for improving the collaboration
abilities of artificial agents. Much recent work studies Lewis-style [24] signaling games (Figure 1a),
where agents are trained to refer to a single object in a shared visual context. However, a general
consensus of this work is that without careful environmental pressures, agents develop successful but
uninterpretable communication schemes distinctly unlike human language [1, 5, 6, 16, 20].
We argue that the reference games typically used in these studies are ill-suited to drive linguistic
systematicity for two reasons. One is perceptual: agents can exploit inscrutable patterns in single
inputs, which leads to communication via spurious features [3]. The other reason is cognitive: human
language can convey abstract ideas, such as kinds and causes, not only reference to specific objects.
Simple reference games are unlikely to drive emergence of such abstract language. In particular,
generalizations over categories are a crucial part of language [36], helping us transfer knowledge that
may be useful in the future. For example, we would like to teach our kin not just to avoid one specific
lion, but to avoid all lions, including those that have not yet been seen. Some have even argued that
language emerged precisely from this need to teach hard-won generalizations to others [19]. With
this idea in mind, can we design an experimental setting that better catalyzes these abilities?
In this paper, we propose extensions of Lewis-style signaling games to sets. In the set reference (setref)
game, a teacher must communicate to a student not just a single object, but rather a group of objects
belonging to a concept (Figure 1b). In the concept game, each agent sees different examples of the
concept (Figure 1c). Inspired by human teaching [9], our core insight is that requiring generalization
to combinatorially large sets of (possibly unseen) objects encourages agents to learn and communicate
rich abstractions across inputs (e.g. seagulls), instead of low-level features (e.g. color #FDA448).
These tasks are more difficult than traditional reference games, and we will show with a variety of
metrics that the learned languages are more systematic, compositional, and interpretable. Finally, the
rich compositional space of concepts explored in these games allows us to probe for specific logical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

