Analogous to Evolutionary Algorithm:
Designing a Unified Sequence Model

Jiangning Zhang1∗ Chao Xu1 Jian Li2 Wenzhou Chen1 Yabiao Wang2
Ying Tai2 Shuo Chen3 Chengjie Wang2 Feiyue Huang2 Yong Liu1†
1
APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
{186368, 21832066, wenzhouchen}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
{swordli, caseywang, yingtai, jasoncjwang, feiyuehuang}@tencent.com
shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp

Abstract
Inspired by biological evolution, we explain the rationality of Vision Transformer
by analogy with the proven practical Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) and derive
that both of them have consistent mathematical representation. Analogous to the
dynamic local population in EA, we improve the existing transformer structure and
propose a more efficient EAT model, and design task-related heads to deal with
different tasks more flexibly. Moreover, we introduce the spatial-filling curve into
the current vision transformer to sequence image data into a uniform sequential
format. Thus we can design a unified EAT framework to address multi-modal tasks,
separating the network architecture from the data format adaptation. Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art results on the ImageNet classification task compared
with recent vision transformer works while having smaller parameters and greater
throughput. We further conduct multi-modal tasks to demonstrate the superiority
of the unified EAT, e.g., Text-Based Image Retrieval, and our approach improves
the rank-1 by +3.7 points over the baseline on the CSS dataset.3

1

Introduction

Since Vaswani et al. [69] introduce the Transformer that achieves outstanding success in the machine
translation task, many improvements have been made to this method [15, 38, 21]. Recent works [64,
82, 43] led by ViT [23] have achieved great success in the field of many vision tasks by replacing
CNN with transformer structure. In general, these works are experimentally conducted to verify the
effectiveness of modules or improvements, but they may lack other forms of supporting evidence.
Inspired by biological population evolution, we explain the rationality of Vision Transformer by
analogy with the proven effective, stable, and robust Evolutionary Algorithm (EA), which has been
widely used in practical applications. Through analogical analysis, we observe that the training
procedure of the transformer has similar attributes to the naive EA, as shown in Figure 1. Take the onetier transformer (abbr., TR) as an example. 1) TR processes a sequence of patch embeddings while EA
evolutes individuals, both of which have the same vector formats and necessary initialization. 2) The
Multi-head Self-Attention (MSA) among patch embeddings in TR is compared with that of (sparse)
global individual crossover among all individuals in EA, in which local and dynamic population
concepts are introduced to increase running speed and optimize results [63, 59]. 3) Feed-Forward
∗

Work done during an intership at Tencent Youtu Lab.
Corresponding author.
3
Code is available at https://github.com/TencentYoutuResearch/BaseArchitecture-EAT.

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

