Measuring Generalization with Optimal Transport
Ching-Yao Chuang† , Youssef Mroueh‡ , Kristjan Greenewald§ ,
Antonio Torralba† Stefanie Jegelka†
†
MIT CSAIL, ‡ IBM Research AI, § MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{cychuang, torralba, stefje}@mit.edu
mroueh@us.ibm.com, kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Abstract
Understanding the generalization of deep neural networks is one of the most important tasks in deep learning. Although much progress has been made, theoretical
error bounds still often behave disparately from empirical observations. In this
work, we develop margin-based generalization bounds, where the margins are normalized with optimal transport costs between independent random subsets sampled
from the training distribution. In particular, the optimal transport cost can be interpreted as a generalization of variance which captures the structural properties of the
learned feature space. Our bounds robustly predict the generalization error, given
training data and network parameters, on large scale datasets. Theoretically, we
demonstrate that the concentration and separation of features play crucial roles in
generalization, supporting empirical results in the literature. The code is available
at https://github.com/chingyaoc/kV-Margin.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the remarkable empirical success of deep learning, there has been significant effort
in statistical learning theory toward deriving generalization error bounds for deep learning, i.e
complexity measures that predict the gap between training and test errors. Recently, substantial
progress has been made, e.g., [3, 4, 7, 13, 21, 43, 56]. Nevertheless, many of the current approaches
lead to generalization bounds that are often vacuous or not consistent with empirical observations
[14, 25, 38].
In particular, Jiang et al. [25] present a large scale study of generalization in deep networks and
show that many existing approaches, e.g., norm-based bounds [4, 42, 43], are not predictive of
generalization in practice. Recently, the Predicting Generalization in Deep Learning (PGDL)
competition described in [26] sought complexity measures that are predictive of generalization error
given training data and network parameters. To achieve a high score, the predictive measure of
generalization had to be robust to different hyperparameters, network architectures, and datasets.
The participants [32, 40, 48] achieved encouraging improvement over the classic measures such as
VC-dimension [54] and weight norm [4]. Unfortunately, despite the good empirical results, these
proposed approaches are not yet supported by rigorous theoretical bounds.
In this work, we attempt to decrease this gap between theory and practice with margin bounds based
on optimal transport. In particular, we show that the expected optimal transport cost of matching
two independent random subsets of the training distribution is a natural alternative to Rademacher
complexity. Interestingly, this optimal transport cost can be interpreted as the k-variance [49], a
generalized notion of variance that captures the structural properties of the data distribution. Applied
to latent space, it captures important properties of the learned feature distribution. The resulting kvariance normalized margin bounds can be easily estimated and correlate well with the generalization
error on the PGDL datasets [26]. In addition, our formulation naturally encompasses the gradient
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

