Consistent Non-Parametric Methods for Maximizing
Robustness
Robi Bhattacharjee
University of California San Diego
rcbhatta@eng.ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California San Diego
kamalika@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Learning classifiers that are robust to adversarial examples has received a great deal
of recent attention. A major drawback of the standard robust learning framework
is there is an artificial robustness radius r that applies to all inputs. This ignores
the fact that data may be highly heterogeneous, in which case it is plausible that
robustness regions should be larger in some regions of data, and smaller in others. In
this paper, we address this limitation by proposing a new limit classifier, called the
neighborhood optimal classifier, that extends the Bayes optimal classifier outside
its support by using the label of the closest in-support point. We then argue that this
classifier maximizes the size of its robustness regions subject to the constraint of
having accuracy equal to the Bayes optimal. We then present sufficient conditions
under which general non-parametric methods that can be represented as weight
functions converge towards this limit, and show that both nearest neighbors and
kernel classifiers satisfy them under certain conditions.

1

Introduction

Adversarially robust classification, that has been of much recent interest, is typically formulated
as follows. We are given data drawn from an underlying distribution D, a metric d, as well as a
pre-specified robustness radius r. We say that a classifier c is r-robust at an input x if it predicts the
same label on a ball of radius r around x. Our goal in robust classification is to find a classifier c that
maximizes astuteness, which is defined as accuracy on those examples where c is also r-robust.
While this formulation has inspired a great deal of recent work, both theoretical and empirical
[5, 17, 19, 20, 26, 15, 18, 21, 22, 23, 30], a major limitation is that enforcing a pre-specified
robustness radius r may lead to sub-optimal accuracy and robustness. To see this, consider what
would be an ideally robust classifier the example in Figure 1. For simplicity, suppose that we know
the data distribution. In this case, a classifier that has an uniformly large robustness radius r will
misclassify some points from the blue cluster on the left, leading to lower accuracy. This is illustrated
in panel (a), in which large robustness radius leads to intersecting robustness regions. On the other
hand, in panel (b), the blue cluster on the right is highly separated from the red cluster, and could
be accurately classified with a high margin. But this will not happen if the robustness radius is set
small enough to avoid the problems posed in panel (a). Thus, enforcing a fixed robustness radius that
applies to the entire dataset may lead to lower accuracy and lower robustness.
In this work, we propose an alternative formulation of robust classification that ensures that in the
large sample limit, there is no robustness-accuracy trade off, and that regions of space with higher
separation are classified more robustly. An extra advantage is that our formulation is achievable by
existing methods. In particular, we show that two very common non-parametric algorithms – nearest
neighbors and kernel classifiers – achieve these properties in the large sample limit.
Our formulation is built on the notion of a new large-sample limit. In the standard statistical learning
framework, the large-sample ideal is the Bayes optimal classifier that maximizes accuracy on the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

