PSD Representations for Effective Probability Models
Alessandro Rudi
Inria, École normale supérieure,
CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris, France
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Carlo Ciliberto
Department of Computer Science
University College London, London, UK
c.ciliberto@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Finding a good way to model probability densities is key to probabilistic inference.
An ideal model should be able to concisely approximate any probability while
being also compatible with two main operations: multiplications of two models
(product rule) and marginalization with respect to a subset of the random variables
(sum rule). In this work, we show that a recently proposed class of positive semidefinite (PSD) models for non-negative functions is particularly suited to this end.
In particular, we characterize both approximation and generalization capabilities
of PSD models, showing that they enjoy strong theoretical guarantees. Moreover,
we show that we can perform efficiently both sum and product rule in closed form
via matrix operations, enjoying the same versatility of mixture models. Our results
open the way to applications of PSD models to density estimation, decision theory
and inference.

1

Introduction

Modeling probability distributions is a key task for many applications in machine learning [17, 5].
To this end, several strategies have been proposed in the literature, such as adopting mixture models
(e.g. Gaussian mixtures) [5], exponential models [32], implicit generative models [11, 13] or kernel
(conditional) mean embeddings [16]. An ideal probabilistic model should have two main features: i)
efficiently perform key operations for probabilistic inference, such as sum rule (i.e. marginalization)
and product rule [5] and, ii) concisely approximate a large class of probabilities. Finding models
that satisfy these two conditions is challenging and current methods tend to tackle only one of the
two. Exponential and implicit generative models have typically strong approximation properties
(see e.g. [32, 29]) but cannot easily perform operations such as marginalization. On the contrary,
mixture models are designed to efficient integrate and multiply probabilities, but tend to require a
large number of components to approximate complicated distributions.
In principle, mixture models would offer an appealing strategy to model probability densities since
they allow for efficient computations when performing key operations such as sum and product rule.
However, these advantages in terms of computations, come as a disadvantage in terms of expressiveness: even though mixture models are universal approximators (namely they can approximate
arbitrarily well any probability density), they require a significant number n of observations and of
components to do that. Indeed it is known that models that are non-negative mixtures of non-negative
components lead to learning rates that suffer from the curse of dimensionality. For example, when
approximating probabilities on Rd , kernel density estimation (KDE) [21] with non-negative components has rates as slow as n 2/(4+d) (see, e.g. [38, page 100]), and cannot improve with the regularity
(smoothness) of the target probability (see e.g. [9, Thm. 16.1] for impossibility results in the one
dimensional case).
In the past decades, this limitation has been overcome by removing either the non-negativity of the
weights of the mixture (leading to RBF networks [27][35]), or the non-negativity of the components
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

