Differentiable Rendering with Perturbed Optimizers
Quentin Le Lidec, Ivan Laptev, Cordelia Schmid and Justin Carpentier
Inria - Département d’Informatique de l’École normale supérieure, PSL Research Un iversity
{quentin.le-lidec,ivan.laptev,cordelia.schmid,justin.carpentier}@inria.fr

Abstract
Reasoning about 3D scenes from their 2D image projections is one of the core
problems in computer vision. Solutions to this inverse and ill-posed problem typically involve a search for models that best explain observed image data. Notably,
images depend both on the properties of observed scenes and on the process of
image formation. Hence, if optimization techniques should be used to explain
images, it is crucial to design differentiable functions for the projection of 3D
scenes into images, also known as differentiable rendering. Previous approaches to
differentiable rendering typically replace non-differentiable operations by smooth
approximations, impacting the subsequent 3D estimation. In this paper, we take
a more general approach and study differentiable renderers through the prism of
randomized optimization and the related notion of perturbed optimizers. In particular, our work highlights the link between some well-known differentiable renderer
formulations and randomly smoothed optimizers, and introduces differentiable perturbed renderers. We also propose a variance reduction mechanism to alleviate the
computational burden inherent to perturbed optimizers and introduce an adaptive
scheme to automatically adjust the smoothing parameters of the rendering process.
We apply our method to 3D scene reconstruction and demonstrate its advantages
on the tasks of 6D pose estimation and 3D mesh reconstruction. By providing
informative gradients that can be used as a strong supervisory signal, we demonstrate the beneﬁts of perturbed renderers to obtain more accurate solutions when
compared to the state-of-the-art alternatives using smooth gradient approximations.

1

Introduction

Many common tasks in computer vision such as 3D shape modelling [5, 15, 34, 36, 37] or 6D pose
estimation [18, 22, 25, 30, 32] aim at inferring 3D information directly from 2D images. Most of
the recent approaches rely on (deep) neural networks and thus require large training datasets with
3D shapes along with well-chosen priors on these shapes. Render & compare methods [18, 22]
circumvent the non-differentiability of the rendering process by learning gradients steps from large
datasets. Using a more structured strategy would allow to alleviate the need for such a strong
supervision.Using a more structured strategy would allow to alleviate the need for such a strong
supervision. In this respect, differentiable rendering intends to model the effective image generation
process to compute a gradient related to the task to solve. This approach has the beneﬁt of containing
the prior knowledge of the rendering process while being interpretable. This makes it possible to
provide a supervision for neural networks in a weakly-supervised manner [10, 16, 23]. The main
challenge of differentiable rendering lies in the non-smoothness of the classical rendering process. In
a renderer, both the rasterization steps, which consist in evaluating the pixel values by discretizing
the 2D projected color-maps, and the aggregation steps, which merge the color-maps of several
objects along the depth dimension by using a Z-buffering operation, are non-differentiable operations
(Fig. 1). Intuitively, these steps imply discontinuities in the ﬁnal rendered image with respect to
the 3D positions of the scene objects. For example, if an object moves on a plane parallel to the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

