Analyzing the Generalization Capability of SGLD
Using Properties of Gaussian Channels

Hao Wang
Harvard University
hao_wang@g.harvard.edu

Yizhe Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
yizhehuang@utexas.edu

Rui Gao
The University of Texas at Austin
rui.gao@mccombs.utexas.edu

Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University
flavio@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Optimization is a key component for training machine learning models and has
a strong impact on their generalization. In this paper, we consider a particular optimization method—the stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD)
algorithm—and investigate the generalization of models trained by SGLD. We
derive a new generalization bound by connecting SGLD with Gaussian channels
found in information and communication theory. Our bound can be computed
from the training data and incorporates the variance of gradients for quantifying a
particular kind of “sharpness” of the loss landscape. We also consider a closely
related algorithm with SGLD, namely differentially private SGD (DP-SGD). We
prove that the generalization capability of DP-SGD can be amplified by iteration.
Specifically, our bound can be sharpened by including a time-decaying factor if the
DP-SGD algorithm outputs the last iterate while keeping other iterates hidden. This
decay factor enables the contribution of early iterations to our bound to reduce with
time and is established by strong data processing inequalities—a fundamental tool
in information theory. We demonstrate our bound through numerical experiments,
showing that it can predict the behavior of the true generalization gap.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly expressive: they can memorize an entire training
dataset and still generalize well to unseen data (Zhang et al., 2016). This empirical observation is
not captured by traditional generalization bounds found in statistical learning theory, which attribute
the generalization ability to the use of a hypothesis class with constrained complexity (Vapnik and
Chervonenkis, 1971; Valiant, 1984). Recent studies demonstrate that different algorithmic choices
and data distributions may yield DNNs with contrasting generalization behaviors (Hardt et al., 2016;
Neyshabur et al., 2017; Bartlett et al., 2017). In this paper, we study how one optimization method
used for training DNNs, namely the stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) algorithm
(Gelfand and Mitter, 1991; Welling and Teh, 2011), may influence their generalization.
The SGLD algorithm is used in different practical settings. For example, it has been implemented
in open-source libraries (Facebook AI, 2020; Radebaugh and Erlingsson, 2019) for training models
with differential privacy guarantees (Dwork et al., 2006; Song et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016). The
additive noise in the SGLD algorithm can also mitigate overfitting for DNNs (Neelakantan et al.,
2015). Recently, there is an increasing number of efforts (see e.g., Raginsky et al., 2017; Mou et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2019; Pensia et al., 2018; Negrea et al., 2019) that investigate the generalization
properties of the SGLD algorithm. It is within this body of work that the present paper is inscribed.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

