Tracking Without Re-recognition in Humans and
Machines
Drew Linsley∗1 , Girik Malik∗2 , Junkyung Kim3 ,
Lakshmi N Govindarajan1 , Ennio Mingolla†2 , Thomas Serre†1
drew_linsley@brown.edu and malik.gi@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Imagine trying to track one particular fruitfly in a swarm of hundreds. Higher
biological visual systems have evolved to track moving objects by relying on
both their appearance and their motion trajectories. We investigate if state-of-theart spatiotemporal deep neural networks are capable of the same. For this, we
introduce PathTracker, a synthetic visual challenge that asks human observers
and machines to track a target object in the midst of identical-looking “distractor”
objects. While humans effortlessly learn PathTracker and generalize to systematic
variations in task design, deep networks struggle. To address this limitation, we
identify and model circuit mechanisms in biological brains that are implicated in
tracking objects based on motion cues. When instantiated as a recurrent network,
our circuit model learns to solve PathTracker with a robust visual strategy that rivals
human performance and explains a significant proportion of their decision-making
on the challenge. We also show that the success of this circuit model extends to
object tracking in natural videos. Adding it to a transformer-based architecture for
object tracking builds tolerance to visual nuisances that affect object appearance,
establishing the new state of the art on the large-scale TrackingNet challenge.
Our work highlights the importance of understanding human vision to improve
computer vision.

1

Introduction

Lettvin and colleagues [1] presciently noted, “The frog does not seem to see or, at any rate, is
not concerned with the detail of stationary parts of the world around him. He will starve to death
surrounded by food if it is not moving.” Object tracking is fundamental to survival, and higher
biological visual systems have evolved the capacity for two distinct and complementary strategies to
do it. Consider Figure 1: can you track the object labeled by the yellow arrow from left-to-right? The
task is trivial when appearance cues, like color, make it possible to solve the temporal correspondence
problem by “re-recognizing” the target in each frame (Fig. 1a). However, this strategy is not effective
when objects cannot be discriminated by their appearance alone (Fig. 1b). In this case integration of
object motion over time is necessary for tracking. Humans are capable of tracking objects by their
motion when appearance is uninformative [2, 3], but it is unclear if the current generation of neural
networks for video analysis and tracking can do the same. To address this question we introduce
PathTracker, a synthetic challenge for object tracking without re-recognition (Fig. 1c).
* † These authors contributed equally to this work.
1

Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Providence, RI
Northeastern University, Boston, MA
3
DeepMind, London, UK
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

