Rectifying the Shortcut Learning of Background for
Few-Shot Learning

Xu Luo1 , Longhui Wei2 , Liangjian Wen1 , Jinrong Yang4 , Lingxi Xie3 ,
Zenglin Xu6,7∗ , Qi Tian5∗
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Science and Technology of China 3 Tsinghua University
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 5 Xidian University
6
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen 7 Pengcheng Laboratory
Frank.Luox@outlook.com,{weilh2568,zenglin}@gmail.com

Abstract
The category gap between training and evaluation has been characterised as one of
the main obstacles to the success of Few-Shot Learning (FSL). In this paper, we for
the first time empirically identify image background, common in realistic images,
as a shortcut knowledge helpful for in-class classification but ungeneralizable
beyond training categories in FSL. A novel framework, COSOC, is designed to
tackle this problem by extracting foreground objects in images at both training
and evaluation without any extra supervision. Extensive experiments carried on
inductive FSL tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches.

1

Introduction

Through observing a few samples at a glance, humans can accurately identify brand-new objects.
This advantage comes from years of experiences accumulated by the human vision system. Inspired
by such learning capabilities, Few-Shot Learning (FSL) is developed to tackle the problem of learning
from limited data [24, 53]. At training, FSL models absorb knowledge from a large-scale dataset;
later at evaluation, the learned knowledge is leveraged to solve a series of downstream classification
tasks, each of which contains very few support (training) images from brand-new categories.
The category gap between training and evaluation has been considered as one of the core issues in
FSL [10]. Intuitively, the prior knowledge of old categories learned at training may not be applicable to
novel ones. [62] consider solving this problem from a causal perspective. Their backdoor adjustment
method, however, adjusts the prior knowledge in a black-box manner and cannot tell which specific
prior knowledge is harmful and should be suppressed.
In this paper, we identify image background as one specific harmful source knowledge for FSL.
Empirical studies in [56] suggest that there exists spurious correlations between background and
category of images (e.g., birds usually stand on branches, and shells often lie on the beaches; see
Fig. 1), which serves as a shortcut knowledge for modern CNN-based vision systems to learn. It
is further revealed that background knowledge has positive impact on the performance of in-class
classification tasks. As illustrated in the simple example of Fig. 1, images from the same category are
more likely to share similar background, making it possible for background knowledge to generalize
from training to testing in common classification tasks. For FSL, however, the category gap produces
brand-new foreground, background and their combinations at evaluation. The correlations learned
at training thus may not be able to generalize and would probably mislead the predictions. We take
*Corresponding author
Code: https://github.com/Frankluox/FewShotCodeBase
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

