Overinterpretation reveals image classification model
pathologies
Brandon Carter
MIT CSAIL
bcarter@csail.mit.edu

Siddhartha Jain
MIT CSAIL

Jonas Mueller
Amazon Web Services

David Gifford
MIT CSAIL
gifford@mit.edu

Abstract
Image classifiers are typically scored on their test set accuracy, but high accuracy
can mask a subtle type of model failure. We find that high scoring convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) on popular benchmarks exhibit troubling pathologies
that allow them to display high accuracy even in the absence of semantically
salient features. When a model provides a high-confidence decision without salient
supporting input features, we say the classifier has overinterpreted its input, finding
too much class-evidence in patterns that appear nonsensical to humans. Here, we
demonstrate that neural networks trained on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet suffer from
overinterpretation, and we find models on CIFAR-10 make confident predictions
even when 95% of input images are masked and humans cannot discern salient
features in the remaining pixel-subsets. We introduce Batched Gradient SIS, a
new method for discovering sufficient input subsets for complex datasets, and use
this method to show the sufficiency of border pixels in ImageNet for training and
testing. Although these patterns portend potential model fragility in real-world
deployment, they are in fact valid statistical patterns of the benchmark that alone
suffice to attain high test accuracy. Unlike adversarial examples, overinterpretation
relies upon unmodified image pixels. We find ensembling and input dropout can
each help mitigate overinterpretation.

1

Introduction

Well-founded decisions by machine learning (ML) systems are critical for high-stakes applications
such as autonomous vehicles and medical diagnosis. Pathologies in models and their respective
training datasets can result in unintended behavior during deployment if the systems are confronted
with novel situations. For example, a medical image classifier for cancer detection attained high
accuracy in benchmark test data, but was found to base decisions upon presence of rulers in an image
(present when dermatologists already suspected cancer) [1]. We define model overinterpretation to
occur when a classifier finds strong class-evidence in regions of an image that contain no semantically
salient features. Overinterpretation is related to overfitting, but overfitting can be diagnosed via
reduced test accuracy. Overinterpretation can stem from true statistical signals in the underlying
dataset distribution that happen to arise from particular properties of the data source (e.g., dermatologists’ rulers). Thus, overinterpretation can be harder to diagnose as it admits decisions that are
made by statistically valid criteria, and models that use such criteria can excel at benchmarks. We
demonstrate overinterpretation occurs with unmodified subsets of the original images. In contrast
to adversarial examples that modify images with extra information, overinterpretation is based on
real patterns already present in the training data that also generalize to the test distribution. Hidden
statistical signals of benchmark datasets can result in models that overinterpret or do not generalize
to new data from a different distribution. Computer vision (CV) research relies on datasets like
CIFAR-10 [2] and ImageNet [3] to provide standardized performance benchmarks. Here, we analyze
the overinterpretation of popular CNN architectures on these benchmarks to characterize pathologies.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

