Identity testing for Mallows model
Róbert Busa-Fekete
Google Research, New York, USA
busarobi@google.com
Balázs Szörényi
Yahoo! Research New York, USA
balazs.szorenyi@yahooinc.com

Dimitris Fotakis
National Technical University of Athens, Greece
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr
Manolis Zampetakis
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley, USA
mzampet@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we devise identity tests for ranking data that is generated from
Mallows model both in the asymptotic and non-asymptotic settings. First we
consider the case when the central ranking is known, and devise two algorithms for
testing the spread parameter of the Mallows model. The first one is obtained by
constructing a Uniformly Most Powerful Unbiased (UMPU) test in the asymptotic
setting and then converting it into a sample-optimal non-asymptotic identity test.
The resulting test is, however, impractical even for medium sized data, because
it requires computing the distribution of the sufficient statistic. The second nonasymptotic test is derived from an optimal learning algorithm for the Mallows
model. This test is both easy to compute and is sample-optimal for a wide range of
parameters. Next, we consider testing Mallows models for the unknown central
ranking case. This case can be tackled in the asymptotic setting by introducing a
bias that exponentially decays with the sample size. We support all our findings with
extensive numerical experiments and show that the proposed tests scale gracefully
with the number of items to be ranked.

1

Introduction

Identity testing of discrete distributions [9, 11] is one of the most fundamental problem which
consists of answering a yes-or-no question about the closeness of some explicitly given distribution
to an unknown distribution from which random samples are observed. This testing problem have
been studied in the classical statistical literature [16], and several tests have been devised in the
asymptotic regime which family hypothesis tests are often referred to as goodness-of-fit tests and
are routinely used in data analysis [10]. In this work, we extend the identity testing setup to a more
general domain that includes rankings over m items which can be viewed as a discrete distribution
testing problem over a domain with size m!. As a consequence, identity testing of ranking data
without any assumption is not feasible,
since lower bound is known for identity testing for discrete
p
distribution [26, 11] that is ⌦( n) where n is the domain size. Therefore we study an important
subclass of ranking distributions, which is introduced by [20] and also known as the exponential
family on rankings. The model has two parameters, the central ranking ⇡0 2 Sm and the spread
parameter 2 [0, 1]. Based on these, the probability of observing a ranking ⇡ 2 Sm is proportional
to d(⇡,⇡0 ) , where d is a ranking distance, such as the number of discordant pairs, a.k.a Kendall’s tau
distance. There are many applications of the Mallows model in Machine Learning, to name a few,
label ranking [18], online learning [3], recommendation systems [29, 15], clustering [23]. The focus
of this study is to devise identity tests for Mallows model that are scalable with the number of items
m. Identity testing is a central problem in analysing output of ranking systems where the goal is to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

