An Even More Optimal Stochastic Optimization
Algorithm: Minibatching and Interpolation Learning

Blake Woodworth
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
blake@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We present and analyze an algorithm for optimizing smooth and convex or strongly
convex objectives using minibatch stochastic gradient estimates. The algorithm is
optimal with respect to its dependence on both the minibatch size and minimum
expected loss simultaneously. This improves over the optimal method of Lan [17],
which is insensitive to the minimum expected loss; over the optimistic acceleration
of Cotter et al. [10], which has suboptimal dependence on the minibatch size; and
over the algorithm of Liu and Belkin [19], which is limited to least squares problems
and is also similarly suboptimal with respect to the minibatch size. Applied to
interpolation learning, the improvement over Cotter et al. and Liu and Belkin
translates to a linear, rather than square-root, parallelization speedup.

1

Introduction

The massive scale of many modern machine learning models and datasets give rise to complex, highdimensional training objectives that can be very computationally expensive to optimize. To reduce
the computational cost, it is therefore important to devise optimization algorithms that can leverage
parallelism to reduce the amount of time needed to train. Stochastic first-order methods, which use
stochastic estimates of the gradient of the training objective, are by far the most common approach
and these methods can be directly improved by using minibatch stochastic gradient estimates, which
are easy to parallelize across multiple computing cores or devices. Accordingly, we propose and
analyze an optimal accelerated minibatch stochastic gradient descent algorithm.
Our analysis exploits that while training machine learning models, it is typically possible to drive the
loss either all the way to zero, or at least very close to zero, and the performance of our algorithm
improves as the minimum value of the loss approaches zero. This property has multiple names
in different contexts. In learning theory, it is common to show fast rates under the assumption of
“realizability”—meaning the data can be fit perfectly by the model, i.e. the loss can be driven to zero.
Even when the problem is not exactly realizable, it is sometimes possible to derive “optimistic rates”
that interpolate between fast rates for realizable learning and the slower agnostic rates [33]. In the
context of “interpolation learning,” there has recently been great interest in understanding training
“overparametrized” models—which have many more parameters than there are training examples,
generally meaning that many settings of the parameters would attain zero training loss—both in terms
of optimization [2–4, 9, 15] and generalization [6, 35, 38]. Finally, in the optimization literature,
there have been efforts to prove optimistic rates depending on the minimum value of the objective
or on the variance of the stochastic gradients a the minimizer [10, 19–21, 23, 31]. Regardless of
the name, these ideas are all based on the same fundamental concept of exploiting the fact that the
minimum value of the objective is nearly zero.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

