Chebyshev-Cantelli PAC-Bayes-Bennett Inequality
for the Weighted Majority Vote

Yi-Shan Wu
University of Copenhagen
yswu@di.ku.dk

Andrés R. Masegosa
University of Aalborg
arma@cs.aau.dk

Christian Igel
University of Copenhagen
igel@di.ku.dk

Stephan S. Lorenzen
University of Copenhagen
lorenzen@di.ku.dk

Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
seldin@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We present a new second-order oracle bound for the expected risk of a weighted
majority vote. The bound is based on a novel parametric form of the ChebyshevCantelli inequality (a.k.a. one-sided Chebyshev’s), which is amenable to efficient
minimization. The new form resolves the optimization challenge faced by prior
oracle bounds based on the Chebyshev-Cantelli inequality, the C-bounds [Germain
et al., 2015], and, at the same time, it improves on the oracle bound based on second
order Markov’s inequality introduced by Masegosa et al. [2020]. We also derive
a new concentration of measure inequality, which we name PAC-Bayes-Bennett,
since it combines PAC-Bayesian bounding with Bennett’s inequality. We use it
for empirical estimation of the oracle bound. The PAC-Bayes-Bennett inequality
improves on the PAC-Bayes-Bernstein inequality of Seldin et al. [2012]. We
provide an empirical evaluation demonstrating that the new bounds can improve
on the work of Masegosa et al. [2020]. Both the parametric form of the ChebyshevCantelli inequality and the PAC-Bayes-Bennett inequality may be of independent
interest for the study of concentration of measure in other domains.

1

Introduction

Weighted majority vote is a central technique for combining predictions of multiple classifiers. It
is an integral part of random forests [Breiman, 1996, 2001], boosting [Freund and Schapire, 1996],
gradient boosting [Friedman, 1999, 2001, Mason et al., 1999, Chen and Guestrin, 2016], and it is also
used to combine predictions of heterogeneous classifiers. It is part of the winning strategies in many
machine learning competitions. The power of the majority vote is in the cancellation of errors effect:
when the errors of individual classifiers are independent or anticorrelated and the error probability of
individual classifiers is smaller than 0.5, then the errors average out and the majority vote tends to
outperform the individual classifiers.
Generalization bounds for weighted majority vote and theoretically-grounded approaches to weighttuning are decades-old research topics. Berend and Kontorovich [2016] derived an optimal solution
under the assumption of known error rates and independence of errors of individual classifiers, but
neither of the two assumptions is typically satisfied in practice.
In absence of the independence assumption, the most basic result is the first order oracle bound,
which is based on Markov’s inequality and bounds the expected loss of ρ-weighted majority vote by
twice the ρ-weighted average of expected losses of the individual classifiers. This finding is so old
and basic that Langford and Shawe-Taylor [2002] call it “the folk theorem”. The ρ-weighted average
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

