BAYES IMP: Uncertainty Quantification for Causal Data Fusion

Siu Lun Chau∗
University of Oxford

Jean-François Ton∗
University of Oxford

Yee Whye Teh
University of Oxford

Javier González
Microsoft Research Cambridge
Dino Sejdinovic
University of Oxford

Abstract
While causal models are becoming one of the mainstays of machine learning, the
problem of uncertainty quantification in causal inference remains challenging. In
this paper, we study the causal data fusion problem, where datasets pertaining to
multiple causal graphs are combined to estimate the average treatment effect of
a target variable. As data arises from multiple sources and can vary in quality
and quantity, principled uncertainty quantification becomes essential. To that
end, we introduce Bayesian Interventional Mean Processes, a framework which
combines ideas from probabilistic integration and kernel mean embeddings to
represent interventional distributions in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space, while
taking into account the uncertainty within each causal graph. To demonstrate the
utility of our uncertainty estimation, we apply our method to the Causal Bayesian
Optimisation task and show improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Causal inference has seen a significant surge of research interest in areas such as healthcare [1],
ecology [2], and optimisation [3]. However, data fusion, the problem of merging information from
multiple data sources, has received limited attention in the context of causal modelling, yet presents
significant potential benefits for practical situations [4, 5]. In this work, we consider a causal data
fusion problem where two causal graphs are combined for the purposes of inference of a target
variable (see Fig.1). In particular, our goal is to quantify the uncertainty under such a setup and
determine the level of confidence in our treatment effect estimates.
BMI

Cancer

Aspirin

Gleason

Target Variable

Cancer Volume

Mediating Variable
Treatment Variable

Age

Statin

PSA

PSA

Confounding Variable

Figure 1: Example problem setup: Causal graphs collected in two separate medical studies i.e. [6]
and [7]. (Left) D1 : Data describing the causal relationships between statin level and Prostate Specific
Antigen (PSA). (Right) D2 : Data from a prostate cancer study for patients about to receive a radical
prostatectomy. Goal: Model E [Cancer Volume|do(Statin)] while also quantifying its uncertainty.
Let us consider the motivating example in Fig.1, where a medical practitioner is investigating how
prostate cancer volume is affected by a statin drug dosage. We consider the case where the doctor
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
∗

Denotes equal contribution with alphabetical ordering

