Reinforcement Learning in Newcomblike
Environments
James Bell
The Alan Turing Institute
London, UK
jbell@posteo.com

Linda Linsefors
Independent Researcher
linda.linsefors@gmail.com

Caspar Oesterheld
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA
caspar.oesterheld@duke.edu

Joar Skalse
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
joar.skalse@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Newcomblike decision problems have been studied extensively in the decision
theory literature, but they have so far been largely absent in the reinforcement
learning literature. In this paper we study value-based reinforcement learning
algorithms in the Newcomblike setting, and answer some of the fundamental
theoretical questions about the behaviour of such algorithms in these environments.
We show that a value-based reinforcement learning agent cannot converge to a
policy that is not ratifiable, i.e., does not only choose actions that are optimal given
that policy. This gives us a powerful tool for reasoning about the limit behaviour
of agents – for example, it lets us show that there are Newcomblike environments
in which a reinforcement learning agent cannot converge to any optimal policy.
We show that a ratifiable policy always exists in our setting, but that there are
cases in which a reinforcement learning agent normally cannot converge to it (and
hence cannot converge at all). We also prove several results about the possible limit
behaviours of agents in cases where they do not converge to any policy.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study decision scenarios in which outcomes depend not only on the choices made
and physically implemented, but also depend directly on the agent’s policy. As an example, consider
an autonomous vehicle (AV) whose goal it is to arrive at target destinations quickly while minimising
the probability of collisions. In practice, AVs are careful drivers. It is easy to imagine an experiment
(or learning process) that might support careful driving: on each day, let the AV decide at random
between a careful and a more aggressive style of driving; other drivers on the road are unaware of
today’s chosen driving style and therefore behave the same around the AV on both types of days.
Presumably the decrease in accidents on careful days outweighs the increase in travel time.
However, imagine now that a type of AV was widely deployed. Then many of the drivers with whom
the AVs interact on the road would know a lot about how these AVs behave (e.g., from reading about
AVs, or from having interacted with other AVs of the same type in the past). In particular, if the other
drivers know that the AVs rarely take risks, they might (whether rationally or irrationally) cut them
off more, not give them right of way, etc. relative to the above experiment. Indeed, this phenomenon
– human drivers bullying timid AVs – has been reported in the real world (Condliffe, 2016; Liu et al.,
2020; cf. Cooper et al., 2019). As a result, the travel times of an AV are much longer if it always
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

