Accommodating Picky Customers: Regret Bound and
Exploration Complexity for Multi-Objective
Reinforcement Learning

Jingfeng Wu
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
uuujf@jhu.edu

Vladimir Braverman
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Lin F. Yang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
In this paper we consider multi-objective reinforcement learning where the objectives are balanced using preferences. In practice, the preferences are often given
in an adversarial manner, e.g., customers can be picky in many applications. We
formalize this problem as an episodic learning problem on a Markov decision process, where transitions are unknown and a reward function is the inner product of a
preference vector with pre-specified multi-objective reward functions. We consider
two settings. In the online setting, the agent receives a (adversarial) preference
every episode and proposes policies to interact with the environment. We provide
a model-based
algorithm that
p
 achieves a nearly minimax optimal regret bound
e min{d, S} · H 2 SAK , where d is the number of objectives, S is the number
O
of states, A is the number of actions, H is the length of the horizon, and K is the
number of episodes. Furthermore, we consider preference-free exploration, i.e.,
the agent first interacts with the environment without specifying any preference
and then is able to accommodate arbitrary preference vector up to  error. Our
proposed algorithm is provably
 efficient with a nearly optimal trajectory complexity
3
2
e
O min{d, S} · H SA/ . This result partly resolves an open problem raised by
Jin et al. [2020].

1

Introduction

In single-objective reinforcement learning (RL), a scalar reward is pre-specified and an agent learns
a policy to maximize the long-term cumulative reward [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. However, in many
real-world applications, we need to optimize multiple objectives for the same (unknown) environment,
even when these objectives are possibly contradicting [Roijers et al., 2013]. For example, in an
autonomous driving application, each passenger may have a different preference of driving styles:
some of the passengers prefer a very steady riding experience while other passengers enjoy the
fast acceleration of the car. Therefore, traditional single-objective RL approach may fail to be
applied in such scenarios. One way to tackle this issue is the multi-objective reinforcement learning
(MORL) [Roijers et al., 2013, Yang et al., 2019, Natarajan and Tadepalli, 2005, Abels et al., 2018]
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

