Counterfactual Explanations Can Be Manipulated

Dylan Slack
UC Irvine
dslack@uci.edu

Sophie Hilgard
Harvard University
ash798@g.harvard.edu

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Sameer Singh
UC Irvine
sameer@uci.edu

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations are emerging as an attractive option for providing
recourse to individuals adversely impacted by algorithmic decisions. As they
are deployed in critical applications (e.g. law enforcement, financial lending), it
becomes important to ensure that we clearly understand the vulnerabilties of these
methods and find ways to address them. However, there is little understanding of
the vulnerabilities and shortcomings of counterfactual explanations. In this work,
we introduce the first framework that describes the vulnerabilities of counterfactual
explanations and shows how they can be manipulated. More specifically, we show
counterfactual explanations may converge to drastically different counterfactuals
under a small perturbation indicating they are not robust. Leveraging this insight,
we introduce a novel objective to train seemingly fair models where counterfactual
explanations find much lower cost recourse under a slight perturbation. We describe
how these models can unfairly provide low-cost recourse for specific subgroups
in the data while appearing fair to auditors. We perform experiments on loan and
violent crime prediction data sets where certain subgroups achieve up to 20x lower
cost recourse under the perturbation. These results raise concerns regarding the
dependability of current counterfactual explanation techniques, which we hope
will inspire investigations in robust counterfactual explanations.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are being deployed to make consequential decisions on tasks ranging from
loan approval to medical diagnosis. As a result, there are a growing number of methods that explain
the decisions of these models to affected individuals and provide means for recourse [1]. For example,
recourse offers a person denied a loan by a credit risk model a reason for why the model made the
prediction and what can be done to change the decision. Beyond providing guidance to stakeholders
in model decisions, algorithmic recourse is also used to detect discrimination in machine learning
models [2–4]. For instance, we expect there to be minimal disparity in the cost of achieving recourse
between both men and women who are denied loans. One commonly used method to generate
recourse is that of counterfactual explanations [5]. Counterfactual explanations offer recourse by
attempting to find the minimal change an individual must make to receive a positive outcome [6–9].
Although counterfactual explanations are used by stakeholders in consequential decision-making
settings, there is little work on systematically understanding and characterizing their limitations.
Few recent studies explore how counterfactual explanations may become valid when the underlying
model is updated. For instance, a model provider might decide to update a model, rendering
previously generated counterfactual explanations invalid [10, 11]. Others point out that counterfactual
explanations, by ignoring the causal relationships between features, sometimes recommend changes
that are not actionable [12]. Though these works shed light on certain shortcomings of counterfactual
explanations, they do not consider whether current formulations provide stable and reliable results,
whether they can be manipulated, and if fairness assessments based on counterfactuals can be trusted.
1

Project Page: https://dylanslacks.website/cfe/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

