Neural View Synthesis and Matching
for Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning of 3D Pose

Angtian Wang

Shenxiao Mei

Alan Yuille

Adam Kortylewski

Johns Hopkins University
Maryland, MD 21218, USA
{angtianwang, smei5, ayuille1, akortyl1}@jhu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning to estimate the 3D object pose from a few labelled
examples and a collection of unlabelled data. Our main contribution is a learning
framework, neural view synthesis and matching, that can transfer the 3D pose
annotation from the labelled to unlabelled images reliably, despite unseen 3D views
and nuisance variations such as the object shape, texture, illumination or scene
context. In our approach, objects are represented as 3D cuboid meshes composed
of feature vectors at each mesh vertex. The model is initialized from a few labelled
images and is subsequently used to synthesize feature representations of unseen
3D views. The synthesized views are matched with the feature representations of
unlabelled images to generate pseudo-labels of the 3D pose. The pseudo-labelled
data is, in turn, used to train the feature extractor such that the features at each
mesh vertex are more invariant across varying 3D views of the object. Our model
is trained in an EM-type manner alternating between increasing the 3D pose
invariance of the feature extractor and annotating unlabelled data through neural
view synthesis and matching. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
semi-supervised learning framework for 3D pose estimation on the PASCAL3D+
and KITTI datasets. We find that our approach outperforms all baselines by a wide
margin, particularly in an extreme few-shot setting where only 7 annotated images
are given. Remarkably, we observe that our model also achieves an exceptional
robustness in out-of-distribution scenarios that involve partial occlusion. The code
is available at https://github.com/Angtian/NeuralVS.

1

Introduction

Object pose estimation is a fundamentally important task in computer vision with a multitude of
real-world applications, e.g. in self-driving cars or augmented reality applications. Current deep
learning approaches to 3D pose estimation achieve a high performance, but they require large amounts
of annotated data to be trained successfully. However, the human annotation of an object’s 3D pose
is difficult and time consuming, therefore it is desirable to develop methods for learning 3D pose
estimation from as few labelled examples as possible.
A powerful approach for training models without requiring a large amount of labels is semi-supervised
learning (SSL). SSL mitigates the requirement for labeled data by providing a means of leveraging
unlabeled data. Since unlabeled data can often be obtained with low human labor, any performance
boost conferred by SSL often comes with low cost. This has led to a multitude of SSL methods,
for example for image classification [18, 44], object detection [40] and keypoint localization [31].
However, only limited attention was devoted to SSL for 3D pose estimation.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

