General Nonlinearities in SO(2)-Equivariant CNNs

Daniel Franzen
Institute of Computer Science
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
Staudingerweg 9,
55122 Mainz, Germany
dfranz@uni-mainz.de

Michael Wand
Institute of Computer Science
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
Staudingerweg 9,
55122 Mainz, Germany
wandm@uni-mainz.de

Abstract
Invariance under symmetry is an important problem in machine learning. Our
paper looks specifically at equivariant neural networks where transformations of
inputs yield homomorphic transformations of outputs. Here, steerable CNNs have
emerged as the standard solution. An inherent problem of steerable representations
is that general nonlinear layers break equivariance, thus restricting architectural
choices. Our paper applies harmonic distortion analysis to illuminate the effect of
nonlinearities on Fourier representations of SO(2). We develop a novel FFT-based
algorithm for computing representations of non-linearly transformed activations
while maintaining band-limitation. It yields exact equivariance for polynomial
(approximations of) nonlinearities, as well as approximate solutions with tunable
accuracy for general functions. We apply the approach to build a fully E(3)equivariant network for sampled 3D surface data. In experiments with 2D and 3D
data, we obtain results that compare favorably to the state-of-the-art in terms of
accuracy while permitting continuous symmetry and exact equivariance.

1

Introduction

Modeling of symmetry in data, i.e., the invariance of properties under classes of transformations, is
a cornerstone of machine learning: Invariance of statistical properties over samples is the basis of
any form of generalization, and the prior knowledge of additional symmetries can be leveraged for
performance gains. Aside from data efficiency prospects, some applications require exact symmetry.
For example, in computational physics, symmetry of potentials and force fields is directly linked to
conservation laws, and is therefore important for the stability of simulations.
In deep neural networks, (discrete) translational symmetry over space and/or time is exploited in
many architectures and is the defining feature of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and their
successors. In most applications, we are typically interested in invariance (e.g., classification remains
unchanged) or co-variance (e.g., predicted geometry is transformed along with the input). Formally,
this goal is captured under the more general umbrella of equivariance [6]:
Let f : X → Y be a function (e.g., a network layer) that maps between vector spaces X, Y (e.g.,
feature maps in a CNN). Let G be a group and let (in slight abuse of notation) g ◦ v denote the
application of the action of group element g on a vector v. f is called equivariant, iff:
∀g ∈ G : f (g ◦ v) = h(g) ◦ f (v),

(1)

where h : G 7→ G0 is a group homomorphism mapping into a suitable group G0 . Informally speaking,
the effect of a transformation on the input should have an effect on the output that has (at least) the
same algebraic structure. Invariance (h ≡ 1G0 ) and covariance (h = idG→G0 ) are special cases, along
with contra-variance and any other isomorphisms of subgroups of G.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

