LEADS: Learning Dynamical
Systems that Generalize Across Environments

Yuan Yin1 , Ibrahim Ayed1,2 , Emmanuel de Bézenac1 , Nicolas Baskiotis1 , Patrick Gallinari1,3
1
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
2
ThereSIS Lab, Thales, Paris, France 3 Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
{yuan.yin,ibrahim.ayed,emmanuel.de-bezenac,
nicolas.baskiotis,patrick.gallinari}@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
When modeling dynamical systems from real-world data samples, the distribution
of data often changes according to the environment in which they are captured,
and the dynamics of the system itself vary from one environment to another.
Generalizing across environments thus challenges the conventional frameworks.
The classical settings suggest either considering data as i.i.d. and learning a single
model to cover all situations or learning environment-specific models. Both are suboptimal: the former disregards the discrepancies between environments leading to
biased solutions, while the latter does not exploit their potential commonalities and
is prone to scarcity problems. We propose LEADS, a novel framework that leverages
the commonalities and discrepancies among known environments to improve model
generalization. This is achieved with a tailored training formulation aiming at
capturing common dynamics within a shared model while additional terms capture
environment-specific dynamics. We ground our approach in theory, exhibiting a
decrease in sample complexity w.r.t. classical alternatives. We show how theory
and practice coincides on the simplified case of linear dynamics. Moreover, we
instantiate this framework for neural networks and evaluate it experimentally on
representative families of nonlinear dynamics. We show that this new setting
can exploit knowledge extracted from environment-dependent data and improves
generalization for both known and novel environments.

1

Introduction

Data-driven approaches offer an interesting alternative and complement to physical-based methods for
modeling the dynamics of complex systems and are particularly promising in a wide range of settings:
e.g. if the underlying dynamics are partially known or understood, if the physical model is incomplete,
inaccurate, or fails to adapt to different contexts, or if external perturbation sources and forces are not
modeled. The idea of deploying machine learning (ML) to model complex dynamical systems picked
momentum a few years ago, relying on recent deep learning progresses and on the development of
new methods targeting the evolution of temporal and spatiotemporal systems [6, 9, 7, 21, 30, 2, 37]. It
is already being applied in different scientific disciplines (see e.g. [36] for a recent survey) and could
help accelerate scientific discovery to address challenging domains such as climate [32] or health [12].
However, despite promising results, current developments are limited and usually postulate an
idealized setting where data is abundant and the environment does not change, the so-called “i.i.d.
hypothesis”. In practice, real-world data may be expensive or difficult to acquire. Moreover, changes
in the environment may be caused by many different factors. For example, in climate modeling, there
are external forces (e.g. Coriolis) which depend on the spatial location [23]; or, in health science,
parameters need to be personalized for each patient as for cardiac computational models [27]. More
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

