FMMformer: Efficient and Flexible Transformer
via Decomposed Near-field and Far-field Attention

Tan M. Nguyen
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Vai Suliafu ∗
School of Computing
Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Stanley J. Osher
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Long Chen
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA

Bao Wang †
Department of Mathematics
Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Abstract
We propose FMMformers, a class of efficient and flexible transformers inspired
by the celebrated fast multipole method (FMM) for accelerating interacting particle simulation. FMM decomposes particle-particle interaction into near-field and
far-field components and then performs direct and coarse-grained computation,
respectively. Similarly, FMMformers decompose the attention into near-field and
far-field attention, modeling the near-field attention by a banded matrix and the
far-field attention by a low-rank matrix. Computing the attention matrix for FMMformers requires linear complexity in computational time and memory footprint
with respect to the sequence length. In contrast, standard transformers suffer from
quadratic complexity. We analyze and validate the advantage of FMMformers
over the standard transformer on the Long Range Arena and language modeling
benchmarks. FMMformers can even outperform the standard transformer in terms
of accuracy by a significant margin. For instance, FMMformers achieve an average
classification accuracy of 60.74% over the five Long Range Arena tasks, which is
significantly better than the standard transformer’s average accuracy of 58.70%.

1

Introduction

Transformers [58] have achieved state-of-the-art performance in sequence processing tasks, including
machine translation and language modeling [58, 2, 15, 4, 61, 16, 9]. Also, transformers can effectively
transfer knowledge from a pre-trained model to tasks with limited supervision [43, 44, 16, 64, 34].
Transformers rely on the attention mechanism and particularly self-attention as a fundamental building
block for their modeling [5, 58, 27].
1.1

Self-attention

The self-attention mechanism is used to learn long-range dependencies while enabling parallel
processing of the input sequence. For a given input sequence X := [x1 , x2 , · · · , xN ]> ∈ RN ×Dx of
∗

†

Equal contribution and Co-first author
Please correspond to: wangbaonj@gmail.com or chenlong@math.uci.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

