Efficient Neural Network Training via
Forward and Backward Propagation Sparsification

Xiao Zhou∗ 1 , Weizhong Zhang∗1 , Zonghao Chen2 , Shizhe Diao1 , Tong Zhang†1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Tsinghua University
xzhoubi@connect.ust.hk, zhangweizhongzju@gmail.com
czh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, sdiaoaa@ust.hk, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Sparse training is a natural idea to accelerate the training speed of deep neural networks and save the memory usage, especially since large modern neural networks
are significantly over-parameterized. However, most of the existing methods cannot
achieve this goal in practice because the chain rule based gradient (w.r.t. structure
parameters) estimators adopted by previous methods require dense computation
at least in the backward propagation step. This paper solves this problem by
proposing an efficient sparse training method with completely sparse forward and
backward passes. We first formulate the training process as a continuous minimization problem under global sparsity constraint. We then separate the optimization
process into two steps, corresponding to weight update and structure parameter
update. For the former step, we use the conventional chain rule, which can be
sparse via exploiting the sparse structure. For the latter step, instead of using the
chain rule based gradient estimators as in existing methods, we propose a variance
reduced policy gradient estimator, which only requires two forward passes without
backward propagation, thus achieving completely sparse training. We prove that
the variance of our gradient estimator is bounded. Extensive experimental results
on real-world datasets demonstrate that compared to previous methods, our algorithm is much more effective in accelerating the training process, up to an order of
magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) [35, 11, 38] have proved their outstanding performance in various fields such as computer vision and natural language processing. However,
training such large-sized networks is still very challenging, requiring huge computational power and
storage. This hinders us from exploring larger networks, which are likely to have better performance.
Moreover, it is a widely-recognized property that modern neural networks are significantly overparameterized, which means that a fully trained network can always be sparsified dramatically by
network pruning techniques [9, 8, 25, 46, 20] into a small sub-network with negligible degradation
in accuracy. After pruning, the inference efficiency can be greatly improved. Therefore, a natural
question is can we exploit this sparsity to improve the training efficiency?
The emerging technique called sparse network training [10] is closely related with our question,
which can obtain sparse networks by training from scratch. We can divide existing methods into
two categories, i.e., parametric and non-parametric, based on whether they explicitly parameterize
network structures with trainable variables (termed structure parameters). Empirical results [24,
34, 44, 23] demonstrate that the sparse networks they obtain have comparable accuracy with those
∗
†

Equal contribution
Jointly with Google Research

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

