When Does Contrastive Learning Preserve
Adversarial Robustness from
Pretraining to Finetuning?
Lijie Fan1 , Sijia Liu2,3 , Pin-Yu Chen3 , Gaoyuan Zhang3 , Chuang Gan3
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Michigan State University,
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
lijiefan@mit.edu, liusiji5@msu.edu,
{pin-yu.chen,gaoyuan.zhang,chuangg}@ibm.com

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) can learn generalizable feature representations and
achieve state-of-the-art performance of downstream tasks by finetuning a linear
classifier on top of it. However, as adversarial robustness becomes vital in image
classification, it remains unclear whether or not CL is able to preserve robustness
to downstream tasks. The main challenge is that in the ‘self-supervised pretraining
+ supervised finetuning’ paradigm, adversarial robustness is easily forgotten due to
a learning task mismatch from pretraining to finetuning. We call such challenge
‘cross-task robustness transferability’. To address the above problem, in this paper
we revisit and advance CL principles through the lens of robustness enhancement.
We show that (1) the design of contrastive views matters: High-frequency components of images are beneficial to improving model robustness; (2) Augmenting
CL with pseudo-supervision stimulus (e.g., resorting to feature clustering) helps
preserve robustness without forgetting. Equipped with our new designs, we propose A DV CL, a novel adversarial contrastive pretraining framework. We show that
A DV CL is able to enhance cross-task robustness transferability without loss of
model accuracy and finetuning efficiency. With a thorough experimental study, we
demonstrate that A DV CL outperforms the state-of-the-art self-supervised robust
learning methods across multiple datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and STL-10)
and finetuning schemes (linear evaluation and full model finetuning). Code is
available at https://github.com/LijieFan/AdvCL.

1

Introduction

Image classification has been revolutionized by convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In spite of
CNNs’ generalization power, the lack of adversarial robustness has shown to be a main weakness
that gives rise to security concerns in high-stakes applications when CNNs are applied, e.g., face
recognition, medical image classification, surveillance, and autonomous driving [1–5]. The brittleness
of CNNs can be easily manifested by generating tiny input perturbations to completely alter the
models’ decision. Such input perturbations and corresponding perturbed inputs are referred to as
adversarial perturbations and adversarial examples (or attacks), respectively [6–10].
One of the most powerful defensive schemes against adversarial attacks is adversarial training (AT)
[11], built upon a two-player game in which an ‘attacker’ crafts input perturbations to maximize the
training objective for worst-case robustness, and a ‘defender’ minimizes the maximum loss for an
improved robust model against these attacks. However, AT and its many variants using min-max
optimization [12–21] were restricted to supervised learning as true labels of training data are required
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

