CAM-GAN: Continual Adaptation Modules for
Generative Adversarial Networks
Sakshi Varshney1∗ , Vinay Kumar Verma2∗ , P. K. Srijith1 , Lawrance Carin4 , Piyush Rai3†
IIT Hyderabad1 , Duke Univeristy2 , IIT Kanpur3 , KAUST Saudi Arabia4
cs16resch01002@iith.ac.in, vv65@duke.edu, srijith@cse.iith.ac.in
larry.carin@kaust.edu.sa, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
We present a continual learning approach for generative adversarial networks
(GANs), by designing and leveraging parameter-efficient feature map transformations. Our approach is based on learning a set of global and task-specific parameters.
The global parameters are fixed across tasks whereas the task-specific parameters
act as local adapters for each task, and help in efficiently obtaining task-specific
feature maps. Moreover, we propose an element-wise addition of residual bias in
the transformed feature space, which further helps stabilize GAN training in such
settings. Our approach also leverages task similarities based on the Fisher information matrix. Leveraging this knowledge from previous tasks significantly improves
the model performance. In addition, the similarity measure also helps reduce the
parameter growth in continual adaptation and helps to learn a compact model.
In contrast to the recent approaches for continually-learned GANs, the proposed
approach provides a memory-efficient way to perform effective continual data
generation. Through extensive experiments on challenging and diverse datasets,
we show that the feature-map-transformation approach outperforms state-of-theart methods for continually-learned GANs, with substantially fewer parameters.
The proposed method generates high-quality samples that can also improve the
generative-replay-based continual learning for discriminative tasks.

1

Introduction

Lifelong learning is an innate human characteristic; we continuously acquire knowledge and upgrade
our skills. We also accumulate our previous experiences to learn a new task efficiently. However,
learning new tasks rarely affects our performance on already-learned tasks. For example, after
learning one programming language, if we learn a new such language it is rare that our skill on
the first deteriorates. In fact, the knowledge of the previous task(s) often speeds up learning of
the subsequent task(s). On the other hand, attaining lifelong learning in deep neural networks is
still a challenge. Naive implementation of continual learning with deep learning models suffers
from catastrophic forgetting [1, 2, 3], which makes lifelong or continual learning (CL) difficult.
Catastrophic forgetting refers to the situation when a model exhibits a decline in its performance on
previously learned tasks, after it learns a new task.
Several prior works [1, 3, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] have been proposed to address catastrophic forgetting in deep
neural networks, with most of them focusing on classification problems. In contrast, continual learning
for unsupervised deep generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GAN) [9] and
variational auto-encoders (VAE) [10] is relatively less studied so far. Some recent work [6, 11, 12, 13]
has tried to address catastrophic forgetting in GANs. Among these, the generative-replay-based
approach [6, 11] usually works well only when the number of tasks is small. As the number of tasks
∗

Equal contribution. † Currently with Google Research

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

