Kernel Identification Through Transformers

Fergus Simpson
Secondmind
Cambridge, UK
fergus@secondmind.ai

Ian Davies ∗
InstaDeep
London, UK

Vidhi Lalchand
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

Nicolas Durrande
Secondmind
Cambridge, UK

Alessandro Vullo
Secondmind
Cambridge, UK

Carl Rasmussen
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

Abstract
Kernel selection plays a central role in determining the performance of Gaussian
Process (GP) models, as the chosen kernel determines both the inductive biases
and prior support of functions under the GP prior. This work addresses the challenge of constructing custom kernel functions for high-dimensional GP regression
models. Drawing inspiration from recent progress in deep learning, we introduce a
novel approach named KITT: Kernel Identification Through Transformers. KITT
exploits a transformer-based architecture to generate kernel recommendations in
under 0.1 seconds, which is several orders of magnitude faster than conventional
kernel search algorithms. We train our model using synthetic data generated from
priors over a vocabulary of known kernels. By exploiting the nature of the selfattention mechanism, KITT is able to process datasets with inputs of arbitrary dimension. We demonstrate that kernels chosen by KITT yield strong performance
over a diverse collection of regression benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In recent years deep parametric models have become a prominent class of model for supervised
learning and have delivered impressive empirical performance over a wide range of tasks. An important limitation, however, is that in their conventional form deep models do not provide prediction
uncertainty. While their Bayesian counterparts try to achieve this, they require significant modifications to the training procedure and are computationally expensive. Uncertainty quantification
in deep models is widely considered to be an open problem, the large array of research proposing
alternative Bayesian neural networks underscores this [10, 12, 17].
On the other hand, kernel driven methods within the Bayesian framework like Gaussian processes
(GPs) account for prediction uncertainty by design. While GPs provide a flexible framework for
inferring distributions over functions, the inductive biases are controlled by the kernel function1 . A
well chosen kernel will typically yield dramatically better performance than a poorly chosen one.
How should we learn expressive kernels for high-dimensional tasks? This has frequently been highlighted as a central question for the continued relevance of GP methods [11]. This work uses representations generated by a deep neural network to identify suitably expressive kernels for highdimensional GP regression tasks. Kernel recommendation is performed by a decoder with access
to a large vocabulary of primitive kernels and products of primitive kernels. The decoder maps an
∗
1

Work undertaken while at Secondmind
also called covariance function or covariance kernel

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

