Learning to Simulate Self-Driven Particles System
with Coordinated Policy Optimization

Zhenghao Peng? , Quanyi Li§ , Ka Ming Hui? , Chunxiao Liu† , Bolei Zhou?
?
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, † SenseTime Research
§
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence

Abstract
Self-Driven Particles (SDP) describe a category of multi-agent systems common
in everyday life, such as flocking birds and traffic flows. In a SDP system, each
agent pursues its own goal and constantly changes its cooperative or competitive
behaviors with its nearby agents. Manually designing the controllers for such
SDP system is time-consuming, while the resulting emergent behaviors are often
not realistic nor generalizable. Thus the realistic simulation of SDP systems
remains challenging. Reinforcement learning provides an appealing alternative for
automating the development of the controller for SDP. However, previous multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods define the agents to be teammates
or enemies before hand, which fail to capture the essence of SDP where the role
of each agent varies to be cooperative or competitive even within one episode.
To simulate SDP with MARL, a key challenge is to coordinate agents’ behaviors
while still maximizing individual objectives. Taking traffic simulation as the testing
bed, in this work we develop a novel MARL method called Coordinated Policy
Optimization (CoPO), which incorporates social psychology principle to learn
neural controller for SDP. Experiments show that the proposed method can achieve
superior performance compared to MARL baselines in various metrics. Noticeably
the trained vehicles exhibit complex and diverse social behaviors that improve
performance and safety of the population as a whole. Demo video and source code
are available at: https://decisionforce.github.io/CoPO/.

1

Introduction

Self-Driven Particles (SDP) describe a wide range of multi-agent systems (MAS) in nature and human
society. In SDP, individual agent pursues its own goal and interacts with each other following simple
local alignment, and then the population exhibits complex collective behaviors [47]. We commonly
see the phenomena of collective behaviors, such as the flocking birds [4], molecular motors [6],
human crowd [17, 16], and the traffic system [20]. To understand and simulate such phenomena,
researchers have developed a number of SDP models. For example, simple-rule based models [7] or
Hydrodynamic equations based models [2, 19] can simulate the SDP very well in an unconstrained
environment with random movement and resemble complex behaviors such as schooling fish [12]
and marching locusts [5]. However, in a more structured environment such as a particular traffic
scene where the interactions of agents are time-varying and the environment is non-stationary, it is
difficult to design manual controllers or use rules to recover the underlying collective behaviors.
When the interactive environment is available, reinforcement learning becomes a promising approach
to learn the controllers for actuating the SDP. Recently, many multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) methods have been developed to play competitive multi-player games, such as Hide
and Seek [1], Football [23], Go and other board games [34], and StarCraft [33]. However, it is
challenging to apply the existing MARL to simulate SDP systems. One essential issue is that each
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

