SubTab: Subsetting Features of Tabular Data for
Self-Supervised Representation Learning
Talip Uçar, Ehsan Hajiramezanali, Lindsay Edwards
Respiratory and Immunology, R&D, AstraZeneca
{talip.ucar, ehsan.hajiramezanali, lindsay.edwards}@astrazeneca.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has been shown to be very effective in learning useful
representations, and yet much of the success is achieved in data types such as
images, audio, and text. The success is mainly enabled by taking advantage of
spatial, temporal, or semantic structure in the data through augmentation. However,
such structure may not exist in tabular datasets commonly used in fields such as
healthcare, making it difficult to design an effective augmentation method, and
hindering a similar progress in tabular data setting. In this paper, we introduce a
new framework, Subsetting features of Tabular data (SubTab), that turns the task
of learning from tabular data into a multi-view representation learning problem by
dividing the input features to multiple subsets. We argue that reconstructing the data
from the subset of its features rather than its corrupted version in an autoencoder
setting can better capture its underlying latent representation. In this framework,
the joint representation can be expressed as the aggregate of latent variables of the
subsets at test time, which we refer to as collaborative inference. Our experiments
show that the SubTab achieves the state of the art (SOTA) performance of 98.31%
on MNIST in tabular setting, on par with CNN-based SOTA models, and surpasses
existing baselines on three other real-world datasets by a significant margin.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the self-supervised learning has successfully been used to learn meaningful representations of the data in natural language processing [34, 41, 11, 28, 10, 21, 9]. A similar success has
been achieved in image and audio domains [7, 15, 37, 5, 17, 13, 8]. This progress is mainly enabled
by taking advantage of spatial, semantic, or temporal structure in the data through data augmentation
[7], pretext task generation [11] and using inductive biases through architectural choices (e.g. CNN
for images). However, these methods can be less effective in the lack of such structures and biases in
the tabular data commonly used in many fields such as healthcare, advertisement, finance, and law.
And some augmentation methods such as cropping, rotation, color transformation etc. are domain
specific, and not suitable for tabular setting. The difficulty in designing similarly effective methods
tailored for tabular data is one of the reasons why self-supervised learning is under-studied in this
domain [46].
The most common approach in tabular data is to corrupt data through adding noise [43]. An autoencoder maps corrupted examples of data to a latent space, from which it maps back to uncorrupted data.
Through this process, it learns a representation robust to the noise in the input. This approach may
not be as effective since it treats all features equally as if features are equally informative. However,
perturbing uninformative features may not result in the intended goal of the corruption. A recent
work takes advantage of self-supervised learning in tabular data setting by introducing a pretext task
[46], in which a de-noising autoencoder with a classifier attached to representation layer is trained on
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

