Denoising Normalizing Flow

Christian Horvat
Department of Physiology
University of Bern
Bern, Switzerland
christian.horvat@unibe.ch

Jean-Pascal Pfister
Department of Physiology
University of Bern
Bern, Switzerland
jeanpascal.pfister@unibe.ch

Abstract
Normalizing flows (NF) are expressive as well as tractable density estimation
methods whenever the support of the density is diffeomorphic to the entire dataspace. However, real-world data sets typically live on (or very close to) lowdimensional manifolds thereby challenging the applicability of standard NF on realworld problems. Here we propose a novel method - called Denoising Normalizing
Flow (DNF) - that estimates the density on the low-dimensional manifold while
learning the manifold as well. The DNF works in 3 steps. First, it inflates the
manifold - making it diffeomorphic to the entire data-space. Secondly, it learns an
NF on the inflated manifold and finally it learns a denoising mapping - similarly
to denoising autoencoders. The DNF relies on a single cost function and does not
require to alternate between a density estimation phase and a manifold learning
phase - as it is the case with other recent methods. Furthermore, we show that
the DNF can learn meaningful low-dimensional representations from naturalistic
images as well as generate high-quality samples.

1

Introduction

Given samples from the data-density p(x), key objectives in probabilistic Machine Learning are 1.
estimating p(x) (density estimation), 2. generating new data points from p(x) (sampling), and 3.
finding low-dimensional representations of the data (inference). The three main methods used to
perform these tasks are Normalizing Flows (NFs) [34], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[17], and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [26]. Among those methods, only the VAE does check
all desired objectives by default. However, it does so by sacrificing the sample quality (compared to
GANs), and only learning a lower bound on p(x) (rather than the exact value as NFs do). Finding
new ways to meet these key objectives, based on either the known main methods or new ones, is an
active and important research area.
How can we infer low-dimensional representations using NFs? The standard NF requires the datadensity p(x) to have a support diffeomorphic to the entire data-space RD . However, the manifold
hypothesis conjectures that the data-manifold M lies close to a d-dimensional manifold embedded in
RD , d < D. Thus, unfortunately, a standard NF cannot be used to infer the latent space. Recently,
Brehmer et al. proposed to overcome this limitation by first projecting the data into a d-dimensional
space using the first d−components of a standard NF, and then using another NF to learn the latent
distribution π(u) [10]. For their method to work they propose different learning schemes, separating
the manifold learning from the density estimation.
In this paper, we propose an easy and new way to learn low-dimensional representations with NFs.
Our idea is based on the theoretical work derived in [20] where it was shown that by inflating the
data-manifold with Gaussian noise ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 ID ), i.e. x̃ := x + ε, the data-density p(x) can
be well approximated by learning the inflated distribution qσ (x̃). More concretely, the main result
in [20] states sufficient conditions on the choice of noise qσ (x̃|x) and type of manifold such that
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

