Learning Optimal Predictive Checklists

Haoran Zhang
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
haoranz@mit.edu
Berk Ustun*
UC San Diego
berk@ucsd.edu

Quaid Morris
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
morrisq@mskcc.org
Maryzeh Ghassemi*
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mghassem@mit.edu

Abstract
Checklists are simple decision aids that are often used to promote safety and
reliability in clinical applications. In this paper, we present a method to learn
checklists for clinical decision support. We represent predictive checklists as
discrete linear classifiers with binary features and unit weights. We then learn
globally optimal predictive checklists from data by solving an integer programming
problem. Our method allows users to customize checklists to obey complex
constraints, including constraints to enforce group fairness and to binarize realvalued features at training time. In addition, it pairs models with an optimality
gap that can inform model development and determine the feasibility of learning
sufficiently accurate checklists on a given dataset. We pair our method with
specialized techniques that speed up its ability to train a predictive checklist that
performs well and has a small optimality gap. We benchmark the performance of
our method on seven clinical classification problems, and demonstrate its practical
benefits by training a short-form checklist for PTSD screening. Our results show
that our method can fit simple predictive checklists that perform well and that can
easily be customized to obey a rich class of custom constraints.

1

Introduction

Checklists are simple tools that are widely used to assist humans when carrying out important tasks or
making important decisions [8, 13, 18, 35, 44, 50, 60, 61, 64, 65, 66]. These tools are often used as
predictive models in modern healthcare applications. In such settings, a checklist is a set of Boolean
conditions that predicts a condition of interest – e.g., a list of symptoms flag a patient for a critical
illness when M out N symptoms are checked. These kinds of “predictive checklists” are often used
for clinical decision support because they are easy to use and easy to understand [33, 54]. In contrast
to other kinds of predictive models, clinicians can easily scrutinize a checklist, and make an informed
decision as to whether they will adopt it. Once they have decided to use a checklist, they can integrate
the model into their clinical workflow without extensive training or technology (e.g., as a printed
sheet [52]).
Considering these benefits, one of the key challenges in using predictive checklists in healthcare
applications is finding a reliable way to create them [33]. Most predictive checklists in medicine are
either hand-crafted by panels of experts [30, 41], or built by combining statistical techniques and
heuristics [e.g., logistic regression, stepwise feature selection, and rounding 39]. These approaches
* Equal supervision.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

