Meta Two-Sample Testing:
Learning Kernels for Testing with Limited Data

Feng Liu∗
Australian AI Institute, UTS
feng.liu@uts.edu.au

Wenkai Xu∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL†
xwk4813@gmail.com

Jie Lu
Australian AI Institute, UTS
jie.lu@uts.edu.au

Danica J. Sutherland
UBC and Amii‡
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Modern kernel-based two-sample tests have shown great success in distinguishing
complex, high-dimensional distributions by learning appropriate kernels (or, as a
special case, classifiers). Previous work, however, has assumed that many samples
are observed from both of the distributions being distinguished. In realistic scenarios with very limited numbers of data samples, it can be challenging to identify
a kernel powerful enough to distinguish complex distributions. We address this
issue by introducing the problem of meta two-sample testing (M2ST), which aims
to exploit (abundant) auxiliary data on related tasks to find an algorithm that can
quickly identify a powerful test on new target tasks. We propose two specific
algorithms for this task: a generic scheme which improves over baselines, and a
more tailored approach which performs even better. We provide both theoretical
justification and empirical evidence that our proposed meta-testing schemes outperform learning kernel-based tests directly from scarce observations, and identify
when such schemes will be successful.

1

Introduction

Two-sample tests ask, “given samples from each, are these two populations the same?” For instance,
one might wish to know whether a treatment and control group differ. With very low-dimensional
data and/or strong parametric assumptions, methods such as t-tests or Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests are
widespread. Recent work in statistics and machine learning has sought tests that cover situations not
well-handled by these classic methods [1–18], providing tools useful in machine learning for domain
adaptation, causal discovery, generative modeling, fairness, adversarial learning, and more [19–34].
Perhaps the most powerful known widely-applicable scheme is based on a kernel method known as
the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [1] – or, equivalently [35], the energy distance [3] – when
one learns an appropriate kernel for the task at hand [10, 16]. Here, one divides the observed data
into “training” and “testing” splits, identifies a kernel on the training data by maximizing a power
ˆ then runs an MMD test on the testing data (as illustrated in Figure 1a). This method
criterion J,
generally works very well when enough data is available for both training and testing.
In real-world scenarios, however, two-sample testing tasks can be challenging if we do not have very
many data observations. For example, in medical imaging, we might face two small datasets of lung
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Now at Department of Statistics, University of Oxford.
‡
Work done partially while at the Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

