The Difficulty of Passive Learning
in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Georg Ostrovski
DeepMind
ostrovski@deepmind.com

Pablo Samuel Castro
Google Research, Brain Team
psc@google.com

Will Dabney
DeepMind
wdabney@deepmind.com

Abstract
Learning to act from observational data without active environmental interaction
is a well-known challenge in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Recent approaches
involve constraints on the learned policy or conservative updates, preventing strong
deviations from the state-action distribution of the dataset. Although these methods
are evaluated using non-linear function approximation, theoretical justifications
are mostly limited to the tabular or linear cases. Given the impressive results of
deep reinforcement learning, we argue for a need to more clearly understand the
challenges in this setting. In the vein of Held & Hein’s classic 1963 experiment,
we propose the “tandem learning” experimental paradigm which facilitates our
empirical analysis of the difficulties in offline reinforcement learning. We identify
function approximation in conjunction with fixed data distributions as the strongest
factors, thereby extending but also challenging hypotheses stated in past work. Our
results provide relevant insights for offline deep reinforcement learning, while also
shedding new light on phenomena observed in the online case of learning control.

1

Introduction

Learning to act in an environment purely from observational data (i.e. with no environment interaction), usually referred to as offline reinforcement learning, has great practical as well as theoretical
importance (see [Levine et al., 2020] for a recent survey). In real-world settings like robotics and
healthcare, it is motivated by the ambition to learn from existing datasets and the high cost of environment interaction. Its theoretical appeal is that stationarity of the data distribution allows for
more straightforward convergence analysis of learning algorithms. Moreover, decoupling learning
from data generation alleviates one of the major difficulties in the empirical analysis of common
reinforcement learning agents, allowing the targeted study of learning dynamics in isolation from
their effects on behavior.
Recent work has identified extrapolation error as a major challenge for offline (deep) reinforcement
learning [Achiam et al., 2019, Buckman et al., 2021, Fujimoto et al., 2019b, Fakoor et al., 2021,
Liu et al., 2020, Nair et al., 2020], with bootstrapping often highlighted as either the cause or an
amplifier of the effect: The value of missing or under-represented state-action pairs in the dataset can
be over-estimated, either transiently (due to insufficient training or data) or even asymptotically (due
to modelling or dataset bias), resulting in a potentially severely under-performing acquired policy.
The corrective feedback-loop [Kumar et al., 2020b], whereby value over-estimation is self-correcting
via exploitation during interaction with the environment (while under-estimation is corrected by
exploration), is critically missing in the offline setting.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

