Meta-learning with an Adaptive Task Scheduler

Huaxiu Yao1∗, Yu Wang2 , Ying Wei3 , Peilin Zhao4
Mehrdad Mahdavi5 , Defu Lian2 , Chelsea Finn1
1
Stanford University, 2 University of Science and Technology, 3 Tencent AI Lab
4
Pennsylvania State University, 5 City University of Hong Kong
1
{huaxiu,cbfinn}@cs.stanford.edu, 2 {wangyu,liandefu}@ustc.edu.cn
3
yingwei@cityu.edu.hk, 4 masonzhao@tencent.com, 5 mzm616@psu.edu

Abstract
To benefit the learning of a new task, meta-learning has been proposed to transfer a
well-generalized meta-model learned from various meta-training tasks. Existing
meta-learning algorithms randomly sample meta-training tasks with a uniform
probability, under the assumption that tasks are of equal importance. However,
it is likely that tasks are detrimental with noise or imbalanced given a limited
number of meta-training tasks. To prevent the meta-model from being corrupted
by such detrimental tasks or dominated by tasks in the majority, in this paper,
we propose an adaptive task scheduler (ATS) for the meta-training process. In
ATS, for the first time, we design a neural scheduler to decide which meta-training
tasks to use next by predicting the probability being sampled for each candidate
task, and train the scheduler to optimize the generalization capacity of the metamodel to unseen tasks. We identify two meta-model-related factors as the input
of the neural scheduler, which characterize the difficulty of a candidate task to
the meta-model. Theoretically, we show that a scheduler taking the two factors
into account improves the meta-training loss and also the optimization landscape.
Under the setting of meta-learning with noise and limited budgets, ATS improves
the performance on both miniImageNet and a real-world drug discovery benchmark
by up to 13% and 18%, respectively, compared to state-of-the-art task schedulers.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning has emerged in recent years as a popular paradigm to benefit the learning of a new task
in a sample-efficient way, by meta-training a meta-model (e.g., initializations for model parameters)
from a set of historical tasks (called meta-training tasks). To learn the meta-model during metatraining, the majority of existing meta-learning methods randomly sample meta-training tasks with
a uniform probability. The assumption behind such uniform sampling is that all tasks are equally
important, which is often not the case. First, some tasks could be noisy. For example, in our
experiments on drug discovery, all compounds (i.e., examples) in some target proteins (i.e., tasks) are
even labeled with the same bio-activity value due to improper measurement. Second, the number of
meta-training tasks is likely limited, so that the distribution over different clusters of tasks is uneven.
There are 2, 523 target proteins in the binding family among all 4, 276 proteins for meta-training,
but only 55 of them belong to the ADME family. To fill the gap, we are motivated to equip the
meta-learning framework with a task scheduler that determines which tasks should be used for
meta-training in the current iteration.
Recently, a few studies have started to consider introducing a task scheduler into meta-learning, by
adjusting the class selection strategy for construction of each few-shot classification task [17, 19],
∗

H. Yao and Y. Wang contribute equally; correspondence to: Y. Wei

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

