Temporal-attentive Covariance Pooling Networks
for Video Recognition

Zilin Gao† , Qilong Wang‡ , Bingbing Zhang† , Qinghua Hu‡ , Peihua Li†∗
†

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
‡
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
gzl@mail.dlut.edu.cn, qlwang@tju.edu.cn, icyzhang@mail.dlut.edu.cn
huqinghua@tju.edu.cn, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
For video recognition task, a global representation summarizing the whole contents
of the video snippets plays an important role for the final performance. However,
existing video architectures usually generate it by using a simple, global average
pooling (GAP) method, which has limited ability to capture complex dynamics
of videos. For image recognition task, there exist evidences showing that covariance pooling has stronger representation ability than GAP. Unfortunately, such
plain covariance pooling used in image recognition is an orderless representative,
which cannot model spatio-temporal structure inherent in videos. Therefore, this
paper proposes a Temporal-attentive Covariance Pooling (TCP), inserted at the
end of deep architectures, to produce powerful video representations. Specifically, our TCP first develops a temporal attention module to adaptively calibrate
spatio-temporal features for the succeeding covariance pooling, approximatively
producing attentive covariance representations. Then, a temporal covariance pooling performs temporal pooling of the attentive covariance representations to characterize both intra-frame correlations and inter-frame cross-correlations of the
calibrated features. As such, the proposed TCP can capture complex temporal
dynamics. Finally, a fast matrix power normalization is introduced to exploit
geometry of covariance representations. Note that our TCP is model-agnostic and
can be flexibly integrated into any video architectures, resulting in TCPNet for
effective video recognition. The extensive experiments on six benchmarks (e.g.,
Kinetics, Something-Something V1 and Charades) using various video architectures show our TCPNet is clearly superior to its counterparts, while having strong
generalization ability. The source code is publicly available.

1

Introduction

Video recognition aims to automatically analyze the contents of videos (e.g., events and actions),
and has a wide range of applications, including intelligent surveillance, multimedia retrieval and
recommendation. The great progress of deep learning, especially convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [48, 52, 22, 61], remarkably improves performance of video recognition. Since videos in
the wild involve complex dynamics caused by appearance changes and variation of visual tempo,
powerful video representations potentially provide high performance of video recognition. However,
most of the existing video recognition architectures based on 3D CNNs [53, 43, 2, 11, 54, 10] or 2D
CNNs [35, 27, 33, 39] usually generate the final video representations by leveraging a global average
pooling (GAP). Such GAP simply computes the first-order statistics of convolution features in a
temporal orderless manner, which discards richer statistical information inherent in spatio-temporal
features and has limited ability to capture complex dynamics of videos.
∗

Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

