NTopo: Mesh-free Topology Optimization using
Implicit Neural Representations

Jonas Zehnder
Department of Computer Science
and Operations Research
Université de Montréal
jonas.zehnder@umontreal.ca

Yue Li
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
yue.li@inf.ethz.ch

Stelian Coros
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
scoros@inf.ethz.ch

Bernhard Thomaszewski
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
bthomasz@ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representations show great promise when it
comes to generating numerical solutions to partial differential equations. Compared
to conventional alternatives, such representations employ parameterized neural
networks to define, in a mesh-free manner, signals that are highly-detailed, continuous, and fully differentiable. In this work, we present a novel machine learning
approach for topology optimization—an important class of inverse problems with
high-dimensional parameter spaces and highly nonlinear objective landscapes. To
effectively leverage neural representations in the context of mesh-free topology
optimization, we use multilayer perceptrons to parameterize both density and displacement fields. Our experiments indicate that our method is highly competitive
for minimizing structural compliance objectives, and it enables self-supervised
learning of continuous solution spaces for topology optimization problems.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are starting to show their potential for solving partial differential equations
(PDEs) in a variety of problem domains, including turbulent flow, heat transfer, elastodynamics, and
many more [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Thanks to their smooth and analytically-differentiable nature, implicit
neural representations with periodic activation functions are emerging as a particularly attractive
and powerful option in this context [4]. In this work, we explore the potential of implicit neural
representations for structural topology optimization—a challenging inverse elasticity problem with
widespread application in many fields of engineering [6].
Topology optimization (TO) methods seek to find designs for physical structures that are as stiff
as possible (i.e. least compliant) with respect to known boundary conditions and loading forces
while adhering to a given material budget. While TO with mesh-based finite element analysis
is a well-studied problem [7], we argue that mesh-free methods provide unique opportunities for
machine learning. We propose the first self-supervised, fully mesh-free method based on implicit
neural representations for topology optimization. The core of our approach is formed by two neural
networks: a displacement network representing force-equilibrium configurations that solve the
forward problem, and a density network that learns optimal material distributions in the domain of
interests. To leverage the power of these representations, we cast TO as a stochastic optimization
problem using Monte Carlo sampling. Compared to conventional mesh-based TO, this setting
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

