Understanding the Generalization Benefit of Model
Invariance from a Data Perspective

Sicheng Zhu*, Bang An*, Furong Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
{sczhu, bangan, furongh}@umd.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models that are developed to be invariant under certain types of
data transformations have shown improved generalization in practice. However,
a principled understanding of why invariance benefits generalization is limited.
Given a dataset, there is often no principled way to select “suitable” data transformations under which model invariance guarantees better generalization. This paper
studies the generalization benefit of model invariance by introducing the sample
cover induced by transformations, i.e., a representative subset of a dataset that
can approximately recover the whole dataset using transformations. For any data
transformations, we provide refined generalization bounds for invariant models
based on the sample cover. We also characterize the "suitability” of a set of data
transformations by the sample covering number induced by transformations, i.e.,
the smallest size of its induced sample covers. We show that we may tighten the
generalization bounds for “suitable” transformations that have a small sample covering number. In addition, our proposed sample covering number can be empirically
evaluated and thus provides a guidance for selecting transformations to develop
model invariance for better generalization. In experiments on multiple datasets, we
evaluate sample covering numbers for some commonly used transformations and
show that the smaller sample covering number for a set of transformations (e.g.,
the 3D-view transformation) indicates a smaller gap between the test and training
error for invariant models, which verifies our propositions.

1

Introduction

Invariance is ubiquitous in many real-world problems. For instance, categorical classification of
visual objects is invariant to slight viewpoint changes [18, 2, 23], text understanding is invariant to
synonymous substitution and minor typos [53, 36, 27]. Intuitively, models capturing the underlying
invariance exhibit improved generalization in practice [21, 13, 50, 14, 45, 14]. Such generalization
benefit is especially crucial when the data are scarce as in some medical tasks [46], or when the task
requires more data than usual as in cases of distribution shift [38] and adversarial attack [40, 49, 5].
A commonly accepted intuition attributes the generalization benefit of model invariance to the reduced
model complexity, especially the reduced sensitivity to spurious features. However, a principled
understanding of why model invariance helps generalization remains elusive, thus leaving many
open questions. Since model invariance may come at a cost (e.g., compromised accuracy, increase
computational overhead), given a task, how should we choose among various data transformations
under which model invariance guarantees better generalization? If existing data transformations
are not good enough for a given task, what is the guiding principle to find new ones? The lack
of a principled understanding limits better exploitation of model invariance to further improve
* Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

