Implicit Generative Copulas

Tim Janke, Mohamed Ghanmi, Florian Steinke
Energy Information Networks and Systems
TU Darmstadt, Germany
{tim.janke},{florian.steinke}@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Copulas are a powerful tool for modeling multivariate distributions as they allow to
separately estimate the univariate marginal distributions and the joint dependency
structure. However, known parametric copulas offer limited flexibility especially
in high dimensions, while commonly used non-parametric methods suffer from the
curse of dimensionality. A popular remedy is to construct a tree-based hierarchy of
conditional bivariate copulas. In this paper, we propose a flexible, yet conceptually
simple alternative based on implicit generative neural networks. The key challenge
is to ensure marginal uniformity of the estimated copula distribution. We achieve
this by learning a multivariate latent distribution with unspecified marginals but
the desired dependency structure. By applying the probability integral transform,
we can then obtain samples from the high-dimensional copula distribution without
relying on parametric assumptions or the need to find a suitable tree structure.
Experiments on synthetic and real data from finance, physics, and image generation
demonstrate the performance of this approach.

1

Introduction

Many approaches are available to reliably model univariate distributions of real-valued variables.
One can use various parametric distributions or employ flexible, non-parametric methods, e.g., by
using empirical distribution functions, kernel density estimation (KDE), or quantile regression [22].
Modeling distributions in higher dimensions is a much harder task. Parametric approaches using,
e.g., Gaussian distributions, are common but inflexible. Many non-parametric approaches become
infeasible in higher dimensions due to the curse of dimensionality [18].
Recent successes in modeling multivariate distributions have been achieved with deep neural networkbased likelihood-free implicit generative models [28], such as Generative Adversarial Networks [13]
(GANs) and Generative Moment Matching Networks (GMMNs) [10; 24].
Copulas are a tool to decouple the modeling of the univariate marginal distributions from modeling the
high-dimensional joint dependency structure [19]. This allows to obtain high-quality marginal models
with the mentioned univariate techniques. Moreover, the (conditional) marginals can be tailored to
the problem at hand and many fields have developed sophisticated domain-specific univariate models
for this task, e.g., for probabilistic forecasts in finance [4], weather [36], or energy [17]. These
models can then be combined with a suitable copula structure to enable the simulation of multivariate
quantities, e.g., [34; 29; 41]. In the machine learning literature copulas have been used to increase the
flexibility of Bayesian networks [11], to model multi-agent coordination in reinforcement learning
[43], or for image generation via the Vine Copula Autoencoder [40]. Another popular application
of copulas is synthetic tabular data generation [33; 27]. Note that in many of these applications, the
main goal is to sample from a multivariate distribution and the copula is used as a building block for
a generative model.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

