Can we globally optimize cross-validation loss?
Quasiconvexity in ridge regression

William T. Stephenson∗ Zachary Frangella
MIT
Cornell
wtstephe@mit.edu
zjf4@cornell.edu

Madeleine Udell
Cornell
udell@cornell.edu

Tamara Broderick
MIT
tbroderick@mit.edu

Abstract
Models like LASSO and ridge regression are extensively used in practice due
to their interpretability, ease of use, and strong theoretical guarantees. Crossvalidation (CV) is widely used for hyperparameter tuning in these models, but do
practical optimization methods minimize the true out-of-sample loss? A recent line
of research promises to show that the optimum of the CV loss matches the optimum
of the out-of-sample loss (possibly after simple corrections). It remains to show
how tractable it is to minimize the CV loss. In the present paper, we show that,
in the case of ridge regression, the CV loss may fail to be quasiconvex and thus
may have multiple local optima. We can guarantee that the CV loss is quasiconvex
in at least one case: when the spectrum of the covariate matrix is nearly flat and
the noise in the observed responses is not too high. More generally, we show
that quasiconvexity status is independent of many properties of the observed data
(response norm, covariate-matrix right singular vectors, and singular-value scaling)
and has a complex dependence on the few that remain. We empirically confirm our
theory using simulated experiments.

1

Introduction

Linear models, including LASSO and ridge regression, are widely used for data analysis across
diverse applied disciplines. Linear models are often preferred since they are straightforward to apply
in various senses. In particular, (1) their parameters are readily interpretable. (2) They have strong
theoretical guarantees on quality. And (3) standard optimization tools are often assumed to find
useful parameter and hyperparameter values. Despite their seeming simplicity, though, mysteries
remain about the quality of inference in linear models. Consider cross-validation (CV) [Stone, 1974,
Allen, 1974], the de facto standard for hyperparameter selection across machine learning methods
[Musgrave et al., 2020]. CV is an easy-to-evaluate proxy for the true out-of-sample loss. Is it a good
proxy? [Homrighausen and McDonald, 2014, 2013, Chetverikov et al., 2020, Hastie et al., 2020, Patil
et al., 2021] give conditions under which the global minimum of the CV loss (possibly with some
mild corrections) matches the optimum of the out-of-sample loss in LASSO and ridge regression. To
complete the picture, we must understand whether standard methods for minimizing the CV loss find
a global minimum.
It would be easy to find a unique minimum of the CV loss if the CV loss were convex. Alas (though
perhaps unsurprisingly), we show below that in essentially every case of interest the CV loss is not
convex. Indeed, the usual introductory cartoon of CV loss (left panel of Fig. 1; see also Fig. 5.9 of
Hastie et al. [2017] or Fig. 1 of Rad and Maleki [2020]) is not convex. But the cartoon CV loss still
exhibits a single global minimum and would be easy to globally minimize with popular approaches
like gradient-based methods [Do et al., 2007, Maclaurin et al., 2015, Pedregosa, 2016, Lorraine et al.,
2020] or grid search [Bergstra and Bengio, 2012, Pedregosa et al., 2011, Hsu et al., 2003]. Indeed, a
∗

Alternate email: wtstephe@gmail.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

