Adaptive Diffusion in Graph Neural Networks

Yuxiao Dong∗
Microsoft Research
ericdongyx@gmail.com

Jialin Zhao
Tsinghua University
zjl19970607@gmail.com
Ming Ding
Tsinghua University
dm18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Evgeny Kharlamov
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Evgeny.Kharlamov@de.bosch.com

Jie Tang†
Tsinghua University
jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of graph neural networks (GNNs) largely relies on the process of
aggregating information from neighbors defined by the input graph structures. Notably, message passing based GNNs, e.g., graph convolutional networks, leverage
the immediate neighbors of each node during the aggregation process, and recently,
graph diffusion convolution (GDC) is proposed to expand the propagation neighborhood by leveraging generalized graph diffusion. However, the neighborhood
size in GDC is manually tuned for each graph by conducting grid search over the
validation set, making its generalization practically limited. To address this issue,
we propose the adaptive diffusion convolution (ADC)* strategy to automatically
learn the optimal neighborhood size from the data. Furthermore, we break the
conventional assumption that all GNN layers and feature channels (dimensions)
should use the same neighborhood size for propagation. We design strategies to
enable ADC to learn a dedicated propagation neighborhood for each GNN layer
and each feature channel, making the GNN architecture fully coupled with graph
structures—the unique property that differs GNNs from traditional neural networks.
By directly plugging ADC into existing GNNs, we observe consistent and significant outperformance over both GDC and their vanilla versions across various
datasets, demonstrating the improved model capacity brought by automatically
learning unique neighborhood size per layer and per channel in GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a type of neural networks that can be directly coupled with
graph-structured data [30, 41]. Specifically, graph convolution networks [12, 19] (GCNs) generalize
the convolution operation to local graph structures, offering attractive performance for various graph
mining tasks [15, 32, 37]. The graph convolution operation is designed to aggregate information from
immediate neighboring nodes into the central node, which is also referred to as message passing [14].
To propagate information between nodes that are further away, multiple neural layers can be stacked
* Now at Meta AI and work done when at Microsoft.
†

Jie Tang is the corresponding author.

* Code is available at https://github.com/abcbdf/ADC

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

