Learning to Learn Dense Gaussian Processes for
Few-Shot Learning
Ze Wang1⇤ Zichen Miao1⇤ Xiantong Zhen2,3 Qiang Qiu1
Purdue University1 University of Amsterdam2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence3
{zewang, miaoz, qqiu}@purdue.edu
x.zhen@uva.nl

Abstract
Gaussian processes with deep neural networks demonstrate to be a strong learner
for few-shot learning since they combine the strength of deep learning and kernels
while being able to well capture uncertainty. However, it remains an open problem
to leverage the shared knowledge provided by related tasks. In this paper, we
propose to learn Gaussian processes with dense inducing variables by meta-learning
for few-shot learning. In contrast to sparse Gaussian processes, we define a set of
dense inducing variables to be of a much larger size than the support set in each
task, which collects prior knowledge from experienced tasks. The dense inducing
variables specify a shared Gaussian process prior over prediction functions of all
tasks, which are learned in a variational inference framework and offer a strong
inductive bias for learning new tasks. To achieve task-specific prediction functions,
we propose to adapt the inducing variables to each task by efficient gradient descent.
We conduct extensive experiments on common benchmark datasets for a variety
of few-shot learning tasks. Our dense Gaussian processes present significant
improvements over vanilla Gaussian processes and comparable or even better
performance with state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Meta learning [31, 4, 18], also referred to as learning to learn, aims at learning to acquire shared
knowledge from a set of related tasks so as to fast resolve novel tasks sampled from the same
underlying task distribution. Meta learning largely stimulates the rise of few-shot learning [9], and the
recent advantages are mainly driven by designing learning algorithms that learn from massive tasks
and acquire prior knowledge, which combined with a small amount of labeled data, induces models
that produce reliable predictions on novel tasks. In practice, the acquisition of prior knowledge can
be realized in different forms. Model agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [9] learns to adapts to new
tasks by few iterations of gradient descend, which inspires many follow-up methods [3, 12, 22, 46].
The adaptation of the entire network makes it hard to be scaled to large networks, and many recent
efforts focus on adapting the last classification layer only [14, 5], while assuming a universal feature
extractor that is shared across all tasks. Despite the remarkable progress, challenges remain due to
the uncertainty in making predictions with very limited data, which requires models to have high
robustness for few-shot learning.
Gaussian processes [25] serve as a powerful model for the inference of functions, which enjoy
appealing properties including natural uncertainty quantification and robustness when the amount of
data is limited. By combining the strong learning ability of deep neural networks, Gaussian processes
with deep kernels further demonstrate improved performance on supervised learning [44]. To alleviate
the computational cost, sparse Gaussian processes were widely studied by learning a sparse set of
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

