Reformulating Zero-shot Action Recognition for
Multi-label Actions
Alec Kerrigan

Kevin Duarte

Yogesh S Rawat

Mubarak Shah

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816,
{aleckerrigan,kevin_duarte}@knights.ucf.edu, {yogesh,shah}@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The goal of zero-shot action recognition (ZSAR) is to classify action classes which
were not previously seen during training. Traditionally, this is achieved by training
a network to map, or regress, visual inputs to a semantic space where a nearest
neighbor classifier is used to select the closest target class. We argue that this
approach is sub-optimal due to the use of nearest neighbor on static semantic space
and is ineffective when faced with multi-label videos - where two semantically
distinct co-occurring action categories cannot be predicted with high confidence.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a ZSAR framework which does not
rely on nearest neighbor classification, but rather consists of a pairwise scoring
function. Given a video and a set of action classes, our method predicts a set of
confidence scores for each class independently. This allows for the prediction of
several semantically distinct classes within one video input. Our evaluations show
that our method not only achieves strong performance on three single-label action
classification datasets (UCF-101, HMDB, and RareAct), but also outperforms
previous ZSAR approaches on a challenging multi-label dataset (AVA) and a
real-world surprise activity detection dataset (MEVA).

1

Introduction

Current image and video classification models require large labeled training datasets but they perform
really well on previously seen classes. However, if novel classes are presented to these models, as
is the case in many real-world applications, they tend to fail. The system has to be retrained with
additional samples for this class to correctly predict these novel classes, which requires additional
training time as well as computational resources. Therefore, it would be beneficial if we can train a
single system on a fixed dataset which can be applied to new, previously unseen classes. To this end,
zero-shot learning (ZSL) approaches [1] have been proposed which leverage semantic information,
e.g. textual descriptions or class names, and relate them to new unseen class categories.
In this work, we focus on zero-shot action recognition (ZSAR), where the goal is to classify videos of
unseen action categories. There has been a great progress focusing on ZSAR [2, 3, 4], however, most
of these existing methods utilize a similar fundamental approach. These approaches project a video
representation to a fixed semantic space (e.g. a text embedding space generated from a pre-trained
Word2Vec [5] model) and perform classification using a nearest neighbor operation. We argue that
such a solution is sub-optimal because the class selection is performed on a static text-based semantic
space. This formulation forces classes that are more similar in the semantic space to have closer
classification boundaries, even if they are visually dissimilar; conversely, actions that are visually
similar, can appear further apart in the semantic space. For example, the action "Tennis Swing" is
closer in semantic space to "Swing" (i.e. a child on a swing) than "Table Tennis Shot" even though it
is more visually similar to the latter action.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

