Collapsed Variational Bounds
for Bayesian Neural Networks
Marcin B. Tomczak, Siddharth Swaroop, Andrew Y. K. Foong, Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
{mbt27,ss2163,ykf21,ret26}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent interest in learning large variational Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs)
has been partly hampered by poor predictive performance caused by underfitting,
and their performance is known to be very sensitive to the prior over weights.
Current practice often fixes the prior parameters to standard values or tunes them
using heuristics or cross-validation. In this paper, we treat prior parameters in a
distributional way by extending the model and collapsing the variational bound with
respect to their posteriors. This leads to novel and tighter Evidence Lower Bounds
(ELBOs) for performing variational inference (VI) in BNNs. Our experiments show
that the new bounds significantly improve the performance of Gaussian mean-field
VI applied to BNNs on a variety of data sets, demonstrating that mean-field VI
works well even in deep models. We also find that the tighter ELBOs can be good
optimization targets for learning the hyperparameters of hierarchical priors.

1

Introduction

There has been a lot of recent interest in developing methods for Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs),
and variational methods provide computationally cheap approximations to the posterior over weights
when compared to alternatives like MCMC. Research on Variational Inference (VI) for BNNs has seen
multiple advances enabling optimization of the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) [29, 65, 24, 7, 38],
allowing for scaling to large neural networks and datasets [57, 63, 15, 16, 66]. However, the underconfidence of mean-field VI (MF-VI) in output-space has caused poor adoption of VI in applications,
especially in sequential decision making [9, 60, 69]. Although a lot of work has improved performance
by deriving better estimators of the gradient of the ELBO [29, 65, 24, 7, 38], this work has focused
on the variational parameters of distributions over weights, with the prior over weights usually fixed
to zero-mean isotropic Gaussians [55, 70, 74, 15, 20, 7, 40].
In this paper, we also apply inference to the prior parameters of Gaussian BNNs (e.g. means and
variances of a Gaussian prior over weights). We do this by using collapsed VI bounds [36, 43, 47, 64],
which analytically solve the inference over prior parameters and allow us to derive tighter ELBOs for
performing VI in BNNs. Many previous works argue that point estimates for parameters of Gaussian
prior in BNNs can be learned reliably by maximizing the ELBO [72, 52, 50, 31], although there
have also been arguments against such an approach [7]. Experiments using our derived ELBOs lead
to two findings: (i) MF-VI performs well in deep models where the prior parameters of Gaussian
distributions over weights have been learned, but severely under-fits data in output space if the prior
over weights is fixed and, (ii) the derived tighter ELBOs are good optimization targets to learn
the hyperparameters of hierarchical Gaussian priors, even in large networks. We provide the code
implementing the introduced algorithms at https://github.com/marctom/collapsed_bnns.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

