Going Beyond Linear Transformers
with Recurrent Fast Weight Programmers

Kazuki Irie1∗, Imanol Schlag1∗, Róbert Csordás1 , Jürgen Schmidhuber1,2
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA, University of Lugano (USI) & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{kazuki, imanol, robert, juergen}@idsia.ch
1

Abstract
Transformers with linearised attention (“linear Transformers”) have demonstrated
the practical scalability and effectiveness of outer product-based Fast Weight
Programmers (FWPs) from the ’90s. However, the original FWP formulation is
more general than the one of linear Transformers: a slow neural network (NN)
continually reprograms the weights of a fast NN with arbitrary architecture. In
existing linear Transformers, both NNs are feedforward and consist of a single
layer. Here we explore new variations by adding recurrence to the slow and fast
nets. We evaluate our novel recurrent FWPs (RFWPs) on two synthetic algorithmic
tasks (code execution and sequential ListOps), Wikitext-103 language models,
and on the Atari 2600 2D game environment. Our models exhibit properties of
Transformers and RNNs. In the reinforcement learning setting, we report large
improvements over LSTM in several Atari games. Our code is public.1

1

Introduction

The Transformer [1] has become one of the most popular neural networks (NNs) for processing
sequential data. Its success on neural machine translation quickly transferred to other problems in
natural language processing, such as language modelling [2, 3] or question answering [4]. Recently,
it has also been applied in other domains, including image processing [5, 6] or mathematical problem
solving [7, 8, 9].
Conceptually, the Transformer is a deep feedforward NN that processes all elements of a sequence in
parallel: unlike in recurrent NNs (RNNs), the computations of a layer for the entire sequence can be
packed into one big matrix multiplication. This scales well with the number of parallel processors.
Despite the benefits of parallelisation, a major drawback of Transformers is that their computational
complexity in time and space is quadratic in sequence length. Furthermore, in the auto-regressive
version [1, 2] — the focus of our work — the state size increases linearly with sequence length. This
makes Transformers infeasible for auto-regressive settings dealing with very long or potentially infinite sequences, forcing practitioners to truncate temporal contexts and ignore long-term dependencies beyond fixed-size time windows. Although recent work tries to address this issue [10, 11], this
limitation makes some applications of Transformers challenging, e.g., reinforcement learning (RL)
in partially observable environments [12, 13], which is still dominated by RNNs such as the Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM; [14]) trained by policy gradients [15, 16, 17, 18].
To scale Transformers to longer sequences, recent works have proposed to linearise the softmax in
the self-attention computation and reorganise the latter in a sequential way [19]. Such models include
∗
1

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/IDSIA/recurrent-fwp

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

