A Little Robustness Goes a Long Way: Leveraging
Robust Features for Targeted Transfer Attacks

Jacob M. Springer
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM, 87545
jacmspringer@gmail.com

Melanie Mitchell
Santa Fe Institute
Santa Fe, NM, 87501
mm@santafe.edu

Garrett T. Kenyon
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM, 87545
gkenyon@lanl.gov

Abstract
Adversarial examples for neural network image classifiers are known to be transferable: examples optimized to be misclassified by a source classifier are often
misclassified as well by classifiers with different architectures. However, targeted
adversarial examples—optimized to be classified as a chosen target class—tend to
be less transferable between architectures. While prior research on constructing
transferable targeted attacks has focused on improving the optimization procedure,
in this work we examine the role of the source classifier. Here, we show that training the source classifier to be “slightly robust”—that is, robust to small-magnitude
adversarial examples—substantially improves the transferability of class-targeted
and representation-targeted adversarial attacks, even between architectures as different as convolutional neural networks and transformers. The results we present
provide insight into the nature of adversarial examples as well as the mechanisms
underlying so-called “robust” classifiers.

1

Introduction

Neural-network image classifiers are well-known to be susceptible to adversarial examples—images
that are perturbed in a way that is largely imperceptable to humans but that cause the neural network to
make misclassifications. Much research has gone into methods for constructing adverarial examples
in order to understand the nature of neural-network vulnerabilities and to develop methods to make
neural-network classifiers more robust to attacks [7, 11, 21, 45, 50, 55, 73].
Untargeted adversarial examples are designed to elicit an unspecified incorrect class, while targeted
adversarial examples are designed to elicit a specific (incorrect) target class. A given adversarial
perturbation is designed via optimization with respect to a given trained network; here we call this the
source network. While untargeted adversarial examples are often transferable—examples designed to
attack a source network also successfully attack other trained networks with different parameters and
architectures [21, 73]—targeted adversarial examples tend to be less transferable [44].
Prior research on constructing transferable adversarial examples for image classifiers has focused
primarily on improving optimization methods for generating successful image perturbations. In this
paper, we take a different tack—focusing on the source neural network used in constructing adversarial
examples. Specifically, we find that “slightly-robust” convolutional neural networks (CNNs)—ones
that have been trained to be robust to small adversarial perturbations—can be leveraged to substantially
improve the transferability of targeted adversarial examples to different architectures. Surprisingly,
we show that targeted adversarial examples constructed with respect to a slightly robust CNN transfer
successfully not only to different CNN architectures but also to transformer architectures such as ViT
[16], LeViT [22], CCT [24], and even CLIP [57], which is trained on different objective than the
source CNN. Such transfers are all “black box” attacks—while generating an adversarial example
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

