Physics-Integrated Variational Autoencoders for
Robust and Interpretable Generative Modeling

Naoya Takeishi, Alexandros Kalousis
University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland (HES-SO)
Geneva, Switzerland
{naoya.takeishi,alexandros.kalousis}@hesge.ch

Abstract
Integrating physics models within machine learning models holds considerable
promise toward learning robust models with improved interpretability and abilities
to extrapolate. In this work, we focus on the integration of incomplete physics
models into deep generative models. In particular, we introduce an architecture of
variational autoencoders (VAEs) in which a part of the latent space is grounded by
physics. A key technical challenge is to strike a balance between the incomplete
physics and trainable components such as neural networks for ensuring that the
physics part is used in a meaningful manner. To this end, we propose a regularized
learning method that controls the effect of the trainable components and preserves
the semantics of the physics-based latent variables as intended. We not only
demonstrate generative performance improvements over a set of synthetic and realworld datasets, but we also show that we learn robust models that can consistently
extrapolate beyond the training distribution in a meaningful manner. Moreover, we
show that we can control the generative process in an interpretable manner.

1

Introduction

Data-driven modeling is often opposed to theory-driven modeling, yet their integration has also been
recognized as an important approach called gray-box or hybrid modeling. In statistical machine
learning, incorporation of mathematical models of physics (in a broad sense; including knowledge of
biology, chemistry, economics, etc.) has also been attracting attention. Gray-box / hybrid modeling in
machine learning holds considerable promise toward learning robust models with improved abilities
to extrapolate beyond the distributions that they have been exposed to during training. Moreover, it
can bring significant benefits in terms of model interpretability since parts of a model get semantically
grounded to concrete domain knowledge.
A technical challenge in deep gray-box modeling is to ensure an appropriate use of physics models.
A careless design of models and learning can lead to an erratic behavior of the components meant to
represent physics (e.g., with erroneous estimation of physics parameters), and eventually, the overall
model just learns to ignore them. This is particularly the case when we bring together simplified or
imperfect physics models with highly expressive data-driven machine learning models such as deep
neural networks. Such cases call for principled methods for striking an appropriate balance between
physics and data-driven models to prevent the detrimental effects during learning.
Integration of physics models into machine learning has been considered in various contexts (see, e.g.,
[44, 40] and our Section 4), but most existing studies focus on prediction or forecasting tasks and are
not directly applicable to other tasks. More importantly, the careful orchestration of physics-based
and data-driven components have not necessarily been considered. A notable exception is Yin et al.
[47], in which they proposed a method to regularize the action of trainable components of a hybrid
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

