Trash or Treasure? An Interactive Dual-Stream
Strategy for Single Image Reflection Separation

Qiming Hu, Xiaojie Guo∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
huqiming@tju.edu.cn xj.max.guo@gmail.com

Abstract
Single image reflection separation (SIRS), as a representative blind source separation task, aims to recover two layers, i.e., transmission and reflection, from one
mixed observation, which is challenging due to the highly ill-posed nature. Existing deep learning based solutions typically restore the target layers individually,
or with some concerns at the end of the output, barely taking into account the
interaction across the two streams/branches. In order to utilize information more
efficiently, this work presents a general yet simple interactive strategy, namely
your trash is my treasure (YTMT), for constructing dual-stream decomposition
networks. To be specific, we explicitly enforce the two streams to communicate
with each other block-wisely. Inspired by the additive property between the two
components, the interactive path can be easily built via transferring, instead of
discarding, deactivated information by the ReLU rectifier from one stream to the
other. Both ablation studies and experimental results on widely-used SIRS datasets
are conducted to demonstrate the efficacy of YTMT, and reveal its superiority over
other state-of-the-art alternatives. The implementation is quite simple and our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/mingcv/YTMT-Strategy.

1

Introduction

Blind source separation, a long-standing problem in signal processing, aims to recover multiple
intrinsic components from their mixture, the difficulty of which comes from its ill-posedness, i.e.,
without extra information, there is an infinite number of feasible decompositions. Particularly in
computer vision, image reflection separation (IRS) is a representative scenario that often occurs when
taking pictures through a transparent medium such as glass. In such cases, the captured images will
contain both the scene transmitted through the medium (transmission) and reflection. On the one
hand, reflections are annoying for high-quality imaging, and may interfere with the performance of
most, if not all, of classic and contemporary vision oriented algorithms such as object detection and
segmentation. On the other hand, one may also want to see what happens in the reflection. Hence,
developing effective transmission-reflection decomposition techniques is desired.
Formally, the captured superimposed image I can be typically modeled as a linear combination of
a transmission layer T and a reflection R, i.e. I = T + R.1 Over last decades, a large number
of schemes have been devised to solve the decomposition problem. Various statistical priors and
regularizers have been proposed to mitigate the ill-posed dilemma, while diverse deep networks have
been recently built for the sake of performance improvement, please see Sec. 2 for details. However,
∗

Corresponding Author
Many problems follow the same additive model, such as denoising (I = B + N , where B and N denote
clean image and noise, respectively), and intrinsic image decomposition (log I = log A + log S, where A and
S stand for albedo and shading, respectively.) The proposed strategy can be potentially applied to all these tasks,
but due to page limit, we concentrate on the task of SIRS to verify primary claims in this paper.
1

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

