Shape registration in the time of transformers

Luca Cosmo
DAIS
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice
luca.cosmo@unive.it

Giovanni Trappolini
Department of Computer Engineering
Sapienza University of Rome
giovanni.trappolini@uniroma1.it
Luca Moschella
Department of Computer Science
Sapienza University of Rome
luca.moschella@uniroma1.it

Riccardo Marin
Department of Computer Science
Sapienza University of Rome
marin@di.uniroma1.it

Simone Melzi
Department of Computer Science
Sapienza University of Rome
simone.melzi@uniroma1.it

Emanuele Rodolà
Department of Computer Science
Sapienza University of Rome
emanuele.rodola@uniroma1.it

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a transformer-based procedure for the efficient registration
of non-rigid 3D point clouds. The proposed approach is data-driven and adopts for
the first time the transformer architecture in the registration task. Our method is
general and applies to different settings. Given a fixed template with some desired
properties (e.g. skinning weights or other animation cues), we can register raw
acquired data to it, thereby transferring all the template properties to the input
geometry. Alternatively, given a pair of shapes, our method can register the first
onto the second (or vice-versa), obtaining a high-quality dense correspondence
between the two. In both contexts, the quality of our results enables us to target real
applications such as texture transfer and shape interpolation. Furthermore, we also
show that including an estimation of the underlying density of the surface eases the
learning process. By exploiting the potential of this architecture, we can train our
model requiring only a sparse set of ground truth correspondences (10 ∼ 20% of
the total points). The proposed model and the analysis that we perform pave the
way for future exploration of transformer-based architectures for registration and
matching applications. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that
our pipeline outperforms state-of-the-art methods for deformable and unordered
3D data registration on different datasets and scenarios.

1

Introduction

Recent technological advancements of 3D acquisition pipelines have produced an abundance of
available data. The direct consequence is the non-standardization of the acquisition process. Such
technological democratization brings along a disparate amount of different representations, discretization, and arbitrary resolution. Given so, the request to align such data has become urgent.
Furthermore, data-driven statistical approaches require aligned data to relate feature changes across
the population, inferring underlying patterns.
The Computer Vision community has devoted an extraordinary effort in the last decades to address
3D objects analysis. A common way to approach this problem is to align the geometry of one
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

