Optimal Gradient-based Algorithms for Non-concave
Bandit Optimization

Baihe Huang1∗ , Kaixuan Huang2∗ , Sham M. Kakade3,4∗ , Jason D. Lee2∗
Qi Lei2∗ , Runzhe Wang2∗ , Jiaqi Yang5∗
1

Peking University 2 Princeton University 3 University of Harvard
4
Microsoft Research 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Bandit problems with linear or concave reward have been extensively studied, but
relatively few works have studied bandits with non-concave reward. This work
considers a large family of bandit problems where the unknown underlying reward
function is non-concave, including the low-rank generalized linear bandit problems
and two-layer neural network with polynomial activation bandit problem. For
the low-rank generalized linear bandit problem, we provide a minimax-optimal
algorithm in the dimension, refuting both conjectures in [55, 43]. Our algorithms
are based on a unified zeroth-order optimization paradigm that applies in great
generality and attains optimal rates in several structured polynomial settings (in the
dimension). We further demonstrate the applicability of our algorithms in RL in
the generative model setting, resulting in improved sample complexity over prior
approaches. Finally, we show that the standard optimistic algorithms (e.g., UCB)
are sub-optimal by dimension factors. In the neural net setting (with polynomial
activation functions) with noiseless reward, we provide a bandit algorithm with
sample complexity equal to the intrinsic algebraic dimension. Again, we show that
optimistic approaches have worse sample complexity, polynomial in the extrinsic
dimension (which could be exponentially worse in the polynomial degree).

1

Introduction

Bandits [51] are a class of online decision-making problems where an agent interacts with the
environment, only receives a scalar reward, and aims to maximize the reward. In many real-world
applications, bandit and RL problems are characterized by large or continuous action space. To encode
the reward information associated with the action, function approximation for the reward function
is typically used, such as linear bandits [20]. Stochastic linear bandits assume the mean reward
to be the inner product between the unknown model parameter and the feature vector associated
with the action. This setting has been extensively studied, and algorithms with optimal regret are
known [20, 51, 2, 13].
However, linear bandits suffer from limited representation power unless the feature dimension is
prohibitively large. A comprehensive empirical study [60] found that real-world problems required
non-linear models and thus non-concave rewards to attain good performance on a testbed of bandit
problems. To take a step beyond the linear setting, it becomes more challenging to design optimal
algorithms. Unlike linear bandits, more sophisticated algorithms beyond optimism are necessary. For
instance, a natural first step is to look at quadratic [44] and higher-order polynomial [35] reward. In
∗
Alphabetical order. Correspondence to: Qi Lei, qilei@princeton.edu, Jason D. Lee, jasonlee@
princeton.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

