Stateful ODE-Nets using Basis Function Expansions

Alejandro Queiruga∗
Google Research
afq@google.com

N. Benjamin Erichson∗
University of Pittsburgh
erichson@pitt.edu

Liam Hodgkinson
ICSI and UC Berkeley
liam.hodgkinson@berkeley.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and UC Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The recently-introduced class of ordinary differential equation networks (ODENets) establishes a fruitful connection between deep learning and dynamical systems. In this work, we reconsider formulations of the weights as continuous-indepth functions using linear combinations of basis functions which enables us to
leverage parameter transformations such as function projections. In turn, this view
allows us to formulate a novel stateful ODE-Block that handles stateful layers.
The benefits of this new ODE-Block are twofold: first, it enables incorporating
meaningful continuous-in-depth batch normalization layers to achieve state-of-theart performance; second, it enables compressing the weights through a change
of basis, without retraining, while maintaining near state-of-the-art performance
and reducing both inference time and memory footprint. Performance is demonstrated by applying our stateful ODE-Block to (a) image classification tasks using
convolutional units and (b) sentence-tagging tasks using transformer encoder units.

1

Introduction

The interpretation of neural networks (NNs) as discretizations of differential equations [7, 17, 31, 43]
has recently unlocked a fruitful link between deep learning and dynamical systems. The strengths
of so-called ordinary differential equation networks (ODE-Nets) are that they are well suited for
modeling time series [11, 39] and smooth density estimation [14]. They are also able to learn
representations that preserve the topology of the input space [9] (which may be seen as a “feature” or
as a “bug”). Further, they can be designed to be highly memory efficient [13, 51]. However, one major
drawback of current ODE-Nets is that the predictive accuracy for tasks such as image classification
is often inferior as compared to other state-of-the-art NN architectures. The reason for the poor
performance is two-fold: (a) ODE-Nets have shallow parameterizations (albeit long computational
graphs), and (b) ODE-Nets do not include a mechanism for handling layers with internal state (i.e.,
stateful layers, or stateful modules), and thus cannot leverage batch normalization layers which are
standard in image classification problems. That is, in modern deep learning environments the running
mean and variance statistics of a batch normalization module are not trainable parameters, but are
instead part of the module’s state, which does not fit into the ODE framework.
Further, traditional techniques such as stochastic depth [21], layer dropout [12] and adaptive depth [10,
28], which are useful for regularization and compressing traditional NNs, do not necessarily apply
in a meaningful manner to ODE-Nets. That is, these methods do not provide a systematic scheme
to derive smaller networks from a single deep ODE-Net source model. This limitation prohibits
quick and rigorous adaptation of current ODE-Nets across different computational environments.
∗

Equal contributions.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

