Prior-independent Dynamic Auctions for a
Value-maximizing Buyer

Yuan Deng
Google Research
dengyuan@google.com

Hanrui Zhang
Duke University
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
We study prior-independent dynamic auction design with production costs for a
value-maximizing buyer, a paradigm that is becoming prevalent recently following
the development of automatic bidding algorithms in advertising platforms. In
contrast to a utility-maximizing buyer, who maximizes the difference between her
total value and total payment, a value-maximizing buyer aims to maximize her
total value subject to a return on investment (ROI) constraint. Our main result is a
dynamic mechanism with regret Õ(T 2/3 ), where T is the time horizon, against the
first-best benchmark, i.e., the maximum amount of revenue the seller can extract
assuming all values of the buyer are publicly known.

1

Introduction

Automatic bidding has become one of the main options for advertisers to buy advertisement opportunities in the online advertising market [Dolan, 2020]. The prevalence of automatic bidding is
partly driven by the fact that it significantly simplifies the interaction between the advertisers and
the advertising platform. Nowadays, millions of auctions are conducted in any given day while the
competitive landscape could be evolving over time and becoming vastly different across auctions.
Therefore, it is difficult for the advertisers to reason about its dynamics, let alone optimizing their
bids for each auction separately. Instead of soliciting for fine-grained bids for different auctions
they participate in, the automatic bidding product only asks the advertisers to provide high-level
objectives and constraints. With provided high-level information, the automatic bidding product bids
on behalf of the advertisers to optimize the objectives while respecting the constraints. While there
are many different types of automatic bidding produces, a well-adopted product bids to maximize the
number of acquisitions subject to a constraint on the advertiser-specified return on investment (ROI)
constraint, i.e., a target ratio between the advertiser’s return and her advertising spend [Facebook,
2021, Google, 2021]. To bid on behalf of the advertiser to maximize the number of acquisitions, the
automatic bidding products can invoke sophisticated prediction algorithms to predict the acquisition
rate. These prediction algorithms have the benefit of being trained with long periods of data to have a
good generalization [Juan et al., 2016, McMahan et al., 2013, Zhou et al., 2018]. In this way, the
advertiser can only focus on designing their high-level objectives and specifying their constraints,
while leaving the complicated bidding part to the automatic bidding products.
The emergence of automatic bidding products opens up the opportunities for novel design of dynamic
auction mechanisms, as classic mechanisms are heavily specialized for utility-maximizing bidders,
the de facto paradigm in economic theory, which maximize the difference between their total value
and total payment [Edelman et al., 2007, Myerson, 1981]. In contrast, automated bidders behave very
differently in a way such that the payment is not directly involved in their objectives; and instead,
the payment indirectly appears in the ROI constraints while the objectives aim to maximize the total
value only. Therefore, classic auction design tailored for utility-maximizing bidders may not continue
to perform well in an automatic bidding environment. Furthermore, recent results demonstrate that
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

