Efficient methods for Gaussian Markov random fields
under sparse linear constraints

David Bolin
King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology
david.bolin@kaust.edu.sa

Jonas Wallin
Department of Statistics,
Lund University
jonas.wallin@stat.lu.se

Abstract
Methods for inference and simulation of linearly constrained Gaussian Markov
Random Fields (GMRF) are computationally prohibitive when the number of
constraints is large. In some cases, such as for intrinsic GMRFs, they may even be
unfeasible. We propose a new class of methods to overcome these challenges in the
common case of sparse constraints, where one has a large number of constraints
and each only involves a few elements. Our methods rely on a basis transformation
into blocks of constrained versus non-constrained subspaces, and we show that
the methods greatly outperform existing alternatives in terms of computational
cost. By combining the proposed methods with the stochastic partial differential
equation approach for Gaussian random fields, we also show how to formulate
Gaussian process regression with linear constraints in a GMRF setting to reduce
computational cost. This is illustrated in two applications with simulated data.

1

Introduction

Linearly constrained Gaussian processes (GPs) have recently gained attention, especially for Gaussian
process regression where the model should obey underlying physical principle such as conservation
laws or equilibrium conditions [13, 16, 17, 30, 31, 36, 37]. A well-known challenge with these models,
and GPs in general, is their high computational cost for inference and prediction in the case of big
data sets [2, 9, 14]. One way to reduce computational burden is to impose conditional independence
assumptions. In fact, conditional independence between random variables is often explicitly or
implicitly assumed in large classes of statistical models including Markov processes, hierarchical
models, and graphical models. The assumption typically increases the model’s interpretability and
facilitates computationally efficient methods for inference [29]. Gaussian variables with conditional
independence properties are known as Gaussian Markov random fields (GMRFs), and these are
widely used in areas ranging from brain imaging [24, 34, 20] to spatial statistics [7] and time series
analysis [28]. GMRFs further arise as computationally efficient approximations of certain GPs
[18], which is a fundamental modeling tool in both machine learning and statistics. In particular,
such approximations in combination with the integrated nested Laplace approximation (INLA)
methodology [29] made latent GMRFs widely used in the applied sciences [3]. GMRFs also have
connections with convolutional neural networks leading to recent considerations of deep GMRFs [33].
The key feature of GMRFs that reduces computational cost is sparsity. Specifically, a GMRF

X = [X1 , . . . , Xn ]> ∼ N µ, Q−1 ,

(1)

has a sparse precision (inverse covariance) matrix Q which enables the use of sparse matrix techniques
such as sparse Cholesky factorization [8] and iterative methods [35, 23, 34] for computationally
efficient sampling and statistical inference [27, 28]. The sparsity is caused by conditional independence assumptions since Qij = 0 if and only if Xi and Xj are independent conditionally on all other
variables in X [see 28, Chapter 2].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

