Robust Allocations with Diversity Constraints

Zeyu Shen
Duke University
Durham NC 27708-0129
zeyu.shen@duke.edu
Aleksandra Korolova
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
korolova@usc.edu

Lodewijk Gelauff
Ashish Goel
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305
{lodewijk,ashishg}@stanford.edu
Kamesh Munagala
Department of Computer Science
Duke University, Durham NC 27708-0129
kamesh@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of allocating divisible items among multiple agents, and
consider the setting where any agent is allowed to introduce diversity constraints
on the items they are allocated. We motivate this via settings where the items
themselves correspond to user ad slots or task workers with attributes such as
race and gender on which the principal seeks to achieve demographic parity. We
consider the following question: When an agent expresses diversity constraints into
an allocation rule, is the allocation of other agents hurt significantly? If this happens,
the cost of introducing such constraints is disproportionately borne by agents who
do not benefit from diversity. We codify this via two desiderata capturing robustness.
These are no negative externality – other agents are not hurt – and monotonicity –
the agent enforcing the constraint does not see a large increase in value. We show
in a formal sense that the Nash Welfare rule that maximizes product of agent values
is uniquely positioned to be robust when diversity constraints are introduced, while
almost all other natural allocation rules fail this criterion. We also show that the
guarantees achieved by Nash Welfare are nearly optimal within a widely studied
class of allocation rules. We finally perform an empirical simulation on real-world
data that models ad allocations to show that this gap between Nash Welfare and
other rules persists in the wild.

1

Introduction

Allocating heterogeneous divisible items (or resources) among agents with different values over these
items is a central problem in economics, with literature dating back many decades [43, 9, 37, 44, 5].
These problems have gained importance in computer science and machine learning due to their
applications in, among other things, large-scale online advertising [33, 7, 29, 6, 24, 8], resource
allocation in datacenters [28] and sharing economy platforms.
Given their wide applicability, there has been a large body of work on elucidating desirable properties
of such allocations. One desirable property is fairness or equity in the value the allocation provides
to different agents. Though there is no universally agreed-upon notion of fairness, one appealing
notion [44] defines fair allocations as those that are both Pareto-optimal on the value they provide to
the agents as well as envy-free [43], meaning that no agent should derive more value from another
agent’s allocation. A less restrictive notion is the so-called Pigou-Dalton principle [17, 35] or
welfarism, which states that given any fixed total value of the agents, an allocation should prefer
distributing these values so that there is no potential transfer of value from an agent with larger value
(the “rich”) to one with smaller value (the “poor”). This loosely translates to allocations that optimize
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

