Conic Blackwell Algorithm: Parameter-Free
Convex-Concave Saddle-Point Solving

Julien Grand-Clément∗
ISOM Department
HEC Paris
grand-clement@hec.fr

Christian Kroer
IEOR Department
Columbia University
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract
We develop new parameter-free and scale-free algorithms for solving convexconcave saddle-point problems. Our results are based on a new simple regret
√
minimizer, the Conic Blackwell Algorithm+ (CBA+ ), which attains O(1/ T )
average regret. Intuitively, our approach generalizes to other decision sets of
interest ideas from the Counterfactual Regret minimization (CFR+ ) algorithm,
which has very strong practical performance for solving sequential games on
simplexes. We show how to implement CBA+ for the simplex, `p norm balls, and
ellipsoidal confidence regions in the simplex, and we present numerical experiments
for solving matrix games and distributionally robust optimization problems. Our
empirical results show that CBA+ is a simple algorithm that outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on synthetic data and real data instances, without the need for any
choice of step sizes or other algorithmic parameters.

1

Introduction

We are interested in solving saddle-point problems (SPPs) of the form
min max F (x, y),

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where X ⊂ Rn , Y ⊂ Rm are convex, compact sets, and F : X ×Y → R is a subdifferentiable convexconcave function. Convex-concave SPPs arise in a number of practical problems. For example, the
problem of computing a Nash equilibrium of a zero-sum game can be formulated as a convex-concave
SPP, and this is the foundation of most methods for solving sequential zero-sum games [vS96,
ZJBP07, TBJB15, KWKKS20]. They also arise in imaging [CP11], `∞ -regression [ST18], Markov
Decision Processes [Iye05, WKR13, ST18], and in distributionally robust optimization, where the
max term represents the distributional uncertainty [ND16, BTHKM15]. In this paper we propose
efficient, parameter-free algorithms for solving (1) in many settings, i.e., algorithms that do not
require any tuning or choices of step sizes.
Repeated game framework One way to solve convex-concave SPPs is by viewing the SPP as
a repeated game between two players, where each step t consists of one player choosing xt ∈ X ,
the other player choosing yt ∈ Y, and then the players observe the payoff F (xt , yt ). If each player
employs a regret-minimization algorithm, then a well-known folk theorem says that the uniform
average strategy generated by two regret minimizers repeatedly playing an SPP against each other
converges to a solution to the SPP. We will call this the “repeated game framework” (see Section
2). There are already well-known algorithms for instantiating the above repeated game framework
∗

Julien Grand-Clément acknowledges the financial support of Hi! Paris for this project.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

