Intriguing Properties of Vision Transformers
Muzammal Naseer†? Kanchana Ranasinghe+? Salman Khan?†
Munawar Hayat¶ Fahad Shahbaz Khan?§ Ming-Hsuan Yang‡ r
†
Australian National University, ? Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, + Stony Brook University,
¶
Monash University, § Linköping University, ‡ University of California, Merced,
Yonsei University, r Google Research
muzammal.naseer@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViT) have demonstrated impressive performance across numerous machine vision tasks. These models are based on multi-head self-attention
mechanisms that can flexibly attend to a sequence of image patches to encode contextual cues. An important question is how such flexibility (in attending image-wide
context conditioned on a given patch) can facilitate handling nuisances in natural
images e.g., severe occlusions, domain shifts, spatial permutations, adversarial and
natural perturbations. We systematically study this question via an extensive set
of experiments encompassing three ViT families and provide comparisons with
a high-performing convolutional neural network (CNN). We show and analyze
the following intriguing properties of ViT: (a) Transformers are highly robust
to severe occlusions, perturbations and domain shifts, e.g., retain as high as 60%
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet even after randomly occluding 80% of the image
content. (b) The robustness towards occlusions is not due to texture bias, instead
we show that ViTs are significantly less biased towards local textures, compared to
CNNs. When properly trained to encode shape-based features, ViTs demonstrate
shape recognition capability comparable to that of human visual system, previously
unmatched in the literature. (c) Using ViTs to encode shape representation leads to
an interesting consequence of accurate semantic segmentation without pixel-level
supervision. (d) Off-the-shelf features from a single ViT model can be combined
to create a feature ensemble, leading to high accuracy rates across a range of
classification datasets in both traditional and few-shot learning paradigms. We
show effective features of ViTs are due to flexible and dynamic receptive fields
possible via self-attention mechanisms. Code: https://git.io/Js15X.

1

Introduction

As visual transformers (ViT) attract more interest [1], it becomes highly pertinent to study characteristics of their learned representations. Specifically, from the perspective of safety-critical applications
such as autonomous cars, robots and healthcare; the learned representations need to be robust and
generalizable. In this paper, we compare the performance of transformers with convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for handling nuisances (e.g., occlusions, distributional shifts, adversarial and natural
perturbations) and generalization across different data distributions. Our in-depth analysis is based on
three transformer families, ViT [2], DeiT [3] and T2T [4] across fifteen vision datasets. For brevity,
we refer to all the transformer families as ViT, unless otherwise mentioned.
We are intrigued by the fundamental differences in the operation of convolution and self-attention,
that have not been extensively explored in the context of robustness and generalization. While
convolutions excel at learning local interactions between elements in the input domain (e.g., edges
and contour information), self-attention has been shown to effectively learn global interactions (e.g.,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

