arXiv:2111.12876v1 [stat.ML] 25 Nov 2021

Time-independent Generalization Bounds for SGLD
in Non-convex Settings

Tyler Farghly
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
farghly@stats.ox.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We establish generalization error bounds for stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) with constant learning rate under the assumptions of dissipativity and smoothness, a setting that has received increased attention in the sampling/optimization literature. Unlike existing bounds for SGLD in non-convex
settings, ours are time-independent and decay to zero as the sample size increases.
Using the framework of uniform stability, we establish time-independent bounds by
exploiting the Wasserstein contraction property of the Langevin diffusion, which
also allows us to circumvent the need to bound gradients using Lipschitz-like
assumptions. Our analysis also supports variants of SGLD that use different
discretization methods, incorporate Euclidean projections, or use non-isotropic
noise.

1

Introduction

Investigating the generalization error of a learning algorithm is a fundamental problem in machine
learning that has motivated the development of a rich theory connecting notions of model complexity
and sensitivity to the ability of a learning algorithm to generalize well to unseen data. Recently, there
has been increased interest in studying the generalization capabilities of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) and its variants, e.g. [13, 1, 6, 17, 22, 19]. Despite them being some of the most important
methods of modern machine learning and statistics, their learning capabilities have not been fully
explored, particularly in non-convex settings.
One variant that has attracted a lot of attention is stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD)
[29]. With the addition of independent Gaussian noise to each iteration, SGLD combines the SGD
framework with the Langevin diffusion, a stochastic process that converges to the Gibbs distribution
of a given objective function. By tuning the scale of the noise applied, SGLD has been shown to
work well as both a sampling scheme and a statistical learning algorithm in a variety of settings,
e.g. [29, 25, 4, 14]. Using its relationship with the Langevin equation, various tools from stochastic
analysis have been adopted to develop a rich theory analyzing SGLD in settings where no comparable
results seem to be available for SGD, e.g. [23, 32, 5, 31]. In particular, a recent work from Raginsky
et al. [23] provides non-asymptotic excess risk bounds for SGLD for a broad class of non-convex
learning problems and these bounds were derived using the exponential ergodicity of Langevin
diffusions. Following this work, there has been ongoing progress in the development of bounds for
both optimization error and mixing times, e.g. [32, 5, 31, 7, 4]. Many of these works are motivated
by recent results showing that Langevin diffusions contract in particular Wasserstein distances [8, 9].
In parallel to this literature, there has been a growing body of work that considers generalization
error bounds for SGLD. Using uniform stability, Mou et al. [17] showed that under the assumption
of bounded gradient updates and bounded loss functions, SGLD attains generalization bounds that
grow slower with time than those that are known for SGD in identical settings [13, 6]. By bounding
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

