Towards Gradient-based Bilevel Optimization with
Non-convex Followers and Beyond

Risheng Liu1,2 Yaohua Liu1 Shangzhi Zeng3 Jin Zhang ∗4,5
International School of Information Science & Engineering, DUT 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, UVic
4
Department of Mathematics, SUSTech 5 National Center for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen
rsliu@dlut.edu.cn liuyaohua_918@163.com
zengshangzhi@gmail.com zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In recent years, Bi-Level Optimization (BLO) techniques have received extensive
attentions from both learning and vision communities. A variety of BLO models in
complex and practical tasks are of non-convex follower structure in nature (a.k.a.,
without Lower-Level Convexity, LLC for short). However, this challenging class
of BLOs is lack of developments on both efficient solution strategies and solid theoretical guarantees. In this work, we propose a new algorithmic framework, named
Initialization Auxiliary and Pessimistic Trajectory Truncated Gradient Method
(IAPTT-GM), to partially address the above issues. In particular, by introducing
an auxiliary as initialization to guide the optimization dynamics and designing a
pessimistic trajectory truncation operation, we construct a reliable approximate
version of the original BLO in the absence of LLC hypothesis. Our theoretical investigations establish the convergence of solutions returned by IAPTT-GM towards
those of the original BLO without LLC. As an additional bonus, we also theoretically justify the quality of our IAPTT-GM embedded with Nesterov’s accelerated
dynamics under LLC. The experimental results confirm both the convergence of
our algorithm without LLC, and the theoretical findings under LLC.

1

Introduction

Bi-Level Optimization (BLO) has been widely used to formulate problems in the field of deep
learning [1, 2], especially for hyperparameter optimization [3, 4, 5], meta learning [6, 7, 8, 9], neural
architecture search [10, 11, 12], adversarial learning [13], and reinforcement learning [14], etc. BLO
aims to tackle nested optimization structures appearing in applications, which has emerged as a
prevailing optimization technique for modern machine learning tasks with underlying hierarchy. In
the last decade, a large number of BLO methods have been proposed to address different machine
learning tasks. In fact, Gradient Methods (GMs), which can effectively handle BLO problems of
large scale, thus gain popularity. According to different types of strategies for gradient calculations,
existing GMs can be divided into two categories, i.e., the explicit approaches which aim to replace
the Lower-Level (LL) problem with dynamic iterations and implicit schemes that apply the implicit
function theorem to formulate the first-order optimality condition of the LL problem.
Explicit Gradient Methods for BLOs. In this type, solving the LL problem is regarded as the
evolution path of the dynamic system starting from a given initial point of the LL variable. The
gradient of the Upper-Level (UL) variable can be directly calculated by automatic differentiation
*Corresponding author
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

