Time Discretization-Invariant
Safe Action Repetition for Policy Gradient Methods

Seohong Park
Seoul National University
artberryx@snu.ac.kr

Jaekyeom Kim
Seoul National University
jaekyeom@snu.ac.kr

Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, continuous time is often discretized by a time scale
δ, to which the resulting performance is known to be highly sensitive. In this
work, we seek to find a δ-invariant algorithm for policy gradient (PG) methods,
which performs well regardless of the value of δ. We first identify the underlying reasons that cause PG methods to fail as δ → 0, proving that the variance
of the PG estimator can diverge to infinity in stochastic environments under a
certain assumption of stochasticity. While durative actions or action repetition
can be employed to have δ-invariance, previous action repetition methods cannot immediately react to unexpected situations in stochastic environments. We
thus propose a novel δ-invariant method named Safe Action Repetition (SAR)
applicable to any existing PG algorithm. SAR can handle the stochasticity of
environments by adaptively reacting to changes in states during action repetition.
We empirically show that our method is not only δ-invariant but also robust to
stochasticity, outperforming previous δ-invariant approaches on eight MuJoCo
environments with both deterministic and stochastic settings. Our code is available
at https://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/sar.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated phenomenal achievements in a wide array of
tasks, including superhuman game-playing [19, 27] and controlling complex robots [8, 13]. Most
RL algorithms are based on an Markov Decision Process (MDP), which is a discrete-time control
process for the iteration of observing a state and performing an action. However, numerous real-world
problems such as robotic manipulation and autonomous driving are defined in continuous time, which
does not directly fit the MDP setting. To fill this gap, continuous time is often discretized by a
discretization time scale δ, where the RL agent makes a decision at every δ. It has been shown that
RL algorithms are greatly sensitive to this hyperparameter [1, 36]. For instance, altering δ via frame
skipping leads to drastic performance differences [1, 4]. Indeed, an excessively high δ precludes the
agent from making fine-grained decisions, which is likely to cause performance degradation.
On average, the agent could perform equally well or better with a lower δ than with a higher δ, since
the agent can make decisions more frequently. However, Baird [2] and Tallec et al. [36] theoretically
proved that the standard Q-learning fails when δ → 0 as the action-value (Q) function collapses to the
state-value (V) function, eliminating preferences between actions. As will be shown in Section 4.1,
policy gradient (PG) methods fail as well with an infinitesimal δ for the following three reasons: (1)
The variance of the gradient estimator explodes. (2) Exploration ranges may become highly limited.
(3) Infinitely many decision steps are required. The latter two also apply to Q-learning methods.
Therefore, it is generally required to differently set an appropriate δ for each continuous environment.
Indeed, continuous control environments in MuJoCo [37] have different discretization time scales
from one another, ranging from 0.008s (Hopper) to 0.05s (InvertedDoublePendulum). However, such
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

