Nested Variational Inference
Heiko Zimmermann†
h.zimmermann@uva.nl

Hao Wu∗
wu.hao10@northeastern.edu

Babak Esmaeili†
b.esmaeili@uva.nl

Jan-Willem van de Meent†∗
j.w.vandemeent@uva.nl

∗

†
Institute of Informatics, University of Amsterdam
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University

Abstract
We develop nested variational inference (NVI), a family of methods that learn
proposals for nested importance samplers by minimizing an forward or reverse KL
divergence at each level of nesting. NVI is applicable to many commonly-used
importance sampling strategies and provides a mechanism for learning intermediate
densities, which can serve as heuristics to guide the sampler. Our experiments
apply NVI to (a) sample from a multimodal distribution using a learned annealing
path (b) learn heuristics that approximate the likelihood of future observations in a
hidden Markov model and (c) to perform amortized inference in hierarchical deep
generative models. We observe that optimizing nested objectives leads to improved
sample quality in terms of log average weight and effective sample size.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models provide a mechanism for incorporating priors into methods for unsupervised
representation learning. This is particularly useful in settings where the prior defines an inductive bias
that reflects the structure of the underlying domain. Training models with structured priors, however,
poses some challenges. A standard strategy for training deep generative models is to maximize a
reparameterized evidence lower bound with respect to both the generative and an inference model
[Kingma, Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014]. This approach works well in variational autoencoders
with isotropic Gaussian priors, but often fails for models with more structured priors or likelihoods.
In recent years, a range of strategies for improving upon standard reparameterized variational
inference have been put forward. These include wake-sleep style variational methods that minimize
the forward KL-divergence [Bornschein, Bengio, 2015; Le et al., 2019] as well as sampling schemes
that incorporate annealing [Huang et al., 2018], Sequential Monte Carlo [Le et al., 2018; Naesseth
et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017], Gibbs sampling [Wu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018], and
MCMC updates [Salimans et al., 2015; Hoffman, 2017; Li et al., 2017]. While these methods offer
flexible inference, typically resulting in better approximations to the posterior compared to traditional
variational inference methods, they are either model-specific, requiring specialized sampling schemes
and gradient estimators, or can not be easily composed with other techniques.
In this paper, we propose nested variational inference, a framework for combining nested importance
sampling and variational inference. Nested importance sampling formalizes the construction of
proposals by way of calls to other importance samplers [Naesseth et al., 2015; Naesseth et al., 2019],
Many existing importance samplers are instances of nested samplers, including methods based on
annealed importance sampling [Neal, 2001] and sequential Monte Carlo [Del Moral et al., 2006].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

