Learning to Predict Trustworthiness with
Steep Slope Loss

†

Yan Luo† , Yongkang Wong‡ , Mohan S Kankanhalli‡ , Qi Zhao†
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota
‡ School of Computing, National University of Singapore

luoxx648@umn.edu, yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
Understanding the trustworthiness of a prediction yielded by a classifier is critical for the safe and effective use of AI models. Prior efforts have been proven
to be reliable on small-scale datasets. In this work, we study the problem of
predicting trustworthiness on real-world large-scale datasets, where the task is
more challenging due to high-dimensional features, diverse visual concepts, and
a large number of samples. In such a setting, we observe that the trustworthiness predictors trained with prior-art loss functions, i.e., the cross entropy loss,
focal loss, and true class probability confidence loss, are prone to view both
correct predictions and incorrect predictions to be trustworthy. The reasons are
two-fold. Firstly, correct predictions are generally dominant over incorrect predictions. Secondly, due to the data complexity, it is challenging to differentiate
the incorrect predictions from the correct ones on real-world large-scale datasets.
To improve the generalizability of trustworthiness predictors, we propose a novel
steep slope loss to separate the features w.r.t. correct predictions from the ones
w.r.t. incorrect predictions by two slide-like curves that oppose each other. The
proposed loss is evaluated with two representative deep learning models, i.e.,
Vision Transformer and ResNet, as trustworthiness predictors. We conduct comprehensive experiments and analyses on ImageNet, which show that the proposed
loss effectively improves the generalizability of trustworthiness predictors. The
code and pre-trained trustworthiness predictors for reproducibility are available at
https://github.com/luoyan407/predict_trustworthiness.

1

Introduction

Classification is a ubiquitous learning problem that categorizes objects according to input features. It
is widely used in a range of applications, such as robotics [1], environment exploration [2], medical
diagnosis [3], etc. In spite of the successful development of deep learning methods in recent decades,
high-performance classifiers would still have a chance to make mistakes due to the improvability of
models and the complexity of real-world data [4, 5, 6, 7].
To assess whether the prediction yielded by a classifier can be trusted or not, there are growing
efforts towards learning to predict trustworthiness [8, 9]. These methods are evaluated on small-scale
datasets, e.g., MNIST [10], where the data is relatively simple and existing classifiers have achieved
high accuracy (> 99%). As a result, there are a dominant proportion of correct predictions and the
trustworthiness predictors are prone to classify incorrect predictions as trustworthy predictions. The
characteristics that the simple data is easy-to-classify aggravate the situation. To further understand
the prowess of predicting trustworthiness, we study this problem on the real-world large-scale datasets,
i.e., ImageNet [11]. This is a challenging theme for classification in terms of boundary complexity,
class ambiguity, and feature dimensionality [12]. As a result, failed predictions are inevitable.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

