Federated Multi-Task Learning
under a Mixture of Distributions
Othmane Marfoq1,3 , Giovanni Neglia1 , Aurélien Bellet2 , Laetitia Kameni3 , and Richard Vidal3
1

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, France, {othmane.marfoq, giovanni.neglia}@inria.fr
2
Inria, Université de Lille, France, aurelien.bellet@inria.fr
3
Accenture Labs, France, {richard.vidal, laetitia.kameni}@accenture.com

Abstract
The increasing size of data generated by smartphones and IoT devices motivated the
development of Federated Learning (FL), a framework for on-device collaborative
training of machine learning models. First efforts in FL focused on learning a
single global model with good average performance across clients, but the global
model may be arbitrarily bad for a given client, due to the inherent heterogeneity of
local data distributions. Federated multi-task learning (MTL) approaches can learn
personalized models by formulating an opportune penalized optimization problem.
The penalization term can capture complex relations among personalized models,
but eschews clear statistical assumptions about local data distributions.
In this work, we propose to study federated MTL under the flexible assumption
that each local data distribution is a mixture of unknown underlying distributions.
This assumption encompasses most of the existing personalized FL approaches and
leads to federated EM-like algorithms for both client-server and fully decentralized
settings. Moreover, it provides a principled way to serve personalized models to
clients not seen at training time. The algorithms’ convergence is analyzed through a
novel federated surrogate optimization framework, which can be of general interest.
Experimental results on FL benchmarks show that our approach provides models
with higher accuracy and fairness than state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [28] allows a set of clients to collaboratively train models without sharing
their local data. Standard FL approaches train a unique model for all clients [47, 32, 38, 29, 48].
However, as discussed in [56], the existence of such a global model suited for all clients is at odds
with the statistical heterogeneity observed across different clients [37, 28]. Indeed, clients can have
non-iid data and varying preferences. Consider for example a language modeling task: given the
sequence of tokens “I love eating,” the next word can be arbitrarily different from one client to
another. Thus, having personalized models for each client is a necessity in many FL applications.
Previous work on personalized FL. A naive approach for FL personalization consists in learning
first a global model and then fine-tuning its parameters at each client via a few iterations of stochastic
gradient descent [58]. In this case, the global model plays the role of a meta-model to be used as
initialization for few-shot adaptation at each client. In particular, the connection between FL and
Model Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) [27] has been studied in [19, 30, 1] in order to build a more
suitable meta-model for local personalization. Unfortunately, these methods can fail to build a model
with low generalization error (as exemplified by LEAF synthetic dataset [7, App. 1]). An alternative
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

