Fast Training Methods for Stochastic Compositional
Optimization Problems

Hongchang Gao1 , Heng Huang2
1

2

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, PA, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
hongchang.gao@temple.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
The stochastic compositional optimization problem covers a wide range of machine
learning models, such as sparse additive models and model-agnostic meta-learning.
Thus, it is necessary to develop efficient methods for its optimization. Existing
methods for the stochastic compositional optimization problem only focus on the
single machine scenario, which is far from satisfactory when data are distributed
on different devices. To address this problem, we propose novel decentralized
stochastic compositional gradient descent methods to efficiently train the largescale stochastic compositional optimization problem. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first one facilitating decentralized training for this kind of problem.
Furthermore, we provide the convergence analysis for our methods, which shows
that the convergence rate of our methods can achieve linear speedup with respect
to the number of devices. At last, we apply our decentralized training methods to
the model-agnostic meta-learning problem, and the experimental results confirm
the superior performance of our methods.

1

Introduction

The stochastic compositional optimization problem [20] plays an important role in the machine
learning field, since it covers numerous applications, such as policy evaluation [19], sparse additive
models [20], and model-agnostic meta-learning [6, 1]. Specifically, the stochastic compositional
optimization problem is defined as follows:
h 
i
min Eζ f Eξ [g(x; ξ)]; ζ ,
(1)
d
x∈R

′

where the outer-level function f (y) = Eζ [f (y; ζ)] : Rd → R is a smooth and nonconvex function,
′
the inner-level function g(x) = Eξ [g(x; ξ)] : Rd → Rd is a smooth function. It is obvious that
the loss function consists of two stochastic functions f and g, making it different from the noncompositional problem.
The compositional structure in Eq. (1) leads to more challenges in optimization compared with the
non-compositional problem, since the stochastic gradient of the loss function in Eq. (1) is not an
unbiased estimation of the full gradient. Thus, efficient training of the stochastic compositional
optimization problem has attracted increasing attention in recent years. For example, [20] proposed
the stochastic compositional gradient descent (SCGD) method to deal with the two-level stochasticity
in Eq. (1). But it has a worse convergence rate than the standard stochastic gradient descent method.
To improve it, a series of variance-reduced methods have been proposed. For example, [25] developed
the composite randomized incremental gradient method based on the SAGA [4] technique. [27, 24]
further improved the convergence rate based on the SPIDER [5] method.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

