Continuous Mean-Covariance Bandits
Yihan Du
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Siwei Wang
CST, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
wangsw2020@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhixuan Fang
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China
zfang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Longbo Huang∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
longbohuang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing risk-aware multi-armed bandit models typically focus on risk measures of
individual options such as variance. As a result, they cannot be directly applied
to important real-world online decision making problems with correlated options.
In this paper, we propose a novel Continuous Mean-Covariance Bandit (CMCB)
model to explicitly take into account option correlation. Specifically, in CMCB,
there is a learner who sequentially chooses weight vectors on given options and
observes random feedback according to the decisions. The agent’s objective
is to achieve the best trade-off between reward and risk, measured with option
covariance. To capture different reward observation scenarios in practice, we
consider three feedback settings, i.e., full-information, semi-bandit and full-bandit
feedback. We propose novel algorithms with optimal regrets (within logarithmic
factors), and provide matching lower bounds to validate their optimalities. The
experimental results also demonstrate the superiority of our algorithms. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work that considers option correlation in
risk-aware bandits and explicitly quantifies how arbitrary covariance structures
impact the learning performance. The novel analytical techniques we developed for
exploiting the estimated covariance to build concentration and bounding the risk of
selected actions based on sampling strategy properties can likely find applications
in other bandit analysis and be of independent interests.

1

Introduction

The stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) [3, 28, 2] problem is a classic online learning model,
which characterizes the exploration-exploitation trade-off in decision making. Recently, due to the
increasing requirements of risk guarantees in practical applications, the Mean-Variance Bandits
(MVB) [26, 30, 34] which aim at balancing the rewards and performance variances have received
extensive attention. While MVB provides a successful risk-aware model, it only considers discrete
decision space and focuses on the variances of individual arms (assuming independence among arms).
However, in many real-world scenarios, a decision often involves multiple options with certain
correlation structure, which can heavily influence risk management and cannot be ignored. For
instance, in finance, investors can select portfolios on multiple correlated assets, and the investment
risk is closely related to the correlation among the chosen assets. The well-known “risk diversification”
strategy [4] embodies the importance of correlation to investment decisions. In clinical trials, a
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

