High Probability Complexity Bounds for Line Search
Based on Stochastic Oracles
Billy Jin
Cornell University
bzj3@cornell.edu

Katya Scheinberg
Cornell University
katyas@cornell.edu

Miaolan Xie
Cornell University
mx229@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider a line-search method for continuous optimization under a stochastic
setting where the function values and gradients are available only through inexact
probabilistic zeroth and first-order oracles. These oracles capture multiple standard settings including expected loss minimization and zeroth-order optimization.
Moreover, our framework is very general and allows the function and gradient
estimates to be biased. The proposed algorithm is simple to describe, easy to implement, and uses these oracles in a similar way as the standard deterministic line
search uses exact function and gradient values. Under fairly general conditions
on the oracles, we derive a high probability tail bound on the iteration complexity
of the algorithm when applied to non-convex smooth functions. These results are
stronger than those for other existing stochastic line search methods and apply in
more general settings.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we analyze a line-search method when applied to the problem of minimizing an unconstrained, differentiable, possibly non-convex function : Rn ! R. The goal is to find a "-stationary
point for ; that is, a point x with kr (x)k  ". We make the standard assumption that r is LLipschitz, but the knowledge of L is not assumed by the algorithm. We consider a setting where
neither the function value (x) nor the gradient r (x) are directly computable. Instead, the algorithm is given black-box access to the following probabilistic oracles:
• Probabilistic zeroth order oracle. Given a point x, the oracle computes f (x, ⇠), a (random) estimate of the function value (x). ⇠ is a random variable (whose distribution may
depend on x), with probability space (⌦, F⌦ , P ). We assume the absolute value of the estimation error e(x) = |f (x, ⇠(x))
(x)| (we omit the dependence on ⇠ for brevity) to be
a “one-sided” sub-exponential-like random variable1 with parameters (⌫, b), whose mean
is bounded by some constant ✏f > 0. Specifically,
✓ 2 2◆

⌫
1
E⇠ [e(x)]  ✏f and E⇠ [exp{ (e(x) E[e(x)])}]  exp
, 8 2 0,
. (1)
2
b
• Probabilistic first order oracle. Given a point x and a constant ↵ > 0, the oracle computes
g(x, ⇠ 0 ), a (random) estimate of the gradient r (x), such that
P⇠0 (kg(x, ⇠ 0 )

r (x)k max{✏g , ↵kg(x, ⇠ 0 )k})

1

.

(2)

Here, ⇠ is a random variable (whose distribution may depend on x), with associated probability space (⌦0 , F⌦0 , P 0 ). (1
) 2 (0, 1) is the probability, intrinsic to the oracle, that the
0

1
This is a weaker requirement than assuming e(x) to be sub-exponential, as one only needs to guard against
the possibility of the error e(x) being too large.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

