VoiceMixer: Adversarial Voice Style Mixup

Sang-Hoon Lee1

Ji-Hoon Kim2

Hyunseung Chung2

Seong-Whan Lee2∗
1

{sh_lee, jihoon_kim, hs_chung, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr
Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
Although recent advances in voice conversion have shown significant improvement,
there still remains a gap between the converted voice and target voice. A key factor
that maintains this gap is the insufficient decomposition of content and voice style
from the source speech. This insufficiency leads to the converted speech containing
source speech style or losing source speech content. In this paper, we present
VoiceMixer which can effectively decompose and transfer voice style through
a novel information bottleneck and adversarial feedback. With self-supervised
representation learning, the proposed information bottleneck can decompose the
content and style with only a small loss of content information. Also, for adversarial
feedback of each information, the discriminator is decomposed into content and
style discriminator with self-supervision, which enable our model to achieve better
generalization to the voice style of the converted speech. The experimental results
show the superiority of our model in disentanglement and transfer performance,
and improve audio quality by preserving content information.

1

Introduction

Voice conversion (VC) is the task of transferring the target voice style to the source speech while
keeping the content information of the source speech. VC is also called voice style transfer (VST),
and it shares a long history with the objective to clone someone’s voice. There is even a potential risk
of usage in crime such as a voice spoofing (Kinnunen et al., 2012), and also in various applications
in entertainment (Nachmani and Wolf, 2019), education (Sisman et al., 2020), security (Wu and Li,
2016), and voice restoring (Yamagishi et al., 2012). Although deep learning made the breakthrough
in the VC domain, there still remains challenging problems for real-world application such as low
audio quality or similarity to target voice style.
Usually, traditional VC systems require the same utterances for different speakers to train properly.
However, it is hard to collect such parallel data for many speakers, and extension to many-to-many VC
systems becomes a laborious task. To overcome this problem, several methods have been developed.
First, generative adversarial networks (GAN) based models (Kaneko and Kameoka, 2018; Kaneko
et al., 2019, 2020; Kameoka et al., 2018) use adversarial feedback with cycle-consistent loss to train
with non-parallel data. However, it is hard to train these models, and they produce lacking audio
quality and transfer performance. The flow-based VC model, Blow (Serrà et al., 2019), is also a
non-parallel VC model with normalizing flows using the hyperconditioning mechanism.
Despite effort to transfer the voice style in non-parallel settings, these models are not able to
sufficiently disentangle content and style from the source speech, and thus the converted speech
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

