Object-Centric Representation Learning with
Generative Spatial-Temporal Factorization

Li Nanbo
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
nanbo.li@ed.ac.uk

Muhammad Ahmed Raza
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
m.a.raza@ed.ac.uk

Zhaole Sun
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
zhaole.sun@ed.ac.uk

Hu Wenbin
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
wenbin.hu@ed.ac.uk

Robert B. Fisher
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
rbf@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning object-centric scene representations is essential for attaining structural
understanding and abstraction of complex scenes. Yet, as current approaches
for unsupervised object-centric representation learning are built upon either a
stationary observer assumption or a static scene assumption, they often: i) suffer single-view spatial ambiguities, or ii) infer incorrectly or inaccurately object
representations from dynamic scenes. To address this, we propose Dynamicsaware Multi-Object Network (DyMON), a method that broadens the scope of
multi-view object-centric representation learning to dynamic scenes. We train DyMON on multi-view-dynamic-scene data and show that DyMON learns—without
supervision—to factorize the entangled effects of observer motions and scene
object dynamics from a sequence of observations, and constructs scene object
spatial representations suitable for rendering at arbitrary times (querying across
time) and from arbitrary viewpoints (querying across space). We also show that
the factorized scene representations (w.r.t. objects) support querying about a single
object by space and time independently.

1

Introduction

Object-centric representation learning promises improved interpretability, generalization, and dataefficient learning on various downstream tasks like reasoning (e.g. [18, 39]) and planning (e.g. [30,
2, 41]). It aims at discovering compositional structures around objects from the raw sensory input
data, i.e. a binding problem [12], where the segregation (i.e. factorization) is the major challenge
(e.g. [9, 4]), especially in cases of no supervision. In the context of visual data, most existing focus
has been on single-view settings, i.e. decomposing and representing 3D scenes based on a single 2D
image [1, 10, 26] or a fixed-view video [23]. These methods often suffer from single-view spatial
ambiguities and thus show several failures or inaccuracies in representing 3D scene properties. It was
demonstrated by Nanbo et al. [31] that such ambiguities could be effectively resolved by multi-view
information aggregation. However, current multi-view models are built upon a foundational staticscene assumption. As a result, they: 1) require static-scene data for training and 2) cannot handle
well dynamic scenes where the spatial structures evolve over time. This greatly harms a model’s
potentials in real-world applications.
In this work, we target an unexplored problem—unsupervised object-centric latent representation
learning in multi-view-dynamic-scene scenarios. Despite the importance of the problem to spatial35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

