Deep Bandits Show-Off:
Simple and Efficient Exploration with Deep Networks

Rong Zhu
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
rongzhu@fudan.edu.cn
Mattia Rigotti∗
IBM Research AI
mr2666@columbia.edu

Abstract
Designing efficient exploration is central to Reinforcement Learning due to the
fundamental problem posed by the exploration-exploitation dilemma. Bayesian
exploration strategies like Thompson Sampling resolve this trade-off in a principled
way by modeling and updating the distribution of the parameters of the action-value
function, the outcome model of the environment. However, this technique becomes
infeasible for complex environments due to the computational intractability of
maintaining probability distributions over parameters of outcome models of corresponding complexity. Moreover, the approximation techniques introduced to
mitigate this issue typically result in poor exploration-exploitation trade-offs, as
observed in the case of deep neural network models with approximate posterior
methods that have been shown to underperform in the deep bandit scenario.
In this paper we introduce Sample Average Uncertainty (SAU), a simple and efficient uncertainty measure for contextual bandits. While Bayesian approaches like
Thompson Sampling estimate outcomes uncertainty indirectly by first quantifying
the variability over the parameters of the outcome model, SAU is a frequentist approach that directly estimates the uncertainty of the outcomes based on the value predictions. Importantly, we show theoretically that the uncertainty measure estimated
by SAU asymptotically matches the uncertainty provided by Thompson Sampling,
as well as its regret bounds. Because of its simplicity SAU can be seamlessly applied to deep contextual bandits as a very scalable drop-in replacement for epsilongreedy exploration. We confirm empirically our theory by showing that SAU-based
exploration outperforms current state-of-the-art deep Bayesian bandit methods
on several real-world datasets at modest computation cost, and make the code to
reproduce our results available at https://github.com/ibm/sau-explore.

1

Introduction

The exploration-exploitation dilemma is a fundamental problem in models of decision making under
uncertainty in various areas of statistics, economics, machine learning, game theory, adaptive control
and management. Given a set of actions associated with unknown probabilistic rewards, an agent has
to decide whether to exploit familiar actions to maximizing immediate reward or to explore poorly
understood or unknown actions for potentially finding ways to improve future rewards.
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

