Learning with Algorithmic
Supervision via Continuous Relaxations

Felix Petersen
University of Konstanz
felix.petersen@uni.kn

Christian Borgelt
University of Salzburg
christian@borgelt.net

Hilde Kuehne
University of Frankfurt
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
kuehne@uni-frankfurt.de

Oliver Deussen
University of Konstanz
oliver.deussen@uni.kn

Abstract
The integration of algorithmic components into neural architectures has gained
increased attention recently, as it allows training neural networks with new forms of
supervision such as ordering constraints or silhouettes instead of using ground truth
labels. Many approaches in the field focus on the continuous relaxation of a specific
task and show promising results in this context. But the focus on single tasks also
limits the applicability of the proposed concepts to a narrow range of applications.
In this work, we build on those ideas to propose an approach that allows to integrate
algorithms into end-to-end trainable neural network architectures based on a general
approximation of discrete conditions. To this end, we relax these conditions in
control structures such as conditional statements, loops, and indexing, so that
resulting algorithms are smoothly differentiable. To obtain meaningful gradients,
each relevant variable is perturbed via logistic distributions and the expectation
value under this perturbation is approximated. We evaluate the proposed continuous
relaxation model on four challenging tasks and show that it can keep up with
relaxations specifically designed for each individual task.

1

Introduction

Artificial Neural Networks have shown their ability to solve various problems, ranging from classical
tasks in computer science such as machine translation [1] and object detection [2] to many other topics
in science such as, e.g., protein folding [3]. Simultaneously, classical algorithms exist, which typically
solve predefined tasks based on a given input and a predefined control structure such as, e.g., sorting,
shortest-path computation and many more. Recently, research has started to combine both elements by
integrating algorithmic concepts into neural network architectures. Those approaches allow training
neural networks with alternative supervision strategies, such as learning 3D representations via a
differentiable renderer [4], [5] or training neural networks with ordering information [6], [7]. We
unify these alternative supervision strategies, which integrate algorithms into the training objective,
as algorithmic supervision:
Definition 1 (Algorithmic Supervision). In algorithmic supervision, an algorithm is applied to
the predictions of a model and the outputs of the algorithm are supervised. In contrast, in direct
supervision, the predictions of a model are directly supervised. This is illustrated in Figure 1.
In general, to allow for end-to-end training of neural architectures with integrated algorithms, the
challenge is to estimate the gradients of a respective algorithm, e.g., by a differentiable approximation.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

