On the Estimation Bias in Double Q-Learning

Zhizhou Ren1†, Guangxiang Zhu2 , Hao Hu2 , Beining Han2 , Jianglun Chen2 , Chongjie Zhang2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
zhizhour@illinois.edu, guangxiangzhu@outlook.com
{hu-h19, hbn18, chen-jl18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Double Q-learning is a classical method for reducing overestimation bias, which is
caused by taking maximum estimated values in the Bellman operation. Its variants
in the deep Q-learning paradigm have shown great promise in producing reliable
value prediction and improving learning performance. However, as shown by prior
work, double Q-learning is not fully unbiased and suffers from underestimation
bias. In this paper, we show that such underestimation bias may lead to multiple
non-optimal fixed points under an approximate Bellman operator. To address the
concerns of converging to non-optimal stationary solutions, we propose a simple but
effective approach as a partial fix for the underestimation bias in double Q-learning.
This approach leverages an approximate dynamic programming to bound the target
value. We extensively evaluate our proposed method in the Atari benchmark tasks
and demonstrate its significant improvement over baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Value-based reinforcement learning with neural networks as function approximators has become a
widely-used paradigm and shown great promise in solving complicated decision-making problems in
various real-world applications, including robotics control (Lillicrap et al., 2016), molecular structure
design (Zhou et al., 2019), and recommendation systems (Chen et al., 2018). Towards understanding
the foundation of these successes, investigating algorithmic properties of deep-learning-based value
function approximation has attracted a growth of attention in recent years (Van Hasselt et al., 2018;
Fu et al., 2019; Achiam et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2020). One of the phenomena of interest is
that Q-learning (Watkins, 1989) is known to suffer from overestimation issues, since it takes a
maximum operator over a set of estimated action-values. Comparing with underestimated values,
overestimation errors are more likely to be propagated through greedy action selections, which
leads to an overestimation bias in value prediction (Thrun and Schwartz, 1993). This overoptimistic
behavior of decision making has also been investigated in the literature of management science
(Smith and Winkler, 2006) and economics (Thaler, 1988).
In deep Q-learning algorithms, one major source of value estimation errors comes from the optmization procedure. Although a deep neural network may have a sufficient expressiveness power
to represent an accurate value function, the back-end optimization is hard to solve. As a result of
computational considerations, stochastic gradient descent is almost the default choice for training
deep Q-networks. As pointed out by Riedmiller (2005) and Van Hasselt et al. (2018), a mini-batch
gradient update may have unpredictable effects on state-action pairs outside the training batch. The
high variance of gradient estimation by such stochastic methods would lead to an unavoidable approximation error in value prediction, which cannot be eliminated by simply increasing sample size and
†

Work done while Zhizhou was an undergraduate at Tsinghua University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

