When is Unsupervised Disentanglement Possible?

Daniella Horan and Eitan Richardson and Yair Weiss
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
{daniella.horan,eitan.richardson,yair.weiss}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
A common assumption in many domains is that high dimensional data are a
smooth nonlinear function of a small number of independent factors. When is
it possible to recover the factors from unlabeled data? In the context of deep
models this problem is called “disentanglement” and was recently shown to be
impossible without additional strong assumptions [17, 19]. In this paper, we
show that the assumption of local isometry together with non-Gaussianity of the
factors, is sufficient to provably recover disentangled representations from data.
We leverage recent advances in deep generative models to construct manifolds of
highly realistic images for which the ground truth latent representation is known,
and test whether modern and classical methods succeed in recovering the latent
factors. For many different manifolds, we find that a spectral method that explicitly
optimizes local isometry and non-Gaussianity consistently finds the correct latent
factors, while baseline deep autoencoders do not. We propose how to encourage
deep autoencoders to find encodings that satisfy local isometry and show that this
helps them discover disentangled representations. Overall, our results suggest
that in some realistic settings, unsupervised disentanglement is provably possible,
without any domain-specific assumptions.

𝑧"

𝑦!

𝑧"

𝑴𝑪𝑪: 𝟎. 𝟗𝟔𝟗𝟓𝟐
𝑳𝑰: 𝟎. 𝟔𝟖𝟑𝟐𝟏

(a) cat1

(b) HLLE+ICA

𝑧!

𝑦"

𝑧!

𝑦"

𝑧!

𝑧!

𝑦!

𝑧"

𝑧"

𝑴𝑪𝑪: 𝟎. 𝟑𝟗𝟎𝟎𝟗
𝑳𝑰: 𝟎. 𝟏𝟐𝟑𝟏𝟑

(c) IRMAE

Figure 1: (a) Manifold of highly realistic images with two independent latent factors. Given unlabled
images, is it possible to recover the true factors? HLLE+ICA (b) succeeds while a baseline autoencoder (c) learns a highly entangled embedding. Similarly, the representation found by HLLE+ICA
approximately satisfies local isometry while the encoding of the baseline autoencoder does not
(bottom). In this paper we show that the assumptions of local isometry and non-Gaussianity are
sufficient to provably recover disentangled representations.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

