Topic Modeling Revisited: A Document Graph-based
Neural Network Perspective

Dazhong Shen1,2 , Chuan Qin2 , Chao Wang1,2 , Zheng Dong2 , Hengshu Zhu2,∗ , Hui Xiong3,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc.
3
Artificial Intelligence Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
sdz@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chuanqin0426@gmail.com, wdyx2012@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
zhdong0@outlook.com, zhuhengshu@gmail.com, xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract
Most topic modeling approaches are based on the bag-of-words assumption, where
each word is required to be conditionally independent in the same document. As a
result, both of the generative story and the topic formulation have totally ignored
the semantic dependency among words, which is important for improving the
semantic comprehension and model interpretability. To this end, in this paper, we
revisit the task of topic modeling by transforming each document into a directed
graph with word dependency as edges between word nodes, and develop a novel
approach, namely Graph Neural Topic Model (GNTM). Specifically, in GNTM,
a well-defined probabilistic generative story is designed to model both the graph
structure and word sets with multinomial distributions on the vocabulary and word
dependency edge set as the topics. Meanwhile, a Neural Variational Inference
(NVI) approach is proposed to learn our model with graph neural networks to
encode the document graphs. Besides, we theoretically demonstrate that Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) can be derived from GNTM as a special case with
similar objective functions. Finally, extensive experiments on four benchmark
datasets have clearly demonstrated the effectiveness and interpretability of GNTM
compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

As one of the most widely-used techniques for document analysis, topic modeling aims to learn a
set of latent topics from the observed document collection, each of which describes an interpretable
semantic concept. In particular, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [5] and its extensions [3, 9, 44, 60]
have achieved great success in various application scenarios over the past decades. These approaches
usually specify a probabilistic generative model to draw the document data with a structure of
latent variables sampled from prior distributions and word distribution on the vocabulary as topics.
Recently, with the development of Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [24], a Neural Variational Inference
algorithm (NVI) with neural networks for topic modeling, namely Neural Topic Model, has attracted
great attention [35, 34, 11, 12, 42, 49, 61] , due to its appealing flexibility and scalability.
However, it is well-known that traditional topic modeling usually has the bag-of-word assumption,
where the words in a document are assumed to be “exchangeable”, which also arouses two typical
challenges behind most topic models. On one hand, given the topic distribution of the document, the
words are conditionally independent. This implicates that the dependency relationship among words
is totally ignored, while words are dependent on each other according to linguistic knowledge [30].
∗

*Corresponding authors. This work was accomplished when Dazhong Shen was an intern in Baidu
supervised by Chuan Qin and Hengshu Zhu.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

