Flattening Sharpness for Dynamic Gradient
Projection Memory Benefits Continual Learning

Danruo Deng1 , Guangyong Chen2∗, Jianye Hao3,4 , Qiong Wang2 , Pheng-Ann Heng1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory
of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{drdeng,pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {gy.chen, wangqiong}@siat.ac.cn,
jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
The backpropagation networks are notably susceptible to catastrophic forgetting,
where networks tend to forget previously learned skills upon learning new ones.
To address such the ’sensitivity-stability’ dilemma, most previous efforts have been
contributed to minimizing the empirical risk with different parameter regularization
terms and episodic memory, but rarely exploring the usages of the weight loss
landscape. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between the weight loss
landscape and sensitivity-stability in the continual learning scenario, based on
which, we propose a novel method, Flattening Sharpness for Dynamic Gradient
Projection Memory (FS-DGPM). In particular, we introduce a soft weight to
represent the importance of each basis representing past tasks in GPM, which can
be adaptively learned during the learning process, so that less important bases
can be dynamically released to improve the sensitivity of new skill learning. We
further introduce Flattening Sharpness (FS) to reduce the generalization gap by
explicitly regulating the flatness of the weight loss landscape of all seen tasks. As
demonstrated empirically, our proposed method consistently outperforms baselines
with the superior ability to learn new skills while alleviating forgetting effectively.2 .

1

Introduction

Humans have the ability to continually learn new knowledge without forgetting their previously
learned ones through mediating a rich set of neurocognitive mechanisms [41, 15, 39]. This ability,
often known as continual learning or lifelong learning [29], is crucial for computational systems,
such as deep neural networks (DNNs), which are required to sequentially learn and deal with multiple
tasks when implemented in the dynamically changing environment. Continual learning remains a
long-standing challenge for DNNs since these networks are typically trained with stationary training
batches by stochastic gradient descent methods [19], which generally leads to an abrupt performance
decrease on previously learned tasks as new tasks are learned. To address such catastrophic forgetting,
we can brutally retrain an oracle network on the entire dataset containing all tasks to capture dynamic
changes in the data distribution, but this methodology is obviously too inefficient to hinder the
learning of novel data in real time.
During the last few years, lots of research efforts have been devoted to improving the stability of
DNNs on old tasks while keeping sensitive to new information. The first intuitive idea is to introduce
∗
2

Corresponding author: Guangyong Chen. <gy.chen@siat.ac.cn>
The code is available at: https://github.com/danruod/FS-DGPM

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

