Gaussian Kernel Mixture Network for
Single Image Defocus Deblurring

Yuhui Quan∗ ,
Zicong Wu∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
South China University of Technology

Hui Ji∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Defocus blur is one kind of blur effects often seen in images, which is challenging
to remove due to its spatially variant amount. This paper presents an end-to-end
deep learning approach for removing defocus blur from a single image, so as to
have an all-in-focus image for consequent vision tasks. First, a pixel-wise Gaussian
kernel mixture (GKM) model is proposed for representing spatially variant defocus
blur kernels in an efficient linear parametric form, with higher accuracy than
existing models. Then, a deep neural network called GKMNet is developed by
unrolling a fixed-point iteration of the GKM-based deblurring. The GKMNet is
built on a lightweight scale-recurrent architecture, with a scale-recurrent attention
module for estimating the mixing coefficients in GKM for defocus deblurring.
Extensive experiments show that the GKMNet not only noticeably outperforms
existing defocus deblurring methods, but also has its advantages in terms of model
complexity and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

The appearance sharpness of an object in an image taken by a camera is determined by the scene
distance of the object to the focal plane of the camera. An object will have the sharpest appearance
when it is on the focal plane, i.e., the object is in focus. The area around the focal plane where objects
appear to be in focus is called the depth of field (DoF). When an object is away from the DoF, it
will appear blurry. The further is an object away from the DoF, the more blurry it appears. Such a
phenomenon is called defocus blur or out-of-focus blur. Defocus blur effects will be prominent in
an image with a shallow DoF, e.g. images captured with a large aperture. This paper concerns the
problem of single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) which is about reconstructing an all-in-focus
image from a defocused image (i.e. an image with defocused regions). SIDD is of practical values to
many applications in machine vision, e.g., photo refocusing, object recognition, and many others [1].
Consider a defocused image y, which relates to its all-in-focus counterpart x by
y = B ◦ x + ,
where  denotes the measurement noise, and B is a linear operator defined by
XX
(B ◦ x)[m, n] :=
bm,n [i, j]x[m − i, n − j].
i

(1)

(2)

j

Each pixel at location [m, n] is associated with a defocus kernel bm,n , also referred to as point spread
function (PSF), which is determined by the distance to the focal plane. Often, these pixel-wise PSFs
are approximated by Gaussian kernels [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] or disk kernels [7, 8]. Without supplementary
information on the scene depth, these pixel-wise PSFs are unknown. Therefore, SIDD is a challenging
nonlinear inverse problem which needs to estimate both B and x from (1).
∗

email: csyhquan@scut.edu.cn (Y. Quan); cszicongwu@mail.scut.edu.cn (Z. Wu); matjh@nus.edu.sg (H. Ji).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

