Going Beyond Linear RL: Sample Efficient Neural
Function Approximation

Baihe Huang1∗ , Kaixuan Huang2∗ , Sham M. Kakade3,4∗ , Jason D. Lee2∗
Qi Lei2∗ , Runzhe Wang2∗ , Jiaqi Yang5∗
1

Peking University 2 Princeton University 3 Harvard University
4
Microsoft Research 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) powered by neural net approximation of the
Q function has had enormous empirical success. While the theory of RL has
traditionally focused on linear function approximation (or eluder dimension) approaches, little is known about nonlinear RL with neural net approximations of the
Q functions. This is the focus of this work, where we study function approximation
with two-layer neural networks (considering both ReLU and polynomial activation
functions). Our first result is a computationally and statistically efficient algorithm
in the generative model setting under completeness for two-layer neural networks.
Our second result considers this setting but under only realizability of the neural
net function class. Here, assuming deterministic dynamics, the sample complexity
scales linearly in the algebraic dimension. In all cases, our results significantly
improve upon what can be attained with linear (or eluder dimension) methods.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent aims to learn the optimal decision-making rule by interacting
with an unknown environment [71]. Deep Reinforcement Learning, empowered by deep neural
networks [48, 32], has achieved tremendous success in various real-world applications, such as Go
[68], Atari [54], Dota2 [7], Texas Holdém poker [56], and autonomous driving [66]. Those modern
RL applications are characterized by large state-action spaces, and the empirical success of deep
RL corroborates the observation that deep neural networks can extrapolate well across state-action
spaces [35, 55, 50].
Although in practice non-linear function approximation scheme is prevalent, theoretical understandings of the sample complexity of RL mainly focus on tabular or linear function approximation
settings [69, 38, 5, 41, 63, 88, 1, 43, 44, 77]. These results rely on finite state space or exact linear approximations. Recently, sample efficient algorithms under non-linear function approximation settings
are proposed [82, 11, 20, 12, 51, 72, 13, 91, 86]. Those algorithms are based on Bellman rank [40],
eluder dimension [64], neural tangent kernel [37, 4, 14, 92], or sequential Rademacher complexity
[60, 61]. Yet, the understanding of how deep RL learns and generalizes in large state spaces is far
from complete. While the aforementioned works study function approximation structures that possess
the nice properties of linear models, such as low information gain and low eluder dimensions, the
highly non-linear nature of neural networks renders challenges on their applicability to deep RL.
For one thing, recent wisdoms in deep learning theory cast doubt on the ability of neural tangent
kernel and random features to model the actual neural networks. Indeed, the neural tangent kernel
∗
Alphabetical order. Correspondence to: Baihe Huang, baihehuang@pku.edu.cn, Jason D. Lee, Jasondl@
princeton.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

