BAST: Bayesian Additive Regression Spanning Trees
for Complex Constrained Domain

Zhao Tang Luo
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
ztluo@stat.tamu.edu

Huiyan Sang
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
huiyan@stat.tamu.edu

Bani Mallick
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
bmallick@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
Nonparametric regression on complex domains has been a challenging task as
most existing methods, such as ensemble models based on binary decision trees,
are not designed to account for intrinsic geometries and domain boundaries. This
article proposes a Bayesian additive regression spanning trees (BAST) model for
nonparametric regression on manifolds, with an emphasis on complex constrained
domains or irregularly shaped spaces embedded in Euclidean spaces. Our model
is built upon a random spanning tree manifold partition model as each weak
learner, which is capable of capturing any irregularly shaped spatially contiguous
partitions while respecting intrinsic geometries and domain boundary constraints.
Utilizing many nice properties of spanning tree structures, we design an efficient
Bayesian inference algorithm. Equipped with a soft prediction scheme, BAST is
demonstrated to significantly outperform other competing methods in simulation
experiments and in an application to the chlorophyll data in Aral Sea, due to its
strong local adaptivity to different levels of smoothness.

1

Introduction

Over the past few decades, data collected from complex constrained domains have attracted much
attention in machine learning and spatial statistics. Domains with non-trivial geometries, such as
irregular boundaries, sharp concavities, and/or interior holes due to geographic constraints (e.g., lakes
and coasts), impose challenges on statistical modeling, as the Euclidean assumption underpinning
many traditional statistical and machine learning methods no longer holds for data with intrinsic
geometries.
In this paper, we consider nonparametric regression problems with features lying on constrained
domains or, more generally, compact Riemannian manifolds. To be more specific, we model the
response variable Y (s) ∈ R at a location s on a compact Riemannian manifold M as
Y (s) = f (s) + (s),

iid

(s) ∼ N(0, σ 2 ),

(1)

2

for some unknown function f : M → R and noise variance σ . In many applications, the true
function f (·) may not be globally smooth but has discontinuities/abrupt changes across some narrow
boundary regions in the domain. For example, housing prices can be substantially different in two
neighboring communities, and ocean chlorophyll data that are separated by a narrow peninsula can
exhibit distinct spatial patterns. It is of great need to develop new methodologies that can both respect
intrinsic geometries of the domain and capture complicated local discontinuity patterns in the true
function.
There is growing literature on nonparametric regression and smoothing for complex domains. Spline
smoothing methods [33, 22, 41, 43, 37] have been developed for data on constrained domains,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

