Fixes That Fail: Self-Defeating Improvements in
Machine-Learning Systems

Ruihan Wu∗
Cornell University
rw565@cornell.edu

Chuan Guo

Awni Hannun
Laurens van der Maaten
Facebook AI Research
{chuanguo,awni,lvdmaaten}@fb.com

Abstract
Machine-learning systems such as self-driving cars or virtual assistants are composed of a large number of machine-learning models that recognize image content,
transcribe speech, analyze natural language, infer preferences, rank options, etc.
Models in these systems are often developed and trained independently, which
raises an obvious concern: Can improving a machine-learning model make the
overall system worse? We answer this question affirmatively by showing that
improving a model can deteriorate the performance of downstream models, even
after those downstream models are retrained. Such self-defeating improvements are
the result of entanglement between the models in the system. We perform an error
decomposition of systems with multiple machine-learning models, which sheds
light on the types of errors that can lead to self-defeating improvements. We also
present the results of experiments which show that self-defeating improvements
emerge in a realistic stereo-based detection system for cars and pedestrians.

1

Introduction

Progress in machine learning has allowed us to develop increasingly sophisticated artificially intelligent systems, including self-driving cars, virtual assistants, and complex robots. These systems
generally contain a large number of machine-learning models that are trained to perform modular
tasks such as recognizing image or video content, transcribing speech, analyzing natural language,
eliciting user preferences, ranking options to be presented to a user, etc. The models feed each other
information: for example, a pedestrian detector may use the output of a depth-estimation model as
input. Indeed, machine-learning systems can be interpreted as directed acyclic graphs in which each
vertex corresponds to a model, and models feed each other information over the edges in the graph.
In practice, various models in this graph are often developed and trained independently [22]. This
modularization tends to lead to more usable APIs but may also be motivated by other practical
constraints. For example, some of the models in the system may be developed by different teams
(some models in the system may be developed by a cloud provider); models may be retrained and deployed at
a very different cadence (personalization models may be updated very regularly but image-recognition models
may not); new downstream models may be added continuously in the graph (user-specific models may
need to be created every time a user signs up for a service); or models may be non-differentiable (gradientboosted decision trees are commonly used for selection of discrete features). This can make backpropagation
through the models in the graph infeasible or highly undesirable in many practical settings.
The scenario described above leads to an obvious potential concern: Can improving a machinelearning model make the machine-learning system worse? We answer this question affirmatively by
showing how improvements in an upstream model can deteriorate the performance of downstream
models, even if all the downstream models are retrained after updating the upstream model. Such
∗

Work performed during internship at Facebook AI Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

