Attention Approximates Sparse Distributed Memory
Trenton Bricken
Systems, Synthetic and Quantitative Biology
Harvard University
trentonbricken@g.harvard.edu

Cengiz Pehlevan
Applied Mathematics
Harvard University
cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
While Attention has come to be an important mechanism in deep learning, there
remains limited intuition for why it works so well. Here, we show that Transformer
Attention can be closely related under certain data conditions to Kanerva’s Sparse
Distributed Memory (SDM), a biologically plausible associative memory model.
We confirm that these conditions are satisfied in pre-trained GPT2 Transformer
models. We discuss the implications of the Attention-SDM map and provide new
computational and biological interpretations of Attention.

Introduction
Used most notably in the Transformer, Attention has helped deep learning to arguably approach
human level performance in various tasks with larger models continuing to boost performance
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, the heuristic motivations that produced Attention leave open the
question of why it performs so well [1, 10]. Insights into why Attention is so effective would not
only make it more interpretable but also guide future improvements.
Much has been done to try and explain Attention’s success, including work showing that Transformer
representations map more closely to human brain recordings and inductive biases than other models
[11, 12]. Our work takes another step in this direction by showing the potential relationship between
Attention and biologically plausible neural processing at the level of neuronal wiring, providing a
novel mechanistic perspective behind the Attention operation. This potential relationship is created
by showing mathematically that Attention closely approximates Sparse Distributed Memory (SDM).
SDM is an associative memory model developed in 1988 to solve the “Best Match Problem”, where
we have a set of memories and want to quickly find the “best” match to any given query [13, 14]. In
the development of its solution, SDM respected fundamental biological constraints, such as Dale’s
law, that synapses are fixed to be either excitatory or inhibitory and cannot dynamically switch (see
Section 1 for an SDM overview and [13] or [15] for a deeper review). Despite being developed
independently of neuroanatomy, SDM’s biologically plausible solution maps strikingly well onto the
cerebellum [13, 16].1
Abstractly, the relationship between SDM and Attention exists because SDM’s read operation uses
intersections between high dimensional hyperspheres that approximate the exponential over sum of
exponentials that is Attention’s softmax function (Section 2). Establishing that Attention approximates
SDM mathematically, we then test it in pre-trained GPT2 Transformer models [3] (Section 3) and
simulations (Appendix B.7). We use the Query-Key Normalized Transformer variant [22] to directly
show that the relationship to SDM holds well. We then use original GPT2 models to help confirm
this result and make it more general.
1

This cerebellar relationship is additionally compelling by the fact that cerebellum-like neuroanatomy exists
in many other organisms including numerous insects (eg. the Drosophila Mushroom Body) and potentially
cephalopods [17, 18, 19, 20, 21].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

