Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with DynamicsAware Rewards in Reinforcement Learning

Jinxin Liu124 Hao Shen3∗ Donglin Wang24† Yachen Kang124 Qiangxing Tian124
1
Zhejiang University. 2 Westlake University. 3 UC Berkeley.
4
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study.
liujinxin@westlake.edu.cn, haoshen@berkeley.edu,
{wangdonglin, kangyachen, tianqiangxing}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised reinforcement learning aims to acquire skills without prior goal
representations, where an agent automatically explores an open-ended environment
to represent goals and learn the goal-conditioned policy. However, this procedure
is often time-consuming, limiting the rollout in some potentially expensive target
environments. The intuitive approach of training in another interaction-rich environment disrupts the reproducibility of trained skills in the target environment due
to the dynamics shifts and thus inhibits direct transferring. Assuming free access
to a source environment, we propose an unsupervised domain adaptation method
to identify and acquire skills across dynamics. Particularly, we introduce a KL
regularized objective to encourage emergence of skills, rewarding the agent for
both discovering skills and aligning its behaviors respecting dynamics shifts. This
suggests that both dynamics (source and target) shape the reward to facilitate the
learning of adaptive skills. We also conduct empirical experiments to demonstrate
that our method can effectively learn skills that can be smoothly deployed in target.

1

Introduction

Recently, the machine learning community has devoted attention to unsupervised reinforcement learning (RL) to acquire useful skills, ie, the problem of automatic discovery of a goal-conditioned policy
and its corresponding goal space [8]. As shown in Figure 1 (left), the standard training procedure of
learning skills in an unsupervised way follows: (1) representing goals, consisting of automatically
generating the goal distribution p(g) and the corresponding goal-achievement reward function rg ; (2)
learning the goal-conditioned policy πθ with the acquired p(g) and rg . Leveraging fully autonomous
interaction with the environment, the agent sets up goals, builds the goal-achievement reward function,
and extrapolates the goal-conditioned policy in parallel by adopting off-the-shelf RL methods [40, 19].
While we can obtain skills without any prior goal representations (p(g) and rg ) in an unsupervised way,
a major drawback of this approach is that it requires a large amount of rollout steps to represent goals
and learn the policy itself, together. This procedure is often impractical in some target environments
(eg, the robot in real world), where online interactions are time-consuming and potentially expensive.
That said, there often exist environments that resemble in structure (dynamics) yet provide more
accessible rollouts (eg, unlimited in simulators). For problems with such source environments
available, training the policy in a source environment significantly reduces the cost associated with
interaction in the target environment. Critically, we can train a policy in one environment and deploy
it in another by utilizing their structural similarity and the excess of interaction. Considering the
navigation in a room, we can learn arbitrary skills through the active exploration in a source simulated
∗

Work was done at Westlake University. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

