ByPE-VAE: Bayesian Pseudocoresets Exemplar VAE

Qingzhong Ai1
Lirong He1
Shiyu Liu1
Zenglin Xu2,3,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu China
2
School of Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen China
3
Department of Network Intelligence,
Peng Cheng National Lab, Shenzhen, China
{qzai,lirong_he}@std.uestc.edu.cn, shyu.liu@foxmail.com, xuzenglin@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies show that advanced priors play a major role in deep generative
models. Exemplar VAE, as a variant of VAE with an exemplar-based prior, has
achieved impressive results. However, due to the nature of model design, an
exemplar-based model usually requires vast amounts of data to participate in training, which leads to huge computational complexity. To address this issue, we
propose Bayesian Pseudocoresets Exemplar VAE (ByPE-VAE), a new variant of
VAE with a prior based on Bayesian pseudocoreset. The proposed prior is conditioned on a small-scale pseudocoreset rather than the whole dataset for reducing
the computational cost and avoiding overfitting. Simultaneously, we obtain the
optimal pseudocoreset via a stochastic optimization algorithm during VAE training
aiming to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the prior based on
the pseudocoreset and that based on the whole dataset. Experimental results show
that ByPE-VAE can achieve competitive improvements over the state-of-the-art
VAEs in the tasks of density estimation, representation learning, and generative
data augmentation. Particularly, on a basic VAE architecture, ByPE-VAE is up to 3
times faster than Exemplar VAE while almost holding the performance. Code is
available at https://github.com/Aiqz/ByPE-VAE.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models that learn implicit data distribution from the enormous amount of data
have received widespread attention to generating highly realistic new samples in machine learning.
In particular, due to the utilization of the reparameterization trick and variational inference for
optimization, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [1, 2] stand out and have demonstrated significant
successes for dimension reduction [3], learning representations [4], and generating data [5]. In
addition, various variants of VAE have been proposed conditioned on advanced variational posterior
[6, 7, 8] or powerful decoders [9, 10].
It is worth noting that the prior in the typical VAE is a simple standard normal distribution that
is convenient to compute while ignores the nature of the data itself. Moreover, a large number of
experiments have empirically demonstrated that simplistic priors could produce the phenomena of
over-regularization and posterior collapse, and finally cause poor performance [5, 11]. Hence, many
researchers have worked to develop more complex priors to enhance the capacity of the variational
posterior. In this line, Tomczak et al. [12] introduces a more flexible prior named VampPrior, which
is a mixture of variational posteriors based on pseudo-inputs to alleviate the problems like overfitting
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

