On the Algorithmic Stability of Adversarial Training
Yue Xing
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
xing49@purdue.edu

Qifan Song
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
qfsong@purdue.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
The adversarial training is a popular tool to remedy the vulnerability of deep learning models against adversarial attacks, and there is rich theoretical literature on the
training loss of adversarial training algorithms. In contrast, this paper studies the
algorithmic stability of a generic adversarial training algorithm, which can further help to establish an upper bound for generalization error. By figuring out
the stability upper bound and lower bound, we argue that the non-differentiability
issue of adversarial training causes worse algorithmic stability than their natural counterparts. To tackle this problem, we consider a noise injection method.
While the non-differentiability problem seriously affects the stability of adversarial training, injecting noise enables the training trajectory to avoid the occurrence
of non-differentiability with dominating probability, hence enhancing the stability
performance of adversarial training. Our analysis also studies the relation between
the algorithm stability and numerical approximation error of adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Successful machine learning algorithms require not only a good empirical performance but also
generalizing well to unseen data. For the robustness towards unseen data, empirical experiments
show that deep learning models can be fragile and vulnerable against adversarial input (Biggio
et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2014). To set an example, in image recognition problems, a deep neural
network will predict a wrong label when the testing image is slightly altered, while the change is
barely recognizable by human eyes (Papernot et al., 2016a).
Related research efforts in adversarial learning include designing adversarial attacks in various applications (Papernot et al., 2016a,b; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016), detecting attacked samples (Tao
et al., 2018; Ma and Liu, 2019), and modifications on the training process to obtain adversarially
robust models, i.e., adversarial training (Shaham et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2017; Jalal et al., 2017).
However, although adversarial training improves the adversarial robustness during testing, its generalization performance is still poor. While Yin et al. (2018) presented that the adversarial Rademacher
complexity is never smaller than its natural counterpart, Schmidt et al. (2018); Zhai et al. (2019) argued that a better adversarial generalization requires more labeled/unlabeled data.
In the literature of natural DNN optimization via iterative gradient moves, the empirical loss at each
iteration can be characterized by convergence rate analysis, yet generalization properties are not well
understood. To characterize the generalization error, one popular way is to study the algorithmic stability. Algorithmic stability is first considered by Kearns and Ron (1999); Bousquet and Elisseeff
(2001, 2002). Later, Hardt et al. (2016) explored the connection between algorithmic stability and
generalization performance of gradient-type optimization. Some follow-up research studies the stability for different classes of algorithms, or relax the definition of stability to generalize its usage,
see Ramezani-Kebrya et al. (2018); Charles and Papailiopoulos (2018); Kuzborskij and Lampert
(2018); Zhou et al. (2018); Lei and Ying (2020); Ho et al. (2020); Madden et al. (2020).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

