Neo-GNNs: Neighborhood Overlap-aware
Graph Neural Networks for Link Prediction

Seongjun Yun, Seoyoon Kim, Junhyun Lee, Jaewoo Kang∗ , Hyunwoo J. Kim∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Korea University
{ysj5419, sykim45, ljhyun33, kangj, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely applied to various fields for
learning over graph-structured data. They have shown significant improvements
over traditional heuristic methods in various tasks such as node classification and
graph classification. However, since GNNs heavily rely on smoothed node features
rather than graph structure, they often show poor performance than simple heuristic methods in link prediction where the structural information, e.g., overlapped
neighborhoods, degrees, and shortest paths, is crucial. To address this limitation,
we propose Neighborhood Overlap-aware Graph Neural Networks (Neo-GNNs)
that learn useful structural features from an adjacency matrix and estimate overlapped neighborhoods for link prediction. Our Neo-GNNs generalize neighborhood
overlap-based heuristic methods and handle overlapped multi-hop neighborhoods.
Our extensive experiments on Open Graph Benchmark datasets (OGB) demonstrate
that Neo-GNNs consistently achieve state-of-the-art performance in link prediction.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in a wide range of domains ranging from social network analysis
[1, 2, 3] to biology [4, 5, 6, 7] and computer vision [8, 9, 10]. In recent years, numerous variants of
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proposed for learning representations over graph-structured
data. GNNs learn low dimensional representations of nodes or graphs via iterative aggregation of
features from neighbors using non-linear transformations. In this manner, GNNs have shown
significant improvements over traditional methods, e.g., heuristic methods and embedding-based
methods, and achieved state-of-the-art performance on various tasks, such as node classification
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15], graph classification [16, 17, 18, 19, 20], and graph generation [21, 22, 23, 24].
However, in link prediction, traditional heuristic methods still show competitive performance compared to GNNs, which often even outperform GNNs. This is because structural information, (e.g.,
overlapped neighborhoods, degrees, and shortest path), is crucial for link prediction whereas GNNs
heavily rely on smoothed node features rather than graph structure. Recently, SEAL [25] has been
proposed to consider structural information for link prediction by utilizing the relative distance
between the target node pair and their neighborhoods. Nonetheless, SEAL requires the expensive
computational cost to apply a GNN independently to an extracted subgraph for each target node pair.
To address this limitation, we propose Neighborhood Overlap-aware Graph Neural Networks (NeoGNNs) that are designed to consider key structural information regarding links without manual
processes. Specifically, instead of using input node features, Neo-GNNs first learn to generate useful
structrual features for each node from an adjacency matrix. Then Neo-GNNs measure the existence
of links by considering the structural features of overlapped neighbhorhoods via neighbhorhood
∗

corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

