Integrating Expert ODEs into Neural ODEs:
Pharmacology and Disease Progression

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zq224@cam.ac.uk

William R. Zame
UCLA
zame@econ.ucla.edu

Paul Elbers
Amsterdam UMC
p.elbers@amsterdamumc.nl

Lucas M. Fleuren
Amsterdam UMC
l.fleuren@amsterdamumc.nl
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
UCLA
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Modeling a system’s temporal behaviour in reaction to external stimuli is a fundamental problem in many areas. Pure Machine Learning (ML) approaches often
fail in the small sample regime and cannot provide actionable insights beyond
predictions. A promising modification has been to incorporate expert domain
knowledge into ML models. The application we consider is predicting the patient health status and disease progression over time, where a wealth of domain
knowledge is available from pharmacology. Pharmacological models describe the
dynamics of carefully-chosen medically meaningful variables in terms of systems
of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs). However, these models only describe
a limited collection of variables, and these variables are often not observable in
clinical environments. To close this gap, we propose the latent hybridisation model
(LHM) that integrates a system of expert-designed ODEs with machine-learned
Neural ODEs to fully describe the dynamics of the system and to link the expert
and latent variables to observable quantities. We evaluated LHM on synthetic data
as well as real-world intensive care data of COVID-19 patients. LHM consistently
outperforms previous works, especially when few training samples are available
such as at the beginning of the pandemic.

1

Introduction

Understanding the temporal evolution of a dynamical system is the central problem in many areas.
The Machine Learning (ML) approach to this problem has been to learn a collection of latent variables
and construct a dynamical model of the system directly from observational data. While ML has
achieved strong predictive performance in some applications, it has two central weaknesses. The first
is that it requires large datasets. The second is that the latent variables that the ML approach identifies
often have no physical interpretation and do not correspond to any previously-identified quantities.
One approach to dealing with these weaknesses has been to incorporate expert domain knowledge into
ML models. Most of the work using this approach has focused on incorporating high-level knowledge
about the underlying physical system, such as conservation of energy [9, 32, 99], independence
of mechanism [63], monotonicity [59], or linearity [34]. In addition, there have been attempts to
integrate domain-specific “expert models” into ML models to create “hybrid” models. Most of this
work has employed expert models that directly issue predictions [54, 86, 91, 93] or extract useful
features from the raw measurements [41].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

