On the Convergence of Step Decay Step-Size for
Stochastic Optimization

Xiaoyu Wang
KTH - Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
wang10@kth.se

Sindri Magnússon
Stockholm University
Stockholm, Sweden
sindri.magnusson@dsv.su.se

Mikael Johansson
KTH - Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
mikaelj@kth.se

Abstract
The convergence of stochastic gradient descent is highly dependent on the step-size,
especially on non-convex problems such as neural network training. Step decay
step-size schedules (constant and then cut) are widely used in practice because
of their excellent convergence and generalization qualities, but their theoretical
properties are not yet well understood. We provide convergence results for step
decay in√
the non-convex regime, ensuring that the gradient norm vanishes at an
O(ln T / T ) rate. We also provide near-optimal (and sometimes provably tight)
convergence guarantees for general, possibly non-smooth, convex and strongly convex problems. The practical efficiency of the step decay step-size is demonstrated
in several large-scale deep neural network training tasks.

1

Introduction

We focus on stochastic programming problems on the form
min f (x) := Eξ∼Ξ [f (x; ξ)].

x∈X

(1)

Here, ξ is a random variable drawn from some source distribution Ξ over an arbitrary probability
space and X is a closed, convex subset of Rd . This problem is often encountered in machine learning
applications, such as training of deep neural networks. Depending on the specifics of the application,
the function f can either be non-convex, convex or strongly convex; it can be smooth or non-smooth;
and it may also have additional structure that can be exploited.
Despite the many advances in the field of stochastic programming, the stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) method [37, 32] remains important and is arguably still the most popular method for solving
(1). The SGD method updates the decision vector x using the following recursion
xt+1 = ΠX (xt − ηt ĝt )

(2)

where ĝt is an unbiased estimate of the gradient (or subgradient) at xt and ΠX is the Euclidean
projection onto X . The step-size parameter (learning-rate) ηt > 0 is critical to control the rate at
which the model learns and to guarantee that the SGD iterates converge to an optimizer of (1). Setting
the step-size too large will result in iterates which never converge; and setting it too small leads to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

