RMM: Reinforced Memory Management
for Class-Incremental Learning

Yaoyao Liu1

Bernt Schiele1

Qianru Sun2

1

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{yaoyao.liu, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) [40] trains classifiers under a strict memory
budget: in each incremental phase, learning is done for new data, most of which
is abandoned to free space for the next phase. The preserved data are exemplars
used for replaying. However, existing methods use a static and ad hoc strategy
for memory allocation, which is often sub-optimal. In this work, we propose a
dynamic memory management strategy that is optimized for the incremental phases
and different object classes. We call our method reinforced memory management
(RMM), leveraging reinforcement learning. RMM training is not naturally compatible with CIL as the past, and future data are strictly non-accessible during
the incremental phases. We solve this by training the policy function of RMM
on pseudo CIL tasks, e.g., the tasks built on the data of the 0-th phase, and then
applying it to target tasks. RMM propagates two levels of actions: Level-1 determines how to split the memory between old and new classes, and Level-2
allocates memory for each specific class. In essence, it is an optimizable and
general method for memory management that can be used in any replaying-based
CIL method. For evaluation, we plug RMM into two top-performing baselines
(LUCIR+AANets and POD+AANets [30]) and conduct experiments on three
benchmarks (CIFAR-100, ImageNet-Subset, and ImageNet-Full). Our results show
clear improvements, e.g., boosting POD+AANets by 3.6%, 4.4%, and 1.9% in the
25-Phase settings of the above benchmarks, respectively. The code is available at
https://class-il.mpi-inf.mpg.de/rmm/.

1

Introduction

Ideally, AI systems should be adaptive to ever-changing environments—where the data are continuously observed by sensors. Their models should be capable of learning new concepts from data while
maintaining the ability to recognize previous ones. In practice, the systems often have constrained
memory budgets because of which most of the historical data have to be abandoned [20]. However,
deep-learning-based AI systems, when continuously updated using new data and limited historical
data, often suffer from catastrophic forgetting, as the updates can override knowledge acquired from
previous data [33, 34, 39].
To encourage research on the forgetting problem, Rebuffi et al. [40] defined a standard protocol
of class-incremental learning (CIL) for image classification, where the training data of different
object classes come in phases. In each phase, the classifier is evaluated on all classes observed so
far. As the total memory size is limited [40], CIL systems abandon the majority of the data and only
preserve a small number of exemplars, e.g., 20 exemplars per class, which will be used for replaying
in subsequent phases. Replaying usually happens for multiple epochs [13, 18, 30, 40], so both the old
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

