Towards Better Understanding of Training Certifiably
Robust Models against Adversarial Examples

Sungyoon Lee
Korea Institute for Advanced Study (KIAS)
sungyoonlee@kias.re.kr
Jinseong Park
Seoul National Univeristy
jinseong@snu.ac.kr

Woojin Lee
Dongguk University-Seoul
wj926@dgu.ac.kr
Jaewook Lee
Seoul National University
jaewook@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the problem of training certifiably robust models against adversarial
examples. Certifiable training minimizes an upper bound on the worst-case loss
over the allowed perturbation, and thus the tightness of the upper bound is an
important factor in building certifiably robust models. However, many studies have
shown that Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) training uses much looser bounds
but outperforms other models that use tighter bounds. We identify another key
factor that influences the performance of certifiable training: smoothness of the
loss landscape. We find significant differences in the loss landscapes across many
linear relaxation-based methods, and that the current state-of-the-arts method often
has a landscape with favorable optimization properties. Moreover, to test the claim,
we design a new certifiable training method with the desired properties. With the
tightness and the smoothness, the proposed method achieves a decent performance
under a wide range of perturbations, while others with only one of the two factors
can perform well only for a specific range of perturbations. Our code is available
at https://github.com/sungyoon-lee/LossLandscapeMatters.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of deep learning in many applications, the existence of adversarial example,
an imperceptibly modified input that is designed to fool the neural network [34, 4], hinders the
application of deep learning to safety-critical domains. There has been increasing interest in building
a model that is robust to adversarial attacks [14, 26, 23, 47, 43, 16, 41]. However, most defense
methods evaluate their robustness with adversarial accuracy against predefined attacks. Thus, these
defenses can be broken by new attacks [1, 6, 37, 8, 9].
To this end, many training methods have been proposed to build a certifiably robust model that can be
guaranteed to be robust to adversarial perturbations [17, 28, 39, 11, 24, 15, 46, 2, 19]. They develop
an upper bound on the worst-case loss over valid adversarial perturbations and minimize it to train
a certifiably robust model. These certifiable training methods can be mainly categorized into two
types: linear relaxation-based methods and bound propagation methods. Linear relaxation-based
methods use relatively tighter bounds, but are slow, hard to scale to large models, and memoryinefficient [39, 40, 11]. On the other hand, bound propagation methods, represented by Interval
Bound Propagation (IBP), are fast and scalable due to the use of simple but much looser bounds
[24, 15]. One would expect that training with tighter bounds would lead to better performance, but
IBP outperforms linear relaxation-based methods, especially when the perturbation is large, despite
using much looser bounds.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

