Techniques for Symbol Grounding with SATNet
Sever Topan1, 2 , David Rolnick1, 3, 4 , and Xujie Si1, 3, 4
1

McGill University, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, 4 CIFAR AI Research Chair
{stopan, drolnick, xsi}@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Many experts argue that the future of artificial intelligence is limited by the field’s
ability to integrate symbolic logical reasoning into deep learning architectures. The
recently proposed differentiable MAXSAT solver, SATNet, was a breakthrough in
its capacity to integrate with a traditional neural network and solve visual reasoning
problems. For instance, it can learn the rules of Sudoku purely from image
examples. Despite its success, SATNet was shown to succumb to a key challenge
in neurosymbolic systems known as the Symbol Grounding Problem: the inability
to map visual inputs to symbolic variables without explicit supervision (“label
leakage”). In this work, we present a self-supervised pre-training pipeline that
enables SATNet to overcome this limitation, thus broadening the class of problems
that SATNet architectures can solve to include datasets where no intermediary
labels are available at all. We demonstrate that our method allows SATNet to attain
full accuracy even with a harder problem setup that prevents any label leakage. We
additionally introduce a proofreading method that further improves the performance
of SATNet architectures, beating the state-of-the-art on Visual Sudoku.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen significant advancements in deep learning, providing breakthroughs in image,
video, and audio processing [1]. Despite its success, deep learning has many known limitations, such
as low interpretability, vulnerability to adversarial attacks, and difficulty in solving problems requiring
hard logical constraints [2–5]. To overcome these limitations, experts have described the need to
migrate from purely deep learning-based systems to neurosymbolic artificial intelligence systems,
which integrate neural networks with logical reasoning [6]. In this work we focus on improving a
promising development in this field: the award-winning architecture known as SATNet [7].
SATNet is a differentiable MAXSAT solver based on a low-rank semidefinite relaxation approach.
It can be integrated into traditional Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to solve composite learning
problems that require both logical reasoning and visual understanding. One such problem is Visual
Sudoku, where the model must learn the rules of a Sudoku puzzle purely from visual examples. When
trained end-to-end, SATNet is able to achieve 63.2% total board accuracy in this task while traditional
DNN architectures are unable to exceed 0% [7]. This was regarded as a significant breakthrough
for neurosymbolic architectures. However, it was recently noted that SATNet training relies upon
“leakage” of labels through the logical constraint layer to the DNN used to classify digits [8].
This leakage essentially means that SATNet is learning in two supervised stages, where it first trains
its digit classification component under direct supervision, and only then trains its SAT layer to
learn the logical constraints delineating Sudoku. When the leakage is removed, SATNet’s ability to
solve Visual Sudoku drops to 0% [8]. This is significant, because taken independently, these two
sub-problems are significantly easier. Digit classification is considered a solved problem, and while
SAT constraint mining is more difficult, it could be argued that the differentiable aspect is no longer
beneficial if the system needs supervision on its inputs to learn regardless. For instance, there exist
other SAT constraint miners that are not differentiable but outperform SATNet [9]. Overall, the issue
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

