Small random initialization is akin to spectral learning:
Optimization and generalization guarantees for
overparameterized low-rank matrix reconstruction

Dominik Stöger
Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
85072 Eichstätt, Germany
Dominik.Stoeger@ku.de

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
soltanol@usc.edu

Abstract
Recently there has been significant theoretical progress on understanding the
convergence and generalization of gradient-based methods on nonconvex losses
with overparameterized models. Nevertheless, many aspects of optimization and
generalization and in particular the critical role of small random initialization
are not fully understood. In this paper, we take a step towards demystifying this
role by proving that small random initialization followed by a few iterations of
gradient descent behaves akin to popular spectral methods. We also show that this
implicit spectral bias from small random initialization, which is provably more
prominent for overparameterized models, also puts the gradient descent iterations
on a particular trajectory towards solutions that are not only globally optimal but
also generalize well. Concretely, we focus on the problem of reconstructing a
low-rank matrix from a few measurements via a natural nonconvex formulation.
In this setting, we show that the trajectory of the gradient descent iterations from
small random initialization can be approximately decomposed into three phases:
(I) a spectral or alignment phase where we show that that the iterates have an
implicit spectral bias akin to spectral initialization allowing us to show that at the
end of this phase the column space of the iterates and the underlying low-rank
matrix are sufficiently aligned, (II) a saddle avoidance/refinement phase where
we show that the trajectory of the gradient iterates moves away from certain
degenerate saddle points, and (III) a local refinement phase where we show that
after avoiding the saddles the iterates converge quickly to the underlying low-rank
matrix. Underlying our analysis are insights for the analysis of overparameterized
nonconvex optimization schemes that may have implications for computational
problems beyond low-rank reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Many contemporary problems in machine learning and signal estimation spanning deep learning to
low-rank matrix reconstruction involve fitting nonlinear models to training data. Despite tremendous
empirical progress, theoretical understanding of these problems poses two fundamental challenges.
First, from an optimization perspective, fitting these models often requires solving highly nonconvex
optimization problems and except for a few special cases, it is not known how to provably find globally
or approximately optimal solutions. Yet simple heuristics such as running (stochastic) gradient
descent from (typically) small random initialization is surprisingly effective at finding globally
optimal solutions. A second generalization challenge is that many modern learning models including
neural network architectures are trained in an overparameterized regime where the parameters of the
model exceed the size of the training dataset. It is well understood that in this overparameterized
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

