Provably Efficient Causal Reinforcement Learning
with Confounded Observational Data
Lingxiao Wang
Northwestern University
lwang@u.northwestern.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
zy6@princeton.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
Empowered by neural networks, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) achieves
tremendous empirical success. However, DRL requires a large dataset by interacting with the environment, which is unrealistic in critical scenarios such as
autonomous driving and personalized medicine. In this paper, we study how to
incorporate the dataset collected in the offline setting to improve the sample efficiency in the online setting. To incorporate the observational data, we face two
challenges. (a) The behavior policy that generates the observational data may depend on unobserved random variables (confounders), which affect the received
rewards and transition dynamics. (b) Exploration in the online setting requires
quantifying the uncertainty given both the observational and interventional data.
To tackle such challenges, we propose the deconfounded optimistic value iteration (DOVI) algorithm, which incorporates the confounded observational data in
a provably efficient manner. DOVI explicitly adjusts for the confounding bias
in the observational data, where the confounders are partially observed or unobserved. In both cases, such adjustments allow us to construct the bonus based on
a notion of information gain, which takes into account the amount of information
acquired from the offline setting. In particular, we prove that the regret of DOVI
is smaller than the optimal regret achievable in the pure online setting when the
confounded observational data are informative upon the adjustments.

1

Introduction

Empowered by the breakthrough in neural networks, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) achieves
significant empirical successes in various scenarios [19, 23, 36, 37]. Learning an expressive function
approximator necessitates collecting a large dataset. Specifically, in the online setting, it requires
the agent to interact with the environment for a large number of steps. For example, to learn a
human-level policy for playing Atari games, the agent has to interact with a simulator for more
than 108 steps [13]. However, in most scenarios, we do not have access to a simulator that allows
for trial and error without any cost. Meanwhile, in critical scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving and
personalized medicine, trial and error in the real world is unsafe and even unethical. As a result, it
remains challenging to apply DRL to more scenarios.
To bypass such a barrier, we study how to incorporate the dataset collected offline, namely the
observational data, to improve the sample efficiency of RL in the online setting [21]. In contrast
to the interventional data collected online in possibly expensive ways, observational data are often
abundantly available in various scenarios. For example, in autonomous driving, we have access
to trajectories generated by the drivers. As another example, in personalized medicine, we have
access to electronic health records from doctors. However, to incorporate the observational data in
a provably efficient way, we have to address two challenges.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

