RMIX: Learning Risk-Sensitive Policies for
Cooperative Reinforcement Learning Agents

Wei Qiu∗ 1 , Xinrun Wang1 , Runsheng Yu2 , Xu He1 , Rundong Wang1 ,
Bo An1 , Svetlana Obraztsova1 , Zinovi Rabinovich1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong

Abstract
Current value-based multi-agent reinforcement learning methods optimize individual Q values to guide individuals’ behaviours via centralized training with
decentralized execution (CTDE). However, such expected, i.e., risk-neutral, Q
value is not sufficient even with CTDE due to the randomness of rewards and
the uncertainty in environments, which causes the failure of these methods to
train coordinating agents in complex environments. To address these issues, we
propose RMIX, a novel cooperative MARL method with the Conditional Value
at Risk (CVaR) measure over the learned distributions of individuals’ Q values.
Specifically, we first learn the return distributions of individuals to analytically
calculate CVaR for decentralized execution. Then, to handle the temporal nature
of the stochastic outcomes during executions, we propose a dynamic risk level
predictor for risk level tuning. Finally, we optimize the CVaR policies with CVaR
values used to estimate the target in TD error during centralized training and the
CVaR values are used as auxiliary local rewards to update the local distribution
via Quantile Regression loss. Empirically, we show that our method outperforms
many state-of-the-art methods on various multi-agent risk-sensitive navigation
scenarios and challenging StarCraft II cooperative tasks, demonstrating enhanced
coordination and revealing improved sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made remarkable advances in many domains, including arcade
video games [28], complex continuous robot control [21] and the game of Go [40]. Recently, many
researchers put their efforts to extend the RL methods into multi-agent systems (MASs), such as
urban systems [41], coordination of robot swarms [16] and real-time strategy (RTS) video games [50].
Centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) [30] has drawn enormous attention via
training policies of each agent with access to global trajectories in a centralized way and executing
actions given only the local observations of each agent in a decentralized way. Empowered by CTDE,
several multi-agent RL (MARL) methods, including value-based and policy gradient-based, are
proposed [10, 43, 35, 42]. These MARL methods propose decomposition techniques to factorize the
global Q value either by structural constraints or by estimating state-values or inter-agent weights to
conduct the global Q value estimation [10, 43, 35, 42, 53, 54].
Despite the merits, most of these works focus on decomposing the global Q value into individual Q
values with different constraints and network architectures, but ignore the fact that such expected, i.e.,
risk-neutral, Q value is not sufficient as optimistic actions executed by some agents can impede the
team coordination such as imprudent actions in hostage rescue operations, which causes the failure of
∗

Correspondence to qiuw0008@e.ntu.edu.sg

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

