Compressive Visual Representations

Kuang-Huei Lee†
Google Research
leekh@google.com
Sergio Guadarrama
Google Research
sguada@google.com

Anurag Arnab†
Google Research
aarnab@google.com
John Canny
Google Research
canny@google.com

Ian Fischer†
Google Research
iansf@google.com

Abstract
Learning effective visual representations that generalize well without human supervision is a fundamental problem in order to apply Machine Learning to a wide
variety of tasks. Recently, two families of self-supervised methods, contrastive
learning and latent bootstrapping, exemplified by SimCLR and BYOL respectively, have made significant progress. In this work, we hypothesize that adding
explicit information compression to these algorithms yields better and more robust
representations. We verify this by developing SimCLR and BYOL formulations
compatible with the Conditional Entropy Bottleneck (CEB) objective, allowing us
to both measure and control the amount of compression in the learned representation, and observe their impact on downstream tasks. Furthermore, we explore the
relationship between Lipschitz continuity and compression, showing a tractable
lower bound on the Lipschitz constant of the encoders we learn. As Lipschitz
continuity is closely related to robustness, this provides a new explanation for
why compressed models are more robust. Our experiments confirm that adding
compression to SimCLR and BYOL significantly improves linear evaluation accuracies and model robustness across a wide range of domain shifts. In particular, the
compressed version of BYOL achieves 76.0% Top-1 linear evaluation accuracy on
ImageNet with ResNet-50, and 78.8% with ResNet-50 2x.1

1

Introduction

Individuals develop mental representations of the surrounding world that generalize over different
views of a shared context. For instance, a shared context could be the identity of an object, as it
does not change when viewed from different perspectives or lighting conditions. This ability to
represent views by distilling information about the shared context has motivated a rich body of
self-supervised learning work [54, 4, 12, 30, 33, 47]. For a concrete example, we could consider
an image from the ImageNet training set [60] as a shared context, and generate different views by
repeatedly applying different data augmentations. Finding stable representations of a shared context
corresponds to learning a minimal high-level description since not all information is relevant or
persistent. This explicit requirement of learning a concise representation leads us to prefer objectives
that are compressive and only retain the relevant information.
Recent contrastive approaches to self-supervised visual representation learning aim to learn representations that maximally capture the mutual information between two transformed views of an
image [54, 4, 12, 33, 40]. The primary idea of these approaches is that this mutual information
†
1

Main contributors
Code available at https://github.com/google-research/compressive-visual-representations

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

