Stable Neural ODE with Lyapunov-Stable
Equilibrium Points for Defending Against
Adversarial Attacks
Qiyu Kang∗
Continental-NTU Corporate Lab
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore
kang0080@e.ntu.edu.sg

Yang Song∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore
songy@ntu.edu.sg

Qinxu Ding
School of Business
Singapore University of Social Sciences
463 Clementi Road, 599494, Singapore
qinxuding@suss.edu.sg

Wee Peng Tay
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore
wptay@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are well-known to be vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, where malicious human-imperceptible perturbations are included in the
input to the deep network to fool it into making a wrong classification. Recent
studies have demonstrated that neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) are
intrinsically more robust against adversarial attacks compared to vanilla DNNs.
In this work, we propose a stable neural ODE with Lyapunov-stable equilibrium
points for defending against adversarial attacks (SODEF). By ensuring that the
equilibrium points of the ODE solution used as part of SODEF is Lyapunov-stable,
the ODE solution for an input with a small perturbation converges to the same
solution as the unperturbed input. We provide theoretical results that give insights
into the stability of SODEF as well as the choice of regularizers to ensure its
stability. Our analysis suggests that our proposed regularizers force the extracted
feature points to be within a neighborhood of the Lyapunov-stable equilibrium
points of the ODE. SODEF is compatible with many defense methods and can be
applied to any neural network’s final regressor layer to enhance its stability against
adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Although deep learning has found successful applications in many tasks such as image classification
[1, 2], speech recognition [3], and natural language processing [4], the vulnerability of deep learning
to adversarial attacks (e.g., see [5]) has limited its real-world applications due to performance and
safety concerns in critical applications. Inputs corrupted with human-imperceptible perturbations can
easily fool many vanilla deep neural networks (DNNs) into mis-classifying them and thus significantly
impact their performance.
Recent studies [6–8] have applied neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) [9] to defend
against adversarial attacks. Some works like [6] have revealed interesting intrinsic properties of
∗

First two authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

