ConE: Cone Embeddings for Multi-Hop Reasoning
over Knowledge Graphs

Jie Wang1,2 ∗
Jiajun Chen1,2
Shuiwang Ji3
Feng Wu1,2
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zqzhang,jjchen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{jiewangx,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
3
Texas A&M University
sji@tamu.edu

Zhanqiu Zhang1,2

Abstract
Query embedding (QE)—which aims to embed entities and first-order logical
(FOL) queries in low-dimensional spaces—has shown great power in multi-hop
reasoning over knowledge graphs. Recently, embedding entities and queries with
geometric shapes becomes a promising direction, as geometric shapes can naturally
represent answer sets of queries and logical relationships among them. However,
existing geometry-based models have difficulty in modeling queries with negation,
which significantly limits their applicability. To address this challenge, we propose
a novel query embedding model, namely Cone Embeddings (ConE), which is the
first geometry-based QE model that can handle all the FOL operations, including
conjunction, disjunction, and negation. Specifically, ConE represents entities and
queries as Cartesian products of two-dimensional cones, where the intersection
and union of cones naturally model the conjunction and disjunction operations.
By further noticing that the closure of complement of cones remains cones, we
design geometric complement operators in the embedding space for the negation
operations. Experiments demonstrate that ConE significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Multi-hop reasoning over knowledge graphs (KGs)—which aims to find answer entities of given
queries using knowledge from KGs—has attracted great attention from both academia and industry
recently [24, 23, 16]. In general, it involves answering first-order logic (FOL) queries over KGs
using operators including existential quantification (∃), conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨), and negation
(¬). A popular approach to multi-hop reasoning over KGs is to first transform a FOL query to
its corresponding computation graph—where each node represents a set of entities and each edge
represents a logical operation—and then traverse the KG according to the computation graph to
identify the answer set. However, this approach confronts two major challenges. First, when some
links are missing in KGs, it has difficulties in identifying the correct answers. Second, it needs to deal
with all the intermediate entities on reasoning paths, which may lead to exponential computation cost.
To address these challenges, researchers have paid increasing attention to the query embedding (QE)
technique, which embeds entities and FOL queries in low-dimensional spaces [12, 22, 21, 25]. QE
models associate each logical operator in computation graphs with a logical operation in embedding
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

