Deeply Shared Filter Bases for Parameter-Efficient
Convolutional Neural Networks
Woochul Kang
Department of Embedded Systems Engineering
Incheon National University
Yeonsu-gu, South Korea 22012
wchkang@inu.ac.kr

Daeyeon Kim∗
Dain Technology, Inc.
dustin@soundablehealth.com

Abstract
Modern convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have massive identical convolution blocks, and, hence, recursive sharing of parameters across these blocks has
been proposed to reduce the amount of parameters. However, naive sharing of
parameters poses many challenges such as limited representational power and the
vanishing/exploding gradients problem of recursively shared parameters. In this
paper, we present a recursive convolution block design and training method, in
which a recursively shareable part, or a filter basis, is separated and learned while
effectively avoiding the vanishing/exploding gradients problem during training. We
show that the unwieldy vanishing/exploding gradients problem can be controlled by
enforcing the elements of the filter basis orthonormal, and empirically demonstrate
that the proposed orthogonality regularization improves the flow of gradients during training. Experimental results on image classification and object detection show
that our approach, unlike previous parameter-sharing approaches, does not trade
performance to save parameters and consistently outperforms overparameterized
counterpart networks. This superior performance demonstrates that the proposed
recursive convolution block design and the orthogonality regularization not only
prevent performance degradation, but also consistently improve the representation
capability while a significant amount of parameters are recursively shared.

1

Introduction

Modern convolutional neural networks (CNNs) such as ResNets have massive identical convolution
blocks and recent analytic studies (Jastrzebski et al., 2018) show that these blocks perform mostly
iterative refinement of features rather than learning new features. Inspired by these results, recursive
sharing of weights has been studied as a promising direction to parameter-efficient CNNs (Jastrzebski
et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019; Savarese & Maire, 2019). However, naive sharing of parameters across
many convolution layers incurs several problems. First of all, recursive sharing of parameters can
result in the vanishing and the exploding gradients problem, which is one of the main reasons that
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are so hard to train properly (Pascanu et al., 2013; Jastrzebski
et al., 2018). Another problem is that overall representation power can be limited by iterative sharing
of parameters. Due to these challenges, most compression approaches based on parameter-sharing
suffer from performance degradation.
In this work, we conjecture that convolution layers or blocks can be separated into inherently
shareable parts and non-shareable parts, and can be trained effectively by avoiding the vanishing and
the exploding gradients problem. To achieve this, for a full convolution operator, we first replace
it with a factorized version that splits the convolution operator into two separate operators; one
∗

W. Kang and D. Kim are contributed equally. This work was conducted at Incheon National University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

