Exploration-Exploitation in Multi-Agent Competition:
Convergence with Bounded Rationality

Stefanos Leonardos, Georgios Piliouras
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{stefanos_leonardos;georgios}@sutd.edu.sg

Kelly Spendlove
University of Oxford
spendlove@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The interplay between exploration and exploitation in competitive multi-agent
learning is still far from being well understood. Motivated by this, we study smooth
Q-learning, a prototypical learning model that explicitly captures the balance
between game rewards and exploration costs. We show that Q-learning always
converges to the unique quantal-response equilibrium (QRE), the standard solution
concept for games under bounded rationality, in weighted zero-sum polymatrix
games with heterogeneous learning agents using positive exploration rates. Complementing recent results about convergence in weighted potential games [16, 34],
we show that fast convergence of Q-learning in competitive settings obtains regardless of the number of agents and without any need for parameter fine-tuning. As
showcased by our experiments in network zero-sum games, these theoretical results
provide the necessary guarantees for an algorithmic approach to the currently open
problem of equilibrium selection in competitive multi-agent settings.

1

Introduction

Zero-sum games and variants thereof are arguably amongst the most well studied settings in game
theory. Indeed much attention has focused on the class of strictly competitive games [4], i.e., two
player games such that when both players change their mixed strategies, then either there is no
change in the expected payoffs, or one of the two expected payoffs increases and the other decreases.1
According to Aumann [4], “Strictly competitive games constitute one of the few areas in game theory,
and indeed in the social sciences, where a fairly sharp, unique prediction is made." The unique
prediction, of course, refers to the min-max solution and the resulting values guaranteed to both
agents due to the classic work of von Neumann [53].
Unfortunately, when we move away from the safe haven of two-agent strictly competitive games,
a lot of these regularities disappear. For example, in multi-agent variants of zero-sum and strictly
competitive games, several critical aspects of the min-max theorem collapse [12]. Critically, Nash
Equilibrium (NE) payoffs need not be unique. In fact, there can be continua of equilibria with the
payoff range of different agents corresponding to positive measure sets. Furthermore, NE strategies
need not be exchangeable (i.e., mixing-matching strategies from different Nash profiles does not
lead to a Nash) nor max-min. Thus, network competition is not only significantly harder, but poses
qualitatively different questions than two-agent competition.
Nevertheless, and despite the intense recent interest inspired by Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) applications such as generative adversarial networks and actor-critic systems
to understand learning dynamics in zero-sum games and even network variants thereof [19, 22, 27],
so far, there has been no systematic study of how agents should deal with uncertainty of the resulting
1
In fact, as recent work has established these strictly competitive games are formally equivalent to weighted
zero-sum games, i.e., affine transformations of zero-sum games [1].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

