TNASP: A Transformer-based NAS Predictor with a
Self-evolution Framework

1

Shun Lu1,2 , Jixiang Li3 , Jianchao Tan3 , Sen Yang3 , Ji Liu3
Research Center for Intelligent Computing Systems, State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Kuaishou Technology
lushun19s@ict.ac.cn, {lijixiang,jianchaotan,senyang,jiliu}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Predictor-based Neural Architecture Search (NAS) continues to be an important
topic because it aims to mitigate the time-consuming search procedure of traditional
NAS methods. A promising performance predictor determines the quality of final
searched models in predictor-based NAS methods. Most existing predictor-based
methodologies train model-based predictors under a proxy dataset setting, which
may suffer from the accuracy decline and the generalization problem, mainly due to
their poor abilities to represent spatial topology information of the graph structure
data. Besides the poor encoding for spatial topology information, these works
did not take advantage of the temporal information such as historical evaluations
during training. Thus, we propose a Transformer-based NAS performance predictor,
associated with a Laplacian matrix based positional encoding strategy, which better
represents topology information and achieves better performance than previous
state-of-the-art methods on NAS-Bench-101, NAS-Bench-201, and DARTS search
space. Furthermore, we also propose a self-evolution framework that can fully
utilize temporal information as guidance. This framework iteratively involves
previous evaluation information as constraints into current optimization iteration,
thus further improving the performance of our predictor. Such framework is modelagnostic, thus can enhance performance on various backbone structures for the
prediction task. Our proposed method helped us rank 2nd among all teams in
CVPR 2021 NAS Competition Track 2: Performance Prediction Track.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automatically find out superb architectures in a predefined search space. The NAS models have outperformed human-designed models in many domains
[37, 18, 13, 3, 15]. However, traditional NAS methods like Reinforcement learning and Evolutionary
learning require enormous computation resources, i.e., hundreds or thousands of GPU hours, to train
sub-models to obtain their performance estimation. The intensive computation prohibits NAS models
from deployments to real applications. Although differentiable NAS methods [26] have less search
time than traditional methods, they usually suffer from performance collapse due to several problems
such as optimization gap [6], discretization discrepancy and the unfair advantage [9], trapping into
sharp minimum and the dominant eigenvalue [49, 5].
To reduce the search cost in NAS, predictor-based NAS methods [30, 23, 43, 29, 32, 7, 46, 4, 1]
use performance predictors to predict the accuracy of architectures quickly instead of training all
architectures to get the accuracy. Simple training-free predictors have been shown promising in
some applications, however, those performances are usually not good enough in practice. Many
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

