Differential Privacy Dynamics of Langevin Diffusion
and Noisy Gradient Descent

Rishav Chourasia* , Jiayuan Ye* , Reza Shokri
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{rishav1, jiayuan, reza}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
What is the information leakage of an iterative randomized learning algorithm
about its training data, when the internal state of the algorithm is private? How
much is the contribution of each specific training epoch to the information leakage
through the released model? We study this problem for noisy gradient descent
algorithms, and model the dynamics of Rényi differential privacy loss throughout
the training process. Our analysis traces a provably tight bound on the Rényi
divergence between the pair of probability distributions over parameters of models
trained on neighboring datasets. We prove that the privacy loss converges exponentially fast, for smooth and strongly convex loss functions, which is a significant
improvement over composition theorems (which over-estimate the privacy loss by
upper-bounding its total value over all intermediate gradient computations). For
Lipschitz, smooth, and strongly convex loss functions, we prove optimal utility
with a small gradient complexity for noisy gradient descent algorithms.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models leak a significant amount of information about their training data, through
their parameters and predictions [21, 18, 5]. Iterative randomized training algorithms can limit this
information leakage and bound the differential privacy loss of the learning process [3, 1, 8, 9]. The
strength of this certified defense is determined by an upper bound on the (Rényi) divergence between
the probability distributions of model parameters learned on any pair of neighboring datasets.
The general method to compute the differential privacy bound for gradient perturbation-based learning
algorithms is to view the process as a number of (identical) differential privacy mechanisms, and
to compute the composition of their bounds. However, this over-estimates the privacy loss of the
released model [13, 19], and results in a loose differential privacy bound. This is because composition
bounds also accounts for the leakage of all intermediate gradient updates, even though only the
final model parameters are observable to adversary. Feldman et al. [8, 9] address this issue for the
privacy analysis of gradient computations over one single training epoch, for smooth and convex
loss functions. However, in learning a model over multiple training epochs, such a guarantee is
quantitatively similar to composition bounds of privacy amplification by sub-sampling [8]. The open
challenge, that we tackle in this paper, is to provide an analysis that can tightly bound the privacy loss
of the released model after K training epochs, for any K.
We present a novel analysis for privacy dynamics of noisy gradient descent with smooth and strongly
convex loss functions. We construct a pair of continuous-time Langevin diffusion [20] processes that
trace the probability distributions over the model parameters of noisy GD. Subsequently, we derive
differential inequalities bounding the rate of privacy loss (worst case Rényi divergence between the
coupled stochastic processes associated with neighboring datasets) throughout the training process.
*

Equal contribution. Alphabetical Order.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

