Beta-CROWN: Efficient Bound Propagation with
Per-neuron Split Constraints for Neural Network
Robustness Verification
Shiqi Wang*,1 Huan Zhang*,2 Kaidi Xu*,3
Xue Lin3 Suman Jana1 Cho-Jui Hsieh4 Zico Kolter2
1
Columbia University 2 CMU 3 Northeastern University 4 UCLA
sw3215@columbia.edu huan@huan-zhang.com xu.kaid@northeastern.edu
xue.lin@northeastern.edu suman@cs.columbia.edu chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu
* Equal Contribution

Abstract
Bound propagation based incomplete neural network verifiers such as CROWN
are very efficient and can significantly accelerate branch-and-bound (BaB) based
complete verification of neural networks. However, bound propagation cannot
fully handle the neuron split constraints introduced by BaB commonly handled by
expensive linear programming (LP) solvers, leading to loose bounds and hurting
verification efficiency. In this work, we develop -CROWN, a new bound propagation based method that can fully encode neuron splits via optimizable parameters
constructed from either primal or dual space. When jointly optimized in intermediate layers, -CROWN generally produces better bounds than typical LP verifiers
with neuron split constraints, while being as efficient and parallelizable as CROWN
on GPUs. Applied to complete robustness verification benchmarks, -CROWN
with BaB is up to three orders of magnitude faster than LP-based BaB methods, and
is notably faster than all existing approaches while producing lower timeout rates.
By terminating BaB early, our method can also be used for efficient incomplete
verification. We consistently achieve higher verified accuracy in many settings
compared to powerful incomplete verifiers, including those based on convex barrier
breaking techniques. Compared to the typically tightest but very costly semidefinite
programming (SDP) based incomplete verifiers, we obtain higher verified accuracy
with three orders of magnitudes less verification time. Our algorithm empowered
the ↵, -CROWN (alpha-beta-CROWN) verifier, the winning tool in VNN-COMP
2021. Our code is available at http://PaperCode.cc/BetaCROWN.

1

Introduction

As neural networks (NNs) are being deployed in safety-critical applications, it becomes increasingly
important to formally verify their behaviors under potentially malicious inputs. Broadly speaking,
the neural network verification problem involves proving certain desired relationships between inputs
and outputs (often referred to as specifications), such as safety or robustness guarantees, for all inputs
inside some domain. Canonically, the problem can be cast as finding the global minima of some
functions on the network’s outputs (e.g., the difference between the predictions of the true label and
another target label), within a bounded input set as constraints. This is a challenging problem due to
the non-convexity and high dimensionality of neural networks.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

