Distributed Principal Component Analysis
with Limited Communication
Foivos Alimisis
Department of Mathematics
University of Geneva

Peter Davies
Department of Computer Science
University of Surrey

Bart Vandereycken
Department of Mathematics
University of Geneva

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria &
Neural Magic, Inc.

Abstract
We study efficient distributed algorithms for the fundamental problem of principal
component analysis and leading eigenvector computation on the sphere, when the
data are randomly distributed among a set of computational nodes. We propose a
new quantized variant of Riemannian gradient descent to solve this problem, and
prove that the algorithm converges with high probability under a set of necessary
spherical-convexity properties. We give bounds on the number of bits transmitted by
the algorithm under common initialization schemes, and investigate the dependency
on the problem dimension in each case.

1

Introduction

The need to process ever increasing quantities of data has motivated significant research interest into
efficient distributed algorithms for standard tasks in optimization and data analysis; see, e.g., [16, 27,
11]. In this context, one of the fundamental metrics of interest is communication cost, measured as
the number of bits sent and received by the processors throughout computation. Communicationefficient variants are known for several classical tasks and algorithms, from basic ones such as mean
estimation [28, 20, 8] to variants of gradient descent [19, 12] or even higher-order optimization [2, 15].
By contrast, much less is known concerning the communication cost for classical problems in data
analysis, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [13, 5], or spectral clustering [23]. In this
paper, we will focus on the closely-related problem of computing the leading eigenvector of the data
covariance matrix, i.e., determining the first principal component, in the setting where d-dimensional
data comes from an unknown distribution, and is split among n machines.
Given the fundamental nature of PCA, there is a rich body of work on solving sequential variants,
both in the Euclidean domain [24, 25, 26] and, more recently, based on Riemannian optimization.
This is because maximizing the Rayleigh quotient can be re-interpreted in terms of a hyper-sphere,
leading to an unconstrained Riemannian optimization problem [1, 32, 31]. These references have
exclusively focused on the sequential setting, where the data can be stored and processed by a single
node. However, in many settings the large volume of data requires processing by multiple nodes,
which has inspired significant work on reducing the distribution overheads of PCA, e.g. [4, 11],
specifically on obtaining efficient algorithms in terms of round complexity.
More precisely, an impressive line of work considered the deterministic setting [17, 4, 6, 10],
where the input is partitioned arbitrarily between machines, for which both round-efficient and
communication-efficient solutions are now known. The general approach is to first perform a careful
low-rank approximation of the local data and then communicate iteratively to reconstruct a faithful
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

