Probabilistic Forecasting: A Level-Set Approach
Hilaf Hasson
Amazon Research
hashilaf@amazon.com

Yuyang Wang
Amazon Research
yuyawang@amazon.com

Tim Januschowski
Amazon Research
tjnsch@amazon.com

Jan Gasthaus
Amazon Research
gasthaus@amazon.com

Abstract
Large-scale time series panels have become ubiquitous over the last years in areas
such as retail, operational metrics, IoT, and medical domain (to name only a few).
This has resulted in a need for forecasting techniques that effectively leverage
all available data by learning across all time series in each panel. Among the
desirable properties of forecasting techniques, being able to generate probabilistic
predictions ranks among the top. In this paper, we therefore present Level Set
Forecaster (LSF), a simple yet effective general approach to transform a point
estimator into a probabilistic one. By recognizing the connection of our algorithm
to random forests (RFs) and quantile regression forests (QRFs), we are able to prove
consistency guarantees of our approach under mild assumptions on the underlying
point estimator. As a byproduct, we prove the first consistency results for QRFs
under the CART-splitting criterion. Empirical experiments show that our approach,
equipped with tree-based models as the point estimator, rivals state-of-the-art deep
learning models in terms of forecasting accuracy.

1

Introduction

Tree-based methods are known to be robust, general-purpose and high-accuracy methods for general
machine learning and data science tasks, particularly those that are not image, video or text based.
This is exemplified by their popularity in competitions. In a recent interview, Anthony Goldbloom,
the CEO of Kaggle, called the prominence of gradient-boosted trees on Kaggle the “most glaring
difference” between what is used on Kaggle and what is “fashionable in academia,” a fact also
reflected in the Kaggle Data Science and Machine Learning surveys [3, 4]. In time series forecasting
in particular, tree-based methods have performed solidly in public competitions over the years [10],
but have had a recent boost in attention via the M5 accuracy competition [23], arguably the most
influential forecasting competition, which was dominated by tree-based methods. However, this
recent surge in interest is not accompanied by methodological advances. In particular, while being
able to generate probabilistic predictions ranks among the top desirable properties of forecasting
techniques, the main tree-based method that outputs predictions for multiple quantiles remains
Quantile Regression Forests (QRFs), which does not take advantage of gradient boosted trees
algorithms.
In this manuscript we provide such an advancement and show its theoretical and empirical soundness:
we introduce a novel algorithm, Level Set Forecaster (LSF), which can turn any point estimator
algorithm into a probabilistic one. Applied to XGBoost [11] (in which case we refer to LSF as XLSF),
and with a simple processing component that turns time series data into tabular data, this yields one
of the first notable methodological advancements towards creating tree-based probabilistic forecasts
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

