Scalars are universal: Equivariant machine learning,
structured like classical physics
Soledad Villar
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University

David W. Hogg
Flatiron Institute
a divison of the Simons Foundation

Kate Storey-Fisher
Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics
Department of Physics, New York University
Weichi Yao
Department of Technology, Operations, and Statistics
Stern School of Business, New York University

Ben Blum-Smith
Center for Data Science
New York University

Abstract
There has been enormous progress in the last few years in designing neural networks that respect the fundamental symmetries and coordinate freedoms of physical law. Some of these frameworks make use of irreducible representations, some
make use of high-order tensor objects, and some apply symmetry-enforcing constraints. Different physical laws obey different combinations of fundamental symmetries, but a large fraction (possibly all) of classical physics is equivariant to
translation, rotation, reflection (parity), boost (relativity), and permutations. Here
we show that it is simple to parameterize universally approximating polynomial
functions that are equivariant under these symmetries, or under the Euclidean,
Lorentz, and Poincaré groups, at any dimensionality d. The key observation is that
nonlinear O(d)-equivariant (and related-group-equivariant) functions can be universally expressed in terms of a lightweight collection of scalars—scalar products
and scalar contractions of the scalar, vector, and tensor inputs. We complement our
theory with numerical examples that show that the scalar-based method is simple,
efficient, and scalable.

1

Introduction

There is a great deal of current interest in building machine-learning methods that respect exact
or approximate symmetries, such as translation, rotation, and physical gauge symmetries [18, 49].
Some of this interest is inspired by the great success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [51],
which are naturally translation equivariant. The implementation of convolutional layers in CNNs
has been given significant credit for the success of deep learning, in a domain (natural images) in
which the convolutional symmetry is only approximately valid. In many data-analysis problems in
astronomy, physics, and chemistry there are exact symmetries that must be obeyed by any generalizable law or rule. Since the approximate symmetries introduced by convolutional networks help in
the natural-image domain, then we have high hopes for the value of encoding exact symmetries for
problems where these symmetries are known to hold exactly.
In detail, the symmetries of physics are legion. Translation symmetry (including conservation of
linear momentum), rotation symmetry (including conservation of angular momentum), and time35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

