Anti-Backdoor Learning: Training Clean Models on
Poisoned Data
Yige Li
Xidian University
yglee@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Xixiang Lyu †
Xidian University
xxlv@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Nodens Koren
University of Copenhagen
nodens.f.koren@di.ku.dk

Lingjuan Lyu
Sony AI
Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com

Bo Li
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
lbo@illinois.edu

Xingjun Ma †
Fudan University
danxjma@gmail

Abstract
Backdoor attack has emerged as a major security threat to deep neural networks
(DNNs). While existing defense methods have demonstrated promising results on
detecting or erasing backdoors, it is still not clear whether robust training methods
can be devised to prevent the backdoor triggers being injected into the trained model
in the first place. In this paper, we introduce the concept of anti-backdoor learning,
aiming to train clean models given backdoor-poisoned data. We frame the overall
learning process as a dual-task of learning the clean and the backdoor portions of
data. From this view, we identify two inherent characteristics of backdoor attacks
as their weaknesses: 1) the models learn backdoored data much faster than learning
with clean data, and the stronger the attack the faster the model converges on
backdoored data; 2) the backdoor task is tied to a specific class (the backdoor target
class). Based on these two weaknesses, we propose a general learning scheme,
Anti-Backdoor Learning (ABL), to automatically prevent backdoor attacks during
training. ABL introduces a two-stage gradient ascent mechanism for standard
training to 1) help isolate backdoor examples at an early training stage, and 2)
break the correlation between backdoor examples and the target class at a later
training stage. Through extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets
against 10 state-of-the-art attacks, we empirically show that ABL-trained models
on backdoor-poisoned data achieve the same performance as they were trained on
purely clean data. Code is available at https://github.com/bboylyg/ABL.

1

Introduction

A backdoor attack is a type of training-time data poisoning attack that implant backdoor triggers into
machine learning models by injecting the trigger pattern(s) into a small proportion of the training
data [1]. It aims to trick the model to learn a strong but task-irrelevant correlation between the trigger
pattern and a target class, and optimizes three objectives: stealthiness of the trigger pattern, injection
(poisoning) rate and attack success rate. A backdoored model performs normally on clean test data
yet consistently predicts the target class whenever the trigger pattern is attached to a test example.
†

Correspondence to: Xixiang Lyu, Xingjun Ma.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

