Learning Debiased and Disentangled Representations
for Semantic Segmentation

Sanghyeok Chu
Dongwan Kim
Bohyung Han
ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University
{sanghyeok.chu,dongwan123,bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to learn biased models with entangled feature
representations, which may lead to subpar performances on various downstream
tasks. This is particularly true for under-represented classes, where a lack of diversity in the data exacerbates the tendency. This limitation has been addressed mostly
in classification tasks, but there is little study on additional challenges that may
appear in more complex dense prediction problems including semantic segmentation. To this end, we propose a model-agnostic and stochastic training scheme for
semantic segmentation, which facilitates the learning of debiased and disentangled
representations. For each class, we first extract class-specific information from the
highly entangled feature map. Then, information related to a randomly sampled
class is suppressed by a feature selection process in the feature space. By randomly
eliminating certain class information in each training iteration, we effectively reduce feature dependencies among classes, and the model is able to learn more
debiased and disentangled feature representations. Models trained with our approach demonstrate strong results on multiple semantic segmentation benchmarks,
with especially notable performance gains on under-represented classes.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a pixelwise classification task that is applicable to a wide range of practical
problems including autonomous driving, medical image diagnosis, scene understanding, and many
others. Ever since deep neural networks have been adopted for semantic segmentation [1–5], its
accuracy has increased gradually with the introduction of stronger network architectures, improved
training schemes, and large-scale datasets.
Despite such phenomenal achievement, semantic segmentation approaches still suffer from the
chronic limitations caused by class imbalance and stereotyped scene context in datasets. The class
imbalance issues are prevalent in semantic segmentation, where certain classes occupy larger area
and/or appear more frequently than others. For example, the “road” class in the Cityscapes dataset [6]
accounts for over 36% of pixels of all training images while the “motorcycle” class does only 0.1% of
pixels. Furthermore, the scene context is not sufficiently diversified in training datasets. For instance,
the objects in the “motorcycle” class is always observed in the vicinity of the “road” class, and the
spatial layout of the two classes are almost identical in all images. Consequently, the models often
learn substantially correlated representations and fail to accurately delineate the boundaries in the
absence of frequently co-located objects.
These issues cause the model to learn suboptimal feature representations, especially for classes that
are under-represented. These feature representations are often entangled with one another, causing
confusion between classes, and are also susceptible to encode adverse biases as well, which may
be detrimental to the model’s overall performance. On the other hand, for classes with abundant
labels, the model is able to leverage the large variations in the data and learn more robust feature
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

