A Multi-Implicit Neural Representation for Fonts

Pradyumna Reddy
Zhaowen Wang
1

2

1

2

Zhifei Zhang
2

Matthew Fisher

University College London

Hailin Jin
2

2

1,2

Niloy J. Mitra

Adobe Research

Abstract
Fonts are ubiquitous across documents and come in a variety of styles. They are
either represented in a native vector format or rasterized to produce fixed resolution
images. In the first case, the non-standard representation prevents benefiting
from latest network architectures for neural representations; while, in the latter
case, the rasterized representation, when encoded via networks, results in loss of
data fidelity, as font-specific discontinuities like edges and corners are difficult
to represent using neural networks. Based on the observation that complex fonts
can be represented by a superposition of a set of simpler occupancy functions, we
introduce multi-implicits to represent fonts as a permutation-invariant set of learned
implicit functions, without losing features (e.g., edges and corners). However,
while multi-implicits locally preserve font features, obtaining supervision in the
form of ground truth multi-channel signals is a problem in itself. Instead, we
propose how to train such a representation with only local supervision, while the
proposed neural architecture directly finds globally consistent multi-implicits for
font families. We extensively evaluate the proposed representation for various
tasks including reconstruction, interpolation, and synthesis to demonstrate clear
advantages with existing alternatives. Additionally, the representation naturally
enables glyph completion, wherein a single characteristic font is used to synthesize
a whole font family in the target style.

1

Introduction

Fonts constitute the vast majority of documents. They come in a variety of styles spanning a range
of topologies representing a mixture of smooth curves and sharp features. Although fonts vary
significantly across families, they remain stylistic coherent across the different alphabets/symbols
inside any chosen font family.
Fonts are most commonly stored in a vector form (e.g., a collection of spline curves) that is compact,
efficient, and can be resampled at arbitrary resolutions without loss of features. This specialized
representation, however, prevents the adaptation of many deep learning setups optimized for regular
structures (e.g., image grids). In order to avoid this problem, custom deep learning architectures have
been developed for directly producing vector output but they typically require access to ground truth
vector data for training. This is problematic: first, collecting sufficient volume of vector data for
training is non trivial; and second, vector representations are not canonical (i.e., same fonts can be
represented by different sequence of vectors), which in turn requires hand-coded network parameters
to account for varying number of vector instructions.
An alternate approach is to rasterize vectorized fonts and simply treat them as images. While this
readily allows using image-based deep learning methods, the approach inherits problems of discretized
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

