Scalable Inference in SDEs by Direct Matching of the
Fokker–Planck–Kolmogorov Equation

Arno Solin
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
arno.solin@aalto.fi

Ella Tamir
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
ella.tamir@aalto.fi

Prakhar Verma
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
prakhar.verma@aalto.fi

Abstract
Simulation-based techniques such as variants of stochastic Runge–Kutta are the
de facto approach for inference with stochastic differential equations (SDEs) in
machine learning. These methods are general-purpose and used with parametric
and non-parametric models, and neural SDEs. Stochastic Runge–Kutta relies on
the use of sampling schemes that can be inefficient in high dimensions. We address
this issue by revisiting the classical SDE literature and derive direct approximations
to the (typically intractable) Fokker–Planck–Kolmogorov equation by matching
moments. We show how this workflow is fast, scales to high-dimensional latent
spaces, and is applicable to scarce-data applications, where a non-parametric SDE
with a driving Gaussian process velocity field specifies the model.

1

Introduction

Differential equations are the standard method of modelling
change over time. In deterministic systems the dynamics
specifying how the system evolves, are typically written
in the form of an ordinary differential equation (ODE).
The dynamics act as prior knowledge and often stem from
first-principles in application areas such as physics, control
engineering, chemistry, or compartmental models in epidemiology and pharmacokinetics. Recently, learning ODE
dynamics with modern automatic differentiation packages
in machine learning has awakened an interest in black-box
learning of continuous-time dynamics (e.g., [6, 37]) and
enabled their more general use across time-series modelling
applications.

2. Gaussian
approximation

3. Probability
density p(z, t) as
solution to the
Fokker–Planck–
Kolmogorov PDE

1. Euler–Maruyama
sample trajectories

GP-SDE
(SDE model
specification
by a GP prior)

Figure 1: Views into solutions to SDEs.
A stochastic differential equation (SDE, [30, 40]) can be
seen as a generalization of ODEs to stochastic dynamical settings, where the driving forces fluctuate
or are uncertain. Stochastic dynamics appear naturally in applications where small (and typically
unobserved) forces interact with the process, such as tracking applications, molecule motion, gene
modelling, or stock markets. In machine learning, SDE models have received wide-spread attention
due to their robustness and appealing properties for uncertainty quantification.
The concept of a ‘solution’ to an SDE is broader than that of an ODE. As the process is stochastic,
the full solution entails a probability distribution, p(z, t), depending on time t and covering the space
z (see, e.g., [36]). For Itô type SDEs, the evolution of the probability mass can be described in
terms of the Fokker–Planck–Kolmogorov (FPK) partial differential equation (backward Kolmogorov
equation). This equation is typically intractable, and instead the de facto approach for inference in
SDEs in machine learning is sampling. The most common approaches in this space are based on
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

