Adaptive Ensemble Q-learning: Minimizing
Estimation Bias via Error Feedback
Sen Lin
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona, USA
slin70@asu.edu

Hang Wang
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona, USA
hwang442@asu.edu

Junshan Zhang
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona, USA
Junshan.Zhang@asu.edu

Abstract
The ensemble method is a promising way to mitigate the overestimation issue in
Q-learning, where multiple function approximators are used to estimate the action
values. It is known that the estimation bias hinges heavily on the ensemble size (i.e.,
the number of Q-function approximators used in the target), and that determining
the ‘right’ ensemble size is highly nontrivial, because of the time-varying nature
of the function approximation errors during the learning process. To tackle this
challenge, we first derive an upper bound and a lower bound on the estimation
bias, based on which the ensemble size is adapted to drive the bias to be nearly
zero, thereby coping with the impact of the time-varying approximation errors
accordingly. Motivated by the theoretic findings, we advocate that the ensemble
method can be combined with Model Identification Adaptive Control (MIAC) for
effective ensemble size adaptation. Specifically, we devise Adaptive Ensemble
Q-learning (AdaEQ), a generalized ensemble method with two key steps: (a)
approximation error characterization which serves as the feedback for flexibly
controlling the ensemble size, and (b) ensemble size adaptation tailored towards
minimizing the estimation bias. Extensive experiments are carried out to show that
AdaEQ can improve the learning performance than the existing methods for the
MuJoCo benchmark.

1

Introduction

Thanks to recent advances in function approximation methods using deep neural networks [20],
Q-learning [35] has been widely used to solve reinforcement learning (RL) problems in a variety
of applications, e.g., robotic control [23, 13], path planning [15, 24] and production scheduling
[34, 21]. Despite the great success, it is well recognized that Q-learning may suffer from the notorious
overestimation bias [29, 33, 32, 10, 37], which would significantly impede the learning efficiency.
Recent work [9, 11] indicates that this problem also persists in the actor-critic setting. To address
this issue, the ensemble method [16, 1, 26, 7] has emerged as a promising solution in which multiple
Q-function approximators are used to get better estimation of the action values. Needless to say, the
ensemble size, i.e., the number of Q-function approximators used in the target, has intrinsic impact
on Q-learning. Notably, it is shown in [6, 17] that while a large ensemble size could completely
remove the overestimation bias, it may go to the other extreme and result in underestimation bias and
unstable training, which is clearly not desirable. Therefore, instead of simply increasing the ensemble
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

