NeuS: Learning Neural Implicit Surfaces
by Volume Rendering for Multi-view Reconstruction

Peng Wang† , Lingjie Liu‡∗, Yuan Liu† , Christian Theobalt‡ , Taku Komura† , Wenping Wang∗
†
The University of Hong Kong ‡ Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Texas A&M University
†
{pwang3,yliu,taku}@cs.hku.hk ‡ {lliu,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

wenping@tamu.edu

Abstract
We present a novel neural surface reconstruction method, called NeuS, for reconstructing objects and scenes with high fidelity from 2D image inputs. Existing
neural surface reconstruction approaches, such as DVR [Niemeyer et al., 2020]
and IDR [Yariv et al., 2020], require foreground mask as supervision, easily get
trapped in local minima, and therefore struggle with the reconstruction of objects
with severe self-occlusion or thin structures. Meanwhile, recent neural methods
for novel view synthesis, such as NeRF [Mildenhall et al., 2020] and its variants,
use volume rendering to produce a neural scene representation with robustness of
optimization, even for highly complex objects. However, extracting high-quality
surfaces from this learned implicit representation is difficult because there are
not sufficient surface constraints in the representation. In NeuS, we propose to
represent a surface as the zero-level set of a signed distance function (SDF) and
develop a new volume rendering method to train a neural SDF representation. We
observe that the conventional volume rendering method causes inherent geometric
errors (i.e. bias) for surface reconstruction, and therefore propose a new formulation that is free of bias in the first order of approximation, thus leading to more
accurate surface reconstruction even without the mask supervision. Experiments
on the DTU dataset and the BlendedMVS dataset show that NeuS outperforms the
state-of-the-arts in high-quality surface reconstruction, especially for objects and
scenes with complex structures and self-occlusion.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing surfaces from multi-view images is a fundamental problem in computer vision and
computer graphics. 3D reconstruction with neural implicit representations has recently become
a highly promising alternative to classical reconstruction approaches [35, 8, 2] due to its high
reconstruction quality and its potential to reconstruct complex objects that are difficult for classical
approaches, such as non-Lambertian surfaces and thin structures. Recent works represent surfaces as
signed distance functions (SDF) [46, 49, 17, 22] or occupancy [29, 30]. To train their neural models,
these methods use a differentiable surface rendering method to render a 3D object into images and
compare them against input images for supervision. For example, IDR [46] produces impressive
reconstruction results, but it fails to reconstruct objects with complex structures that causes abrupt
depth changes. The cause of this limitation is that the surface rendering method used in IDR only
considers a single surface intersection point for each ray. Consequently, the gradient only exists at
this single point, which is too local for effective back propagation and would get optimization stuck
in a poor local minimum when there are abrupt changes of depth on images. Furthermore, object
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

