Causal Effect Inference for Structured Treatments
Jean Kaddour∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Yuchen Zhu
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Qi Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Matt J. Kusner
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Ricardo Silva
Department of Statistical Science
University College London

Abstract
We address the estimation of conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) for
structured treatments (e.g., graphs, images, texts). Given a weak condition on the
effect, we propose the generalized Robinson decomposition, which (i) isolates the
causal estimand (reducing regularization bias), (ii) allows one to plug in arbitrary
models for learning, and (iii) possesses a quasi-oracle convergence guarantee under
mild assumptions. In experiments with small-world and molecular graphs we
demonstrate that our approach outperforms prior work in CATE estimation.

1

Introduction

Estimating feature-level causal effects, so-called conditional average treatment effects (CATEs), from
observational data is a fundamental problem across many domains. Examples include understanding
the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the transmission of COVID-19 in a specific region
[12], how school meal programs impact child health [13], and the effects of chemotherapy drugs
on cancer patients [52]. Supervised learning methods face two challenges in such settings: (i)
missing interventions, the fact that we only observe one treatment for each individual means models
must extrapolate to new treatments without access to ground truth, and (ii) confounding factors that
affect both treatment assignment and the outcome means that extrapolation from observation to
intervention requires assumptions. Many approaches have been proposed to overcome these issues
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29, 33, 39, 41, 42, 45, 52, 56, 57, 60, 64, 67].
In many cases, treatments are naturally structured. For instance, a drug is commonly represented by
its molecular structure (graph), the nutritional content of a meal as a food label (text), and geographic
regions affected by a new policy as a map (image). Taking this structure into account can provide
several advantages: (i) higher data-efficiency, (ii) capability to work with many treatments, and (iii)
generalizing to unseen treatments during test time. However, the vast majority of prior work operates
on either binary or continuous scalar treatments (structured treatments are rarely considered, a notable
exception to this trend is Harada & Kashima [16] which we describe in Section 2).
To estimate CATEs with structured interventions, our contributions include:
• Generalized Robinson decomposition (GRD): A generalization of the Robinson decomposition
[47] to treatments that can be vectorized as a continuous embedding. This GRD reveals a learnable
∗

Correspondence to jean.kaddour.20@ucl.ac.uk

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

