TopicNet: Semantic Graph-Guided Topic Discovery

Zhibin Duan, Yishi Xu, Bo Chen∗, Dongsheng Wang, Chaojie Wang
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
xd_zhibin@163.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Existing deep hierarchical topic models are able to extract semantically meaningful
topics from a text corpus in an unsupervised manner and automatically organize
them into a topic hierarchy. However, it is unclear how to incorporate prior belief
such as knowledge graph to guide the learning of the topic hierarchy. To address
this issue, we introduce TopicNet as a deep hierarchical topic model that can inject
prior structural knowledge as an inductive bias to influence the learning. TopicNet
represents each topic as a Gaussian-distributed embedding vector, projects the
topics of all layers into a shared embedding space, and explores both the symmetric
and asymmetric similarities between Gaussian embedding vectors to incorporate
prior semantic hierarchies. With an auto-encoding variational inference network,
the model parameters are optimized by minimizing the evidence lower bound and
a regularization term via stochastic gradient descent. Experiments on widely used
benchmarks show that TopicNet outperforms related deep topic models on discovering deeper interpretable topics and mining better document representations.

1

Introduction

Topic models, which have the ability to uncover the hidden semantic structure in a text corpus,
have been widely applied to text analysis. Generally, a topic model is designed to discover a set
of semantically-meaningful latent topics from a collection of documents, each of which captures
word co-occurrence patterns commonly observed in a document. While vanilla topic models, such as
latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [1] and Poisson factor analysis (PFA) [2], are able to achieve this
goal, a series of their hierarchical extensions [3–12] have been developed in the hope of exploring
multi-layer document representations and mining meaningful topic taxonomies. Commonly, these
hierarchical topic models aim to learn a hierarchy, in which the latent topics exhibit an increasing
level of abstraction when moving towards a deeper hidden layer, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Consequently,
it provides users with an intuitive and interpretable way to better understand textual data.
Despite their attractive performance, many existing hierarchical topic models are purely data-driven
and incorporate no prior domain knowledge, which may result in some learned topics failing to
describe a semantically coherent concept [13], especially for those at a deeper hidden layer [14].
Furthermore, the inflexibility of adding prior knowledge also somewhat limits the applicability of
hierarchical topic models, since it is common that a user is interested in a specific topic structure and
only focused on information related to it [15]. To address this issue, we assume a structured prior in
the form of a predefined topic hierarchy, where each topic is described by a semantic concept, with
the concepts at adjacent layers following the hypernym relations, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Such a
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

