Representation Learning for
Event-based Visuomotor Policies
Sai Vemprala
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA - 98052

Sami Mian ∗
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA - 15260

Ashish Kapoor
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA - 98052

savempra@microsoft.com

sami.mian@pitt.edu

akapoor@microsoft.com

Abstract
Event-based cameras are dynamic vision sensors that provide asynchronous measurements of changes in per-pixel brightness at a microsecond level. This makes
them significantly faster than conventional frame-based cameras, and an appealing
choice for high-speed navigation. While an interesting sensor modality, this asynchronously streamed event data poses a challenge for machine learning techniques
that are more suited for frame-based data. In this paper, we present an event variational autoencoder and show that it is feasible to learn compact representations
directly from asynchronous spatiotemporal event data. Furthermore, we show that
such pretrained representations can be used for event-based reinforcement learning
instead of end-to-end reward driven perception. We validate this framework of
learning event-based visuomotor policies by applying it to an obstacle avoidance
scenario in simulation. Compared to techniques that treat event data as images, we
show that representations learnt from event streams result in faster policy training,
adapt to different control capacities, and demonstrate a higher degree of robustness.

1

Introduction

Autonomous navigation, which is driven by a tight coupling between perception and action, is
particularly challenging for fast, agile robots such as unmanned micro aerial vehicles (MAV) that are
often deployed in cluttered and low altitude areas. For such reactive navigation applications such
as obstacle avoidance, low sensor latency is the key to performing agile maneuvers successfully [1].
MAVs are also limited in their size and payload capacity, which constrains onboard sensor choices to
small, low-power sensors, and the computational load of the processing algorithms to be minimal.
Modern computer vision and machine learning techniques for perception and navigation typically
focus on analyzing data from conventional CMOS based cameras, in various modalities such as RGB
images, depth maps etc. While these cameras provide high resolution data, the main drawback of
these sensors is their speed, with most averaging output at a rate of 30-60 Hz. This makes such
sensors unable to scale up to the perception data rate required by agile navigation.
Inspired by biological vision, neuromorphic engineering has resulted in a novel sensor known as the
dynamic vision sensor, or an event-based camera [2]. These cameras detect and measure changes in
log-luminance on a per-pixel basis, and return information about ‘events’ with a temporal resolution
on the order of microseconds. Due to the increased sampling speed of these cameras and the minimal
processing needed to parse the data, perception using event cameras can be much faster than traditional
approaches. This can allow for faster control schemes to be used, as enough relevant environmental
information can be collected quickly in order to make informed control choices. Moreover, the events
are inherently generated by changes in brightness typically arising from motion. This makes event
cameras natural motion detectors and a good fit for learning control policies.
∗

Work done while interning at Microsoft Research

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

