Variational Bayesian Reinforcement Learning with
Regret Bounds

Brendan O’Donoghue
DeepMind, UK
bodonoghue@google.com

Abstract
In reinforcement learning the Q-values summarize the expected future rewards
that the agent will attain. However, they cannot capture the epistemic uncertainty
about those rewards. In this work we derive a new Bellman operator with associated fixed point we call the ‘knowledge values’. These K-values compress both the
expected future rewards and the epistemic uncertainty into a single value, so that
high uncertainty, high reward, or both, can yield high K-values. The key principle
is to endow the agent with a risk-seeking utility function that is carefully tuned to
balance exploration and exploitation. When the agent follows√a Boltzmann policy
over the K-values it yields a Bayes regret bound of Õ(L3/2 SAT ), where L is
the time horizon, S is the number of states, A is the number of actions, and T is the
total number of elapsed timesteps. We show deep connections of this approach to
the soft-max and maximum-entropy strands of research in reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction and related work

In reinforcement learning (RL) an agent interacts with an environment in an episodic manner and
attempts to maximize its return [54, 45]. In this work the environment is a Markov decision process
(MDP) and we consider the Bayesian case where the agent has some prior information and as it
gathers data it updates its posterior beliefs about the environment. In this setting the agent is faced
with the choice of visiting well understood states or exploring the environment to determine the
value of other states which might lead to a higher return. This trade-off is called the explorationexploitation dilemma. One way to measure how well an agent balances this trade-off is a quantity
called regret, which measures how sub-optimal the rewards the agent has received are so far, relative
to the (unknown) optimal policy [12]. In the Bayesian case the natural quantity to consider is the
Bayes regret, which is the expected regret under the agents prior information [17].
The optimal Bayesian policy can be formulated using belief states, but this is believed to be intractable for all but small problems [17]. Approximations to the optimal Bayesian policy exist, one
of the most successful being Thompson sampling [53, 55] wherein the agent samples from the posterior over value functions and acts greedily with respect to that sample [38, 42, 27, 41]. It can be
shown that this strategy yields both Bayesian and frequentist regret bounds under certain assumptions [3]. In practice, maintaining a posterior over value functions is intractable, and so instead the
agent maintains the posterior over MDPs, and at each episode an MDP is sampled from this posterior, the value function for that sample is computed, and the policy acts greedily with respect to that
value function. Due to the repeated sampling and computing of value functions this is practical only
for small problems, though attempts have been made to extend it [37, 43].
Bayesian algorithms have the advantage of being able to incorporate prior information about the
problem and, as we show in the numerical experiments, they tend to perform better than nonBayesian approaches in practice [17, 51, 49]. Although typically Bayes regret bounds hold for any
prior that satisfies the assumptions, the requirement that the prior over the MDP is known in advance
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

