Model-Based Reinforcement Learning via Imagination
with Derived Memory

Yao Mu
The University of Hong Kong

Yuzheng Zhuang ∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Bin Wang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

muyao@connect.hku.hk

zhuangyuzheng@huawei.com

wangbin158@huawei.com

Guangxiang Zhu
Tsinghua University

Wulong Liu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Jianyu Chen
Tsinghua University

guangxiangzhu@outlook.com

liuwulong@huawei.com

jianyuchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Ping Luo
The University of Hong Kong

Shengbo Eben Li
Tsinghua University

Chongjie Zhang
Tsinghua University

pluo@cs.hku.hk

lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn

chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Jianye Hao
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
haojianye@huawei.com

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning aims to improve the sample efficiency of
policy learning by modelling the dynamics of the environment. Recently, the latent
dynamics model has been further developed to enable fast planning in a compact
space. It summarizes the high-dimensional experiences of an agent, which mimics
the memory function of humans. Learning policies via imagination with the latent
model shows great potential for solving complex tasks. However, only considering
memories from the true experiences in the process of imagination could limit its
advantages. Inspired by the memory prosthesis proposed by neuroscientists, we
present a novel model-based reinforcement learning framework called Imagining
with Derived Memory (IDM). It enables the agent to learn policy from enriched
diverse imagination with prediction-reliability weight, thus improving sample
efficiency and policy robustness. Experiments on various high-dimensional visual
control tasks in the DMControl benchmark demonstrate that IDM outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods in terms of policy robustness and further improves
the sample efficiency of the model-based method.

1

Introduction

Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) approaches benefit from the knowledge of a model,
allowing them to summarize the agent’s past experiences and foresight the future outcomes in
a compact latent space [1, 2, 3, 4]. Previous approaches can be generally categorized into four
branches, including 1) Dyna-style algorithms, 2) sampling-based methods, 3) value expansion, and
4) backpropagation through paths. First, the Dyna-style algorithms [5] generate virtual interaction
∗
Yuzheng Zhuang is the corresponding author. Yao Mu conducted this work during the internship in Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

