Meta Internal Learning

Raphael Bensadoun∗
The School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Shir Gur
The School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Tomer Galanti
The School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
The School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Internal learning for single-image generation is a framework where a generator
is trained to produce novel images based on a single image. Since these models
are trained on a single image, they are limited in their scale and application. To
overcome these issues, we propose a meta-learning approach that enables training
over a collection of images, in order to model the internal statistics of the sample
image more effectively. In the presented meta-learning approach, a single-image
GAN model is generated given an input image, via a convolutional feedforward hypernetwork f . This network is trained over a dataset of images, allowing for feature
sharing among different models and for interpolation in the space of generative models. The generated single-image model contains a hierarchy of multiple generators
and discriminators. Therefore, the meta-learner needs to be trained in an adversarial manner, which requires careful design choices that we justify by a theoretical
analysis. Our results show that the models obtained are as suitable as single-image
GANs for many common image applications, and significantly reduce training time
per image, without loss in performance, and introduce novel capabilities, such as
interpolation and feedforward modeling of novel images. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/RaphaelBensTAU/MetaInternalLearning.

1

Introduction

In the field of internal learning, one wishes to learn the internal statistics of a signal in order to
perform various downstream tasks. In this work, we focus on Single image GANs [31, 32, 13, 8],
which present extremely impressive results in modeling the distribution of images that are similar to
the input image, and in applying this distribution to a variety of applications. However, given that
there is no shortage of unlabeled images, one may ask whether a better approach would be to model
multiple images, and only then condition the model on a single input image. Doing so, one could
(i) benefit from knowledge and feature sharing between the different images, (ii) better define the
boundaries between the distribution obtained from the input image and those of other images, (iii)
possibly avoid the costly training phase for a novel image, and instead employ feedforward inference,
and (iv) mix different single-image models to create novel types of images.
∗

Corresponding author - bensadoun@mail.tau.ac.il

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

