Towards Efficient and Effective Adversarial Training

Gaurang Sriramanan∗, Sravanti Addepalli∗, Arya Baburaj, R.Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
The vulnerability of Deep Neural Networks to adversarial attacks has spurred
immense interest towards improving their robustness. However, present state-of-theart adversarial defenses involve the use of 10-step adversaries during training, which
renders them computationally infeasible for application to large-scale datasets.
While the recent single-step defenses show promising direction, their robustness
is not on par with multi-step training methods. In this work, we bridge this
performance gap by introducing a novel Nuclear-Norm regularizer on network
predictions to enforce function smoothing in the vicinity of data samples. While
prior works consider each data sample independently, the proposed regularizer uses
the joint statistics of adversarial samples across a training minibatch to enhance
optimization during both attack generation and training, obtaining state-of-the-art
results amongst efficient defenses. We achieve further gains by incorporating
exponential averaging of network weights over training iterations. We finally
introduce a Hybrid training approach that combines the effectiveness of a twostep variant of the proposed defense with the efficiency of a single-step defense.
We demonstrate superior results when compared to multi-step defenses such as
TRADES and PGD-AT as well, at a significantly lower computational cost.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed the rise of Deep Learning based systems and solutions in many
applications related to Computer Vision, Natural Language Processing and Speech Processing.
Despite the remarkable success of Deep Networks, they are known to be susceptible to crafted
imperceptible noise called Adversarial Attacks [27], which can have disastrous implications when
deployed in critical applications such as self-driving cars, medical diagnosis and surveillance systems.
The robustness of Deep Networks to Adversarial Attacks has been of prime importance, since this
relates to improving their worst-case performance [6].
Early attempts of improving robustness to adversarial attacks could be broadly classified into input
pre-processing based defenses [4, 32, 25, 13] and adversarial training methods [11, 20]. While the
input pre-processing based defenses were computationally cheap, they primarily involved masking of
gradients to prevent the generation of strong attacks. Such methods were later shown to be ineffective
against attacks constructed using expectation over the randomized components or smooth approximations of non-differentiable components [3]. Amongst the latter methods, the most successful
early defense which stood the test of time was the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) adversarial
training method proposed by Madry et al. [20]. This involved minimization of cross-entropy loss on
the worst-case perturbations generated using multiple iterations of constrained optimization, leading
to a significantly higher computational cost when compared to standard training.
∗

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Gaurang Sriramanan <gaurangs@umd.edu>, Sravanti Addepalli <sravantia@iisc.ac.in>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

