Oracle Complexity in Nonsmooth Nonconvex
Optimization
Guy Kornowski
Weizmann Institute of Science
guy.kornowski@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
It is well-known that given a smooth, bounded-from-below, and possibly nonconvex function, standard gradient-based methods can find ✏-stationary points
(with gradient norm less than ✏) in O(1/✏2 ) iterations. However, many important
nonconvex optimization problems, such as those associated with training modern
neural networks, are inherently not smooth, making these results inapplicable. In
this paper, we study nonsmooth nonconvex optimization from an oracle complexity
viewpoint, where the algorithm is assumed to be given access only to local information about the function at various points. We provide two main results (under mild
assumptions): First, we consider the problem of getting near ✏-stationary points.
This is perhaps the most natural relaxation of finding ✏-stationary points, which
is impossible in the nonsmooth nonconvex case. We prove that this relaxed goal
cannot be achieved efficiently, for any distance and ✏ smaller than some constants.
Our second result deals with the possibility of tackling nonsmooth nonconvex
optimization by reduction to smooth optimization: Namely, applying smooth optimization methods on a smooth approximation of the objective function. For this
approach, we prove an inherent trade-off between oracle complexity and smoothness: On the one hand, smoothing a nonsmooth nonconvex function can be done
very efficiently (e.g., by randomized smoothing), but with dimension-dependent
factors in the smoothness parameter, which can strongly affect iteration complexity
when plugging into standard smooth optimization methods. On the other hand,
these dimension factors can be eliminated with suitable smoothing methods, but
only by making the oracle complexity of the smoothing process exponentially
large.

1

Introduction

We consider optimization problems associated with functions f : Rd ! R, where f (·) is Lipschitz
continuous and bounded from below, but otherwise satisfies no special structure, such as convexity.
Clearly, in high dimensions, it is generally impossible to efficiently find a global minimum of a
nonconvex function. However, if we relax our goal to finding (approximate) stationary points, then
the nonconvexity is no longer an issue. In particular, it is known that if f (·) is smooth – namely,
differentiable and with a Lipschitz continuous gradient – then for any ✏ > 0, simple gradientbased algorithms can find x such that krf (x)k  ✏, using only O(1/✏2 ) gradient computations,
independent of the dimension (see for example [30, 22, 11]).
Unfortunately, many optimization problems of interest are inherently not smooth. For example, when
training modern neural networks, involving max operations and rectified linear units, the associated
optimization problem is virtually always nonconvex as well as nonsmooth. Thus, the positive results
above, which crucially rely on smoothness, are inapplicable. Although there are positive results
even for nonconvex nonsmooth functions, they tend to be either purely asymptotic in nature (e.g.,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

