Understanding the Under-Coverage Bias
in Uncertainty Estimation

Yu Bai
Salesforce Research
yu.bai@salesforce.com

Song Mei
UC Berkeley
songmei@berkeley.edu

Huan Wang
Salesforce Research
huan.wang@salesforce.com

Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
cxiong@salesforce.com

Abstract
Estimating the data uncertainty in regression tasks is often done by learning a
quantile function or a prediction interval of the true label conditioned on the
input. It is frequently observed that quantile regression—a vanilla algorithm for
learning quantiles with asymptotic guarantees—tends to under-cover than the
desired coverage level in reality. While various fixes have been proposed, a more
fundamental understanding of why this under-coverage bias happens in the first
place remains elusive.
In this paper, we present a rigorous theoretical study on the coverage of uncertainty
estimation algorithms in learning quantiles. We prove that quantile regression
suffers from an inherent under-coverage bias, in a vanilla setting where we learn a
realizable linear quantile function and there is more data than parameters. More
quantitatively, for α > 0.5 and small d/n, the α-quantile learned by quantile
regression roughly achieves coverage α − (α − 1/2) · d/n regardless of the noise
distribution, where d is the input dimension and n is the number of training
data. Our theory reveals that this under-coverage bias stems from a certain highdimensional parameter estimation error that is not implied by existing theories
on quantile regression. Experiments on simulated and real data verify our theory
and further illustrate the effect of various factors such as sample size and model
capacity on the under-coverage bias in more practical setups.

1

Introduction

This paper is concerned with the problem of uncertainty estimation in regression problems. Uncertainty estimation is an increasingly important task in modern machine learning applications—Models
should not only make high-accuracy predictions, but also have a sense of how much the true label
may deviate from the prediction. This capability is crucial for deploying machine learning in the real
world, in particular in risk-sensitive domains such as medical AI [15, 29], self-driving cars [47], and
so on. A common approach for uncertainty estimation in regression is to learn a quantile function or
a prediction interval of the true label conditioned on the input, which provides useful distributional
information about the label. Such learned quantiles are typically evaluated by their coverage, i.e.,
probability that it covers the true label on a new test example. For example, a learned 90% upper
quantile function should be an actual upper bound of the true label at least 90% of the time.
Algorithms for learning quantiles date back to the classical quantile regression [35], which estimates
the quantile function by solving an empirical risk minimization problem with a suitable loss function
that depends on the desired quantile level α. Quantile regression is conceptually simple, and is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

