Adaptive Proximal Gradient Methods for Structured
Neural Networks
Jihun Yun
KAIST
arcprime@kaist.ac.kr

Aurélie C. Lozano
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
aclozano@us.ibm.com

Eunho Yang
KAIST, AITRICS
eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider the training of structured neural networks where the regularizer can
be non-smooth and possibly non-convex. While popular machine learning libraries
have resorted to stochastic (adaptive) subgradient approaches, the use of proximal
gradient methods in the stochastic setting has been little explored and warrants
further study, in particular regarding the incorporation of adaptivity. Towards this
goal, we present a general framework of stochastic proximal gradient descent methods that allows for arbitrary positive preconditioners and lower semi-continuous
regularizers. We derive two important instances of our framework: (i) the first proximal version of A DAM, one of the most popular adaptive SGD algorithm, and (ii) a
revised version of P ROX Q UANT [1] for quantization-specific regularizers, which
improves upon the original approach by incorporating the effect of preconditioners
in the proximal mapping computations. We provide convergence guarantees for our
framework and show that adaptive gradient methods can have faster convergence
in terms of constant than vanilla SGD for sparse data. Lastly, we demonstrate
the superiority of stochastic proximal methods compared to subgradient-based
approaches via extensive experiments. Interestingly, our results indicate that the
benefit of proximal approaches over sub-gradient counterparts is more pronounced
for non-convex regularizers than for convex ones.

1

Introduction

We study the regularized training of neural networks, which can be formulated as the following
(stochastic) optimization problem
f (θ)

{
z
}|
minimize F (θ) := Eξ∼P f (θ; ξ) +R(θ)
θ∈Rd

(1)

where θ ∈ Rd represents the network parameter, ξ is the random variable representing mini-batch
data samples, and R(·) is a regularizer encouraging low-dimensional structural constraints on θ.
The technique of regularization is ubiquitous in machine learning as it can effectively prevent
overfitting and yield better generalization. The `1 -regularized training for Lasso estimators/sparse
Gaussian graphical model (GMRF) estimation [2, 3] and `2 weight decay [4] on parameters are
prototypical examples. In the context of deep learning, important instances include network pruning [5,
6], which induces a sparse network structure, and network quantization [7, 8, 1], which gives hard
constraints so that parameters have only discrete values.
For the unregularized case, i.e., when R(θ) = 0, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been a
prevalent approach to solve the optimization problem stated in (1). At each iteration, SGD evaluates
the gradient on a randomly chosen subset of training samples (mini-batch). While vanilla SGD
employs a uniform learning rate for all coordinates, several adaptive variants have been proposed to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

