Sparse Steerable Convolutions: An Efficient Learning
of SE(3)-Equivariant Features for Estimation and
Tracking of Object Poses in 3D Space

Jiehong Lin1,2∗, Hongyang Li1∗, Ke Chen1,3 , Jiangbo Lu4 , Kui Jia1,3,5†
1
South China University of Technology. 2 DexForce Co. Ltd.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory. 4 SmartMore Technology Co. Ltd. 5 Pazhou Laboratory.
{lin.jiehong, eeli.hongyang}@mail.scut.edu.cn
jiangbo.lu@gmail.com, {chenk, kuijia}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
As a basic component of SE(3)-equivariant deep feature learning, steerable convolution has recently demonstrated its advantages for 3D semantic analysis. The
advantages are, however, brought by expensive computations on dense, volumetric
data, which prevent its practical use for efficient processing of 3D data that are
inherently sparse. In this paper, we propose a novel design of Sparse Steerable
Convolution (SS-Conv) to address the shortcoming; SS-Conv greatly accelerates
steerable convolution with sparse tensors, while strictly preserving the property
of SE(3)-equivariance. Based on SS-Conv, we propose a general pipeline for
precise estimation of object poses, wherein a key design is a Feature-Steering
module that takes the full advantage of SE(3)-equivariance and is able to conduct an efficient pose refinement. To verify our designs, we conduct thorough
experiments on three tasks of 3D object semantic analysis, including instance-level
6D pose estimation, category-level 6D pose and size estimation, and categorylevel 6D pose tracking. Our proposed pipeline based on SS-Conv outperforms
existing methods on almost all the metrics evaluated by the three tasks. Ablation studies also show the superiority of our SS-Conv over alternative convolutions in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. Our code is released publicly at
https://github.com/Gorilla-Lab-SCUT/SS-Conv.

1

Introduction

SE(3)-equivariant deep networks [20, 25, 7] have shown the promise recently in some tasks of 3D
semantic analysis, among which 3D Steerable CNN [25] is a representative one. 3D Steerable
CNNs employ steerable convolutions (termed as ST-Conv) to learn pose-equivariant features in
a layer-wise manner, thus preserving the pose information of the 3D input. Intuitively speaking,
for a layer of ST-Conv, any SE(3) transformation (r, t) applied to its 3D input would induce a
pose-synchronized transformation to its output features, where r ∈ SO(3) stands for a rotation and
t ∈ R3 for a translation. Fig. 1 (a) gives an illustration where given an SE(3) transformation of the
input, the locations at which feature vectors are defined are rigidly transformed with respect to (r, t),
and the feature vectors themselves are also rotated by ρ(r) (ρ(r) is a representation of rotation r).
This property of SE(3)-equivariance enables the steerability of feature space. For example, without
transforming the input, SE(3) transformation can be directly realized by steering in the feature space.
To produce steerable features, ST-Conv confines its feature domain to regular grids of 3D volumetric
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

