Replay-Guided Adversarial Environment Design

Minqi Jiang∗
UCL, FAIR

Michael Dennis∗
UC Berkeley

Jakob Foerster
FAIR

Edward Grefenstette
UCL, FAIR

Jack Parker-Holder
University of Oxford
Tim Rocktäschel
UCL, FAIR

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents may successfully generalize to new
settings if trained on an appropriately diverse set of environment and task
configurations. Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) is a promising selfsupervised RL paradigm, wherein the free parameters of an underspecified
environment are automatically adapted during training to the agent’s capabilities,
leading to the emergence of diverse training environments. Here, we cast Prioritized
Level Replay (PLR), an empirically successful but theoretically unmotivated
method that selectively samples randomly-generated training levels, as UED. We
argue that by curating completely random levels, PLR, too, can generate novel and
complex levels for effective training. This insight reveals a natural class of UED
methods we call Dual Curriculum Design (DCD). Crucially, DCD includes both
PLR and a popular UED algorithm, PAIRED, as special cases and inherits similar
theoretical guarantees. This connection allows us to develop novel theory for PLR,
providing a version with a robustness guarantee at Nash equilibria. Furthermore,
our theory suggests a highly counterintuitive improvement to PLR: by stopping
the agent from updating its policy on uncurated levels (training on less data), we
can improve the convergence to Nash equilibria. Indeed, our experiments confirm
that our new method, PLR⊥ , obtains better results on a suite of out-of-distribution,
zero-shot transfer tasks, in addition to demonstrating that PLR⊥ improves the
performance of PAIRED, from which it inherited its theoretical framework.

1

Introduction

While deep reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have led to many successful applications in
challenging domains like Atari [21], Go [35], Chess [36], Dota [4], and StarCraft [40] in recent years,
deep RL agents still prove to be brittle, often failing to transfer to environments only slightly different
from those encountered during training [44, 9]. To ensure learning of robust and well-generalizing
policies, agents must train on sufficiently diverse and informative variations of environments (e.g. see
Section 3.1 of [8]). However, it is not always feasible to specify an appropriate training distribution or
a generator thereof. Agents may therefore benefit greatly from methods that automatically adapt the
distribution over environment variations throughout training [10, 17]. Throughout this paper we will
call a particular environment instance or configuration (e.g. an arrangement of blocks, race tracks, or
generally any of the environment’s constituent entities) a level.
Two recent works [10, 17] have sought to empirically demonstrate this need for a more targeted agentadaptive mechanism for selecting levels on which to train RL agents, so to ensure efficient learning
and generalization to unseen levels—as well as to provide methods implementing such mechanisms.
The first method, Protagonist Antagonist Induced Regret Environment Design (PAIRED) [10],
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to msj@fb.com and michael_dennis@berkeley.edu .

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

