On the Value of Infinite Gradients in
Variational Autoencoder Models
Bin Dai
Institue for Advanced Study
Tsinghua University
daib09physics@hotmail.com

Li K. Wenliang
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
kevinli@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

David Wipf
Shanghai AI Research Lab
Amazon Web Services
davidwipf@gmail.com

Abstract
A number of recent studies of continuous variational autoencoder (VAE) models
have noted, either directly or indirectly, the tendency of various parameter gradients
to drift towards infinity during training. Because such gradients could potentially
contribute to numerical instabilities, and are often framed as a problematic phenomena to be avoided, it may be tempting to shift to alternative energy functions
that guarantee bounded gradients. But it remains an open question: What might
the unintended consequences of such a restriction be? To address this issue, we
examine how unbounded gradients relate to the regularization of a broad class
of autoencoder-based architectures, including VAE models, as applied to data
lying on or near a low-dimensional manifold (e.g., natural images). Our main
finding is that, if the ultimate goal is to simultaneously avoid over-regularization
(high reconstruction errors, sometimes referred to as posterior collapse) and underregularization (excessive latent dimensions are not pruned from the model), then
an autoencoder-based energy function with infinite gradients around optimal representations is provably required per a certain technical sense which we carefully
detail. Given that both over- and under-regularization can directly lead to poor
generated sample quality or suboptimal feature selection, this result suggests that
heuristic modifications to or constraints on the VAE energy function may at times
be ill-advised, and large gradients should be accommodated to the extent possible.

1

Introduction

Suppose we have access to continuous variables x ∈ χ that are drawn from ground-truth measure µgt .
This measureRassigns probability mass µgt (dx) to the infinitesimal dx residing within χ ⊂ Rd such
that we have χ µgt (dx) = 1. This formalism allows us to consider data that may lie on or near an
r-dimensional manifold embedded in Rd (implying r < d), capturing the notion of low-dimensional
structure relative to the high-dimensional ambient space.
Because of the possibility of an unknown latent manifold, it is common to approximate the corresponding ground-truth measure via a density model parameterized as
Z
pθ (x) = pθ (x|z)p(z)dz.
(1)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

