Tailoring: encoding inductive biases by optimizing
unsupervised objectives at prediction time
Ferran Alet, Maria Bauza, Kenji Kawaguchi,
Nurullah Giray Kuru, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling
MIT
{alet,bauza,kawaguch,ngkuru,tlp,lpk}@mit.edu

Abstract
From CNNs to attention mechanisms, encoding inductive biases into neural networks has been a fruitful source of improvement in machine learning. Adding
auxiliary losses to the main objective function is a general way of encoding biases
that can help networks learn better representations. However, since auxiliary losses
are minimized only on training data, they suffer from the same generalization gap
as regular task losses. Moreover, by adding a term to the loss function, the model
optimizes a different objective than the one we care about. In this work we address
both problems: ﬁrst, we take inspiration from transductive learning and note that after receiving an input but before making a prediction, we can ﬁne-tune our networks
on any unsupervised loss. We call this process tailoring, because we customize the
model to each input to ensure our prediction satisﬁes the inductive bias. Second,
we formulate meta-tailoring, a nested optimization similar to that in meta-learning,
and train our models to perform well on the task objective after adapting them
using an unsupervised loss. The advantages of tailoring and meta-tailoring are
discussed theoretically and demonstrated empirically on a diverse set of examples.

1

Introduction

The key to successful generalization in machine learning is the encoding of useful inductive biases.
A variety of mechanisms, from parameter tying to data augmentation, have proven useful to improve
the performance of models. Among these, auxiliary losses can encode a wide variety of biases,
constraints, and objectives; helping networks learn better representations and generalize more broadly.
Auxiliary losses add an extra term to the task loss that is minimized over the training data.
However, they have two major problems:
1. Auxiliary losses are only minimized at training time, but not for the query points. This leads
to a generalization gap between training and testing, in addition to that of the task loss.
2. By minimizing the sum of the task loss plus the auxiliary loss, we are optimizing a different
objective than the one we care about (only the task loss).
In this work we propose a solution to each problem:
1. We use ideas from transductive learning to minimize unsupervised auxiliary losses at each
query, thus eliminating their generalization gap. Because these losses are unsupervised, we
can optimize them at any time inside the prediction function. We call this process tailoring,
since we customize the model to each query.
2. We use ideas from meta-learning to learn a model that performs well on the task loss after
being tailored with the unsupervised auxiliary loss; i.e. meta-tailoring. This effectively
trains the model to leverage the unsupervised tailoring loss in order to minimize the task loss.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

