An online passive-aggressive algorithm for
difference-of-squares classification

Lawrence K. Saul
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, Mail Code 0404
La Jolla, CA 92093-0404
saul@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We investigate a low-rank model of quadratic classification inspired by previous
work on factorization machines, polynomial networks, and capsule-based architectures for visual object recognition. The model is parameterized by a pair of affine
transformations, and it classifies examples by comparing the magnitudes of vectors
that these transformations produce. The model is also over-parameterized in the
sense that different pairs of affine transformations can describe classifiers with the
same decision boundary and confidence scores. We show that such pairs arise from
discrete and continuous symmetries of the model’s parameter space: in particular,
the latter define symmetry groups of rotations and Lorentz transformations, and
we use these group structures to devise appropriately invariant procedures for
model alignment and averaging. We also leverage the form of the model’s decision
boundary to derive simple margin-based updates for online learning. Here we
explore a strategy of passive-aggressive learning: for each example, we compute
the minimum change in parameters that is required to predict its correct label with
high confidence. We derive these updates by solving a quadratically constrained
quadratic program (QCQP); interestingly, this QCQP is nonconvex but tractable,
and it can be solved efficiently by elementary methods. We highlight the conceptual and practical contributions of this approach. Conceptually, we show that it
extends the paradigm of passive-aggressive learning to a larger family of nonlinear
models for classification. Practically, we show that these models perform well on
large-scale problems in online learning.

1

Introduction

As data sets grow in size and complexity, they create new opportunities—and challenges—for largescale applications of online learning [1]. These challenges have been extensively studied and, for the
most part, elegantly resolved for the simplest linear models of classification [2]. For such models,
one particularly elegant approach is that of passive-aggressive learning [3]. In this framework, a
model is only updated when it fails to classify an example correctly with high confidence. When
an update is triggered, however, the model is changed by whatever minimum amount is required to
achieve this goal. This approach neatly dispenses with the need to choose or adapt learning rates.
Given the appeal of such updates, it is of natural interest to extend this approach to a larger family
of nonlinear models. Proceeding from the linear model, this can be done most straightforwardly
by the use of kernel methods [4–6]. But kernel methods do not scale effortlessly to the regime
of online learning that we envision in this paper—where the examples are arriving in a streaming
fashion from an essentially unlimited source [7, 8]. It is possible to adopt a budgeted approach [9–14]
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

