Task-Adaptive Neural Network Search with
Meta-Contrastive Learning
Wonyong Jeong1,2⇤ † Hayeon Lee1,2⇤ † Geon Park1,2⇤ †
Eunyoung Hyung1,2† Jinheon Baek1 Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2 , Seoul, South Korea
wyjeong@kaist.ac.kr, hayeon926@kaist.ac.kr, geon.park@kaist.ac.kr
ey0301.hyung@samsung.com, jinheon.baek@kaist.ac.kr, sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Most conventional Neural Architecture Search (NAS) approaches are limited in
that they only generate architectures without searching for the optimal parameters.
While some NAS methods handle this issue by utilizing a supernet trained on a
large-scale dataset such as ImageNet, they may be suboptimal if the target tasks
are highly dissimilar from the dataset the supernet is trained on. To address
such limitations, we introduce a novel problem of Neural Network Search (NNS),
whose goal is to search for the optimal pretrained network for a novel dataset and
constraints (e.g. number of parameters), from a model zoo. Then, we propose a
novel framework to tackle the problem, namely Task-Adaptive Neural Network
Search (TANS). Given a model-zoo that consists of network pretrained on diverse
datasets, we use a novel amortized meta-learning framework to learn a cross-modal
latent space with contrastive loss, to maximize the similarity between a dataset and
a high-performing network on it, and minimize the similarity between irrelevant
dataset-network pairs. We validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method on
ten real-world datasets, against existing NAS/AutoML baselines. The results show
that our method instantly retrieves networks that outperform models obtained with
the baselines with significantly fewer training steps to reach the target performance,
thus minimizing the total cost of obtaining a task-optimal network. Our code and
the model-zoo are available at https://github.com/wyjeong/TANS.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automate the design process of network architectures
by searching for high-performing architectures with RL [76, 77], evolutionary algorithms [43, 11],
parameter sharing [6, 42], or surrogate schemes [38], to overcome the excessive cost of trial-and-error
approaches with the manual design of neural architectures [47, 23, 27]. Despite their success, existing
NAS methods suffer from several limitations, which hinder their applicability to practical scenarios.
First of all, the search for the optimal architectures usually requires a large amount of computation,
which can take multiple GPU hours or even days to finish. This excessive computation cost makes
it difficult to efficiently obtain an optimal architecture for a novel dataset. Secondly, most NAS
approaches only search for optimal architectures, without the consideration of their parameter values.
Thus, they require extra computations and time for training on the new task, in addition to the
architecture search cost, which is already excessively high.
For this reason, supernet-based methods [8, 37] that search for a sub-network (subnet) from a network
pretrained on large-scale data, are attracting more popularity as it eliminates the need for additional
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
This work was done while the author was interning at AITRICS.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

