Permutation-Invariant Variational Autoencoder for
Graph-Level Representation Learning

Robin Winter
Bayer AG
Freie Universität Berlin
robin.winter@bayer.com

Frank Noé
Freie Universität Berlin
frank.noe@fu-berlin.de

Djork-Arné Clevert
Bayer AG
djork-arne.clevert@bayer.com

Abstract
Recently, there has been great success in applying deep neural networks on graph
structured data. Most work, however, focuses on either node- or graph-level
supervised learning, such as node, link or graph classification or node-level unsupervised learning (e.g., node clustering). Despite its wide range of possible
applications, graph-level unsupervised representation learning has not received
much attention yet. This might be mainly attributed to the high representation
complexity of graphs, which can be represented by n! equivalent adjacency matrices, where n is the number of nodes. In this work we address this issue by
proposing a permutation-invariant variational autoencoder for graph structured
data. Our proposed model indirectly learns to match the node order of input and
output graph, without imposing a particular node order or performing expensive
graph matching. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model for graph
reconstruction, generation and interpolation and evaluate the expressive power of
extracted representations for downstream graph-level classification and regression.

1

Introduction

Graphs are an universal data structure that can be used to describe a vast variety of systems from
social networks to quantum mechanics [1]. Driven by the success of Deep Learning in fields such
as Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing, there has been an increasing interest in
applying deep neural networks on non-Euclidean, graph structured data as well [2, 3]. Most notably,
generalizing Convolutional Neural Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks to arbitrarily structured
graphs for supervised learning has lead to significant advances on task such as molecular property
prediction [4] or question-answering [5]. Research on unsupervised learning on graphs mainly
focused on node-level representation learning, which aims at embedding the local graph structure
into latent node representations [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Usually, this is achieved by adopting an autoencoder
framework where the encoder utilizes e.g., graph convolutional layers to aggregate local information
at a node level and the decoder is used to reconstruct the graph structure from the node embeddings.
Graph-level representations are usually extracted by aggregating node-level features into a single
vector, which is common practice in supervised learning on graph-level labels [4].
Unsupervised learning of graph-level representations, however, has not yet received much attention,
despite its wide range of possible applications, such as feature extraction, pre-training for graph-level
classification/regression tasks, graph matching or similarity ranking. This might be mainly attributed
to the high representation complexity of graphs arising from their inherent invariance with respect
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

