Evaluation of Human-AI Teams for Learned and
Rule-Based Agents in Hanabi

Ho Chit Siu ∗

Jaime D. Peña ∗

Kyle Palko ‡

Yutai Zhou ∗

Edenna Chen †

Kimberlee C. Chang ∗

Victor J. Lopez ‡

Ross E. Allen ∗

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning has generated superhuman AI in competitive games
such as Go and StarCraft. Can similar learning techniques create a superior AI
teammate for human-machine collaborative games? Will humans prefer AI teammates that improve objective team performance or those that improve subjective
metrics of trust? In this study, we perform a single-blind evaluation of teams of
humans and AI agents in the cooperative card game Hanabi, with both rule-based
and learning-based agents. In addition to the game score, used as an objective
metric of the human-AI team performance, we also quantify subjective measures of
the human’s perceived performance, teamwork, interpretability, trust, and overall
preference of AI teammate. We find that humans have a clear preference toward
a rule-based AI teammate (SmartBot) over a state-of-the-art learning-based AI
teammate (Other-Play) across nearly all subjective metrics, and generally view
the learning-based agent negatively, despite no statistical difference in the game
score. This result has implications for future AI design and reinforcement learning
benchmarking, highlighting the need to incorporate subjective metrics of human-AI
teaming rather than a singular focus on objective task performance. 4

1

Introduction

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have resulted in agents that perform at superhuman levels
within domains previously thought to be solely the purview of human intelligence. Such performance
has been demonstrated through application of reinforcement learning (RL) in environments such
as board games [6, 39], arcade games [31], real-time strategy games [44], multiplayer online battle
arenas [4], and simulated aerial dogfights [11].
In nearly all cases, these demonstrations of AI superiority are in purely adversarial, one- or two-player
games. However, in order to achieve real-world applicability and adoption, AI must be able to
demonstrate teaming intelligence, particularly with human teammates [23]. Due to the focus on
adversarial games, teaming intelligence has been understudied in RL research. AI teammates must
also exhibit behavior that engenders an appropriate level of certain human reactions, such as trust,
mental workload, and risk perception [26, 37]. Failure to do so risks the same kind of misuse, disuse,
and abuse that Parasuraman and Riley illustrated with traditional automation systems [37]. These
issues are distinct from much of current multi-agent AI work, as AI that is able to team effectively
with other AI agents has failed to work effectively with humans [9].
∗

MIT Lincoln Laboratory, {hochit.siu,jdpena,yutai.zhou,chestnut,ross.allen}@ll.mit.edu
MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, edenna@mit.edu
‡
U.S. Air Force Artificial Intelligence Accelerator, {victor.lopez.10,kyle.palko.1}@us.af.mil
4
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

