Long Short-Term Transformer for
Online Action Detection
Mingze Xu
Yuanjun Xiong
Hao Chen
Xinyu Li
Wei Xia
Zhuowen Tu
Stefano Soatto
Amazon/AWS AI
{xumingze,yuanjx,hxen,xxnl,wxia,ztu,soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
We present Long Short-term TRansformer (LSTR), a temporal modeling algorithm for online action detection, which employs a long- and short-term memory
mechanism to model prolonged sequence data. It consists of an LSTR encoder
that dynamically leverages coarse-scale historical information from an extended
temporal window (e.g., 2048 frames spanning of up to 8 minutes), together with
an LSTR decoder that focuses on a short time window (e.g., 32 frames spanning
8 seconds) to model the fine-scale characteristics of the data. Compared to prior
work, LSTR provides an effective and efficient method to model long videos with
fewer heuristics, which is validated by extensive empirical analysis. LSTR achieves
state-of-the-art performance on three standard online action detection benchmarks,
THUMOS’14, TVSeries, and HACS Segment. Code has been made available at:
https://xumingze0308.github.io/projects/lstr.

1

Introduction

Given an incoming stream of video frames, online action detection [14] is concerned with the task
of classifying what is happening at each frame without seeing the future. Unlike offline methods
that assume the entire video is available, online methods process the data causally, up to the current
time. In this paper, we present an online temporal modeling algorithm capable of capturing temporal
relations on prolonged sequences up to 8 minutes long, while retaining fine granularity of the event
in the representation. This is achieved by modeling activities at different temporal scales, so as to
capture a variety of events ranging from bursts to slow trends.
Specifically, we propose a method, named Long Short-term TRansformer (LSTR), to jointly model
long- and short-term temporal dependencies. LSTR has two main advantages over prior work. 1)
It stores the history directly thus avoiding the pitfalls of recurrent models [18, 50, 28, 10]. Backpropagation through time, BPTT, is not needed as the model can directly attend to any useful frames
from memory. 2) It separates long- and short-term memories, which allows modeling short-term
context while extracting useful correlations from the long-term history. This allows us to compress
the long-term history without losing important fine-scale information.
As shown in Fig. 1, we explicitly divide the entire history into the long- and short-term memories and
build our model with an encoder-decoder architecture. Specifically, the LSTR encoder compresses
and abstracts the long-term memory into a latent representation of fixed length, and the LSTR decoder
uses a short window of transient frames to perform self-attention and cross-attention operations
on the extracted token embeddings from the LSTR encoder. In the LSTR encoder, an extended
temporal support becomes beneficial in dealing with untrimmed, streaming videos by devising twostage memory compression, which is shown to be computationally efficient in both training and
inference. Our overall long short-term Transformer architecture gives rise to an effective and efficient
representation for modeling prolonged sequence data.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

