Optimal Order Simple Regret for Gaussian Process
Bandits
Sattar Vakili∗ , Nacime Bouziani+ , Sepehr Jalali∗ , Alberto Bernacchia∗ , Da-shan Shiu∗
∗
MediaTek Research
{sattar.vakili, sepehr.jalali, alberto.bernacchia, ds.shiu}@mtkresearch.com
+
Imperial College London
n.bouziani18@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider the sequential optimization of a continuous, possibly non-convex, and
expensive to evaluate objective function f . The problem can be cast as a Gaussian
Process (GP) bandit where f lives in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS).
The state of the art analysis of several learning algorithms shows a significant gap
between the lower and upper bounds on the simple regret performance. When N is
the number
p of exploration trials and γN is the maximal information gain, we prove
an Õ( γN /N ) bound on the simple regret performance of a pure exploration
algorithm that is significantly tighter than the existing bounds. We show that this
bound is order optimal up to logarithmic factors for the cases where a lower bound
on regret is known. To establish these results, we prove novel and sharp confidence
intervals for GP models applicable to RKHS elements which may be of broader
interest.

1

Introduction

Sequential optimization has evolved into one of the fastest developing areas of machine learning [1].
We consider sequential optimization of an unknown objective function from noisy and expensive to
evaluate zeroth-order1 observations. That is a ubiquitous problem in academic research and industrial
production. Examples of applications include exploration in reinforcement learning, recommendation
systems, medical analysis tools and speech recognizers [4]. A notable application in the field of
machine learning is automated hyper-parameter tuning. Prevalent methods such as grid search can
be prohibitively expensive [5, 6]. Sequential optimization methods, on the other hand, are shown to
efficiently find good hyper-parameters by an adaptive exploration of the hyper-parameter space [7].
Our sequential optimization setting is as follows. Consider an objective function f defined over
a domain X ⊂ Rd , where d ∈ N is the dimension of the input. A learning algorithm is allowed
to perform an adaptive exploration to sequentially observe the potentially corrupted values of the
objective function {f (xn ) + n }N
n=1 , where n are random noises. At the end of N exploration trials,
the learning algorithm returns a candidate maximizer x̂∗N ∈ X of f . Let x∗ ∈ argmaxx∈X f (x) be a
true optimal solution. We may measure the performance of the learning algorithm in terms of simple
regret; that is, the difference between the performance under the true optimal solution, f (x∗ ), and
that under the learnt value, f (x̂∗N ).
Our formulation falls under the general framework of continuum armed bandit that signifies receiving
feedback only for the selected observation point xn at each time n [8, 9, 10, 11]. Bandit problems have
been extensively studied under numerous settings and various performance measures including simple
1
Zeroth-order feedback signifies observations from f in contrast to first-order feedback which refers to
observations from gradient of f as e.g. in stochastic gradient descent [see, e.g., 2, 3].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

