Fair Algorithms for Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits

Safwan Hossain
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
safwan.hossain@mail.utoronto.ca

Evi Micha
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
emicha@cs.toronto.edu

Nisarg Shah
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We propose a multi-agent variant of the classical multi-armed bandit problem, in
which there are N agents and K arms, and pulling an arm generates a (possibly
different) stochastic reward for each agent. Unlike the classical multi-armed bandit
problem, the goal is not to learn the “best arm”; indeed, each agent may perceive
a different arm to be the best for her personally. Instead, we seek to learn a fair
distribution over the arms. Drawing on a long line of research in economics and
computer science, we use the Nash social welfare as our notion of fairness. We
design multi-agent variants of three classic multi-armed bandit algorithms and
show that they achieve sublinear regret, which is now measured in terms of the lost
Nash social welfare.

1

Introduction

In the classical (stochastic) multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, a principal has access to K arms and
pulling arm j generates a stochastic reward for the principal from an unknown distribution Dj with
an unknown mean µ∗j . If the mean rewards were known a priori, the principal could just repeatedly
pull the best arm given by arg maxj µ∗j . However, the principal has no apriori knowledge of the
quality of the arms. Hence, she uses a learning algorithm which operates in rounds, pulls arm j t in
round t, observes the stochastic reward generated, and uses that information to learn the best arm
over time. The performance of such an algorithm is measured in terms of its cumulative regret up
PT
to a horizon T , defined as t=1 (maxj µ∗j − µ∗j t ). Note that this is the difference between the total
mean reward that would have been achieved if the best arm was pulled repeatedly and the total mean
reward of the arms pulled by the learning algorithm up to round T .
This problem can model situations where the principal is deliberating a policy decision and the arms
correspond to the different alternatives she can implement. However, in many real-life scenarios,
making a policy decision affects not one, but several agents. For example, imagine a company making
a decision that affects all its employees, or a conference deciding the structure of its review process,
which affects various research communities. This can be modeled by a multi-agent variant of the
multi-armed bandit (MA-MAB) problem, in which there are N agents and pulling arm j generates a
(possibly different) stochastic reward for each agent i from an unknown distribution Di,j with an
unknown mean µ∗i,j .
Before pondering about learning the “best arm” over time, we must ask what the best arm even
means in this context. Indeed, the “best arm” for one agent may not be the best for another. A first
attempt may be to associate some “aggregate quality” to each arm; for example, the quality of arm
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

