Revisiting Smoothed Online Learning

1

Lijun Zhang1,2 , Wei Jiang1 , Shiyin Lu1 , Tianbao Yang3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
{zhanglj, jiangw, lusy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the problem of smoothed online learning, in which the
online learner suffers both a hitting cost and a switching cost, and target two performance metrics: competitive ratio and dynamic regret with switching cost. To
bound the competitive ratio, we assume the hitting cost is known to the learner
in each round, and investigate the simple idea of balancing the two costs by an
optimization problem. Surprisingly, we find that minimizing the hitting cost alone
is max(1, α2 )-competitive for α-polyhedral functions and 1 + λ4 -competitive for
λ-quadratic growth functions, both of which improve state-of-the-art results significantly. Moreover, when the hitting cost is both convex and λ-quadratic growth,
we reduce the competitive ratio to 1 + √2λ by minimizing the weighted sum of the
hitting cost and the switching cost. To bound the dynamic regret with switching
cost, we follow the standard setting of online convex optimization, in which the
hitting cost is convex but hidden from the learner before making predictions. We
modify Ader, an existing algorithm designed for dynamic regret, slightly to take
into account the switching cost when measuring the performance.
The proposed alp
gorithm, named as Smoothed Ader, attains an optimal O( T (1 + PT )) bound for
dynamic regret with switching cost, where PT is the path-length of the comparator
sequence. Furthermore, if the hitting cost is accessible in the beginning of each
round, we obtain
pa similar guarantee without the bounded gradient condition, and
establish an Ω( T (1 + PT )) lower bound to confirm the optimality.

1

Introduction

Online learning is the process of making a sequence of predictions given knowledge of the answer to
previous tasks and possibly additional information [Shalev-Shwartz, 2011]. While the traditional
online learning aims to make the prediction as accurate as possible, in this paper, we study smoothed
online learning (SOL), where the online learner incurs a switching cost for changing its predictions
between rounds [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2013]. SOL has received lots of attention recently because in
many real-world applications, a change of action usually brings some additional cost. Examples
include the dynamic right-sizing for data centers [Lin et al., 2011], geographical load balancing [Lin
et al., 2012], real-time electricity pricing [Kim and Giannakis, 2014], video streaming [Joseph and
de Veciana, 2012], spatiotemporal sequence prediction [Kim et al., 2015], multi-timescale control
[Goel et al., 2017], and thermal management [Zanini et al., 2010].
Specifically, SOL is performed in a sequence of consecutive rounds, where at round t the learner is
asked to select a point xt from the decision set X , and suffers a hitting cost ft (xt ). Depending on the
performance metric, the learner may be allowed to observe ft (·) when making decisions, which is
different from the traditional online learning in which ft (·) is revealed to the learner after submitting
the decision [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]. Additionally, the learner also incurs a switching cost
m(xt , xt−1 ) for changing decisions between successive rounds. The switching cost m(xt , xt−1 )
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

