Interpolation can hurt robust generalization even
when there is no noise
Konstantin Donhauser1∗, Alexandru T, ifrea1∗, Michael Aerni1 ,
Reinhard Heckel2,3 , Fanny Yang1
1
2
ETH Zurich Rice University 3 Technical University of Munich
konstantin.donhauser@ai.ethz.ch tifreaa@inf.ethz.ch aernim@ethz.ch
reinhard.heckel@gmail.com fan.yang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Numerous recent works show that overparameterization implicitly reduces variance
for min-norm interpolators and max-margin classifiers. These findings suggest
that ridge regularization has vanishing benefits in high dimensions. We challenge
this narrative by showing that, even in the absence of noise, avoiding interpolation
through ridge regularization can significantly improve generalization. We prove
this phenomenon for the robust risk of both linear regression and classification, and
hence provide the first theoretical result on robust overfitting.

1

Introduction

Conventional statistical wisdom cautions the user who trains a model by minimizing a loss L(θ): if
a global minimizer achieves zero or near-zero training loss (i.e., it interpolates), we run the risk of
overfitting (i.e., high variance) and thus suboptimal prediction performance. Instead, regularization is
commonly used to reduce the effect of noise and to obtain an estimator with better generalization.
Specifically, regularization limits model complexity and induces worse data fit, for example via an
explicit penalty term R(θ). The resulting penalized loss L(θ) + λR(θ) explicitly imposes certain
structural properties on the minimizer. This classical rationale, however, does seemingly not apply to
overparameterized models: for example, large neural networks in practice exhibit good generalization
performance on i.i.d. samples even if L(θ) vanishes and label noise is present [36].
Since interpolators are not unique in the overparameterized regime, it is crucial to study the specific
implicit biases of interpolating estimators. In particular, for common losses, a large body of recent
work analyzes the properties of the solutions found via gradient descent at convergence (see e.g. [44,
12, 13, 22, 26, 27, 49, 31]). For example, for linear and logistic regression, it is well-known that
gradient descent converges to the min-`2 -norm and max-`2 -margin solutions, respectively [22, 27,
32, 49]. These interpolating estimators also minimize the respective penalized loss L(θ) + λkθk22 in
the limit of λ → 0 [44].
A plethora of recent papers explicitly study generalization properties on min-`2 -norm interpolators [15,
18, 23, 6, 33, 34, 35] and max-`2 -margin solutions [14, 34, 46], and show that the variance decreases
as the overparameterization ratio increases beyond the interpolation threshold. While regularization
with λ > 0 is commonly known to reduce the risk at the interpolation threshold [23, 37], many
of these works are motivated by the second descent of the double descent phenomenon [7] which
suggests that regularization becomes redundant with sufficient overparameterization. Hence, previous
papers focus on highly overparameterized settings where the optimal regularization parameter satisfies
λopt ≤ 0 [29, 54, 43], implying that for large d/n, explicit regularization with λ > 0 is redundant or
even detrimental for generalization.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

