Estimating High Order Gradients of the
Data Distribution by Denoising
Chenlin Meng
Stanford University
chenlin@cs.stanford.edu

Yang Song
Stanford University
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Wenzhe Li
Tsinghua University
lwz21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The first order derivative of a data density can be estimated efficiently by denoising
score matching, and has become an important component in many applications,
such as image generation and audio synthesis. Higher order derivatives provide
additional local information about the data distribution and enable new applications.
Although they can be estimated via automatic differentiation of a learned density
model, this can amplify estimation errors and is expensive in high dimensional
settings. To overcome these limitations, we propose a method to directly estimate
high order derivatives (scores) of a data density from samples. We first show
that denoising score matching can be interpreted as a particular case of Tweedie’s
formula. By leveraging Tweedie’s formula on higher order moments, we generalize
denoising score matching to estimate higher order derivatives. We demonstrate
empirically that models trained with the proposed method can approximate second
order derivatives more efficiently and accurately than via automatic differentiation.
We show that our models can be used to quantify uncertainty in denoising and
to improve the mixing speed of Langevin dynamics via Ozaki discretization for
sampling synthetic data and natural images.

1

Introduction

The first order derivative of the log data density function, also known as score, has found many
applications including image generation [23, 24, 6], image denoising [20, 19] and audio synthesis [9].
Denoising score matching (DSM) [29] provides an efficient way to estimate the score of the data
density from samples and has been widely used for training score-based generative models [23, 24]
and denoising [20, 19]. High order derivatives of the data density, which we refer to as high order
scores, provide a more accurate local approximation of the data density (e.g., its curvature) and
enable new applications. For instance, high order scores can improve the mixing speed for certain
sampling methods [2, 18, 12], similar to how high order derivatives accelerate gradient descent in
optimization [11]. In denoising problems, given a noisy datapoint, high order scores can be used to
compute high order moments of the underlying noise-free datapoint, thus providing a way to quantify
the uncertainty in denoising.
Existing methods for score estimation [8, 29, 25, 32], such as denoising score matching [29], focus
on estimating the first order score (i.e., the Jacobian of the log density). In principle, high order
scores can be estimated from a learned first order score model (or even a density model) via automatic
differentiation. However, this approach is computationally expensive for high dimensional data
and score models parameterized by deep neural networks. For example, given a D dimensional
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

