Optimal Rates for Random Order Online Optimization

Uri Sherman
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
urisherman@mail.tau.ac.il.

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University, and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il.

Yishay Mansour
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University, and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com.

Abstract
We study online convex optimization in the random order model, recently proposed
by Garber et al. [8], where the loss functions may be chosen by an adversary, but are
then presented to the online algorithm in a uniformly random order. Focusing on
the scenario where the cumulative loss function is (strongly) convex, yet individual
loss functions are smooth but might be non-convex, we give algorithms that achieve
the optimal bounds and significantly outperform the results of Garber et al. [8],
completely removing the dimension dependence and improving their scaling with
respect to the strong convexity parameter. Our analysis relies on novel connections
between algorithmic stability and generalization for sampling without-replacement
analogous to those studied in the with-replacement i.i.d. setting, as well as on a
refined average stability analysis of stochastic gradient descent.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization [25, 12] studies the iterative process of decision making as data arrives in
an online fashion. The model posits a game of 𝑇 rounds, where in each round the learner chooses
a decision 𝑤 𝑡 from a convex set 𝑊 ⊆ ℝ 𝑑 , after which she observes a loss function 𝑓𝑡 : 𝑊 → ℝ,
and incurs loss 𝑓𝑡 (𝑤 𝑡 ). The learner’s objective is to minimize her regret,
P defined as her cumulative
loss minus that of the best decision in hindsight 𝑤 ∗ = arg min 𝑤 ∈𝑊 𝑇𝑡=1 𝑓𝑡 (𝑤). In the prototypical
setting, the individual loss functions are assumed to be convex and adversarially chosen by an
opponent—commonly known as nature or the adversary—who has knowledge of the learner’s
algorithm. While this setup is fundamental enough to accommodate a diverse set of applications (see,
e.g., [12]), studying variants of the basic model promotes modeling flexibility, and further broadens
the set of problems to which optimization techniques may be applied.
Recently, Garber et al. [8] consider relaxing the convexity assumption by requiring that only on average
the loss is (strongly) convex—a property the authors refer to as cumulative (strong) convexity—but
do not require that the losses are convex individually. It is well known (e.g., [4]) that under these
assumptions, if the losses are sampled i.i.d. from some distribution, stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
obtains the optimal 𝑂 (log 𝑇) regret in expectation. However, as it turns out, in the fully adversarial
model the cumulative strong convexity assumption is too weak: Garber et al. [8] show that in this case
there is a linear regret lower bound. Consequently, they propose the random order model, where 𝑇
losses are chosen adversarially but then revealed to the learner in uniformly random order. Within this
model, under the relaxed convexity assumption Garber et al. [8] obtain sub-linear regret for a number
of specialized settings, differing in their assumptions on the structure of the individual loss functions.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

