Passive Attention in Artificial Neural Networks
Predicts Human Visual Selectivity
Thomas A. Langlois1,a,b , H. Charles Zhao1,a , Erin Grantc , Ishita Dasguptad ,
Thomas L. Griffiths2,a,e , and Nori Jacoby2,b
1

T.A.L. and H.C.Z. contributed equally to this work.
2
T.L.G. and N.J. contributed equally to this work.
a
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
b
Computational Auditory Perception Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics
c
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
d
DeepMind, New York
e
Department of Psychology, Princeton University

Abstract
Developments in machine learning interpretability techniques over the past decade
have provided new tools to observe the image regions that are most informative
for classification and localization in artificial neural networks (ANNs). Are the
same regions similarly informative to human observers? Using data from 79 new
experiments and 7,810 participants, we show that passive attention techniques
reveal a significant overlap with human visual selectivity estimates derived from
6 distinct behavioral tasks including visual discrimination, spatial localization,
recognizability, free-viewing, cued-object search, and saliency search fixations.
We find that input visualizations derived from relatively simple ANN architectures
probed using guided backpropagation methods are the best predictors of a shared
component in the joint variability of the human measures. We validate these
correlational results with causal manipulations using recognition experiments. We
show that images masked with ANN attention maps were easier for humans to
classify than control masks in a speeded recognition experiment. Similarly, we find
that recognition performance in the same ANN models was likewise influenced by
masking input images using human visual selectivity maps. This work contributes
a new approach to evaluating the biological and psychological validity of leading
ANNs as models of human vision: by examining their similarities and differences
in terms of their visual selectivity to the information contained in images.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed the rise of artificial neural networks (ANNs) that can match and
even exceed human performance on a variety of perceptual and cognitive tasks, ranging from image
recognition [1] to natural language processing and reinforcement learning [2]. Alongside the rapid
development of these technologies, a significant body of work aimed at improving the interpretability
of these systems and comparing them to biological ones has also grown [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In computer
vision, techniques for probing which visual regions ANNs “attend to” when classifying images have
been developed to visualize the receptive fields of convolutional layers as well as regions of a visual
input that most influence the class activations of the models [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In neuroscience,
researchers began to quantify the functional fidelity of leading ANNs as models of the human visual
system using both neural and behavioral benchmarks [13, 14, 15]. Finally, cognitive scientists
have developed techniques to compare the structure of ANN learned representations to human
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

