Parameter-free HE-friendly Logistic Regression

Junyoung Byun∗
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
quswns95@snu.ac.kr

Woojin Lee∗
Dongguk University-Seoul,
Seoul, Korea
wj926@dgu.ac.kr

Jaewook Lee†
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
jaewook@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Privacy in machine learning has been widely recognized as an essential ethical
and legal issue, because the data used for machine learning may contain sensitive
information. Homomorphic encryption has recently attracted attention as a key
solution to preserve privacy in machine learning applications. However, current
approaches on the training of encrypted machine learning have relied heavily on
hyperparameter selection, which should be avoided owing to the extreme difficulty
of conducting validation on encrypted data. In this study, we propose an effective
privacy-preserving logistic regression method that is free from the approximation
of the sigmoid function and hyperparameter selection. In our framework, a logistic
regression model can be transformed into the corresponding ridge regression for
the logit function. We provide a theoretical background for our framework by
suggesting a new generalization error bound on the encrypted data. Experiments
on various real-world data show that our framework achieves better classification
results while reducing latency by ∼ 68%, compared to the previous models.

1

Introduction

Machine learning on encrypted data (MLED) is an effective method to ensure privacy for both machine
learning models and data used for the model training. Unlike other privacy-preserving machine
learning methods, MLED does not require decryption of intermediate products of the algorithm or
data transfer between participants, enabling a complete outsourcing of machine learning. As data have
become increasingly valuable, MLED models have been actively studied in an attempt to combine
data and computing power that are separated from each other. With the development of efficient
homomorphic encryption (HE) schemes that enable MLED, recent studies [4, 9, 38, 30, 29, 31] cover
most machine learning models, from simple linear regression to deep neural networks (DNN).
However, current research on MLEDs remains lacking owing to the limitations of the proposed HE
schemes. Operations on ciphertexts are very inefficient in terms of computation time and memory
consumption, compared to operations on plaintexts. In addition, after performing a certain number
of operations, a costly procedure called bootstrapping is required [19, 5]. Therefore, the majority
of studies are limited to the inference phase, assuming a situation that provides machine learning
inference as a service. The training phase should be studied more deeply top extract the maximum
value from the data.
One of the MLED models, whose training steps have been commonly studied, is logistic regression
(LR). LR is a simple classification model that linearly divides the data space, which is used effectively
in various fields, including medicine, marketing, and geology [8, 10, 28]. [23] trained an encrypted
LR model with gradient descent and approximated the sigmoid function with the most similar
polynomials within a certain range. Despite performing well on several benchmark datasets, their
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

