VQ-GNN: A Universal Framework to Scale-up
Graph Neural Networks using Vector Quantization
Mucong Ding∗ , Kezhi Kong∗ , Jingling Li , Chen Zhu ,
John Dickerson , Furong Huang , Tom Goldstein
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
{mcding, kong, jingling, chenzhu, john, furongh, tomg}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) can be defined as a form
of graph convolution which can be realized by message passing between direct
neighbors or beyond. To scale such GNNs to large graphs, various neighbor-, layer-,
or subgraph-sampling techniques are proposed to alleviate the “neighbor explosion”
problem by considering only a small subset of messages passed to the nodes in a
mini-batch. However, sampling-based methods are difficult to apply to GNNs that
utilize many-hops-away or global context each layer, show unstable performance
for different tasks and datasets, and do not speed up model inference. We propose a
principled and fundamentally different approach, VQ-GNN, a universal framework
to scale up any convolution-based GNNs using Vector Quantization (VQ) without
compromising the performance. In contrast to sampling-based techniques, our
approach can effectively preserve all the messages passed to a mini-batch of
nodes by learning and updating a small number of quantized reference vectors of
global node representations, using VQ within each GNN layer. Our framework
avoids the “neighbor explosion” problem of GNNs using quantized representations
combined with a low-rank version of the graph convolution matrix. We show that
such a compact low-rank version of the gigantic convolution matrix is sufficient
both theoretically and experimentally. In company with VQ, we design a novel
approximated message passing algorithm and a nontrivial back-propagation rule
for our framework. Experiments on various types of GNN backbones demonstrate
the scalability and competitive performance of our framework on large-graph node
classification and link prediction benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The rise of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has brought the modeling of complex graph data into a
new era. Using message-passing, GNNs iteratively share information between neighbors in a graph to
make predictions of node labels, edge labels, or graph-level properties. A number of powerful GNN
architectures [1–4] have been widely applied to solve down-stream tasks such as recommendation,
social analysis, visual recognition, etc.
With the soaring size of realistic graph datasets and the industrial need to model them efficiently,
GNNs are hindered by a scalability problem. An L-layer GNN aggregates information from all L-hop
neighbors, and standard training routines require these neighbors to all lie on the GPU at once. This
prohibits full-batch training when facing a graph with millions of nodes [5].
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

