Asynchronous Decentralized Online Learning

Jiyan Jiang∗
Tsinghua University

Wenpeng Zhang∗
Ant Group

scjjy95@outlook.com

zhangwenpeng0@gmail.com

Jinjie Gu
Ant Group

Wenwu Zhu†
Tsinghua University

jinjie.gujj@antgroup.com

wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing algorithms in decentralized online learning are conducted in the
synchronous setting. However, synchronization makes these algorithms suffer
from the straggler problem, i.e., fast learners have to wait for slow learners, which
significantly reduces such algorithms’ overall efficiency. To overcome this problem,
we study decentralized online learning in the asynchronous setting, which allows
different learners to work at their own pace. We first formulate the framework
of Asynchronous Decentralized Online Convex Optimization, which specifies the
whole process of asynchronous decentralized online learning using a sophisticated
event indexing system. Then we propose the Asynchronous Decentralized Online
Gradient-Push (AD-OGP) algorithm, which performs asymmetric gossiping communication and instantaneous model averaging. We further derive a regret bound
of AD-OGP, which is a function of the network topology, the levels of processing
delays, and the levels of communication delays. Extensive experiments show that
AD-OGP runs significantly faster than its synchronous counterpart and also verify
the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Decentralized online learning has recently received increasing research attention due to its capability
of processing large-scale streaming data in decentralized computational architectures (e.g., mobile
networks and CPU/GPU clusters). Many different algorithms have been proposed [31, 32, 22, 15, 28,
16, 24] and successfully applied in various application scenarios, such as recommendation systems
[29], energy management [5] and cooperative navigation [21].
Most of the existing decentralized online algorithms are investigated under the synchronous setting,
where all the learners are restricted to communicating their updated information (e.g., model parameters, gradients, dual variables) with each other at the same pace. However, this synchronization
mechanism incurs the straggler problem, which can markedly deteriorate the efficiency of the algorithms [30, 17, 3]. In more detail, at each iteration, the fast learners have to wait for the slow learners,
i.e., the stragglers, to finish their update and communication. Consequently, their speeds will be
dragged down by those of the stragglers, which may dramatically reduce the algorithms’ overall
efficiency as the speeds of different learners in a decentralized system usually vary widely owing to
varying computing powers, storage capacities, network bandwidths, etc.
As is well acknowledged, designing the asynchronous counterpart of a synchronous algorithm is
the most common way to resolve the straggler problem. However, compared to the well-studied
∗

Equal contributions.

†

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

