Partition-Based Formulations for Mixed-Integer
Optimization of Trained ReLU Neural Networks

Calvin Tsay
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
c.tsay@imperial.ac.uk

Jan Kronqvist
Department of Mathematics
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
jankr@kth.se

Alexander Thebelt
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
alexander.thebelt18@imperial.ac.uk

Ruth Misener
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
r.misener@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces a class of mixed-integer formulations for trained ReLU
neural networks. The approach balances model size and tightness by partitioning
node inputs into a number of groups and forming the convex hull over the partitions
via disjunctive programming. At one extreme, one partition per input recovers the
convex hull of a node, i.e., the tightest possible formulation for each node. For
fewer partitions, we develop smaller relaxations that approximate the convex hull,
and show that they outperform existing formulations. Specifically, we propose
strategies for partitioning variables based on theoretical motivations and validate
these strategies using extensive computational experiments. Furthermore, the
proposed scheme complements known algorithmic approaches, e.g., optimizationbased bound tightening captures dependencies within a partition.

1

Introduction

Many applications use mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) to optimize over trained feedforward ReLU neural networks (NNs) [5, 14, 18, 23, 32, 36]. A MILP encoding of a ReLU-NN
enables network properties to be rigorously analyzed, e.g., maximizing a neural acquisition function
[33] or verifying robustness of an output (often classification) within a restricted input domain [6].
MILP encodings of ReLU-NNS have also been used to determine robust perturbation bounds [9],
compress NNs [28], count linear regions [27], and find adversarial examples [17]. The so-called bigM formulation is the main approach for encoding NNs as MILPs in the above references. Optimizing
the resulting MILPs remains challenging for large networks, even with state-of-the-art software.
Effectively solving a MILP hinges on the strength of its continuous relaxation [10]; weak relaxations
can render MILPs computationally intractable. For NNs, Anderson et al. [3] showed that the big-M
formulation is not tight and presented formulations for the convex hull (i.e., the tightest possible
formulation) of individual nodes. However, these formulations require either an exponential (w.r.t.
inputs) number of constraints or many additional/auxiliary variables. So, despite its weaker continuous
relaxation, the big-M formulation can be computationally advantageous owing to its smaller size.
Given these challenges, we present a novel class of MILP formulations for ReLU-NNs. The
formulations are hierarchical: their relaxations start at a big-M equivalent and converge to the
convex hull. Intermediate formulations can closely approximate the convex hull with many fewer
variables/constraints. The formulations are constructed by viewing each ReLU node as a two-part
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

