DeepReduce: A Sparse-tensor Communication
Framework for Federated Deep Learning
Hang Xu
KAUST
hang.xu@kaust.edu.sa

Kelly Kostopoulou
Columbia University
kelkost@cs.columbia.edu

Xin Li
University of Central Florida
xin.li@ucf.edu

Alexandros Ntoulas
NKUA
antoulas@di.uoa.gr

Aritra Dutta
KAUST
aritra.dutta@kaust.edu.sa
Panos Kalnis
KAUST
panos.kalnis@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Sparse tensors appear frequently in federated deep learning, either as a direct
artifact of the deep neural network’s gradients, or, as a result of an explicit sparsification process. Existing communication primitives are agnostic to the challenges
of deep learning; consequently, they impose unnecessary communication overhead.
This paper introduces DeepReduce, a versatile framework for the compressed
communication of sparse tensors, tailored to federated deep learning. DeepReduce
decomposes sparse tensors into two sets, values and indices, and allows both independent and combined compression of these sets. We support a variety of standard
compressors, such as Deflate for values, and Run-Length Encoding for indices.
We also propose two novel compression schemes that achieve superior results:
curve-fitting based for values, and bloom-filter based for indices. DeepReduce
is orthogonal to existing gradient sparsifiers and can be applied in conjunction
with them, transparently to the end-user, to significantly lower the communication
overhead. As a proof of concept, we implement our approach on TensorFlow
and PyTorch. Our experiments with real models demonstrate that DeepReduce
transmits 320% less data than existing sparsifiers, without affecting accuracy.
Code is available at https://github.com/hangxu0304/DeepReduce.

1

Introduction

In federated learning [43, 47, 55, 72], the training is typically performed by a large number of
resource-constrained client devices (e.g., smartphones), operating on their private data and computing
a local model. Periodically, a subset of the devices is polled by a central server that retrieves their
gradients, updates the global model and broadcasts it back to the clients. The most constrained
resource in client devices is the network, either because the practically sustained bandwidth between
remote clients and the server is low (typically, in the order of 25-50Mbps), or, the financial cost (e.g.,
data plans for 4G/5G mobile connections) is high. On the other hand, deep neural network model
sizes have been steadily increasing at a much faster rate than the available bandwidth. Consequently,
in federated learning, it is imperative to reduce the communicated data volume.
One key observation that can help with reducing this volume is that the data exchanged during
the Deep Neural Network (DNN) training often correspond to sparse tensors, i.e., tensors with
many zero-value elements. Sparse tensors may be: (i) direct artifacts of the training process; for
instance, the gradients of the NCF [35] and DeepLight [18] models consist of roughly 40% and
99% zero elements, respectively; or (ii) explicitly generated by sparsification [6, 51, 69, 71, 76, 81],
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

