Local plasticity rules can learn deep representations
using self-supervised contrastive predictions
Bernd Illing

Jean Ventura

Guillaume Bellec⇤

Wulfram Gerstner⇤

{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch
Department of Computer Science & Department of Life Sciences
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
1015 Switzerland

Abstract
Learning in the brain is poorly understood and learning rules that respect biological
constraints, yet yield deep hierarchical representations, are still unknown. Here,
we propose a learning rule that takes inspiration from neuroscience and recent
advances in self-supervised deep learning. Learning minimizes a simple layerspecific loss function and does not need to back-propagate error signals within or
between layers. Instead, weight updates follow a local, Hebbian, learning rule that
only depends on pre- and post-synaptic neuronal activity, predictive dendritic input
and widely broadcasted modulation factors which are identical for large groups
of neurons. The learning rule applies contrastive predictive learning to a causal,
biological setting using saccades (i.e. rapid shifts in gaze direction). We find that
networks trained with this self-supervised and local rule build deep hierarchical
representations of images, speech and video.

1

Introduction

Synaptic connection strengths in the brain are thought to change according to ‘Hebbian’ plasticity
rules [Hebb, 1949]. Such rules are local and depend only on the recent state of the pre- and postsynaptic neurons [Sjöström et al., 2001, Caporale and Dan, 2008, Markram et al., 2011], potentially
modulated by a third factor related to reward, attention or other high-level signals [Kuśmierz et al.,
2017, Gerstner et al., 2018]. Therefore, one appealing hypothesis is that representation learning in
sensory cortices emerges from local and unsupervised plasticity rules.
Following a common definition in the field [Fukushima, 1988, Riesenhuber and Poggio, 1999,
LeCun, 2012, Lillicrap et al., 2020], a hierarchical representation (i) builds higher-level features
out of lower-level ones, and (ii) provides more useful features in higher layers. Now there seems
to be a substantial gap between the rich hierarchical representations observed in the cortex and the
representations emerging from local plasticity rules implementing principal/independent component
analysis [Oja, 1982, Hyvärinen and Oja, 1998], sparse coding [Olshausen and Field, 1997, Rozell
et al., 2008] or slow-feature analysis [Földiák, 1991, Wiskott and Sejnowski, 2002, Sprekeler et al.,
2007]. Hebbian rules seem to struggle especially when ‘stacked’, i.e. when asked to learn deep,
hierarchical representations.
⇤

shared last author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

