A Prototype-Oriented Framework for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Korawat Tanwisuth∗,1 , Xinjie Fan∗,1 , Huangjie Zheng∗,1 , Shujian Zhang1 ,
Hao Zhang2 , Bo Chen3 , Mingyuan Zhou1
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Cornell University 3 Xidian University
korawat.tanwisuth@utexas.edu, mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Existing methods for unsupervised domain adaptation often rely on minimizing
some statistical distance between the source and target samples in the latent space.
To avoid the sampling variability, class imbalance, and data-privacy concerns
that often plague these methods, we instead provide a memory and computationefficient probabilistic framework to extract class prototypes and align the target
features with them. We demonstrate the general applicability of our method on a
wide range of scenarios, including single-source, multi-source, class-imbalance,
and source-private domain adaptation. Requiring no additional model parameters
and having a moderate increase in computation over the source model alone, the
proposed method achieves competitive performance with state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, such as healthcare and autonomous driving, data labeling can be
expensive and time-consuming. To make predictions on a new unlabeled dataset, one may naively
use an existing supervised model trained on a large labeled dataset. However, even subtle changes
in the data-collection conditions, such as lighting or background for natural images, can cause a
model’s performance to degrade drastically [1]. This shift in the input data distribution is referred to
in the literature as covariate shift [2]. By leveraging the labeled samples from the source domain and
unlabeled samples from the target domain, unsupervised domain adaptation aims to overcome this
issue, making the learned model generalize well in the target domain [3].
Ben-David et al. [4, 5] provide an H-divergence based theoretical upper bound on the target error.
Ganin [6] popularizes learning an invariant representation between the source and target domains
to minimize this divergence. Numerous prior methods [7–12] follow this trend, focusing on using
the source and target samples for feature alignment in the latent space. While this approach can
reduce the discrepancy between domains, directly using the source and target samples for feature
alignment has the following problems. First, several commonly used methods that can be used to
quantify the difference between two empirical distributions, such as maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) [13] and Wasserstein distance [14, 15], are sensitive to outlier samples in a mini-batch when
used to match the source and target marginal distributions [16, 17]. We attribute this problem to the
sampling variability of both the source and target samples. Second, while we typically assume that
the two domains share the same label space, we cannot guarantee that the samples drawn from the
source and target domains will cover the same set of classes in each mini-batch. Especially, if the
label proportions shift between domains, learning domain invariant representation might not lead
to improvements over using the source data alone to train the model [18]. If we pull the support of
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding to: mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu
PyTorch code is available at https://github.com/korawat-tanwisuth/Proto_DA

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

