Do Wider Neural Networks Really Help Adversarial
Robustness?
Jinghui Chen ∗
Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16801
jzc5917@psu.edu

Boxi Wu ∗
State Key Lab of CAD&CG
Zhejiang University
boxiwu@zju.edu.cn
Deng Cai
State Key Lab of CAD&CG
Zhejiang University
dengcai@cad.zju.edu.cn

Xiaofei He
State Key Lab of CAD&CG
Zhejiang University
xiaofeihe@cad.zju.edu.cn

Quanquan Gu
Dept. of Computer Science
UCLA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training is a powerful type of defense against adversarial examples.
Previous empirical results suggest that adversarial training requires wider networks
for better performances. However, it remains elusive how does neural network
width affect model robustness. In this paper, we carefully examine the relationship
between network width and model robustness. Specifically, we show that the
model robustness is closely related to the tradeoff between natural accuracy and
perturbation stability, which is controlled by the robust regularization parameter
λ. With the same λ, wider networks can achieve better natural accuracy but worse
perturbation stability, leading to a potentially worse overall model robustness.
To understand the origin of this phenomenon, we further relate the perturbation
stability with the network’s local Lipschitzness. By leveraging recent results on
neural tangent kernels, we theoretically show that wider networks tend to have
worse perturbation stability. Our analyses suggest that: 1) the common strategy of
first fine-tuning λ on small networks and then directly use it for wide model training
could lead to deteriorated model robustness; 2) one needs to properly enlarge λ to
unleash the robustness potential of wider models fully. Finally, we propose a new
Width Adjusted Regularization (WAR) method that adaptively enlarges λ on wide
models and significantly saves the tuning time.

1

Introduction

Researchers have found that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) suffer badly from adversarial examples
[59]. By perturbing the original inputs with an intentionally computed, undetectable noise, one can
deceive DNNs and even arbitrarily modify their predictions on purpose. To defend against adversarial
examples and further improve model robustness, various defense approaches have been proposed
[48, 42, 18, 40, 67, 26, 58, 55]. Among them, adversarial training [23, 41] has been shown to be the
most effective type of defenses [5]. Adversarial training can be seen as a form of data augmentation by
first finding the adversarial examples and then training DNN models on those examples. Specifically,
given a DNN classifier f parameterized by θ, a general form of adversarial training with loss function
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

