SOAT: A Scene- and Object-Aware Transformer for
Vision-and-Language Navigation

Abhinav Moudgil1˚, Arjun Majumdar1 , Harsh Agrawal1 , Stefan Lee2 , Dhruv Batra1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Oregon State University

Abstract
Natural language instructions for visual navigation often use scene descriptions
(e.g., ‘bedroom’) and object references (e.g., ‘green chairs’) to provide a breadcrumb trail to a goal location. This work presents a transformer-based vision-andlanguage navigation (VLN) agent that uses two different visual encoders – a scene
classification network and an object detector – which produce features that match
these two distinct types of visual cues. In our method, scene features contribute
high-level contextual information that supports object-level processing. With this
design, our model is able to use vision-and-language pretraining (i.e., learning the
alignment between images and text from large-scale web data) to substantially
improve performance on the Room-to-Room (R2R) [1] and Room-Across-Room
(RxR) [2] benchmarks. Specifically, our approach leads to improvements of 1.8%
absolute in SPL on R2R and 3.7% absolute in SR on RxR. Our analysis reveals even
larger gains for navigation instructions that contain six or more object references,
which further suggests that our approach is better able to use object features and
align them to references in the instructions.

1

Introduction

The vision-and-language navigation (VLN) task [1] requires an agent to follow a path through an
environment that is specified by natural language navigation instructions. A central component of this
task is associating (or grounding) the instruction to visual landmarks in the environment. Figure 1
provides an illustrative example from the Room-to-Room (R2R) dataset [1]: ‘Exit the bedroom and
turn left. Continue down the hall and into the room straight ahead and stop before the desk with two
green chairs.’ The visual landmarks in this instruction include scene descriptions (e.g., ‘bedroom’
and ‘hall’) and specific object references (e.g., ‘desk’ and ‘two green chairs’). To be successful, a
VLN agent should be able to (a) recognize and (b) ground both types of visual cues.
Learning the appropriate grounding between referring expressions in an instruction and the corresponding visual regions is difficult in VLN due to the limited visual diversity seen in training. For
example, the Room-to-Room (R2R) [1] and Room-Across-Room (RxR) [2] datasets only use 61
unique training environments, so models simply cannot learn about the long-tail of visual cues that
appear in new testing (or validation) scenes. To address this challenge, recent work has shown the
promise of transferring visual grounding with multimodal representation models that are pretrained
on a large amount of image-text web data before finetuning on the embodied VLN task [3, 4]. In this
work, we build on this general approach.
For visual recognition, most VLN methods [1, 4–14] first encode observations with a convolutional
network that was trained to solve an image-level classification task – either using ImageNet [15] or
the Places [16] scene recognition dataset. While ImageNet features may identify objects mentioned
in the instructions and Places features might match the scene descriptions, neither solution was
˚

Correspondence to abhinavmoudgil95@gmail.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

