Combining Latent Space and Structured Kernels for
Bayesian Optimization over Combinatorial Spaces

Aryan Deshwal
School of EECS
Washington State University
aryan.deshwal@wsu.edu

Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS
Washington State University
jana.doppa@wsu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing combinatorial spaces (e.g., sequences,
trees, and graphs) using expensive black-box function evaluations. For example,
optimizing molecules for drug design using physical lab experiments. Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient framework for solving such problems by intelligently
selecting the inputs with high utility guided by a learned surrogate model. A recent
BO approach for combinatorial spaces is through a reduction to BO over continuous spaces by learning a latent representation of structures using deep generative
models (DGMs). The selected input from the continuous space is decoded into a
discrete structure for performing function evaluation. However, the surrogate model
over the latent space only uses the information learned by the DGM, which may
not have the desired inductive bias to approximate the target black-box function.
To overcome this drawback, this paper proposes a principled approach referred as
LADDER. The key idea is to define a novel structure-coupled kernel that explicitly
integrates the structural information from decoded structures with the learned latent
space representation for better surrogate modeling. Our experiments on real-world
benchmarks show that LADDER significantly improves over the BO over latent
space method, and performs better or similar to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

A huge range of science and engineering applications involve optimizing combinatorial spaces (e.g.,
sequences, trees, graphs) using expensive black-box function evaluations [18, 70, 17]. For example, in
drug design application, each candidate structure is a molecule and evaluation involves performing an
expensive physical lab experiment. Bayesian optimization (BO) [59, 20] is an effective framework for
optimizing expensive black-box functions and has shown great success in practice [63, 74, 21, 6, 5].
The key idea is to learn a cheap-to-evaluate surrogate statistical model, e.g., Gaussian process (GP),
from past function evaluations and employ it to select inputs with high-utility for evaluation. BO
for combinatorial spaces is a relatively less-studied problem with many challenges in the small-data
setting (number of function evaluations is small).
A recent approach to solve some of these challenges is through a reduction to BO over continuous
spaces, which we refer as BO over latent space [26, 68]. This method relies on two ideas. First,
we learn a latent space representation from a database of unsupervised structures (i.e., function
evaluations are not available) using a encoder-decoder style deep generative model (DGM) [37, 33].
Second, we build a surrogate model over this latent space to perform BO. Each selected input from
the latent space is decoded into a structured object for performing function evaluation. BO over latent
space has shown good success when the number of function evaluations is large [26, 68, 19, 34].
However, we conjecture that this approach may not be effective in the small-data settings for the
following reasons. 1) The surrogate model over the latent space only uses the information learned
by the DGM, which may not have the desired inductive bias to approximate the target black-box
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

