Cross-Modal Domain Adaptation for Cost-Efficient
Visual Reinforcement Learning

Xiong-Hui Chen∗, Shengyi Jiang∗, Feng Xu, Zongzhang Zhang† , Yang Yu
National Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
{chenxh, jiangsy, xufeng}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In visual-input sim-to-real scenarios, to overcome the reality gap between images
rendered in simulators and those from the real world, domain adaptation, i.e.,
learning an aligned representation space between simulators and the real world,
then training and deploying policies in the aligned representation, is a promising
direction. Previous methods focus on same-modal domain adaptation. However,
those methods require building and running simulators that render high-quality
images, which can be difficult and costly. In this paper, we consider a more costefficient setting of visual-input sim-to-real where only low-dimensional states are
simulated. We first point out that the objective of learning mapping functions in
previous methods that align the representation spaces is ill-posed, prone to yield an
incorrect mapping. When the mapping crosses modalities, previous methods are
easier to fail. Our algorithm, Cross-mOdal Domain Adaptation with Sequential
structure (CODAS), mitigates the ill-posedness by utilizing the sequential nature
of the data sampling process in RL tasks. Experiments on MuJoCo and Hand
Manipulation Suite tasks show that the agents deployed with our method achieve
similar performance as it has in the source domain, while those deployed with
previous methods designed for same-modal domain adaptation suffer a larger
performance gap.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) for vision-based robotic control tasks has achieved remarkable success
in recent years [1, 2]. However, current RL algorithms necessitate a substantial number of interactions
with the environment, which are costly both in time and money on real robots. An appealing
alternative is to train policies in simulators, then transfer these policies to real-world systems [3]. Due
to inevitable differences of representation between simulators and the real world, which is also known
as the “reality gap” [4], applying policies trained in one domain directly to another almost surely fail,
especially in visual-input tasks, which is due to the poor generalization of RL policies [5]. Domain
adaptation is a promising direction to handle the gap by mapping representation from two domains to
an aligned representation and then training and deploying policies in the aligned representation.
Many recent works, which learn a mapping function to align the data distributions of the two domains,
have adopted unsupervised visual domain adaptation [6, 7, 8]. We point out that, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), the objective is ill-posed for learning a correct mapping function. These adaptation methods
exploit structural constraints [9] in two domains of the same modality (e.g., learned on simulated
images and deployed on real images). These methods implicitly alleviate the intrinsic ill-posedness
of distribution matching.
∗

Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

