Controlling Neural Networks with Rule
Representations

Sungyong Seo, Sercan Ö. Arık, Jinsung Yoon, Xiang Zhang, Kihyuk Sohn, Tomas Pfister
Google Cloud AI
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
{sungyongs,soarik,jinsungyoon,fancyzhx,kihyuks,tpfister}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a novel training method that integrates rules into deep learning, in a
way the strengths of the rules are controllable at inference. Deep Neural Networks
with Controllable Rule Representations (D EEP CTRL) incorporates a rule encoder
into the model coupled with a rule-based objective, enabling a shared representation
for decision making. D EEP CTRL is agnostic to data type and model architecture.
It can be applied to any kind of rule defined for inputs and outputs. The key aspect
of D EEP CTRL is that it does not require retraining to adapt the rule strength – at
inference, the user can adjust it based on the desired operation point on accuracy vs.
rule verification ratio. In real-world domains where incorporating rules is critical –
such as Physics, Retail and Healthcare – we show the effectiveness of D EEP CTRL
in teaching rules for deep learning. D EEP CTRL improves the trust and reliability
of the trained models by significantly increasing their rule verification ratio, while
also providing accuracy gains at downstream tasks. Additionally, D EEP CTRL
enables novel use cases such as hypothesis testing of the rules on data samples, and
unsupervised adaptation based on shared rules between datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) excel at numerous tasks such as image classification [28, 29], machine
translation [22, 30], time series forecasting [11, 21], and tabular learning [2, 25]. DNNs get more
accurate as the size and coverage of training data increase [17]. While investing in high-quality
and large-scale labeled data is one path, another is utilizing prior knowledge – concisely referred
to as ‘rules’: reasoning heuristics, equations, associative logic, constraints or blacklists. In most
scenarios, labeled datasets are not sufficient to teach all rules present about a task [4, 12, 23, 24]. Let
us consider an example from Physics: the task of predicting the next state in a double pendulum
system, visualized in Fig. 1. Although a ‘data-driven’ black-box model, fitted with conventional
supervised learning, can fit a relatively accurate mapping from the current state to next, it can easily
fail to capture the canonical rule of ‘energy conservation’. In this work, we focus on how to teach
‘rules’ in effective ways so that DNNs absorb the knowledge from them in addition to learning from
the data for the downstream task.
The benefits of learning from rules are multifaceted. First, rules can provide extra information for
cases with minimal data supervision, improving the test accuracy. Second, the rules can improve
trust and reliability of DNNs. One major bottleneck for widespread use of DNNs is them being
‘black-box’. The lack of understanding of the rationale behind their reasoning and inconsistencies of
their outputs with human judgement often reduce the trust of the users [3, 26]. By incorporating rules,
such inconsistencies can be minimized and the users’ trust can be improved. For example, if a DNN
for loan delinquency prediction can absorb all the decision heuristics used at a bank, the loan officers
of the bank can rely on the predictions more comfortably. Third, DNNs are sensitive to slight changes
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

