Improving black-box optimization in VAE latent
space using decoder uncertainty

Pascal Notin
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
pascal.notin@cs.ox.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Yarin Gal
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
yarin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Optimization in the latent space of variational autoencoders is a promising approach to generate high-dimensional discrete objects that maximize an expensive
black-box property (e.g., drug-likeness in molecular generation, function approximation with arithmetic expressions). However, existing methods lack robustness
as they may decide to explore areas of the latent space for which no data was
available during training and where the decoder can be unreliable, leading to the
generation of unrealistic or invalid objects. We propose to leverage the epistemic
uncertainty of the decoder to guide the optimization process. This is not trivial
though, as a naive estimation of uncertainty in the high-dimensional and structured
settings we consider would result in high estimator variance. To solve this problem,
we introduce an importance sampling-based estimator that provides more robust
estimates of epistemic uncertainty. Our uncertainty-guided optimization approach
does not require modifications of the model architecture nor the training process. It
produces samples with a better trade-off between black-box objective and validity
of the generated samples, sometimes improving both simultaneously. We illustrate
these advantages across several experimental settings in digit generation, arithmetic
expression approximation and molecule generation for drug design.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of optimizing an expensive black-box objective function taking inputs in a
high-dimensional discrete space. This could be for example finding new molecules for drug design,
or automatically generating a computer program that matches a desired output. Solving this task
directly in the original space (e.g., with discrete local search methods such as genetic algorithms) may
be challenging given the complex structure and high dimensionality of the data. Recently, Variational
autoencoders (VAEs) [1, 2] have been successfully leveraged to model a wide range of discrete data
modalities — from natural language [3], to arithmetic expressions [4], computer programs [5] or
molecules [6]. By learning a lower-dimensional continuous representation of objects in their latent
space, VAEs allow to transform the original discrete optimization problem into a simpler continuous
optimization one in latent space. For example, this can be achieved via Bayesian Optimization in
the latent space, or via gradient ascent with a jointly-trained neural network predicting the black box
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

