Adversarially Robust Learning for
Security-Constrained Optimal Power Flow
Priya L. Donti⇤ , Aayushya Agarwal⇤ , Neeraj Vijay Bedmutha, Larry Pileggi, J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{pdonti, aayushya, nbedmuth, pileggi, zkolter}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
In recent years, the ML community has seen surges of interest in both adversarially
robust learning and implicit layers, but connections between these two areas have
seldom been explored. In this work, we combine innovations from these areas
to tackle the problem of N-k security-constrained optimal power flow (SCOPF).
N-k SCOPF is a core problem for the operation of electrical grids, and aims to
schedule power generation in a manner that is robust to potentially k simultaneous
equipment outages. Inspired by methods in adversarially robust training, we frame
N-k SCOPF as a minimax optimization problem – viewing power generation
settings as adjustable parameters and equipment outages as (adversarial) attacks
– and solve this problem via gradient-based techniques. The loss function of this
minimax problem involves resolving implicit equations representing grid physics
and operational decisions, which we differentiate through via the implicit function
theorem. We demonstrate the efficacy of our framework in solving N-3 SCOPF,
which has traditionally been considered as prohibitively expensive to solve given
that the problem size depends combinatorially on the number of potential outages.

1

Introduction

Robust optimization problems are pervasive across many applications and domains – such as electric
power systems, supply chain management, and civil engineering – where the goal is to construct
some solution that is robust under any allowable instantiation of uncertainty [1, 2]. While the
aim is generally that these solutions be provably robust, there unfortunately remain many settings
where it is either not easy or not possible to construct such solutions. This has often motivated the
use of heuristic approaches. For instance, many approaches in adversarially robust deep learning
formulate neural network training as a minimax game over neural network parameters and input
perturbations, optimizing this problem via gradient-based techniques that do not yield provable
robustness guarantees, but are nonetheless effective in practice [3].
In this work, we draw inspiration from adversarially robust training to address the problem of
N-k security-constrained optimal power flow (SCOPF). N-k SCOPF is a fundamental problem to
schedule power generation in a way that is robust to k potential equipment failures (e.g., generator or
line outages). Unfortunately, N-k SCOPF is prohibitively expensive to solve at scale, leading grid
operators to use rough approximations in practice. To address this challenge, we frame N-k SCOPF
as a minimax attacker-defender problem, where the “defender” aims to schedule power generation,
and the “attacker” aims to pick adversarial equipment failures. The loss function of this problem
requires solving implicit equations representing the physics of the electric grid as well as additional
operational decisions that are made after an attack has occurred. As such, we optimize this problem
using gradient-based techniques, and employ insights from the literature on implicit differentiation
and implicit layers to cheaply compute gradients through the loss function.
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

