Joint Semantic Mining for Weakly Supervised
RGB-D Salient Object Detection

Jingjing Li1,∗ , Wei Ji1,∗( ) , Qi Bi2 , Cheng Yan3 , Miao Zhang4 ,
Yongri Piao4 , Huchuan Lu4,5 , Li Cheng1
1
University of Alberta, Canada 2 Wuhan University, China 3 Tianjin University, China
4
Dalian University of Technology, China 5 Pengcheng Lab, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Training saliency detection models with weak supervisions, e.g., image-level tags
or captions, is appealing as it removes the costly demand of per-pixel annotations.
Despite the rapid progress of RGB-D saliency detection in fully-supervised setting,
it however remains an unexplored territory when only weak supervision signals
are available. This paper is set to tackle the problem of weakly-supervised RGB-D
salient object detection. The key insight in this effort is the idea of maintaining perpixel pseudo-labels with iterative refinements by reconciling the multimodal input
signals in our joint semantic mining (JSM). Considering the large variations in the
raw depth map and the lack of explicit pixel-level supervisions, we propose spatial
semantic modeling (SSM) to capture saliency-specific depth cues from the raw
depth and produce depth-refined pseudo-labels. Moreover, tags and captions are
incorporated via a fill-in-the-blank training in our textual semantic modeling (TSM)
to estimate the confidences of competing pseudo-labels. At test time, our model involves only a light-weight sub-network of the training pipeline, i.e., it requires only
an RGB image as input, thus allowing efficient inference. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach under the weakly-supervised setting.
Importantly, our method could also be adapted to work in both fully-supervised
and unsupervised paradigms. In each of these scenarios, superior performance has
been attained by our approach with comparing to the state-of-the-art dedicated
methods. As a by-product, a CapS dataset is constructed by augmenting existing
benchmark training set with additional image tags and captions. Code and dataset
are available at https://github.com/jiwei0921/JSM.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental computer vision task, salient object detection (SOD) aims at locating and segmenting visually distinctive objects in a scene. It plays an important role in a variety of downstream applications including image retrieval [31, 65], medical analysis [48, 28, 25], multimodal fusion [79, 80]
and video analysis [88, 81, 90]. Recent progress in supervised RGB-D SOD [5, 52, 10, 26, 89, 33] has
demonstrated significant benefits of engaging depth information in saliency detection from complex
scenes. The success of these fully-supervised methods, however, relies heavily on the large-scale, precise, pixel-level annotations, which are often laborious and time-consuming to acquire. On the other
hand, an image usually comes with additional information in its meta-data such as tags and captions
from users to describe the scene context and content, which may serve as cheap weak-supervision
signals. These weak supervision signals are nonetheless noisy and have mixed qualities. Similar
weak-supervision signals have been explored in RGB-image based SOD [63, 70, 38], where the noisy
nature of these side information is unfortunately overlooked. To further complicate the matter, the
lack of explicit pixel-level supervision brings new challenge to the RGB-D SOD task: the depth
values from raw depth maps are often noisy and sometimes inconsistent. For example, in Fig. 1,
*means equal contributions. Wei Ji

(wji3@ualberta.ca) is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

