Design of Experiments
for Stochastic Contextual Linear Bandits
Andrea Zanette∗
EECS Department
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA
zanette@berkeley.edu
Kefan Dong∗
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
kefandong@stanford.edu

Jonathan Lee∗
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
jnl@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In the stochastic linear contextual bandit setting there exist several minimax procedures for exploration with policies that are reactive to the data being acquired.
In practice, there can be a significant engineering overhead to deploy these algorithms, especially when the dataset is collected in a distributed fashion or when a
human in the loop is needed to implement a different policy. Exploring with a single non-reactive policy is beneficial in such cases. Assuming some batch contexts
are available, we design a single stochastic policy to collect a good dataset from
which a near-optimal policy can be extracted. We present a theoretical analysis as
well as numerical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Many settings may substantially benefit from data-driven contextualized decision policies that optimize the desired expected outcome. Online machine learning methods like multi-armed bandits and
reinforcement learning, that adaptively change interventions in response to outcomes in a closed
loop process (see Figure 1a), may not yet be practical for all domains due to the expertise and infrastructure needed. However running an experiment with a fixed decision policy to identify a good
personalized policy is likely to be both simple logistically (since currently such decision policies
are often specified by hand) and more easily accepted, since many areas (education, healthcare,
social sciences) commonly deploy experiments across a few conditions to find the best approach.
For example, education startups, political campaigns, and governmental agencies can use email and
∗

The first three authors contributed equally. The work was fully completed while Andrea Zanette was a
PhD Candidate in the Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering at Stanford University. Future
revision of this article will be made available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.09912.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

