Coupled Segmentation and Edge Learning via
Dynamic Graph Propagation

Zhiding Yu∗ Rui Huang∗† , Wonmin Byeon, Sifei Liu, Guilin Liu,
Thomas Breuel, Anima Anandkumar, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA

Abstract
Image segmentation and edge detection are both central problems in perceptual
grouping. It is therefore interesting to study how these two tasks can be coupled to
benefit each other. Indeed, segmentation can be easily transformed into contour
edges to guide edge learning. However, the converse is nontrivial since general
edges may not always form closed contours. In this paper, we propose a principled
end-to-end framework for coupled edge and segmentation learning, where edges
are leveraged as pairwise similarity cues to guide segmentation. At the core of
our framework is a recurrent module termed as dynamic graph propagation (DGP)
layer that performs message passing on dynamically constructed graphs. The layer
uses learned gating to dynamically select neighbors for message passing using
max-pooling. The output from message passing is further gated with an edge signal
to refine segmentation. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed framework is
able to let both tasks mutually improve each other. On Cityscapes validation, our
best model achieves 83.7% mIoU in semantic segmentation and 78.7% maximum
F-score in semantic edge detection. Our method also leads to improved zero-shot
robustness on Cityscapes with natural corruptions (Cityscapes-C).

1

Introduction

Image segmentation and edge detection have been widely studied as important perception problems.
The two problems are closely related. In fact, segmentation subsumes edge detection since any
segmentation contour makes a closed boundary of a region. The converse is however not true since
general edges do not always form closed contours. Nevertheless, edge detection can serve as an
auxiliary task to improve segmentation performance since edges provide important pairwise similarity
cues for segmentation. Early works tend to focus on the grouping and contrast of pixels from a
perceptual similarity perspective. Martin et al. [1] proposed the Berkeley Segmentation Dataset, a
popular benchmark for segmentation and boundary detection that inspired many impactful works in
perceptual grouping [2–5]. The recent surge of deep learning renders powerful representations with
learned features using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6]. This has led to great advances in
both areas [7–12], but the two tasks are often considered separately.
In light of the status quo, we consider coupled edge and segmentation learning. Our goal is twofold: (1) Multi-task learning - being able to produce high quality edge detection and segmentation.
(2) Mutual improvement - the two tasks can help each other with non-trivial performance gains.
Designing a principled framework is however nontrivial. The key question is how sparse edge signals
can be effectively transformed into dense region-level ones to interact with segmentation. To this
end, we propose a learnable recurrent message passing layer where semantic edges are considered
∗
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to Zhiding Yu <zhidingy@nvidia.com>.
Work partially done during an internship at NVIDIA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

