Robustness between the worst and average case
Leslie Rice
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
larice@cs.cmu.edu
Huan Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
huan@huan-zhang.com

Anna Bair
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
abair@cmu.edu
J. Zico Kolter
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University &
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Pittsburgh, PA
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Several recent works in machine learning have focused on evaluating the test-time
robustness of a classifier: how well the classifier performs not just on the target domain it was trained upon, but upon perturbed examples. In these settings, the focus
has largely been on two extremes of robustness: the robustness to perturbations
drawn at random from within some distribution (i.e., robustness to random perturbations), and the robustness to the worst case perturbation in some set (i.e., adversarial
robustness). In this paper, we argue that a sliding scale between these two extremes
provides a valuable additional metric by which to gauge robustness. Specifically,
we illustrate that each of these two extremes is naturally characterized by a (functional) q-norm over perturbation space, with q = 1 corresponding to robustness to
random perturbations and q = 1 corresponding to adversarial perturbations. We
then present the main technical contribution of our paper: a method for efficiently
estimating the value of these norms by interpreting them as the partition function of
a particular distribution, then using path sampling with MCMC methods to estimate
this partition function (either traditional Metropolis-Hastings for non-differentiable
perturbations, or Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for differentiable perturbations). We
show that our approach provides substantially better estimates than simple random
sampling of the actual “intermediate-q” robustness of standard, data-augmented,
and adversarially-trained classifiers, illustrating a clear tradeoff between classifiers
that optimize different metrics. Code for reproducing experiments can be found at
https://github.com/locuslab/intermediate_robustness.

1

Introduction

There has been an increasing focus in recent years in evaluating the robustness of machine learning
classifiers, broadly interpreted as evaluating their performance not just on a test set, but also evaluating
the performance relative to some additional (possibly domain-specific) uncertainty or bounds on
the problems. Although there are many formal definitions of robustness, most work in this area has
focused on two particular settings. In the “classical” sense of robustness, we can consider evaluating
the classifier in terms of its worst-case loss under some perturbation set applied to the inputs, i.e., we
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

