Cooperative Stochastic Bandits with Asynchronous
Agents and Constrained Feedback

Lin Yang, Yu-Zhen Janice Chen
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{linyang,yuzhenchen}@cs.umass.edu
Mohammad H. Hajiesmaili
University of Massachusetts Amherst
hajiesmaili@cs.umass.edu

Stephen Pasteris
University College London
stephen.pasteris@gmail.com
John C. S. Lui
Chinese University of Hong Kong
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Don Towsley
University of Massachusetts Amherst
towsley@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the scenario of large-scale learning in distributed systems, this paper
studies a scenario where M agents cooperate together to solve the same instance
of a K-armed stochastic bandit problem. The agents have limited access to a local
subset of arms and are asynchronous with different gaps between decision-making
rounds. The goal is to find the global optimal arm, and agents are able to pull
any arm; however, they can only observe the reward when the selected arm is
local. The challenge is a tradeoff for agents between pulling a local arm with
observable feedback or pulling external arms without feedback and relying on
others’ observations that occur at different rates. We propose AAE-LCB, a two-stage
algorithm that prioritizes pulling local arms following an active arm elimination
policy and switches to other arms only if all local arms are dominated by some
external arms. We analyze the regret of AAE-LCB and show it matches the regret
lower bound up to a small factor.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits (MABs) [16, 50] is a remarkably successful online learning framework that
has been extensively studied since the 1950s [47]. It has a broad range of applications including
datacenter optimization, web advertising, and recommender systems [50, 31, 39, 15]. In the basic
MAB problem, a learner repeatedly chooses an action (pulls an arm) in each round, and collects
(and observes) the reward associated with the selected arm, but not rewards associated with the
unselected arms. The goal of the learner is to maximize the long-term reward collected, and the
performance metric is regret, which is the difference between the expected reward for the best arm
and that received by the learner.
The distributed/multi-agent/multiplayer MAB problem is an extension of the basic MAB that has
been studied extensively in different settings [43, 51, 11, 36, 33, 25, 45, 53, 48]. This problem is
motivated by several applications such as (1) large-scale learning systems [19] in domains such
as finance or recommendation systems; (2) cooperative search by multiple robots [41, 32]; (3) the
application of wireless cognitive radio [17, 43, 42, 9]; and (4) distributed learning in distributed
systems (e.g., a set of IoT devices learning about an underlying environment) [46, 23, 5, 12, 54].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

