Sageflow: Robust Federated Learning against
Both Stragglers and Adversaries

Jungwuk Park∗
KAIST
savertm@kaist.ac.kr

Dong-Jun Han∗
KAIST
djhan93@kaist.ac.kr

Minseok Choi
Jeju National University
ejaqmf@jejunu.ac.kr

Jaekyun Moon
KAIST
jmoon@kaist.edu

Abstract
While federated learning (FL) allows efficient model training with local data at
edge devices, among major issues still to be resolved are: slow devices known
as stragglers and malicious attacks launched by adversaries. While the presence
of both of these issues raises serious concerns in practical FL systems, no known
schemes or combinations of schemes effectively address them at the same time.
We propose Sageflow, staleness-aware grouping with entropy-based filtering and
loss-weighted averaging, to handle both stragglers and adversaries simultaneously.
Model grouping and weighting according to staleness (arrival delay) provides
robustness against stragglers, while entropy-based filtering and loss-weighted
averaging, working in a highly complementary fashion at each grouping stage,
counter a wide range of adversary attacks. A theoretical bound is established
to provide key insights into the convergence behavior of Sageflow. Extensive
experimental results show that Sageflow outperforms various existing methods
aiming to handle stragglers/adversaries.

1

Introduction

Large volumes of data collected at various edge devices (i.e., smart phones) are valuable resources in
training a model with a good performance. Federated learning [18, 12, 7] is a promising direction for
large-scale learning, which enables training of a global model with less privacy concerns. However,
among major issues that need to be addressed in current federated learning (FL) systems are the
devices called stragglers that are considerably slower than the average and the adversaries that enforce
a various form of attacks.
Regarding the first issue, simply waiting for all the stragglers at each global round can significantly
slow down the overall training process. To handle stragglers, asynchronous FL schemes [15, 22,
25, 21, 14] update the global model every time the server receives a local model from each device;
especially in FedAsync [25], the global model is updated asynchronously according to the device’s
staleness t − τ , the time difference between the current round t and the past round τ when the device
first received the global model. While the asynchronous schemes are highly effective in handling
stragglers, the one-by-one update nature does not lend itself well for integration with established
aggregation methods to combat the second issue, the adversaries.
There are different forms of adversarial attacks that significantly degrade current FL systems. In
untargeted attacks, an attacker can poison the updated model at the devices before it is sent to the
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

