You Never Cluster Alone
Yuming Shen∗ 1 , Ziyi Shen2 , Menghan Wang3 , Jie Qin4 , Philip H.S. Torr1 , and Ling Shao5
4

1
University of Oxford 2 University College London 3 eBay
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 5 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
ymcidence@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent advances in self-supervised learning with instance-level contrastive objectives facilitate unsupervised clustering. However, a standalone datum is not
perceiving the context of the holistic cluster, and may undergo sub-optimal assignment. In this paper, we extend the mainstream contrastive learning paradigm to a
cluster-level scheme, where all the data subjected to the same cluster contribute to
a unified representation that encodes the context of each data group. Contrastive
learning with this representation then rewards the assignment of each datum. To implement this vision, we propose twin-contrast clustering (TCC). We define a set of
categorical variables as clustering assignment confidence, which links the instancelevel learning track with the cluster-level one. On one hand, with the corresponding
assignment variables being the weight, a weighted aggregation along the data
points implements the set representation of a cluster. We further propose heuristic
cluster augmentation equivalents to enable cluster-level contrastive learning. On
the other hand, we derive the evidence lower-bound of the instance-level contrastive
objective with the assignments. By reparametrizing the assignment variables, TCC
is trained end-to-end, requiring no alternating steps. Extensive experiments show
that TCC outperforms the state-of-the-art on challenging benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Ancestored by various similarity-based [59] and feature-based [4, 56] approaches, unsupervised deep
clustering jointly optimizes data representations and cluster assignments [81]. A recent fashion in
this domain takes inspiration from contrastive learning in computer vision [11, 12, 24], leveraging
the effectiveness and simplicity of discriminative feature learning. This strategy is experimentally
reasonable, as previous research has found that the learnt representations reveal data semantics and
locality [34, 80]. Even a simple migration of contrastive learning significantly improves clustering
performance, of which examples include a two-stage clustering pipeline [73] with contrastive pretraining and k-means [56] and a composition of an InfoNCE loss [62] and a clustering one [81] in
[89]. Compared with the deep generative counterparts [16, 36, 54, 86], contrastive clustering is free
from decoding and computationally practical, with guaranteed feature quality.
However, have we been paying too much attention to the representation expressiveness of a single
data point? Intuitively, a standalone data point, regardless of its feature quality, cannot tell us much
about how the cluster looks like. Fig. 1 illustrates a simple analogy using the TwoMoons dataset.
Without any context for the crescents, it is difficult to assign a data point to either of the two clusters
based on its own representation, as the point can be inside one moon but still close to the other.
Accordingly, observing more data reveals more about the holistic distributions of the clusters, e.g., the
shapes of the moons in Fig. 1, and thus heuristically benefits clustering. Although we can implicitly
parametrize the context of the clusters by the model itself, e.g., using a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) [4] or encoding this information by deep model parameters, explicitly representing the
context yields the most common deep learning practice. This further opens the door for learning
cluster-level representations with all corresponding data points. Namely, you never cluster alone.
∗

A part of this work was done when the author was with eBay.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

