Optimizing Conditional Value-At-Risk
of Black-Box Functions
Quoc Phong Nguyen, Zhongxiang Dai, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet†
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA†
{qphong,daizhongxiang,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu†

Abstract
This paper presents two Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithms with theoretical
performance guarantee to maximize the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) of a
black-box function: CV-UCB and CV-TS which are based on the well-established
principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty and Thompson sampling, respectively. To achieve this, we develop an upper confidence bound of CVaR and prove
the no-regret guarantee of CV-UCB by utilizing an interesting connection between
CVaR and value-at-risk (VaR). For CV-TS, though it is straightforwardly performed
with Thompson sampling, bounding its Bayesian regret is non-trivial because it requires a tail expectation bound for the distribution of CVaR of a black-box function,
which has not been shown in the literature. The performances of both CV-UCB
and CV-TS are empirically evaluated in optimizing CVaR of synthetic benchmark
functions and simulated real-world optimization problems.

1

Introduction

A wide range of applications from Auto-ML [15] to chemistry [6] and drug design [3] require
optimizing a black-box objective function (i.e., its closed-form expression, gradient, and convexity
are unknown) through observing noisy function evaluations. To resolve this problem, an efficient
class of algorithms, called Bayesian optimization (BO) [2, 20], has seen rapid development lately.
One of the recent developments of BO considers searching for the optimization variable x∗ that
maximizes the objective function ρ[f (x, W)] [4]. Different from the classical BO, there exists an
environmental random variable W that cannot be controlled, which happens frequently in real-world
problems. For example, to maximize the crop yield (i.e., f (x, W)) by controlling the amount
of fertilizer (i.e., x), there are various uncontrollable weather conditions such as the temperature,
lighting, and rainfall (i.e., W) [13]. Thus, even though an amount of fertilizer x increases the crop
yield most of the time, there exists a risk/chance that under certain weather conditions (realizations of
W), the same amount of fertilizer leads to a low crop yield (an undesirable realization of the random
variable f (x, W)). This issue renders the optimization of f (x, W) futile, so the work of [4] proposes
to optimize a risk measure, denoted as ρ, of f (x, W) such as value-at-risk (VaR) and conditional
VaR (CVaR). However, its approach suffers from two main shortcomings: the computational cost of a
nested optimization procedure and the lack of theoretical performance guarantee. Although these
drawbacks are addressed in the work of [13], its proposed algorithm only works for optimizing VaR
of a black-box function. Hence, an efficient algorithm with theoretical performance guarantee for
optimizing CVaR of a black-box function remains an open question.
Nonetheless, optimizing CVaR of a black-box function is desirable, especially when the effect of
optimizing CVaR cannot be obtained by optimizing VaR. A prominent property of CVaR is its
sensitivity to values at the extreme tails of the random variable f (x, W), which VaR does not
exhibit [19]. Let us consider two portfolio allocation schemes: one scheme has an unacceptable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

