KS-GNN: Keywords Search over Incomplete Graphs
via Graph Neural Network

Yu Hao
University of New South Wales
NSW, Australia
yu.hao@unsw.edu.au

Xin Cao∗
University of New South Wales
NSW, Australia
xin.cao@unsw.edu.au

Yufan Sheng
University of New South Wales
NSW, Australia
yufan.sheng@unsw.edu.au

Yixiang Fang
Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen, China
fangyixiang@cuhk.edu.cn

Wei Wang
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Guangzhou, China
weiwcs@ust.hk

Abstract
Keyword search is a fundamental task to retrieve information that is the most
relevant to the query keywords. Keyword search over graphs aims to find subtrees
or subgraphs containing all query keywords ranked according to some criteria.
Existing studies all assume that the graphs have complete information. However,
real-world graphs may contain some missing information (such as edges or keywords), thus making the problem much more challenging. To solve the problem
of keyword search over incomplete graphs, we propose a novel model named
KS-GNN based on the graph neural network and the auto-encoder. By considering
the latent relationships and the frequency of different keywords, the proposed
KS-GNN aims to alleviate the effect of missing information and is able to learn
low-dimensional representative node embeddings that preserve both graph structure
and keyword features. Our model can effectively answer keyword search queries
with linear time complexity over incomplete graphs. The experiments on four
real-world datasets show that our model consistently achieves better performance
than state-of-the-art baseline methods in graphs having missing information.

1

Introduction

Keyword search is an important research topic which allows users to provide query keywords and
returns the most relevant results. The keyword search over graph data [1] usually retrieves top-k
subtrees or subgraphs which contain all the query keywords ranked according to some criteria. For
example, He et al. [2] propose a general scoring function considering both graph structure and content,
and they aim to find top-k nodes where each node can reach all query keywords, and the sum of its
shortest path distances to these keywords is as small as possible. This ranking method is commonly
used in later graph keyword search works [3, 4].
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

