LeadCache: Regret-Optimal Caching in Networks

Debjit Paria∗
Department of Computer Science
Chennai Mathematical Institute
Chennai 603103, India
debjit.paria1999@gmail.com

Abhishek Sinha
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Chennai 600036, India
abhishek.sinha@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
We consider an online prediction problem in the context of network caching.
Assume that multiple users are connected to several caches via a bipartite network.
At any time slot, each user may request an arbitrary file chosen from a large catalog.
A user’s request at a slot is met if the requested file is cached in at least one of the
caches connected to the user. Our objective is to predict, prefetch, and optimally
distribute the files on the caches at each slot to maximize the total number of cache
hits. The problem is non-trivial due to the non-convex and non-smooth nature of
the objective function. In this paper, we propose LeadCache - an efficient online
caching policy based on the Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader paradigm. We show that
LeadCache is regret-optimal up to a factor of Õ(n3/8 ), where n is the number
of users. We design two efficient implementations of the LeadCache policy, one
based on Pipage rounding and the other based on Madow’s sampling, each of
which makes precisely one call to an LP-solver per iteration. Furthermore, with a
Strong-Law-type assumption, we show that the total number of file fetches under
LeadCache remains almost surely finite over an infinite horizon. Finally, we derive
an approximately tight regret lower bound using results from graph coloring. We
conclude that the learning-based LeadCache policy decisively outperforms the
state-of-the-art caching policies both theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

We consider an online structured learning problem, called Bipartite Caching, that lies at the core
of many large-scale internet services, including Content Distribution Networks (CDN) and Cloud
Computing. Formally, a set I of n users is connected to a set J of m caches via a bipartite network
G(I ⊍ J , E). Each cache is connected to at most d users, and each user is connected to at most ∆
caches (see Figure 1 (b)). There is a catalog consisting of N unique files, and each of the m caches
can host at most C files at a time (in practice, C ≪ N ). The system evolves in discrete time slots.
Each of the n users may request any file from the catalog at each time slot. The file requests could be
dictated by an adversary. Given the storage capacity constraints, an online caching policy decides
the files to be cached on different caches at each slot before the requests for that slot arrive. The
objective is to maximize the total number of hits by the unknown incoming requests by coordinating
the caching decisions among multiple caches in an online fashion. The Bipartite Caching problem
is a strict generalization of the online k-sets problem that predicts a set of k items at each round
so that the predicted set includes the item chosen by the adversary [Koolen et al., 2010, Cohen and
Hazan, 2015]. However, unlike the k-sets problem, which predicts a single subset at a time, in this
problem, we are interested in sequentially predicting multiple subsets, each corresponding to one
of the caches. The interaction among the caches through the non-linear reward function makes this
problem challenging.
∗

Work done at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras as a part of the first author’s Master’s thesis.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

