Dueling Bandits with Team Comparisons

Lee Cohen∗
Tel Aviv University
leecohencs@gmail.com

Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin∗
Technische Universität Berlin
u.schmidt-kraepelin
@tu-berlin.de

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and
Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce the dueling teams problem, a new online-learning setting in which
the learner observes noisy comparisons of disjoint pairs of k-sized teams from a
universe of n players. The goal of the learner is to minimize the number of duels
required to identify, with high probability, a Condorcet winning team, i.e., a team
which wins against any other disjoint team (with probability at least 1/2). Noisy
comparisons are linked to a total order on the teams. We formalize our model by
building upon the dueling bandits setting (Yue et al., 2012) and provide several
algorithms, both for stochastic and deterministic settings. For the stochastic setting,
we provide a reduction to the classical dueling bandits setting, yielding an algorithm
log n,log k)
that identifies a Condorcet winning team within O((n+k log(k)) max(log ∆
)
2
duels, where ∆ is a gap parameter. For deterministic feedback, we additionally
present a gap-independent algorithm that identifies a Condorcet winning team
within O(nk log(k) + k 5 ) duels.

1

Introduction

Multi-arm bandits (MAB) is a classical model of decision making under uncertainty. In spite of
the simplicity of the model, it already incorporates the essential tradeoff between exploration and
exploitation. In MAB, the learner performs actions and can only observe rewards of the actions
performed. One of the main tasks in MAB is best arm identification, where the goal is to identify a
near-optimal action while minimizing the number of actions executed. The MAB model has numerous
practical applications, including online advertising, recommendation systems, clinical trials, and
more. (See Slivkins (2019); Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020) for more background).
One weakness of the MAB model is the assumption that real-valued rewards are always available. In
many applications, it is more natural to compare two actions and observe which one of them is better
rather than give every single action a numerical reward. For example, recommendation systems often
suggest two items and obtain only their relative preference as feedback (e.g., by a click on one of
them). This leads very naturally to the well-known model of dueling bandits (Yue et al., 2012), where
the learner selects a pair of actions each time and observes the binary “winner” of a duel between the
two. (See Busa-Fekete et al. (2018) for a survey on extensions of the dueling bandit model).
In this work we are interested in the case that the learner has to select two disjoint teams for a duel,
which are k-sized subsets of the actions (which we call players). This appears naturally in sports
or online games, where the goal is to pick one of the best teams from a set of players by observing
the outcomes of matches (say, to be a school representative team, or to sponsor for tournaments).
Examples include doubles tennis, basketball, and the online game League of Legends, where each
match requires two disjoint teams of players to compete. Similar phenomena appear in working
environments, where different R&D teams compete on implementing a project. Another example
could be online advertisements where multiple products are bundled to a display ad and a customer
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

