Improved Learning Rates of a Functional Lasso-type
SVM with Sparse Multi-Kernel Representation

Shaogao Lv1 , Junhui Wang4 , Jiankun Liu5 , Yong Liu2,3∗
1
Nanjing Audit University
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
4
City University of Hong Kong
5
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
lvsg716@nau.edu.cn, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we provide theoretical results of estimation bounds and excess
risk upper bounds for support vector machine (SVM) with sparse multi-kernel
representation. These convergence rates for multi-kernel SVM are established by
analyzing a Lasso-type regularized learning scheme within composite multi-kernel
spaces. It is shown that the oracle rates of convergence of classifiers depend on
the complexity of multi-kernels, the sparsity, a Bernstein condition and the sample
size, which significantly improve on previous results even for the additive or linear
cases. In summary, this paper not only provides unified theoretical results for multikernel SVMs, but also enriches the literature on high-dimensional nonparametric
classification.

1

Introduction

SVM was first introduced in [45] and has became one of the most popular machine learning algorithms
in the past two decades. The standard SVM classification consists of two main ingredients, namely
the hinge loss and the kernel embedding. The hinge loss is used to model the learning target and
can often generate sparse solutions [38], while the kernel embedding is used to model nonlinear
relationship between input features and response [39]. In [38], they provide a detailed overview of
SVMs and related learning theory. More work on theoretical perspective of SVM have also been
developed in recent years, such as [12, 53, 36, 33, 30, 24], among many others.
It is known that the performance of kernel machines largely depends on the data representation via
the choice of kernel function [34, 16, 19, 28, 26, 48, 49]. Towards this direction, many approaches
have been proposed for kernel selection under different frameworks. For example, Micchelli et
al.[34] attempt to find an optimal kernel from a prescribed convex set of basis kernels; Wu et
al.[46] optimize the scale parameter among various Gaussian kernels; and Ong et al.[35] study
hyperkernels on the space of kernels and alternative approaches, including kernels selection by
DC programming and semi-infinite programming. In particular, the seminal work of [22] proposes
the so-called multiple kernel learning (MKL) method, learning SVM and a linear combination of
kernels simultaneously, which has received a lot of attention in recent years [3, 50, 20, 19, 16,
23, 17, 27, 25, 29, 51]. To be precise, given a finite (possibly large) dictionary of symmetric
positive semidefinite kernels {Km : m = 1, 2, ..., M } , one can try to find an ‘ideal’ kernel K as a
convex
of the kernels from aopredefined family of potential candidates: K ∈ K :=
nP combination
PM
M
m=1 θm Km :
m=1 θm = 1, θm ≥ 0 . This combination of multiple kernels corresponds to a
∗

Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

