Post-Training Sparsity-Aware Quantization

Gil Shomron†
†

Freddy Gabbay§

Samer Kurzum†

Uri Weiser†

Technion — Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
§
Ruppin Academic Center, Emek Hefer, Israel

{gilsho@campus, ssamer15@campus, uri.weiser@ee}.technion.ac.il
freddyg@ruppin.ac.il

Abstract
Quantization is a technique used in deep neural networks (DNNs) to increase execution performance and hardware efficiency. Uniform post-training quantization
(PTQ) methods are common, since they can be implemented efficiently in hardware and do not require extensive hardware resources or a training set. Mapping
FP32 models to INT8 using uniform PTQ yields models with negligible accuracy
degradation; however, reducing precision below 8 bits with PTQ is challenging,
as accuracy degradation becomes noticeable, due to the increase in quantization
noise. In this paper, we propose a sparsity-aware quantization (SPARQ) method,
in which the unstructured and dynamic activation sparsity is leveraged in different representation granularities. 4-bit quantization, for example, is employed by
dynamically examining the bits of 8-bit values and choosing a window of 4 bits,
while first skipping zero-value bits. Moreover, instead of quantizing activation-byactivation to 4 bits, we focus on pairs of 8-bit activations and examine whether
one of the two is equal to zero. If one is equal to zero, the second can opportunistically use the other’s 4-bit budget; if both do not equal zero, then each is
dynamically quantized to 4 bits, as described. SPARQ achieves minor accuracy
degradation and a practical hardware implementation. The code is available at
https://github.com/gilshm/sparq.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are at the heart of numerous applications, such as image classification
and object detection [8], image synthesis [30], and recommendation systems [7]. DNNs, however,
require abundant computations, as, for example, billions of multiply-and-accumulate (MAC) operations are required to assign a 224×224 colored image from the ImageNet dataset to one of its
thousand possible classes. Limited computational resources, such as those in edge devices, latency
constraints, and higher input resolutions, are all catalysts for development of methods that increase
the ratio between DNN execution performance to hardware area, with as minimal impact on model
accuracy as possible. One common method of doing so is quantization.
Quantization is commonly used to map the 32-bit floating-point (FP32) activations and weights
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to 8-bit integers (INT8), which is known to result in
minor or no degradation in model accuracy while easing hardware implementation [14]. Going
below 8 bits, however, is not trivial, as quantization noise leads to a noticeable decrease in model
accuracy. Quantization-aware training (QAT) methods employ training for quantization, to decrease
quantization noise and recoup model accuracy [3, 25, 42]. Nevertheless, it is not always possible
to employ training, for reasons such as lack of hardware resources, time, power, energy, dataset
availability, or skilled manpower. Post-training quantization (PTQ) methods circumvent these
issues [1, 5, 6].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

