Faster Matchings via Learned Duals

Michael Dinitz
Johns Hopkins University
mdinitz@cs.jhu.edu

Sungjin Im
UC Merced
sim3@ucmerced.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Carnegie Mellon University
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Thomas Lavastida
Carnegie Mellon University
tlavasti@andrew.cmu.edu
Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
A recent line of research investigates how algorithms can be augmented with
machine-learned predictions to overcome worst case lower bounds. This area has
revealed interesting algorithmic insights into problems, with particular success in
the design of competitive online algorithms. However, the question of improving
algorithm running times with predictions has largely been unexplored.
We take a first step in this direction by combining the idea of machine-learned
predictions with the idea of “warm-starting" primal-dual algorithms. We consider
one of the most important primitives in combinatorial optimization: weighted
bipartite matching and its generalization to b-matching. We identify three key
challenges when using learned dual variables in a primal-dual algorithm. First,
predicted duals may be infeasible, so we give an algorithm that efficiently maps
predicted infeasible duals to nearby feasible solutions. Second, once the duals are
feasible, they may not be optimal, so we show that they can be used to quickly
find an optimal solution. Finally, such predictions are useful only if they can be
learned, so we show that the problem of learning duals for matching has low sample
complexity. We validate our theoretical findings through experiments on both real
and synthetic data. As a result we give a rigorous, practical, and empirically
effective method to compute bipartite matchings.

1

Introduction

Classical algorithm analysis considers worst case performance of algorithms, capturing running times,
approximation and competitive ratios, space complexities, and other notions of performance. Recently
there has been a renewed interest in finding formal ways to go beyond worst case analysis [41], to
better understand performance of algorithms observed in practice, and develop new methods tailored
to typical inputs observed.
An emerging line of research dovetails this with progress in machine learning, and asks how algorithms
can be augmented with machine-learned predictors to circumvent worst case lower bounds when the
predictions are good, and approximately match them otherwise (see Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii
[36] for a survey). Naturally, a rich area of applications of this paradigm has been in online
algorithms, where the additional information revealed by the predictions reduces the uncertainty
about the future and can lead to better choices, and thus better competitive ratios. For instance, see
the work by Lykouris and Vassilvitskii [33], Rohatgi [40], Jiang et al. [29] on caching; Antoniadis
et al. [3], Dütting et al. [19] on the classic secretary problem; Purohit et al. [39], Lattanzi et al. [32]
on scheduling; Purohit et al. [39], Anand et al. [2] on ski rental; and Bamas et al. [8] on set cover.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

