Marginalised Gaussian Processes
with Nested Sampling

Fergus Simpson∗
Secondmind
Cambridge, UK
fergus@secondmind.ai

Vidhi Lalchand∗
University of Cambridge, UK
vr308@cam.ac.uk

Carl E. Rasmussen
University of Cambridge, UK
cer54@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Gaussian Process models are a rich distribution over functions with inductive biases
controlled by a kernel function. Learning occurs through optimisation of the kernel
hyperparameters using the marginal likelihood as the objective. This work proposes
nested sampling as a means of marginalising kernel hyperparameters, because it is
a technique that is well-suited to exploring complex, multi-modal distributions. We
benchmark against Hamiltonian Monte Carlo on time-series and two-dimensional
regression tasks, finding that a principled approach to quantifying hyperparameter
uncertainty substantially improves the quality of prediction intervals.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) represent a powerful non-parametric and probabilistic framework for
performing regression and classification. An important step in using GP models is the specification
of a covariance function and in turn setting the parameters of the chosen covariance function. Both
these steps are jointly referred to as the model selection problem [Rasmussen and Williams, 2006].
The parameters of the covariance function are called hyperparameters as the latent function values
take the place of parameters in a GP.
The bulk of the GP literature addresses the model selection problem through maximisation of the GP
marginal likelihood p(y|θ). This approach called ML-II2 typically involves using gradient based optimisation methods to yield point estimates of hyperparameters. The posterior predictive distribution is
then evaluated at these optimised hyperparameter point estimates. Despite its popularity this classical
approach to training GPs suffers from two issues: 1) Using point estimates of hyperparameters yield
overconfident predictions, by failing to account for hyperparameter uncertainty, and 2) Non-convexity
of the marginal likelihood surface can lead to poor estimates located at local minima. Further, the
presence of multiple modes can affect the interpretability of kernel hyperparameters. This work
proposes a principled treatment of model hyperparameters and assesses its impact on the quality of
prediction uncertainty. Marginalising over hyperparameters can also be seen as a robust approach to
the model selection question in GPs.
The form of the kernel function influences the geometry of the marginal likelihood surface. For
instance, periodic kernels give rise to multiple local minima as functions with different periodicities
can be compatible with the data. Expressive kernels which are derived by adding/multiplying together
primitive kernels to encode different types of inductive biases typically have many hyperparameters,
exacerbating the local minima problem.
∗

Equal contribution
where ‘ML’ stands for marginal likelihood and ‘II’ denotes the second level of the hierarchy pertaining to
hyperparameters
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

