Understanding Bandits with Graph Feedback

Houshuang Chen
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
chenhoushuang@sjtu.edu.cn
Shuai Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Zengfeng Huang
Fudan University
huangzf@fudan.edu.cn
Chihao Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
chihao@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The bandit problem with graph feedback, proposed in [Mannor and Shamir,
NeurIPS 2011], is modeled by a directed graph G = (V, E) where V is the
collection of bandit arms, and once an arm is triggered, all its incident arms are
observed. A fundamental question is how the structure of the graph affects the
min-max regret. We propose the notions of the fractional weak domination number
δ ∗ and the k-packing independence number capturing upper bound and lower
bound for the regret respectively. We show that the two notions are inherently
connected via aligning them with the linear program of the weakly dominating
set and its dual — the fractional vertex packing set respectively. Based on this
connection,
duality theorem to prove a general
 we utilize 1the 2strong

 regret upper
1
2
∗
∗
3
3
bound O (δ log |V |) T 3 and a lower bound Ω (δ /α) T 3 where α is the
integrality gap of the dual linear program. Therefore, our bounds are tight up to
1
a (log |V |) 3 factor on graphs with bounded integrality gap for the vertex packing
problem including trees and graphs with bounded degree. Moreover, we show that
1
for several special families of graphs, we can get rid of the (log |V |) 3 factor and
establish optimal regret.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit is an extensively studied problem in reinforcement learning. Imagining a
player facing an n-armed bandit, each time the player pulls one of the n arms and incurs a loss. At
the end of each round, the player receives some feedback and tries to make a better choice in the next
round. The expected regret is defined by the difference between the player’s cumulative losses and
cumulative losses of the single best arm during T rounds. In this article, we assume the loss at each
round is given in an adversarial fashion. This is called the adversarial bandit in the literature. The
difficulty of the adversarial bandit problem is usually measured by the min-max regret which is the
expected regret of the best strategy against the worst possible loss sequence.
Player’s strategy depends on how the feedback is given at each round. One simple type of feedback is
called full feedback where the player can observe all arm’s losses after playing an arm. An important
problem studied in this model is online learning with experts [14, 17]. Another extreme, introduced
in [8], is the vanilla bandit feedback where the player can only observe the loss of the arm he/she just
pulled. Optimal bounds for the regret, either in n or in T , are known for both types of feedback.
The work of [24] initialized the study on the generalization of the above two extremes, that is, the
feedback consists of the losses of a collection of arms. This type of feedback can be naturally
described by a feedback graph G where the vertex set is [n] and a directed edge (i, j) means pulling
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

