Topological Relational Learning on Graphs

Yuzhou Chen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
yc0774@princeton.edu

Baris Coskunuzer
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
coskunuz@utdallas.edu

Yulia R. Gel
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas and
National Science Foundation
ygl@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for graph classification and representation learning. However, GNNs tend to suffer from oversmoothing problems and are vulnerable to graph perturbations. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel topological neural framework of topological relational inference (TRI) which allows for integrating higher-order graph information
to GNNs and for systematically learning a local graph structure. The key idea is
to rewire the original graph by using the persistent homology of the small neighborhoods of nodes and then to incorporate the extracted topological summaries
as the side information into the local algorithm. As a result, the new framework
enables us to harness both the conventional information on the graph structure and
information on the graph higher order topological properties. We derive theoretical
stability guarantees for the new local topological representation and discuss their
implications on the graph algebraic connectivity. The experimental results on node
classification tasks demonstrate that the new TRI-GNN outperforms all 14 state-ofthe-art baselines on 6 out 7 graphs and exhibit higher robustness to perturbations,
yielding up to 10% better performance under noisy scenarios.

1

Introduction

Node classification is one of the most active research areas in graph learning. The target here is,
given a single attributed graph G and a small subset of nodes with prior label information, to predict
labels of all remaining unlabelled nodes. Applications of node classification are very diverse, ranging
from customer attrition analytics to tracking corruption-convictions among politicians. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) offer a powerful machinery for addressing such problems on large heterogeneous
networks, resulting in an emerging field of geometric deep learning (GDL) which adapts deep learning
to non-Euclidean objects such as graphs [9, 51, 54, 16].
Although GDL achieves a highly competitive performance in various graph-based classification and
prediction tasks, similarly to the image domain deep learning on graphs is often found to be vulnerable
to graph perturbations and adversarial attacks [43, 50, 26]. In turn, most recent results [42, 19] suggest
that local graph information may be invaluable for robustifying GDL against graph perturbations and
adversarial attacks. Also, as shown by [36, 4, 53] in conjunction with network community learning,
local algorithms (i.e., algorithms based only on a small radius neighborhood around the node) may
demonstrate superior performance if coupled with side information in the form of a node labeling
positively correlated with the true graph structure. Inspired by these results, the ultimate goal of this
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

