Disrupting Deep Uncertainty Estimation Without
Harming Accuracy

Ido Galil
Technion
idogalil.ig@gmail.com

Ran El-Yaniv
Technion, Deci.AI
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have proven to be powerful predictors and are
widely used for various tasks. Credible uncertainty estimation of their predictions,
however, is crucial for their deployment in many risk-sensitive applications. In
this paper we present a novel and simple attack, which unlike adversarial attacks,
does not cause incorrect predictions but instead cripples the network’s capacity
for uncertainty estimation. The result is that after the attack, the DNN is more
confident of its incorrect predictions than about its correct ones without having
its accuracy reduced. We present two versions of the attack. The first scenario
focuses on a black-box regime (where the attacker has no knowledge of the target
network) and the second scenario attacks a white-box setting. The proposed attack
is only required to be of minuscule magnitude for its perturbations to cause severe
uncertainty estimation damage, with larger magnitudes resulting in completely
unusable uncertainty estimations. We demonstrate successful attacks on three of
the most popular uncertainty estimation methods: the vanilla softmax score, Deep
Ensembles and MC-Dropout. Additionally, we show an attack on SelectiveNet,
the selective classification architecture. We test the proposed attack on several
contemporary architectures such as MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0, all trained
to classify ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) show great and improving performance in a wide variety of application
domains including computer vision and natural language processing. Successful deployment of
these models, however, is critically dependent on providing effective uncertainty estimation for their
predictions, or employing some kind of selective prediction [8].
In the context of classification, practical and well-known uncertainty estimation techniques include:
(1) the classification prediction’s softmax score [3, 4], which quantifies the embedding margin
between an instance to the decision boundary; (2) MC-Dropout [7], which is argued to proxy
Bayesian networks [22, 20, 23]; (3) Deep Ensembles [18], which have shown state-of-the-art results
in various estimation settings; and (4) SelectiveNet [9], which learns to estimate uncertainty in a way
that produces optimal risk for a specific desired coverage.
In this paper we show that all these well-known uncertainty estimation techniques are vulnerable
to a new and different type of attack that can completely destroy their usefulness and that works in
both black-box (where the attacker can only query the attacked model for predicted labels and has
no knowledge of the model itself) and white-box (the attacker has complete knowledge about the
attacked model) settings. While standard adversarial attacks target model accuracy, the proposed
attack is designed to keep accuracy performance intact and refrains from changing the original
classification predictions made by the attacked model. We call our method ACE: Attack on Confidence
Estimation. To demonstrate the relevance of our findings, we test ACE on modern architectures, such
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

