Argmax Centroids: with Applications to
Multi-domain Learning
Chengyue Gong
Mao Ye
Qiang Liu
Computer Science Department, The University of Texas at Austin
{cygong17,my21,lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a general method to construct centroid approximation for the distribution of maximum points of a random function (a.k.a. argmax distribution),
which finds broad applications in machine learning. Our method optimizes a set of
centroid points to compactly approximate the argmax distribution with a simple
objective function, without explicitly drawing exact samples from the argmax
distribution. Theoretically, the argmax centroid method can be shown to minimize
a surrogate of Wasserstein distance between the ground-truth argmax distribution
and the centroid approximation under proper conditions. We demonstrate the
applicability and effectiveness of our method on a variety of real-world multitask learning applications, including few-shot image classification, personalized
dialogue systems and multi-target domain adaptation.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning and statistics involve optimizing a random function such as
the empirical loss. This work focuses on approximating the distribution of the optimum points of a
random function of interest. Specifically, we consider the following problem:
The Argmax Centroid Problem Assume we are given a random function f⇠ (✓) where ⇠ is a
random variable and ✓ is a variable of interest. We are interested in estimating the distribution ⇢⇤
of the minimum points ✓⇠ := arg min✓ f⇠ (✓) as we draw ⇠ randomly. In particular, we want to find
a set of “centroid points” {✓i }ni=1 , whose empirical measure is close to ⇢⇤ in terms of Wasserstein
distance. We assume the minimizer of f⇠ is always unique.
This problem can find applications in a variety of machine learning and statistics techniques, including
bootstrap (Efron & Tibshirani, 1994), random MAP (Hazan et al., 2013), Thompson sampling (Russo
et al., 2017), as well as multi-task learning and meta learning. One naive method to approximate
⇢⇤ , which is widely used in the methods above, is to draw an i.i.d. sample of ⇠ and calculate
the corresponding argmin points. However, this approach is computationally expensive because
calculating each argmin point requires solving an independent optimization problem and the quality
of Monte Carlo approximation is poor unless n is very large, especially for large-scale optimization
problems in deep learning.
In this work, we propose a more efficient centroid approximation to replace the Monte Carlo sampling,
in which we explicitly optimize a set of points ✓ = {✓i }ni=1 to approximate target distribution ⇢⇤ . By
carefully choosing the location of each point ✓i (rather than drawing them randomly), our method
allows us to obtain a set of points ✓ that are well aligned to approximate the overall argmin distribution
⇢⇤ . Theoretically, under proper conditions, our method can be viewed as minimizing a surrogate
of the Wasserstein distance between the empirical distribution of the centroid approximation and
the ground-truth distribution. Therefore, given a small budget on sample size, we can estimate the
argmin distribution more accurately than using Monte Carlo estimation.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

