On the Periodic Behavior of Neural Network Training
with Batch Normalization and Weight Decay

Ekaterina Lobacheva1∗, Maxim Kodryan1∗, Nadezhda Chirkova1
Andrey Malinin1,2 , Dmitry Vetrov1,3
1
HSE University 2 Yandex 3 AIRI
Moscow, Russia
elobacheva@hse.ru, mkodryan@hse.ru, nchirkova@hse.ru
am969@yandex-team.ru, dvetrov@hse.ru

Abstract
Training neural networks with batch normalization and weight decay has become a
common practice in recent years. In this work, we show that their combined use
may result in a surprising periodic behavior of optimization dynamics: the training
process regularly exhibits destabilizations that, however, do not lead to complete
divergence but cause a new period of training. We rigorously investigate the
mechanism underlying the discovered periodic behavior from both empirical and
theoretical points of view and analyze the conditions in which it occurs in practice.
We also demonstrate that periodic behavior can be regarded as a generalization
of two previously opposing perspectives on training with batch normalization and
weight decay, namely the equilibrium presumption and the instability presumption.

1

Introduction

Normalization approaches, such as batch or layer normalization, have become vital for the successful
training of modern deep neural networks [12, 2, 24, 21, 27]. Despite much recent work [3, 22, 9, 28],
it is still not completely understood how normalization influences the training process. In this work,
we investigate the surprising periodic behavior that may occur when a neural network is trained
with a commonly used combination of some kind of normalization, in our case batch normalization
(BN) [12], and weight decay regularization (WD). Examples of this behavior are provided in Figure 1.
The dynamics of neural network training with BN and WD have been examined extensively in
literature due to the non-trivial competing influence of BN and WD on the norm of neural network’s
weights. More precisely, using BN makes (a part of) neural network’s weights scale-invariant, i.e.,
multiplying them by a positive constant does not change the network’s output. Although scale
invariance allows optimizing on a sphere with a fixed weight norm [6], classic SGD-based approaches
are usually preferred over constraint optimization methods in practice due to more straightforward
implementation. Making an SGD step in the direction of the loss gradient always increases the norm of
scale-invariant parameters, while WD aims at decreasing the weight norm (see illustration in Figure 2).
In sum, training the neural network with BN and WD results in an interplay between two forces: a
“centripetal force” of the WD and the “centrifugal force” of the loss gradients. Many works notice the
positive effect of WD on optimization and generalization caused by the control of the scale-invariant
weights norm and the subsequent influence on the effective learning rate [25, 10, 29, 18, 19, 26, 20],
i.e., the learning rate on a unit sphere in the scale-invariant weights space. However, the general
dynamics of the norm of the scale-invariant weights are viewed in the literature from two contradicting
points, and this work is devoted to resolving this contradiction.
∗

First two authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

