Online Adaptation to Label Distribution Shift

Ruihan Wu
Cornell University
rw565@cornell.edu

Chuan Guo
Facebook AI Research
chuanguo@fb.com

Yi Su

Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University
{ys756, kqw4@cornell.edu}

Abstract
Machine learning models often encounter distribution shifts when deployed in the
real world. In this paper, we focus on adaptation to label distribution shift in the
online setting, where the test-time label distribution is continually changing and
the model must dynamically adapt to it without observing the true label. Leveraging a novel analysis, we show that the lack of true label does not hinder estimation
of the expected test loss, which enables the reduction of online label shift adaptation to conventional online learning. Informed by this observation, we propose
adaptation algorithms inspired by classical online learning techniques such as Follow The Leader (FTL) and Online Gradient Descent (OGD) and derive their regret
bounds. We empirically verify our findings under both simulated and real world
label distribution shifts and show that OGD is particularly effective and robust to
a variety of challenging label shift scenarios.

1

Introduction

A common assumption in machine learning is that the training set and test set are drawn from the
same distribution [25]. However, this assumption often does not hold in practice when models are
deployed in the real world [3, 28]. One common type of distribution shift is label shift, where
the conditional distribution p(x|y) is fixed but the label distribution p(y) changes over time. This
phenomenon is most typical when the label y is the causal variable and the feature x is the observation [31]. For instance, a model trained to diagnose malaria can encounter a much higher prevalence
of the disease in tropical regions.
Prior work have primarily studied the problem of label shift in the offline setting [2, 4, 22, 42],
where the phenomenon occurs only once after the model is trained. However, in many common
scenarios, the label distribution can change continually over time. For example, the prevalence of
a disease such as influenza changes depending on the season and whether an outbreak occurs. The
distribution of news article categories is influenced by real world events such as political tension and
the economy. In these scenarios, modeling the test-time label distribution as being stationary can be
inaccurate and over-simplistic, especially if the model is deployed over a long period of time.
To address this shortcoming, we define and study the problem of online label shift, where the distribution shift is modeled as an online process. An adaptation algorithm in this setting is tasked with
making sequential predictions on random samples from a drifting test distribution and dynamically
adjusting the model’s prediction in real-time. Different from online learning, the test label is not
observed after making a prediction, hence making the problem much more challenging.
Nevertheless, we show that it is possible to adapt to the drifting test distribution in an online fashion, despite never observing a single label. In detail, we describe a method of obtaining unbiased
estimates of the expected 0-1 loss and its gradient using only unlabeled samples. This allows the
reduction of online label shift adaptation to conventional online learning, which we then utilize to
define two algorithms inspired by classical techniques—Online Gradient Descent (OGD) and Follow The History (FTH)—the latter being a close relative of the Follow The Leader algorithm. Under
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

