Densely connected normalizing flows

Matej Grcić, Ivan Grubišić and Siniša Šegvić
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
University of Zagreb
matej.grcic@fer.hr ivan.grubisic@fer.hr sinisa.segvic@fer.hr

Abstract
Normalizing flows are bijective mappings between inputs and latent representations
with a fully factorized distribution. They are very attractive due to exact likelihood
evaluation and efficient sampling. However, their effective capacity is often insufficient since the bijectivity constraint limits the model width. We address this issue
by incrementally padding intermediate representations with noise. We precondition
the noise in accordance with previous invertible units, which we describe as crossunit coupling. Our invertible glow-like modules increase the model expressivity
by fusing a densely connected block with Nyström self-attention. We refer to
our architecture as DenseFlow since both cross-unit and intra-module couplings
rely on dense connectivity. Experiments show significant improvements due to
the proposed contributions and reveal state-of-the-art density estimation under
moderate computing budgets.1

1

Introduction

One of the main tasks of modern artificial intelligence is to generate images, audio waveforms,
and natural-language symbols. To achieve the desired goal, the current state of the art uses deep
compositions of non-linear transformations [1, 2] known as deep generative models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Formally, deep generative models estimate an unknown data distribution pD given by a set of i.i.d.
samples D = {x1 , ..., xn }. The data distribution is approximated with a model distribution pθ
defined by the architecture of the model and a set of parameters θ. While the architecture is usually
handcrafted, the set of parameters θ is obtained by optimizing the likelihood across the training
distribution pD :
θ∗ = argmin Ex∼pD [− ln pθ (x)].
(1)
θ∈Θ

Properties of the model (e.g. efficient sampling, ability to evaluate likelihood etc.) directly depend on
the definition of pθ (x), or decision to avoid it. Early approaches consider unnormalized distribution
[3] which usually requires MCMC-based sample generation [8, 9, 10] with long mixing times. Alternatively, the distribution can be autoregressively factorized [7, 11], which allows likelihood estimation
and powerful but slow sample generation. VAEs [4] use a factorized variational approximation of
the latent representation, which allows to learn an autoencoder by optimizing a lower bound of the
likelihood. Diffussion models [12, 13, 14] learn to reverse a diffusion process, which is a fixed
Markov chain that gradually adds noise to the data in the opposite direction of sampling until the
signal is destroyed. Generative adversarial networks [5] mimic the dataset samples by competing in a
minimax game. This allows to efficiently produce high quality samples [15], which however often
do not span the entire training distribution support [16]. Additionally, the inability to "invert" the
generation process in any meaningful way implies inability to evaluate the likelihood.
Contrary to previous approaches, normalizing flows [6, 17, 18] model the likelihood using a bijective
mapping to a predefined latent distribution p(z), typically a multivariate Gaussian. Given the bijection
1

Code available at: https://github.com/matejgrcic/DenseFlow

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

