Stateful Strategic Regression
Keegan Harris
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
keeganh@cmu.edu

Hoda Heidari
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
hheidari@cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
Automated decision-making tools increasingly assess individuals to determine if
they qualify for high-stakes opportunities. A recent line of research investigates how
strategic agents may respond to such scoring tools to receive favorable assessments.
While prior work has focused on the short-term strategic interactions between
a decision-making institution (modeled as a principal) and individual decisionsubjects (modeled as agents), we investigate interactions spanning multiple timesteps. In particular, we consider settings in which the agent’s effort investment
today can accumulate over time in the form of an internal state—impacting both
his future rewards and that of the principal. We characterize the Stackelberg
equilibrium of the resulting game and provide novel algorithms for computing
it. Our analysis reveals several intriguing insights about the role of multiple
interactions in shaping the game’s outcome: First, we establish that in our stateful
setting, the class of all linear assessment policies remains as powerful as the
larger class of all monotonic assessment policies. While recovering the principal’s
optimal policy requires solving a non-convex optimization problem, we provide
polynomial-time algorithms for recovering both the principal and agent’s optimal
policies under common assumptions about the process by which effort investments
convert to observable features. Most importantly, we show that with multiple
rounds of interaction at her disposal, the principal is more effective at incentivizing
the agent to accumulate effort in her desired direction. Our work addresses several
critical gaps in the growing literature on the societal impacts of automated decisionmaking—by focusing on longer time horizons and accounting for the compounding
nature of decisions individuals receive over time.

1

Introduction

Automated decision-making tools increasingly assess individuals to determine whether they qualify
for life-altering opportunities in domains such as lending [27], higher education [32], employment [41], and beyond. These assessment tools have been widely criticized for the blatant disparities
they produce through their scores [43, 3]. This overwhelming body of evidence has led to a remarkably active area of research into understanding the societal implications of algorithmic/data-driven
automation. Much of the existing work on the topic has focused on the immediate or short-term
societal effects of automated decision-making. (For example, a thriving line of work in Machine
Learning (ML) addresses the unfairness that arises when ML predictions inform high-stakes decisions [18, 22, 31, 8, 1, 16, 11] by defining it as a form of predictive disparity, e.g., inequality in
false-positive rates [22, 3] across social groups.) With the exception of several noteworthy recent
articles (which we discuss shortly), prior work has largely ignored the processes through which
algorithmic decision-making systems can induce, perpetuate, or amplify undesirable choices and
behaviors.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

