Look at the Variance! Efficient Black-box
Explanations with Sobol-based Sensitivity Analysis

Thomas Fel1,3,4 ∗
Rémi Cadène1,2 ∗†
Mathieu Chalvidal1,3
2,5
3,4
Matthieu Cord
David Vigouroux
Thomas Serre1,3
1
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, USA 2 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, France
3
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, France
4
Institut de Recherche Technologique Saint-Exupery, France 5 Valeo.ai
{thomas_fel,remi_cadene}@brown.edu

Abstract
We describe a novel attribution method which is grounded in Sensitivity Analysis
and uses Sobol indices. Beyond modeling the individual contributions of image
regions, Sobol indices provide an efficient way to capture higher-order interactions
between image regions and their contributions to a neural network’s prediction
through the lens of variance. We describe an approach that makes the computation
of these indices efficient for high-dimensional problems by using perturbation
masks coupled with efficient estimators to handle the high dimensionality of
images. Importantly, we show that the proposed method leads to favorable scores on
standard benchmarks for vision (and language models) while drastically reducing
the computing time compared to other black-box methods – even surpassing the
accuracy of state-of-the-art white-box methods which require access to internal
representations. Our code is freely available: github.com/fel-thomas/
Sobol-Attribution-Method.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are now being deployed in numerous domains including medicine, transportation, security or finances with broad societal implications. Yet, these networks have become
nearly inscrutable, and for most real-world applications, these systems are used to make critical
decisions – often without any explanation. In recent years, numerous explainability methods have
been proposed [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. In addition to helping improve people’s trust in these systems,
these methods have helped identify and correct biases in datasets [4, 5, 9]. This has, in turn, helped
improve these systems’ robustness and accelerate their broad deployment. An important limitation of
standard explainability methods is that they require access to the system’s internal states including
hidden layer activations or input gradients [1, 5, 6, 10]. As a result, these so-called white-box methods
cannot be applied in the most general situations for which the internal states of network are not
publicly accessible. For instance, it is common for companies to use neural networks provided by
third parties (e.g., through web APIs or specialized hardware). However, only a handful of so-called
black-box methods have been proposed to address this challenge with limited successes [2, 4, 8].
It is thus critical to develop more general methods that can reliably interpret and characterize the
underlying decision processes of a wider array of models.
Common approaches to explaining a model’s prediction consists of attributing a score for each
input dimension such as image pixels for computer vision systems or individual words for natural
language processing. Shown in Fig. 1 is an example image and associated importance map for an
image categorization system, whereby scores for individual pixels are displayed as heatmaps where
* Equal contribution † Work done before April 2021 and joining Tesla

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

