Score-based Generative Modeling in Latent Space

Arash Vahdat∗
NVIDIA
avahdat@nvidia.com

Karsten Kreis∗
NVIDIA
kkreis@nvidia.com

Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
jkautz@nvidia.com

Abstract
Score-based generative models (SGMs) have recently demonstrated impressive
results in terms of both sample quality and distribution coverage. However, they
are usually applied directly in data space and often require thousands of network
evaluations for sampling. Here, we propose the Latent Score-based Generative
Model (LSGM), a novel approach that trains SGMs in a latent space, relying on the
variational autoencoder framework. Moving from data to latent space allows us to
train more expressive generative models, apply SGMs to non-continuous data, and
learn smoother SGMs in a smaller space, resulting in fewer network evaluations
and faster sampling. To enable training LSGMs end-to-end in a scalable and stable
manner, we (i) introduce a new score-matching objective suitable to the LSGM
setting, (ii) propose a novel parameterization of the score function that allows SGM
to focus on the mismatch of the target distribution with respect to a simple Normal
one, and (iii) analytically derive multiple techniques for variance reduction of the
training objective. LSGM obtains a state-of-the-art FID score of 2.10 on CIFAR-10,
outperforming all existing generative results on this dataset. On CelebA-HQ-256,
LSGM is on a par with previous SGMs in sample quality while outperforming
them in sampling time by two orders of magnitude. In modeling binary images,
LSGM achieves state-of-the-art likelihood on the binarized OMNIGLOT dataset.
Our implementation is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/LSGM.

1

Introduction

The long-standing goal of likelihood-based generative learning is to faithfully learn a data distribution,
while also generating high-quality samples. Achieving these two goals simultaneously is a tremendous
challenge, which has led to the development of a plethora of different generative models. Recently,
score-based generative models (SGMs) demonstrated astonishing results in terms of both high sample
quality and likelihood [1, 2]. These models define a forward diffusion process that maps data to noise
by gradually perturbing the input data. Generation corresponds to a reverse process that synthesizes
novel data via iterative denoising, starting from random noise. The problem then reduces to learning
the score function—the gradient of the log-density—of the perturbed data [3]. In a seminal work,
Song et al. [2] show how this modeling approach is described with a stochastic differential equation
(SDE) framework which can be converted to maximum likelihood training [4]. Variants of SGMs
have been applied to images [1, 2, 5, 6], audio [7, 8, 9, 10], graphs [11] and point clouds [12, 13].
Albeit high quality, sampling from SGMs is computationally expensive. This is because generation
amounts to solving a complex SDE, or equivalently ordinary differential equation (ODE) (denoted as
the probability flow ODE in [2]), that maps a simple base distribution to the complex data distribution.
The resulting differential equations are typically complex and solving them accurately requires
numerical integration with very small step sizes, which results in thousands of neural network
evaluations [1, 2, 6]. Furthermore, generation complexity is uniquely defined by the underlying data
distribution and the forward SDE for data perturbation, implying that synthesis speed cannot be
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

