Dynamic Visual Reasoning by
Learning Differentiable Physics Models
from Video and Language

Mingyu Ding
MIT CSAIL and HKU

Zhenfang Chen
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Tao Du
MIT CSAIL

Ping Luo
HKU

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
In this work, we propose a unified framework, called Visual Reasoning with Differentiable Physics (VRDP) 1 , that can jointly learn visual concepts and infer physics
models of objects and their interactions from videos and language. This is achieved
by seamlessly integrating three components: a visual perception module, a concept
learner, and a differentiable physics engine. The visual perception module parses
each video frame into object-centric trajectories and represents them as latent scene
representations. The concept learner grounds visual concepts (e.g., color, shape,
and material) from these object-centric representations based on the language,
thus providing prior knowledge for the physics engine. The differentiable physics
model, implemented as an impulse-based differentiable rigid-body simulator, performs differentiable physical simulation based on the grounded concepts to infer
physical properties, such as mass, restitution, and velocity, by fitting the simulated
trajectories into the video observations. Consequently, these learned concepts and
physical models can explain what we have seen and imagine what is about to
happen in future and counterfactual scenarios. Integrating differentiable physics
into the dynamic reasoning framework offers several appealing benefits. More
accurate dynamics prediction in learned physics models enables state-of-the-art
performance on both synthetic and real-world benchmarks while still maintaining
high transparency and interpretability; most notably, VRDP improves the accuracy
of predictive and counterfactual questions by 4.5% and 11.5% compared to its
best counterpart. VRDP is also highly data-efficient: physical parameters can be
optimized from very few videos, and even a single video can be sufficient. Finally,
with all physical parameters inferred, VRDP can quickly learn new concepts from
few examples.

1

Introduction

Dynamic visual reasoning about objects, relations, and physics is essential for human intelligence.
Given a raw video, humans can easily use their common sense of intuitive physics to explain what has
happened, predict what will happen next, and infer what would happen in counterfactual situations.
Such human-like physical scene understanding capabilities are also of great importance in practical
applications such as industrial robot control [2, 53].
1

Project page: http://vrdp.csail.mit.edu/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

