Estimating the Unique Information
of Continuous Variables
Ari Pakman
Columbia University

Amin Nejatbakhsh
Columbia University

Luca Mazzucato
University of Oregon

Dar Gilboa
Harvard University

Michael Wibral
Georg August University

Abdullah Makkeh
Georg August University
Elad Schneidman
Weizmann Institute

Abstract
The integration and transfer of information from multiple sources to multiple targets is a core motive of neural systems. The emerging field of partial information
decomposition (PID) provides a novel information-theoretic lens into these mechanisms by identifying synergistic, redundant, and unique contributions to the mutual
information between one and several variables. While many works have studied
aspects of PID for Gaussian and discrete distributions, the case of general continuous distributions is still uncharted territory. In this work we present a method
for estimating the unique information in continuous distributions, for the case of
one versus two variables. Our method solves the associated optimization problem
over the space of distributions with fixed bivariate marginals by combining copula
decompositions and techniques developed to optimize variational autoencoders.
We obtain excellent agreement with known analytic results for Gaussians, and illustrate the power of our new approach in several brain-inspired neural models. Our
method is capable of recovering the effective connectivity of a chaotic network of
rate neurons, and uncovers a complex trade-off between redundancy, synergy and
unique information in recurrent networks trained to solve a generalized XOR task.

1

Introduction and background

In neural systems, often multiple neurons are driven by one external event or stimulus; conversely
multiple neural inputs can converge onto a single neuron. A natural question in both cases is how
multiple variables hold information about the singleton variable. In their seminal work [1], Williams
and Beer proposed an axiomatic extension of classic information theory to decompose the mutual
information between multiple source variables and a single target variable in a meaningful way. For
the case of two sources X1 , X2 , their partial information decomposition (PID) amounts to expressing
the mutual information of X1 , X2 with a target Y as a sum of four non-negative terms,
I(Y : (X1 , X2 )) = U (Y : X1 \X2 ) + U (Y : X2 \X1 ) + R(Y : (X1 , X2 )) + S(Y : (X1 , X2 )) ,

(1.1)

corresponding to unique (U1 , U2 ), redundant (R) and synergistic (S) contributions, respectively.
These terms should also obey the consistency equations
I(Y : X1 ) = R(Y : (X1 , X2 )) + U (Y : X1 \X2 ) ,
I(Y : X2 ) = R(Y : (X1 , X2 )) + U (Y : X2 \X1 ) .

(1.2)
(1.3)

The PID has proved useful in understanding information processing by distributed systems in a
diverse array of fields including machine learning [2, 3], earth science [4] and cellular automata [5],
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

