Intermediate Layers Matter in Momentum
Contrastive Self Supervised Learning

Aakash Kaku
Center for Data Science
New York University
New York, NY 10011
ark576@nyu.edu

Sahana Upadhya
Department of Computer Science
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York, NY 10011
su575@nyu.edu

Narges Razavian
Departments of Population Health and Radiology
NYU Grossman School of Medicine
and NYU Center for Data Science
New York, NY 10016
Narges.Razavian@nyulangone.org

Abstract
We show that bringing intermediate layers’ representations of two augmented
versions of an image closer together in self supervised learning helps to improve
the momentum contrastive (MoCo) method. To this end, in addition to the contrastive loss, we minimize the mean squared error between the intermediate layer
representations or make their cross-correlation matrix closer to an identity matrix. Both loss objectives either outperform standard MoCo, or achieve similar
performances on three diverse medical imaging datasets: NIH-Chest Xrays, Breast
Cancer Histopathology, and Diabetic Retinopathy. The gains of the improved
MoCo are especially large in a low-labeled data regime (e.g. 1% labeled data)
with an average gain of 5% across three datasets. We analyze the models trained
using our novel approach via feature similarity analysis and layer-wise probing.
Our analysis reveals that models trained via our approach have higher feature
reuse compared to a standard MoCo and learn informative features earlier in the
network. Finally, by comparing the output probability distribution of models fine
tuned on small versus large labeled data, we conclude that our proposed method
of pre-training leads to lower Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance, as compared to a
standard MoCo. This provides additional evidence that our proposed method learns
more informative features in the pre-training phase which could be leveraged in a
low-labeled data regime.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) [Noroozi and Favaro, 2016, Doersch et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2016,
He et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020, Caron et al., 2020, Zbontar et al., 2021, Caron et al., 2021]
helps in learning useful representations from large unlabeled dataset that can be used as pre-trained
initialization points for different downstream tasks. These pretrained models are particularly useful
in settings where we have a small labeled dataset to learn from. Recent advances have shown that
such self-supervised methods are capable of learning representations that are competitive with those
learned in a fully supervised manner for natural images [Wu et al., 2018, Hjelm et al., 2018, Zbontar
et al., 2021, Caron et al., 2021]. In application domains such as medical imaging, where high quality
labeled data is scarce and data modalities shift rapidly, SSL has potential to make a significant impact.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

