Faster Algorithms and Constant Lower Bounds for the
Worst-Case Expected Error

Jonah Brown-Cohen
Chalmers University of Technology
jonahb@chalmers.se

Abstract
The study of statistical estimation without distributional assumptions on data
values, but with knowledge of data collection methods was recently introduced by
Chen, Valiant and Valiant (NeurIPS 2020). In this framework, the goal is to design
estimators that minimize the worst-case expected error. Here the expectation is over
a known, randomized data collection process from some population, and the data
values corresponding to each element of the population are assumed to be worstcase. Chen, Valiant and Valiant show that, when data values are `∞ -normalized,
there is a polynomial time algorithm to compute an estimator for the mean with
worst-case expected error that is within a factor π2 of the optimum within the natural
class of semilinear estimators. However, their algorithm is based on optimizing a
somewhat complex concave objective function over a constrained set of positive
semidefinite matrices, and thus does not come with explicit runtime guarantees
beyond being polynomial time in the input. In this paper we design provably
efficient algorithms for approximating the optimal semilinear estimator based on
online convex optimization. In the setting where data values are `∞ -normalized,
our algorithm achieves a π2 -approximation by iteratively solving a sequence of
standard SDPs. When data values are `2 -normalized, our algorithm iteratively
computes the top eigenvector of a sequence of matrices, and does not lose any
multiplicative approximation factor. Further, using experiments in settings where
sample membership is correlated with data values (e.g. "importance sampling" and
"snowball sampling"), we show that our `2 -normalized algorithm gives a similar
advantage over standard estimators as the original `∞ -normalized algorithm of
Chen, Valiant and Valiant, but with much lower computational complexity. We
complement these positive results by stating a simple combinatorial condition
which, if satisfied by a data collection process, implies that any (not necessarily
semilinear) estimator for the mean has constant worst-case expected error.

1

Introduction

Standard methods in statistical analysis are often based on the assumption that data values are drawn
independently from some underlying distribution, and may perform poorly when this assumption
is violated. Methods from robust statistics often modify this assumption, for example by allowing
a small fraction of data values to be arbitrary outliers while the bulk of the data values remain
independent samples. However, there are natural settings in which data values may be strongly
correlated to sample membership, so that distributional assumptions (e.g. independence of data
values) can lead to inaccurate results. Furthermore, inaccuracy of predictions in such settings can
have serious societal consequences–for example predictions of election outcomes or the spread of a
contagious disease.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

