GraphFormers: GNN-nested Transformers for
Representation Learning on Textual Graph

Junhan Yang© ∗, Zheng Liu¨ , Shitao Xiao« , Chaozhuo Li¨ , Defu Lian© ,
Sanjay Agrawalª , Amit Singhª , Guangzhong Sun© , Xing Xie¨
© University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
¨ Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
« Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
ª Microsoft India Development Center, Bengaluru, India
yangjun2@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{zhengliu,cli,siamit,xingx}@microsoft.com,
stxiao@bupt.edu.cn,
{liandefu,gzsun}@ustc.edu.cn,
sanjayiitk0@gmail.com

Abstract
The representation learning on textual graph is to generate low-dimensional embeddings for the nodes based on the individual textual features and the neighbourhood
information. Recent breakthroughs on pretrained language models and graph neural networks push forward the development of corresponding techniques. The
existing works mainly rely on the cascaded model architecture: the textual features of nodes are independently encoded by language models at first; the textual
embeddings are aggregated by graph neural networks afterwards. However, the
above architecture is limited due to the independent modeling of textual features.
In this work, we propose GraphFormers, where layerwise GNN components are
nested alongside the transformer blocks of language models. With the proposed
architecture, the text encoding and the graph aggregation are fused into an iterative
workflow, making each node’s semantic accurately comprehended from the global
perspective. In addition, a progressive learning strategy is introduced, where the
model is successively trained on manipulated data and original data to reinforce its
capability of integrating information on graph. Extensive evaluations are conducted
on three large-scale benchmark datasets, where GraphFormers outperform the
SOTA baselines with comparable running efficiency. The source code is released
at https://github.com/microsoft/GraphFormers .

1

Introduction

The textual graph is a widely existed data format, where each node is annotated with its textual feature.
The representation learning on textual graph is to generate low-dimensional node embeddings based
on the individual textual features and the information from the neighbourhood. In recent years, the
breakthroughs in pretrained language models and graph neural networks contribute to the development
of corresponding techniques. Particularly, with pretrained language models, such as BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019a), the underlying semantics of texts can be captured more
precisely; at the same time, with graph neural networks, like GraphSage (Hamilton et al., 2017a) and
GAT (Veličković et al., 2018), neighbours can be effectively aggregated for more informative node
embeddings. It is necessary to combine both techniques for better textual graph representation. As
∗

Work was done by 2021.01 during Junhan Yang and Shitao Xiao’s internship in MSRA

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

