Structured Reordering for Modeling Latent
Alignments in Sequence Transduction

1

Bailin Wang1 Mirella Lapata1 Ivan Titov1,2,3
University of Edinburgh 2 University of Amsterdam 3 Innopolis University
bailin.wang@ed.ac.uk, {mlap, ititov}@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Despite success in many domains, neural models struggle in settings where train
and test examples are drawn from different distributions. In particular, in contrast
to humans, conventional sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models fail to generalize
systematically, i.e., interpret sentences representing novel combinations of concepts
(e.g., text segments) seen in training. Traditional grammar formalisms excel in such
settings by implicitly encoding alignments between input and output segments,
but are hard to scale and maintain. Instead of engineering a grammar, we directly
model segment-to-segment alignments as discrete structured latent variables within
a neural seq2seq model. To efficiently explore the large space of alignments, we
introduce a reorder-first align-later framework whose central component is a neural
reordering module producing separable permutations. We present an efficient
dynamic programming algorithm performing exact marginal and MAP inference
of separable permutations, and, thus, enabling end-to-end differentiable training of
our model. The resulting seq2seq model exhibits better systematic generalization
than standard models on synthetic problems and NLP tasks (i.e., semantic parsing
and machine translation).

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have led to major progress in many domains, with neural models
sometimes achieving or even surpassing human performance [49]. However, these methods often struggle in
out-of-distribution (ood) settings where train and test examples are drawn from different distributions. In particular, unlike humans, conventional sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) models, widely used in natural language processing (NLP), fail to generalize systematically [4, 27, 28],
i.e., correctly interpret sentences representing novel combinations of concepts seen in training. Our goal is to provide
a mechanism for encouraging systematic generalization in
seq2seq models.

Training Examples
what is the length of the colorado river ?
len( river( riverid ( ‘colorado‘ ) ) )
what is the longest river ?
longest( river( all ) ) )

Test Example
what is the length of the longest river ?
len( longest( river( all ) ) )

To get an intuition about our method, consider the semantic
parsing task shown in Figure 1. A learner needs to map
Figure 1: A semantic parser needs to
a natural language (NL) utterance to a program which
generalize to test examples which concan then be executed on a knowledge base. To process
tain segments from multiple training exthe test utterance, the learner needs to first decompose it
amples (shown in green and blue).
into two segments previously observed in training (shown
in green and blue), and then combine their corresponding program fragments to create a new
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

