Distributed Saddle-Point Problems Under Similarity
Aleksandr Beznosikov
MIPT,⇤ HSE University and Yandex, Russia
anbeznosikov@gmail.com
Alexander Rogozin
MIPT and HSE University, Russia
aleksandr.rogozin@phystech.edu

Gesualdo Scutari
Purdue University, USA
gscutari@purdue.edu

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, HSE University and ISP RAS†, Russia
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
We study solution methods for (strongly-)convex-(strongly)-concave Saddle-Point
Problems (SPPs) over networks of two type–master/workers (thus centralized)
architectures and mesh (thus decentralized) networks. The local functions at each
node are assumed to be similar, due to statistical data similarity or otherwise.
We establish lower complexity bounds for a fairly general class of algorithms
solving the SPP. We show that a given suboptimality ✏ > 0 is achieved over
master/workers networks in ⌦ · /µ·log(1/") rounds of communications, where
> 0 measures the degree of similarity of the local functions, µ is their strong
convexity constant, and is the diameter of the network.
p The lower communication
complexity bound over mesh networks reads ⌦ 1/ ⇢ · /µ · log(1/") , where
⇢ is the (normalized) eigengap of the gossip matrix used for the communication
between neighbouring nodes. We then propose algorithms matching the lower
bounds over either types of networks (up to log-factors). We assess the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithms on a robust regression problem.

1

Introduction

We study smooth (strongly-)convex-(strongly-)concave SPPs over a network of M agents:
M

min max f (x, y) :=

x2X y2Y

1 X
fm (x, y),
M m=1

(P)

where X, Y ✓ Rd are convex and compact sets common to all the agents; and fm (x, y) is the loss
function of agent m, known only to the agent. Problem (P) has found a wide range of applications,
including, game theory [42, 10], image deconvolution problems [7], adversarial training [3, 12], and
statistical learning [1]–see Sec. 2 for some motivating examples in the distributed setting. We are
particularly interested in learning problems, where each fm is the empirical risk that measures the
mismatch between the model to be learned and the local dataset owned by agent m.
Since the functions fm can be accessed only locally and routing local data to other agents is
infeasible or highly inefficient, solving (P) calls for the design of distributed algorithms that alternate
between a local computation procedure at each agent’s side, and a round of communication among
(suitably chosen) neighboring nodes. We address such a design considering explicitly two type of
computational architectures, namely: (i) master/workers networks–these are centralized systems
suitable for parallel computing; for instance, they are the typical computational architecture arising
⇤
†

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

