Closing the loop in medical decision support by
understanding clinical decision-making: A case study
on organ transplantation

Yuchao Qin∗
University of Cambridge
yq257@cam.ac.uk

Fergus Imrie∗
University of California, Los Angeles
imrie@g.ucla.edu

Daniel Jarrett
University of Cambridge
daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk

Alihan Hüyük
University of Cambridge
ah2075@cam.ac.uk

Alexander Edward Gimson
University of Cambridge
alexander.gimson@nhs.net

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
University of California, Los Angeles
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Significant effort has been placed on developing decision support tools to improve
patient care. However, drivers of real-world clinical decisions in complex medical
scenarios are not yet well-understood, resulting in substantial gaps between these
tools and practical applications. In light of this, we highlight that more attention on
understanding clinical decision-making is required both to elucidate current clinical
practices and to enable effective human-machine interactions. This is imperative
in high-stakes scenarios with scarce available resources. Using organ transplantation as a case study, we formalize the desiderata of methods for understanding
clinical decision-making. We show that most existing machine learning methods
are insufficient to meet these requirements and propose iTransplant, a novel datadriven framework to learn the factors affecting decisions on organ offers in an
instance-wise fashion directly from clinical data, as a possible solution. Through
experiments on real-world liver transplantation data from OPTN, we demonstrate
the use of iTransplant to: (1) discover which criteria are most important to clinicians for organ offer acceptance; (2) identify patient-specific organ preferences of
clinicians allowing automatic patient stratification; and (3) explore variations in
transplantation practices between different transplant centers. Finally, we emphasize that the insights gained by iTransplant can be used to inform the development
of future decision support tools.

1

Introduction

The decision that a patient and a clinician jointly make when a donor organ is offered for transplantation is critical and carries serious consequences. Even though the initial offer of a donor
organ for a particular recipient is made on the basis of agreed criteria as to optimum allocation
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

