Recurrent Submodular Welfare and
Matroid Blocking Semi-Bandits
Orestis Papadigenopoulos
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
papadig@cs.utexas.edu

Constantine Caramanis
Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Abstract
A recent line of research focuses on the study of stochastic multi-armed bandits
(MAB), in the case where temporal correlations of specific structure are imposed
between the player’s actions and the reward distributions of the arms. These correlations lead to (sub-)optimal solutions that exhibit interesting dynamical patterns
– a phenomenon that yields new challenges both from an algorithmic as well as
a learning perspective. In this work, we extend the above direction to a combinatorial semi-bandit setting and study a variant of stochastic MAB, where arms
are subject to matroid constraints and each arm becomes unavailable (blocked)
for a fixed number of rounds after each play. A natural common generalization
of the state-of-the-art for blocking bandits, and that for matroid bandits, only
guarantees a 1/2-approximation for general matroids. In this paper we develop
the novel technique of correlated (interleaved) scheduling, which allows us to
obtain a polynomial-time (1 1/e)-approximation algorithm (asymptotically and in
expectation) for any matroid. Along the way, we discover an interesting connection
to a variant of Submodular Welfare Maximization, for which we provide (asymptotically) matching upper and lower approximability bounds. In the case where the
mean arm rewards are unknown, our technique naturally decouples the scheduling
from the learning problem, and thus allows to control the (1 1/e)-approximate
regret of a UCB-based adaptation of our online algorithm.

1

Introduction

Despite the large number of variants of the stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB) model [46, 33] that
have been introduced [8, 34], the majority of the results comply with the common assumption that
playing an action does not alter the environment, namely, the reward distributions of the subsequent
rounds (with notable exceptions discussed below). Only recently, researchers have focused their
attention on settings where temporal dependencies of specific structure are imposed between the
player’s actions and the reward distributions [27, 10, 7, 39, 6]. In [27], Kleinberg and Immorlica
consider the setting of recharging bandits, where the expected reward of each arm is a concave and
weakly increasing function of the time passed since its last play, modeling in that way scenarios of
local performance loss. In a similar spirit, Basu et al. [7] consider the problem of blocking bandits, in
which case once an arm is played at some round, it cannot be played again (i.e., it becomes blocked)
for a fixed number of consecutive rounds. Notice that all the aforementioned examples are variations
of the stochastic MAB setting, where the decision maker plays (at most) one arm per time step.
When combinatorial constraints and time dynamics come together, the result is a much richer and
more challenging setting, precisely because their interplay creates a complex dynamical structure.
Indeed, in the standard combinatorial bandits setting [11], the optimal solution in hindsight is to
consistently play the feasible subset of arms of maximum expected reward. However, in the presence
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

