Dynamic Bottleneck for Robust Self-Supervised
Exploration

Chenjia Bai
Harbin Institute of Technology
bai_chenjia@stu.hit.edu.cn
Lei Han
Tencent Robotics X
lxhan@tencent.com
Jianye Hao
Tianjin University
jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn

Lingxiao Wang
Northwestern University
lingxiaowang2022@u.northwestern.edu
Animesh Garg
University of Toronto, Vector Institute, NVIDIA
garg@cs.toronto.edu

Peng Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology
pengliu@hit.edu.cn

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
Exploration methods based on pseudo-count of transitions or curiosity of dynamics
have achieved promising results in solving reinforcement learning with sparse
rewards. However, such methods are usually sensitive to environmental dynamicsirrelevant information, e.g., white-noise. To handle such dynamics-irrelevant
information, we propose a Dynamic Bottleneck (DB) model, which attains a
dynamics-relevant representation based on the information-bottleneck principle.
Based on the DB model, we further propose DB-bonus, which encourages the agent
to explore state-action pairs with high information gain. We establish theoretical
connections between the proposed DB-bonus, the upper confidence bound (UCB)
for linear case, and the visiting count for tabular case. We evaluate the proposed
method on Atari suits with dynamics-irrelevant noises. Our experiments show
that exploration with DB bonus outperforms several state-of-the-art exploration
methods in noisy environments.

1

Introduction

The tradeoff between exploration and exploitation has long been a major challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) [35, 50, 58]. Generally, excessive exploitation of the experience suffers from
the potential risk of being suboptimal, whereas excessive exploration of novel states hinders the
improvement of the policy. A straightforward way to tackle the exploration-exploitation dilemma is
to enhance exploration efficiency while keeping exploitation in pace. When the extrinsic rewards are
dense, reward shaping is commonly adopted for efficient exploration. However, in many real-world
applications such as autonomous driving [34], the extrinsic rewards are sparse, making efficient
exploration a challenging task in developing practical RL algorithms. The situations become even
worse when the extrinsic rewards are entirely unavailable. In such a scenario, the task of collecting
informative trajectories from exploration is known as the self-supervised exploration [11].
An effective approach to self-supervised exploration is to design a dense intrinsic reward that motivates
the agent to explore novel transitions. Previous attempts include count-based [9] and curiosity-driven
[39] explorations. The count-based exploration builds a density model to measure the pseudo-count
of state visitation and assign high intrinsic rewards to less frequently visited states. In contrast, the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

