Statistical Query Lower Bounds for
List-Decodable Linear Regression

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Ankit Pensia
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ankitp@cs.wisc.edu

Thanasis Pittas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
pittas@wisc.edu

Alistair Stewart
Web 3 Foundation
stewart.al@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of list-decodable linear regression, where an adversary can
corrupt a majority of the examples. Specifically, we are given a set T of labeled
examples (x, y) ∈ Rd × R and a parameter 0 < α < 1/2 such that an α-fraction
of the points in T are i.i.d. samples from a linear regression model with Gaussian
covariates, and the remaining (1 − α)-fraction of the points are drawn from an
arbitrary noise distribution. The goal is to output a small list of hypothesis vectors
such that at least one of them is close to the target regression vector. Our main
result is a Statistical Query (SQ) lower bound of dpoly(1/α) for this problem. Our
SQ lower bound qualitatively matches the performance of previously developed
algorithms, providing evidence that current upper bounds for this task are nearly
best possible.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

Linear regression is one of the oldest and most fundamental statistical tasks with numerous applications in the sciences [RL87, Die01, McD09]. In the standard setup, the data are labeled examples
(x(i) , y (i) ), where the examples (covariates) x(i) are i.i.d. samples from a distribution Dx on Rd and
the labels y (i) are noisy evaluations of a linear function. More specifically, each label is of the form
y (i) = β · x(i) + η (i) , where η (i) is the observation noise, for an unknown target regression vector
β ∈ Rd . The objective is to approximately recover the hidden regression vector. In this basic setting,
linear regression is well-understood. For example, under Gaussian distribution, the least-squares
estimator is known to be statistically and computationally efficient.
Unfortunately, classical efficient estimators inherently fail in the presence of even a very small
fraction of adversarially corrupted data. In several applications of modern data analysis, including
machine learning security [BNJT10, BNL12, SKL17, DKK+ 19] and exploratory data analysis, e.g.,
in biology [RPW+ 02, PLJD10, LAT+ 08], typical datasets contain arbitrary or adversarial outliers.
Hence, it is important to understand the algorithmic possibilities and fundamental limits of learning
and inference in such settings. Robust statistics focuses on designing estimators tolerant to a small
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

