Refining Language Models with Compositional
Explanations

1

Huihan Yao1 Ying Chen2 Qinyuan Ye3 Xisen Jin3 Xiang Ren3
Peking University 2 Tsinghua University 3 University of Southern California
yaohuihan@pku.edu.cn chenying17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{qinyuany,xisenjin,xiangren}@usc.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained language models have been successful on text classification tasks, but
are prone to learning spurious correlations from biased datasets, and are thus vulnerable when making inferences in a new domain. Prior work reveals such spurious
patterns via post-hoc explanation algorithms which compute the importance of
input features. Further, the model is regularized to align the importance scores
with human knowledge, so that the unintended model behaviors are eliminated.
However, such a regularization technique lacks flexibility and coverage, since only
importance scores towards a pre-defined list of features are adjusted, while more
complex human knowledge such as feature interaction and pattern generalization
can hardly be incorporated. In this work, we propose to refine a learned language
model for a target domain by collecting human-provided compositional explanations regarding observed biases. By parsing these explanations into executable
logic rules, the human-specified refinement advice from a small set of explanations
can be generalized to more training examples. We additionally introduce a regularization term allowing adjustments for both importance and interaction of features
to better rectify model behavior. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach on two text classification tasks by showing improved performance in
target domain as well as improved model fairness after refinement1 .

1

Introduction

With recent advances in model architectures and pre-training techniques, neural language models [4,
31, 25] have achieved impressive results on a broad set of natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as sentiment analysis and hate speech detection [3, 45]. However, when a source model (finetuned on some upstream dataset) is applied to a target domain with a different data distribution, the
model may suffer from poor performance due to some spurious feature patterns learned from the
upstream dataset [33, 44, 6]. Moreover, some spurious patterns may cause unintended biases in the
downstream tasks, resulting in fairness and trust concerns about the model [21].
Prior work suggests that humans can identify such spurious patterns through examining the visualized
“heat-map” (Fig. 1) produced by a post-hoc model explanation algorithm [13]. As a prominent
example, feature attribution methods [42, 14, 19] interpret model prediction on an instance by
assigning an importance (attribution) score to each input feature (or token, in the context of NLP
tasks), which helps uncover an overemphasis or understatement of a specific feature (e.g., “Sweden” is
overemphasized as indication of hate speech, as in Fig. 1). To alleviate these spurious patterns, recent
attempts study model regularization methods that update models in a differentiable and incremental
fashion, which looks to align feature attribution scores with the “intended” scores manually specified
by human annotators [38, 35, 30]. For example, attribution scores on overemphasised, unintended
tokens are decreased (to close to zero) through updating the model weights [21].
1

Code and data are available at https://github.com/INK-USC/expl-refinement.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

