Differentiable Annealed Importance Sampling
and the Perils of Gradient Noise
Guodong Zhang1,2 , Kyle Hsu3 , Jianing Li1 , Chelsea Finn3 , Roger Grosse1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Stanford University
{gdzhang, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu
{kylehsu, cbfinn}@cs.stanford.edu, jrobert.li@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Annealed importance sampling (AIS) and related algorithms are highly effective
tools for marginal likelihood estimation, but are not fully differentiable due to the
use of Metropolis-Hastings correction steps. Differentiability is a desirable property
as it would admit the possibility of optimizing marginal likelihood as an objective
using gradient-based methods. To this end, we propose Differentiable AIS (DAIS),
a variant of AIS which ensures differentiability by abandoning the MetropolisHastings corrections. As a further advantage, DAIS allows for mini-batch gradients.
We provide a detailed convergence analysis for Bayesian linear regression which
goes beyond previous analyses by explicitly accounting for the sampler not having
reached equilibrium. Using this analysis, we prove that DAIS is consistent in the
full-batch setting and provide a sublinear convergence rate. Furthermore, motivated
by the problem of learning from large-scale datasets, we study a stochastic variant
of DAIS that uses mini-batch gradients. Surprisingly, stochastic DAIS can be
arbitrarily bad due to a fundamental incompatibility between the goals of last-iterate
convergence to the posterior and elimination of the accumulated stochastic error.
This is in stark contrast with other settings such as gradient-based optimization and
Langevin dynamics, where the effect of gradient noise can be washed out by taking
smaller steps. This indicates that annealing-based marginal likelihood estimation
with stochastic gradients may require new ideas.

1

Introduction

Marginal likelihood (ML), sometimes called evidence, is a central quantity in Bayesian learning
as it measures how well a model can describe a particular dataset. It is commonly used to select
hyperparameters for Gaussian processes [Rasmussen, 2003], where either closed-form solutions or
accurate, tractable approximations are available. However, it is more often the case that computing
ML is computationally intractable, as it involves summation or integration over high-dimensional
model parameters or latent variables. In this case, one must resort to numerical methods or other
approximations [Kass and Raftery, 1995]. In the context of model comparison (e.g., evaluating generative models [Wu et al., 2016, Huang et al., 2020]), annealed importance sampling (AIS) [Neal, 2001]
is one of the most popular and effective algorithms. Notably, AIS is closely related to other generic
ML estimators that yield accurate estimation [Grosse et al., 2015], including Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) [Doucet et al., 2001] and nested sampling [Skilling et al., 2006]. Under some assumptions,
AIS is able to produce accurate estimates of marginal likelihood given enough computation time (it
converges to the true ML value quickly by adding more intermediate distributions).
AIS alternates between Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) transitions and importance sampling
updates, where the MCMC step typically involves a non-differentiable Metropolis-Hastings (MH)
correction. Unfortunately, the non-differentiability precludes gradient-based optimization of the
sampler and complicates theoretical analysis. To deal with this, we marry AIS with Hamiltonian
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

