Regularized Softmax Deep Multi-Agent Q-Learning

Ling Pan1 , Tabish Rashid2 , Bei Peng3∗, Longbo Huang1 , Shimon Whiteson2
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
pl17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
University of Oxford
tabish.rashid@cs.ox.ac.uk, shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk
3
University of Liverpool
bei.peng@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Tackling overestimation in Q-learning is an important problem that has been
extensively studied in single-agent reinforcement learning, but has received comparatively little attention in the multi-agent setting. In this work, we empirically
demonstrate that QMIX, a popular Q-learning algorithm for cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL), suffers from a more severe overestimation
in practice than previously acknowledged, and is not mitigated by existing approaches. We rectify this with a novel regularization-based update scheme that
penalizes large joint action-values that deviate from a baseline and demonstrate
its effectiveness in stabilizing learning. Furthermore, we propose to employ a
softmax operator, which we efficiently approximate in a novel way in the multiagent setting, to further reduce the potential overestimation bias. Our approach,
Regularized Softmax (RES) Deep Multi-Agent Q-Learning, is general and can be
applied to any Q-learning based MARL algorithm. We demonstrate that, when
applied to QMIX, RES avoids severe overestimation and significantly improves
performance, yielding state-of-the-art results in a variety of cooperative multi-agent
tasks, including the challenging StarCraft II micromanagement benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved significant progress [4, 20]
under the popular centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm [23, 15, 7]. In
CTDE, the agents must learn decentralized policies so that at execution time they can act based on
only local observations, but the training itself is centralized, with access to global information. A
critical challenge in this setting is how to represent and learn the joint action-value function [28].
In learning the value function, overestimation is an important challenge that stems from the max
operator [34] typically used in the bootstrapping target. Specifically, the max operator in Q-learning
[39] approximates the maximum expected value with the maximum estimated value. This can lead to
overestimation as E [maxi Xi ] ≥ maxi E [Xi ] due to noise [34, 11], where Xi is a random variable
representing the Q-value of action i given a state. This overestimation error can accumulate during
learning, lead to sub-optimal policy updates and behaviors, and hurt the performance of both valuebased [37, 2, 32, 16] and actor-critic algorithms [8], and has been widely studied in the single-agent
domain. However, overestimation can be even more severe in the multi-agent setting. For example,
suppose there are n agents, each agent has K actions, and the Q-value for each action given a state is
independently drawn from a uniform distribution U (0, 1). Then, maxi E [Xi ] is 12 while E [maxi Xi ]
n
is KKn +1 , which quickly approaches 1 (the maximum value of Xi ) as the size of the joint action space
∗

Work done while at University of Oxford.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

