G EO M OL: Torsional Geometric Generation of
Molecular 3D Conformer Ensembles
Octavian-Eugen Ganea ⇤, ‡
Connor W. Coley †

Lagnajit Pattanaik *, †

Regina Barzilay ‡

William H. Green †

Klavs F. Jensen †

Tommi S. Jaakkola ‡

Abstract
Prediction of a molecule’s 3D conformer ensemble from the molecular graph holds
a key role in areas of cheminformatics and drug discovery. Existing generative
models have several drawbacks including lack of modeling important molecular
geometry elements (e.g., torsion angles), separate optimization stages prone to error
accumulation, and the need for structure fine-tuning based on approximate classical
force-fields or computationally expensive methods. We propose G EO M OL — an
end-to-end, non-autoregressive, and SE(3)-invariant machine learning approach
to generate distributions of low-energy molecular 3D conformers. Leveraging the
power of message passing neural networks (MPNNs) to capture local and global
graph information, we predict local atomic 3D structures and torsion angles, avoiding unnecessary over-parameterization of the geometric degrees of freedom (e.g.,
one angle per non-terminal bond). Such local predictions suffice both for both the
training loss computation and for the full deterministic conformer assembly (at
test time). We devise a non-adversarial optimal transport based loss function to
promote diverse conformer generation. G EO M OL predominantly outperforms popular open-source, commercial, or state-of-the-art machine learning (ML) models,
while achieving significant speed-ups. We expect such differentiable 3D structure
generators to significantly impact molecular modeling and related applications. 4

1

Overview

Problem & importance. We tackle the problem of
molecular conformer generation (MCG), i.e., predicting the ensemble of low-energy 3D conformations
of a small molecule solely based on the molecular
graph (fig. 1). A single conformation is represented
by the list of 3D coordinates for each atom in the
respective molecule. In this work, we assume that the Figure 1: We generate a representative set
low-energy states are implicitly defined by the given of low-energy 3D conformers from the input
dataset, i.e., our training data consist of molecular molecular graph. This example molecule has
graphs and corresponding sets of energetically favor- both rigid (rings) and flexible parts. Conformable 3D conformations. Low-energy structures are ers are shown aligned and juxtaposed.
the most stable configurations and, thus, expected to be observed most often experimentally.
⇤

Equal first authorship and contribution. Correspondence to {oct,lagnajit}@mit.edu .
Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
‡
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
4
Code is available at https://github.com/PattanaikL/GeoMol.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

