Teachable Reinforcement Learning via
Advice Distillation
Olivia Watkins
UC Berkeley
oliviawatkins@berkeley.edu
Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley
trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

Jacob Andreas
MIT
jda@mit.edu

Abhishek Gupta
UC Berkeley
abhigupta@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Training automated agents to complete complex tasks in interactive environments
is challenging: reinforcement learning requires careful hand-engineering of reward
functions, imitation learning requires specialized infrastructure and access to a
human expert, and learning from intermediate forms of supervision (like binary
preferences) is time-consuming and extracts little information from each human
intervention. Can we overcome these challenges by building agents that learn
from rich, interactive feedback instead? We propose a new supervision paradigm
for interactive learning based on “teachable” decision-making systems that learn
from structured advice provided by an external teacher. We begin by formalizing
a class of human-in-the-loop decision making problems in which multiple forms
of teacher-provided advice are available to a learner. We then describe a simple
learning algorithm for these problems that first learns to interpret advice, then
learns from advice to complete tasks even in the absence of human supervision. In
puzzle-solving, navigation, and locomotion domains, we show that agents that learn
from advice can acquire new skills with significantly less human supervision than
standard reinforcement learning algorithms and often less than imitation learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a promising paradigm for building agents that can learn complex
behaviors from autonomous interaction and minimal human effort. In practice, however, significant
human effort is required to design and compute the reward functions that enable successful RL [49]:
the reward functions underlying some of RL’s most prominent success stories involve significant
domain expertise and elaborate instrumentation of the agent and environment [37, 38, 44, 28, 15].
Even with this complexity, a reward is ultimately no more than a scalar indicator of how good a
particular state is relative to others. Rewards provide limited information about how to perform tasks,
and reward-driven RL agents must perform significant exploration and experimentation within an
environment to learn effectively. A number of alternative paradigms for interactively learning policies
have emerged as alternatives, such as imitation learning [40, 20, 50], DAgger [43], and preference
learning [10, 6]. But these existing methods are either impractically low bandwidth (extracting little
information from each human intervention) [25, 30, 10] or require costly data collection [44, 23]. It
has proven challenging to develop training methods that are simultaneously expressive and efficient
enough to rapidly train agents to acquire novel skills.
Human learners, by contrast, leverage numerous, rich forms of supervision: joint attention [34],
physical corrections [5] and natural language instruction [9]. For human teachers, this kind of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

