Gone Fishing: Neural Active Learning with
Fisher Embeddings
Jordan T. Ash
Microsoft Research NYC
ash.jordan@microsoft.com

Surbhi Goel
Microsoft Research NYC
goel.surbhi@microsoft.com

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research NYC
akshaykr@microsoft.com

Sham Kakade
Microsoft Research NYC
University of Washington
sham.kakade@microsoft.com

Abstract

There is an increasing need for effective active learning algorithms that are compatible with deep neural networks. This paper motivates and revisits a classic,
Fisher-based active selection objective, and proposes BAIT, a practical, tractable,
and high-performing algorithm that makes it viable for use with neural models.
BAIT draws inspiration from the theoretical analysis of maximum likelihood estimators (MLE) for parametric models. It selects batches of samples by optimizing a
bound on the MLE error in terms of the Fisher information, which we show can be
implemented efficiently at scale by exploiting linear-algebraic structure especially
amenable to execution on modern hardware. Our experiments demonstrate that
BAIT outperforms the previous state of the art on both classification and regression
problems, and is flexible enough to be used with a variety of model architectures.

1

Introduction

The active learning paradigm considers a sequential, supervised learning scenario in which unlabeled
samples are abundant but label acquisition is costly. At each round of active learning, the agent fits its
parameters using available labeled data before selecting a batch of unlabeled samples to be labeled and
integrated into its training set. A well-chosen batch of samples is one that is maximally informative
to the learner, such that it can obtain the best hypothesis possible given a fixed labeling budget.
Active learning is well established as an area of machine learning research due to the ubiquity of important real world problems that fit the sample-abundant, label-expensive setting; commonly cited applications range from medical diagnostics [1, 2] to image labeling [3]. Mitigating large sample complexity
requirements is particularly relevant for deep neural networks, which have in recent years achieved
impressive success on a wide array of tasks but often require considerable amounts of labeled data.
Shifting the focus of active learning to deep neural networks highlights several important problems.
For one, most foundational active learning work assumes a convex setting, which is clearly violated
by massive nonlinear neural networks. Many of these approaches are computationally expensive, and
it is not clear how to adapt them for real-world use [4]. Further, because neural network training is
generally expensive, practical active learning algorithms must be able to work in the batch regime,
querying B samples at each round of active learning instead of a single point at a time [5].
Despite a long history of active learning research, these constraints draw attention to a need for
practical, principled batch active learning algorithms for neural networks. Current state-of-the-art
methods, like Batch Active Learning by Diverse Gradient Embeddings (BADGE), perform robustly in
experiments, but explanations for its behavior are fairly limited [6]. This drawback makes it unclear
how to scale some active learning algorithms into regimes that deviate somewhat from the setting for
which they were designed—BADGE, for example, cannot be run on regression problems, and as we
show in this paper, performs poorly when used in conjunction with a convex model.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

