Provably efficient, succinct, and precise explanations

Guy Blanc∗
Stanford University
gblanc@stanford.edu

Jane Lange∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jlange@mit.edu

Li-Yang Tan∗
Stanford University
liyang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of explaining the predictions of an arbitrary blackbox
model f : given query access to f and an instance x, output a small set of x’s features
that in conjunction essentially determines f (x). We design an efficient algorithm
with provable guarantees on the succinctness and precision of the explanations
that it returns. Prior algorithms were either efficient but lacked such guarantees, or
achieved such guarantees but were inefficient.
We obtain our algorithm via a connection to the problem of implicitly learning decision trees. The implicit nature of this learning task allows for efficient algorithms
even when the complexity of f necessitates an intractably large surrogate decision
tree. We solve the implicit learning problem by bringing together techniques from
learning theory, local computation algorithms, and complexity theory.
Our approach of “explaining by implicit learning” shares elements of two previously
disparate methods for post-hoc explanations, global and local explanations, and we
make the case that it enjoys advantages of both.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning systems have access to unprecedented amounts of computational resources
and data, enabling them to rapidly train sophisticated models. These models achieve remarkable
performance on a wide range of tasks, but their success appears to come at a price: the complexity of
these models, responsible for their expressivity and accuracy, makes their inner workings inscrutable
to human beings, rendering them powerful but opaque blackboxes. As these blackboxes become
central in mission-critical systems and their predictions increasingly relied upon in high-stakes
decisions, there is a growing urgency to address their lack of interpretability [DVK17, Lip18].
There has therefore been a surge of interest in the problem of explaining the predictions of blackbox models: why did a model f assign an instance x the label f (x)? While there are numerous
possibilities for what qualifies as an explanation (see e.g. [SK10, BSH+ 10, SVZ14, RSG16, KL17,
LL17, STY17]), in this work we consider an explanation to be a set of x’s features that in conjunction
essentially determines f (x) [RSG18]. Following terminology from complexity theory, we call such
an explanation a certificate.
We seek succinct and precise certificates. Intuitively, this means that we would like the set of features
to be as small as possible, and for it to nonetheless be a sufficient explanation for f (x) with high
probability; more formally, we have the following definition:
∗

Alphabetical order.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

