Learning Treatment Effects in Panels with
General Intervention Patterns
Andrew A. Li
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aali1@cmu.edu

Vivek F. Farias
Sloan School of Management
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
vivekf@mit.edu

Tianyi Peng
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
tianyi@mit.edu

Abstract
The problem of causal inference with panel data is a central econometric question.
The following is a fundamental version of this problem: Let M ∗ be a low rank
matrix and E be a zero-mean noise matrix. For a ‘treatment’ matrix Z with entries
∗
in {0, 1} we observe the matrix O with entries Oij := Mij
+ Eij + Tij Zij where
Tij are unknown, heterogenous treatment
effects.
The
problem
requires we estimate
P
P
the average treatment effect τ ∗ := ij Tij Zij / ij Zij . The synthetic control
paradigm provides an approach to estimating τ ∗ when Z places support on a single
row. This paper extends that framework to allow rate-optimal recovery of τ ∗ for
general Z, thus broadly expanding its applicability. Our guarantees are the first
of their type in this general setting. Computational experiments on synthetic and
real-world data show a substantial advantage over competing estimators.

1

Introduction

Consider that we are given a sequence of T observations on each of n distinct ‘units’. In an
econometric context, a unit might correspond to a geographic region with the associated sequence
of observations corresponding to some economic time series of interest. In e-commerce, a unit may
correspond to a customer, with the associated sequence of observations corresponding to site-visits
for that customer over time. For each unit, some subset of its observations are potentially impacted
by an intervention. This may correspond to a new economic policy in the econometric example, or
the application of a new type of promotion in the e-commerce context. The question at hand is to
estimate the ‘average treatment effect’ of this intervention. This is a core question in econometrics.
The problem above can be formalized as follows: Let M ∗ ∈ Rn×T be a fixed, unknown matrix
and E be a zero-mean random matrix; we refer to M ∗ + E as the ‘counterfactual’ matrix with
each row corresponding to a distinct ‘unit’. A known ‘treatment’ matrix Z with entries in {0, 1}
encodes observations impacted by an intervention. Specifically, we observe a matrix O with entries
∗
Oij = Mij
+ Eij + Tij Zij where the Tij areP
unknown, heterogenous
treatment effects.1 Our goal is
P
∗
to recover the average treatment effect τ = ij Tij Zij / ij Zij .
1

Observable covariates on each unit may also be available; we suppress this aspect here for clarity.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

