CAPE: Encoding Relative Positions with
Continuous Augmented Positional Embeddings
Tatiana Likhomanenko⇤
Facebook AI Research

tata.antares@gmail.com

Ronan Collobert
Facebook AI Research
locronan@fb.com

Qiantong Xu
Facebook AI Research
qiantong@fb.com

Gabriel Synnaeve
Facebook AI Research
gab@fb.com

Alex Rogozhnikov
Herophilus, Inc.

alex.rogozhnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
Without positional information, attention-based Transformer neural networks are
permutation-invariant. Absolute or relative positional embeddings are the most
popular ways to feed Transformer models with positional information. Absolute
positional embeddings are simple to implement, but suffer from generalization
issues when evaluating on sequences longer than seen at training time. Relative positions are more robust to input length change, but are more complex to implement
and yield inferior model throughput due to extra computational and memory costs.
In this paper, we propose an augmentation-based approach (CAPE) for absolute
positional embeddings, which keeps the advantages of both absolute (simplicity
and speed) and relative positional embeddings (better generalization). In addition,
our empirical evaluation on state-of-the-art models in machine translation, image and speech recognition demonstrates that CAPE leads to better generalization
performance as well as increased stability with respect to training hyper-parameters.

1

Introduction

Transformers have been shown to be highly effective on problems involving sequential modeling,
such as machine translation (MT) [48] and natural language processing (NLP) [14, 41, 6]. Following
its success on these tasks, the Transformer architecture raised immediate interest in other domains:
automatic speech recognition (ASR) [15, 23], music generation [26], object detection [7], and finally
image recognition [16, 47] and video understanding [5].
Two major components of the Transformer are the attention mechanism [2, 48] and the positional
encoding [48, 44, 26, 11]. Without the latter, vanilla attention Transformers are invariant with respect
to input tokens permutations (making “cat eats fish” and “fish eats cat” identical to the model). In the
original Transformer publication, sinusoidal positional encoding was introduced [48]. Token positions
were encoded in an absolute manner, which was sufficient to achieve state-of-the-art performance
in numerous tasks. However, performance issues were later observed when dealing with sequences
of length not seen at training time [26, 11, 59, 33, 42, 18]. For most applications relative positions
between tokens are more relevant than absolute ones. A number of approaches were thus proposed to
encode relative positions in an explicit form [44, 11, 26, 42, 27], leading to improvements in modeling
long sequences. However, all these approaches focus on modifying the attention mechanism and
suffer from additional computational and memory costs [57]. Relative positional encoding is also
⇤

Currently at Apple.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

