Cross-view Geo-localization with Layer-to-Layer
Transformer
Hongji Yang∗
Xiufan Lu∗
Yingying Zhu†
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Shenzhen University
{yanghongji2020, luxiufan2019}@email.szu.edu.cn zhuyy@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of cross-view geo-localization, which estimates the geospatial location of a street view image by matching it with a database
of geo-tagged aerial images. The cross-view matching task is extremely challenging due to drastic appearance and geometry differences across views. Unlike
existing methods that predominantly fall back on CNN, here we devise a novel
layer-to-layer Transformer (L2LTR) that utilizes the properties of self-attention
in Transformer to model global dependencies, thus significantly decreasing visual
ambiguities in cross-view geo-localization. We also exploit the positional encoding
of the Transformer to help the L2LTR understand and correspond geometric configurations between ground and aerial images. Compared to state-of-the-art methods
that impose strong assumptions on geometry knowledge, the L2LTR flexibly learns
the positional embeddings through the training objective. It hence becomes more
practical in many real-world scenarios. Although Transformer is well suited to
our task, its vanilla self-attention mechanism independently interacts within image
patches in each layer, which overlooks correlations between layers. Instead, this
paper proposes a simple yet effective self-cross attention mechanism to improve
the quality of learned representations. Self-cross attention models global dependencies between adjacent layers and creates short paths for effective information
flow. As a result, the proposed self-cross attention leads to more stable training,
improves the generalization ability, and prevents the learned intermediate features
from being overly similar. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our L2LTR
performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods on standard, fine-grained, and
cross-dataset cross-view geo-localization tasks. The code is available online.3

1

Introduction

Estimating the geospatial location of a given image is of paramount importance for robot navigation [11], 3D reconstruction [12], and autonomous driving [5]. Recently, cross-view geo-localization,
which aims to match query ground images with geo-tagged database aerial/satellite images, has
emerged as a promising proposal to address this problem. Despite its appealing application prospect,
the cross-view matching task is extremely challenging due to drastic viewpoint changes between
ground and aerial images. Thus, it is critical to understand and correspond both image content
(appearance and semantics) and spatial layout across views.
Towards the above goal, several recent works incorporate convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
with NetVlad layers [8], capsule networks [20] or attention mechanisms [2, 16] to learn visually
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
3
https://github.com/yanghongji2007/cross_view_localization_L2LTR

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

