Make Sure You’re Unsure: A Framework for
Verifying Probabilistic Specifications

Leonard Berrada∗†

Sumanth Dathathri ∗†

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham∗†

Robert Stanforth † Rudy Bunel † Jonathan Uesato † Sven Gowal † M. Pawan Kumar †

Abstract
Most real world applications require dealing with stochasticity like sensor noise
or predictive uncertainty, where formal specifications of desired behavior are
inherently probabilistic. Despite the promise of formal verification in ensuring
the reliability of neural networks, progress in the direction of probabilistic
specifications has been limited. In this direction, we first introduce a general
formulation of probabilistic specifications for neural networks, which captures both
probabilistic networks (e.g., Bayesian neural networks, MC-Dropout networks)
and uncertain inputs (distributions over inputs arising from sensor noise or other
perturbations). We then propose a general technique to verify such specifications
by generalizing the notion of Lagrangian duality, replacing standard Lagrangian
multipliers with "functional multipliers" that can be arbitrary functions of the
activations at a given layer. We show that an optimal choice of functional multipliers
leads to exact verification (i.e., sound and complete verification), and for specific
forms of multipliers, we develop tractable practical verification algorithms.
We empirically validate our algorithms by applying them to Bayesian Neural
Networks (BNNs) and MC Dropout Networks, and certifying properties such as
adversarial robustness and robust detection of out-of-distribution (OOD) data. On
these tasks we are able to provide significantly stronger guarantees when compared
to prior work – for instance, for a VGG-64 MC-Dropout CNN trained on CIFAR10 in a verification-agnostic manner, we improve the certified AUC (a verified
lower bound on the true AUC) for robust OOD detection (on CIFAR-100) from
0% → 29%. Similarly, for a BNN trained on MNIST, we improve on the `∞ robust
accuracy from 60.2% → 74.6%. Further, on a novel specification – distributionally
robust OOD detection – we improve on the certified AUC from 5% → 23%.

1

Introduction

While neural networks (NNs) have shown significant promise in a wide-range of applications (for
e.g., [He et al., 2016, Yu and Deng, 2014]), a key-bottleneck towards their wide-spread adoption in
safety-critical applications is the lack of formal guarantees regarding safety and performance. In
this direction, there has been considerable progress towards developing scalable methods that can
provide formal guarantees regarding the conformance of NNs with desired properties [Katz et al.,
2017, Dvijotham et al., 2018b, Raghunathan et al., 2018]. However, much of this progress has been in
the setting where the specifications and neural networks do not exhibit any probabilistic behaviour, or
is mostly specialized for specific probabilistic specifications [Weng et al., 2019, Wicker et al., 2020].
∗
Equal contribution. Authors listed in alphabetical order. Correspondance to lberrada@deepmind.com,
sdathath@deepmind.com, dvij@cs.washington.edu.
†
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

