Probing Inter-modality: Visual Parsing with
Self-Attention for Vision-Language Pre-training
Hongwei Xue1∗, Yupan Huang2∗, Bei Liu3 , Houwen Peng3 , Jianlong Fu3 , Houqiang Li1 , Jiebo Luo4
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
2
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China,
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China,
4
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY
1
gh051120@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 2 huangyp28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
3
{bei.liu, houwen.peng, jianf}@microsoft.com,
1
lihq@ustc.edu.cn, 4 jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) aims to learn multi-modal representations
from image-text pairs and serves for downstream vision-language tasks in a finetuning fashion. The dominant VLP models adopt a CNN-Transformer architecture,
which embeds images with a CNN, and then aligns images and texts with a
Transformer. Visual relationship between visual contents plays an important role
in image understanding and is crucial for inter-modal alignment learning in VLP.
However, CNNs have limitations in visual relation learning due to local receptive
field’s weakness in modeling long-range dependencies. Thus the two objectives of
learning visual relation and inter-modal alignment are encapsulated in the same
Transformer network. Such design might restrict the inter-modal alignment learning
in the Transformer by neglecting the specialized characteristic of each objective. To
tackle this challenge, we propose a fully Transformer visual embedding for VLP to
better learn visual relation and further promote inter-modal alignment. Specifically,
we propose a metric named Inter-Modality Flow (IMF) to measure the interaction
between vision and language (i.e., inter-modality). We also design a novel masking
optimization mechanism named Masked Feature Regression (MFR) in Transformer
to further promote the inter-modality learning. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first study to explore the benefit of Transformer for visual feature learning in
VLP. We verify our method on a wide range of vision-language tasks, including
Image-Text Retrieval, Visual Question Answering (VQA), Visual Entailment and
Visual Reasoning. The result shows that our approach not only outperforms the
state-of-the-art VLP models, but also exhibits superiority on the IMF metric.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) has shown great benefits for Visual-Language (VL) tasks such
as Visual Question Answering (VQA), Visual Entailment, etc., in many recent works [9, 21, 31,
32, 36, 40, 42, 51]. VLP is designed to learn vision and language (VL) joint representation and
alignment with a huge number of image-text pairs. It provides a powerful initialization of multimodal representation for downstream VL tasks in a fine-tuning way. In this paper, we explore how to
improve the multi-modal representation which is the key challenge in VLP from the perspective of
intra-modal and inter-modal learning.
∗

This work was performed when Hongwei Xue and Yupan Huang were visiting Microsoft Research as
research interns.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

