M-FAC: Efficient Matrix-Free Approximations of
Second-Order Information
Elias Frantar
IST Austria
elias.frantar@ist.ac.at

Eldar Kurtic
IST Austria
eldar.kurtic@ist.ac.at

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Efficiently approximating local curvature information of the loss function is a
key tool for optimization and compression of deep neural networks. Yet, most
existing methods to approximate second-order information have high computational
or storage costs, which limits their practicality. In this work, we investigate
matrix-free, linear-time approaches for estimating Inverse-Hessian Vector Products
(IHVPs) for the case when the Hessian can be approximated as a sum of rank-one
matrices, as in the classic approximation of the Hessian by the empirical Fisher
matrix. We propose two new algorithms: the first is tailored towards network
compression and can compute the IHVP for dimension d, if the Hessian is given
as a sum of m rank-one matrices, using O(dm2 ) precomputation, O(dm) cost for
computing the IHVP, and query cost O(m) for any single element of the inverse
Hessian. The second algorithm targets an optimization setting, where we wish to
compute the product between the inverse Hessian, estimated over a sliding window
of optimization steps, and a given gradient direction, as required for preconditioned
SGD. We give an algorithm with cost O(dm + m2 ) for computing the IHVP and
O(dm + m3 ) for adding or removing any gradient from the sliding window. These
two algorithms yield state-of-the-art results for network pruning and optimization
with lower computational overhead relative to existing second-order methods.
Implementations are available at [9] and [17].

1

Introduction

Given the recent success and increasing impact of deep learning, there has been significant work on
improving the fundamental technical tools underpinning its progress. One such tool is the ability to
estimate the local geometry of the loss function for deep models, which often comes in the form of
estimates for second-order (Hessian) information. Such information is critical in several settings,
such as neural network optimization and pruning.
Directly using Hessian information in the context of deep learning is infeasible: for example, just
storing the Hessian matrix for the standard ResNet50 model [14] would occupy 2.5 Petabytes. These
constraints have inspired significant work on efficient numerical approximations of the Hessian for
deep neural networks, such as the line of work on the K-FAC approximation [19, 31, 5, 49], or
efficient block-wise approximations [47, 37]. One of the classic approaches, which we focus on in
this paper, is the empirical Fisher [13, 3, 4] approximation to the Hessian, written as:
N
X
b= 1
H≃F
∇`i · ∇`>
i ,
N i=1

(1)

where N is the number of samples, ∇`i denotes the gradient w.r.t. the ith sample at the given point,
and · is the outer product of individual gradients, which we view as column vectors.
The empirical Fisher approximation is fairly standard, e.g. [13, 3, 4], and has been recognized to be
useful in a variety of practical settings where exact estimation of the Hessian or of the true Fisher
information matrix is not feasible. At the same time, there is still active research in the community
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

