Learning Graph Models for
Retrosynthesis Prediction

Vignesh Ram Somnath1

Charlotte Bunne1

Andreas Krause1

Connor W. Coley2

Regina Barzilay3

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH
Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT
3
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT
1
{vsomnath, bunnec, krausea}@ethz.ch, 2 ccoley@mit.edu, 3 regina@csail.mit.edu
2

Abstract
Retrosynthesis prediction is a fundamental problem in organic synthesis, where
the task is to identify precursor molecules that can be used to synthesize a target
molecule. A key consideration in building neural models for this task is aligning
model design with strategies adopted by chemists. Building on this viewpoint,
this paper introduces a graph-based approach that capitalizes on the idea that the
graph topology of precursor molecules is largely unaltered during a chemical
reaction. The model first predicts the set of graph edits transforming the target into
incomplete molecules called synthons. Next, the model learns to expand synthons
into complete molecules by attaching relevant leaving groups. This decomposition
simplifies the architecture, making its predictions more interpretable, and also
amenable to manual correction. Our model achieves a top-1 accuracy of 53.7%,
outperforming previous template-free and semi-template-based methods.

1

Introduction

Retrosynthesis prediction, first formalized by E. J. Corey [Corey, 1991] is a fundamental problem
in organic synthesis that attempts to identify a series of chemical transformations for synthesizing
a target molecule. In the single-step formulation, the task is to identify a set of reactant molecules
given a target. Beyond simple reactions, many practical tasks involving complex organic molecules
are difficult even for expert chemists. As a result, substantial experimental exploration is needed
to cover for deficiencies of analytical approaches. This has motivated interest in computer-assisted
retrosynthesis [Corey and Wipke, 1969], with a recent surge in machine learning methods [Chen
et al., 2019, Coley et al., 2017b, Dai et al., 2019, Zheng et al., 2019, Genheden et al., 2020].
Computationally, the main challenge is how to explore the combinatorial space of reactions that can
yield the target molecule. Largely, previous methods for retrosynthesis prediction can be divided into
template-based [Coley et al., 2017b, Dai et al., 2019, Segler and Waller, 2017] and template-free
[Chen et al., 2019, Zheng et al., 2019] approaches. Template-based methods match a target molecule
against a large set of templates, which are molecular subgraph patterns that highlight changes during
a chemical reaction. Despite their interpretability, these methods fail to generalize to new reactions.
Template-free methods bypass templates by learning a direct mapping from the SMILES [Weininger,
1988] representations of the product to reactants. Despite their greater generalization potential, these
methods generate reactant SMILES character by character, increasing generation complexity.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

