Making a (Counterfactual) Difference
One Rationale at a Time
Michael Green
Laboratory for Analytic Sciences
magree22@ncsu.edu

Mitchell Plyler
Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
mlplyler@ncsu.edu

Min Chi
Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
mchi@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Rationales, snippets of extracted text that explain an inference, have emerged as a
popular framework for interpretable natural language processing (NLP). Rationale
models typically consist of two cooperating modules: a selector and a classifier
with the goal of maximizing the mutual information (MMI) between the "selected"
text and the document label. Despite their promises, MMI-based methods often
pick up on spurious text patterns and result in models with nonsensical behaviors.
In this work, we investigate whether counterfactual data augmentation (CDA),
without human assistance, can improve the performance of the selector by lowering
the mutual information between spurious signals and the document label. Our
counterfactuals are produced in an unsupervised fashion using class-dependent
generative models. From an information theoretic lens, we derive properties of
the unaugmented dataset for which our CDA approach would succeed. The effectiveness of CDA is empirically evaluated by comparing against several baselines
including an improved MMI-based rationale schema [19] on two multi-aspect
datasets. Our results show that CDA produces rationales that better capture the
signal of interest.

1

Introduction

Research in neural model interpretability has been cast as important and received significant recent
attention [21]. Within the field of natural language processing (NLP), rationales have been a popular
method for providing interpretability in the form of extracted subsets of text [10]. Rationale models
typically consist of two cooperating modules where one module, the "rationale selector", selects the
rationale from a source document, and the other module, the "classifier", acts on only the selected
rationale without seeing the rest of the document. There is interpretability through sparsity and
exclusivity.
A common approach for training these rationale models is based on the maximum mutual information
criteria (MMI) [7]. With the MMI criteria, rationale selectors seek the subset of text that carries the
most information about the target label. Often, sparsity and coherency constraints are used to keep the
rationales interpretable. Within many datasets, however, spurious patterns and co-varying aspects can
cause the rationale selector to pick up on patterns that do not capture a desired relationship between
input text and target labels. As a result, the rationalized model can have undesirable behaviour like
predicting a hotel is very clean because it is in a convenient location. Nonsensical rationales or
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

