On Episodes, Prototypical Networks,
and Few-Shot Learning

Steinar Laenen ∗
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
V.S.E.Laenen@sms.ed.ac.uk

Luca Bertinetto
FiveAI
luca.bertinetto@five.ai

Abstract
Episodic learning is a popular practice among researchers and practitioners interested in few-shot learning. It consists of organising training in a series of learning
problems (or episodes), each divided into a small training and validation subset to
mimic the circumstances encountered during evaluation. But is this always necessary? In this paper, we investigate the usefulness of episodic learning in methods
which use nonparametric approaches, such as nearest neighbours, at the level of
the episode. For these methods, we not only show how the constraints imposed by
episodic learning are not necessary, but that they in fact lead to a data-inefficient
way of exploiting training batches. We conduct a wide range of ablative experiments with Matching and Prototypical Networks, two of the most popular methods
that use nonparametric approaches at the level of the episode. Their “non-episodic”
counterparts are considerably simpler, have less hyperparameters, and improve
their performance in multiple few-shot classification datasets.

1

Introduction

The problem of few-shot learning (FSL) – classifying examples from previously unseen classes given
only a handful of training data – has considerably grown in popularity within the machine learning
community in the last few years. The reason is likely twofold. First, being able to perform well
on FSL problems is important for several applications, from learning new symbols [23] to drug
discovery [2]. Second, since the aim of researchers interested in meta-learning is to design systems
that can quickly learn novel concepts by generalising from previously encountered learning tasks, FSL
benchmarks are often adopted as a practical way to empirically validate meta-learning algorithms.
To the best of our knowledge, there is not a widely recognised definition of meta-learning. In a recent
survey, Hospedales et al. [22] informally describe it as “the process of improving a learning algorithm
over multiple learning episodes”. In practical terms, following the compelling rationale that “test
and train conditions should match” [48, 13], several seminal meta-learning papers (e.g. [48, 32, 14])
have emphasised the importance of organising training into episodes, i.e. learning problems with
a limited amount of “training” (the support set) and “test” examples (the query set) to mimic the
test-time scenario presented by FSL benchmarks.
However, several recent works (e.g. [9, 49, 11, 44]) showed that simple baselines can outperform
established FSL meta-learning methods by using embeddings pre-trained with the standard crossentropy loss, thus casting a doubt on the importance of episodes in FSL. Inspired by these results, we
aim at understanding the practical usefulness of episodic learning in popular FSL methods relying on
metric-based nonparametric classifiers such as Matching and Prototypical Networks [48, 40]. We
chose this family of methods because they do not perform any adaptation at test time. This allows us
∗

Work done while research intern at FiveAI

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

