Do Transformers Really Perform Bad
for Graph Representation?

Chengxuan Ying1∗, Tianle Cai2 , Shengjie Luo3∗,
Shuxin Zheng4†, Guolin Ke4 , Di He4†, Yanming Shen1 , Tie-Yan Liu4
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 Princeton University
3
Peking University 4 Microsoft Research Asia
yingchengsyuan@gmail.com, tianle.cai@princeton.edu, luosj@stu.pku.edu.cn
{shuz†, guoke, dihe†, tyliu}@microsoft.com, shen@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has become a dominant choice in many domains, such
as natural language processing and computer vision. Yet, it has not achieved competitive performance on popular leaderboards of graph-level prediction compared
to mainstream GNN variants. Therefore, it remains a mystery how Transformers
could perform well for graph representation learning. In this paper, we solve this
mystery by presenting Graphormer, which is built upon the standard Transformer
architecture, and could attain excellent results on a broad range of graph representation learning tasks, especially on the recent OGB Large-Scale Challenge. Our key
insight to utilizing Transformer in the graph is the necessity of effectively encoding
the structural information of a graph into the model. To this end, we propose several
simple yet effective structural encoding methods to help Graphormer better model
graph-structured data. Besides, we mathematically characterize the expressive
power of Graphormer and exhibit that with our ways of encoding the structural
information of graphs, many popular GNN variants could be covered as the special
cases of Graphormer. The code and models of Graphormer will be made publicly
available at https://github.com/Microsoft/Graphormer.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [46] is well acknowledged as the most powerful neural network in modelling
sequential data, such as natural language [11, 35, 6] and speech [17]. Model variants built upon
Transformer have also been shown great performance in computer vision [12, 36] and programming
language [19, 57, 41]. However, to the best of our knowledge, Transformer has still not been
the de-facto standard on public graph representation leaderboards [22, 14, 21]. There are many
attempts of leveraging Transformer into the graph domain, but the only effective way is replacing
some key modules (e.g., feature aggregation) in classic GNN variants by the softmax attention
[47, 7, 23, 48, 56, 43, 13]. Therefore, it is still an open question whether Transformer architecture is
suitable to model graphs and how to make it work in graph representation learning.
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer by developing Graphormer, which is directly built
upon the standard Transformer, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of graphlevel prediction tasks, including the very recent Open Graph Benchmark Large-Scale Challenge
(OGB-LSC) [21], and several popular leaderboards (e.g., OGB [22], Benchmarking-GNN [14]). The
Transformer is originally designed for sequence modeling. To utilize its power in graphs, we believe
∗
†

Interns at MSRA.
Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

