Statistical Undecidability in Linear, Non-Gaussian
Causal Models in the Presence of Latent Confounders
Konstantin Genin∗
University of Tübingen
konstantin.genin@gmail.com

Abstract
If causal relationships are linear and acyclic and noise terms are independent and
Gaussian, causal orientation is not identified from observational data — even
if faithfulness is satisfied (Spirtes et al., 2002). Shimizu et al. (2006) showed
that acyclic, linear, non-Gaussian (LiNGAM) causal models are identified from
observational data, so long as no latent confounders are present. That holds
even when faithfulness fails. Genin and Mayo-Wilson (2020) refine that result:
not only are causal relationships identified, but causal orientation is statistically
decidable. That means that for every ϵ > 0, there is a method that converges in
probability to the correct orientation and, at every sample size, outputs an incorrect
orientation with probability less than ϵ. These results naturally raise questions
about what happens in the presence of latent confounders. Hoyer et al. (2008) and
Salehkaleybar et al. (2020) show that, although the causal model is not uniquely
identified, causal orientation among observed variables is identified in the presence
of latent confounders, so long as faithfulness is satisfied. This paper refines these
results: although it is possible to converge to the right orientation in the limit,
causal orientation is no longer statistically decidable—it is not possible to converge
to the correct orientation with finite-sample bounds on the probability of orientation
errors, even if faithfulness is satisfied. However, that limiting result suggests several
adjustments to the LiNGAM model that may recover decidability.

1

Introduction

Spirtes et al. [2000] develop the elements of causal discovery from observational data in the linear
Gaussian setting. They show that when functional relationships between variables are linear and
acyclic and noise terms are independent and Gaussian, it is possible to converge to the Markov
equivalence class of the graph generating the data. Although some non-trivial causal information
can be recovered, causal orientation is in general not identified: two linear Gaussian models may
differ in causal orientation and nevertheless generate the exact same distribution over the observed
variables. Identifiability fails even when causal faithfulness is satisfied and no hidden variables are
present. For this reason, it was a significant advance when Shimizu et al. [2006] showed that, when
functional relationships between variables are linear and acylic and noise terms are independent and
non-Gaussian, all causal orientations can be uniquely identified from observational data, even without
assuming faithfulness. However, that early result depends on the absence of unobserved confounders.
Since then, the LiNGAM framework, as it came to be called, has been extended to accommodate
the presence of hidden variables [Hoyer et al., 2008, Salehkaleybar et al., 2020]. Salehkaleybar et al.
[2020] prove that if, in addition to the usual LiNGAM assumptions, we assume causal faithfulness,
then causal ancestry relationships between observed variables are identified even in the presence of
∗
Research Group Leader "Ethics and Epistemology of Machine Learning" at the Cluster of Excellence
"Machine Learning for Science", University of Tübingen.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

