Noether Networks:
Meta-Learning Useful Conserved Quantities
Ferran Alet∗1 , Dylan Doblar∗1 , Allan Zhou2 ,
Joshua Tenenbaum1 , Kenji Kawaguchi3 , Chelsea Finn2
1
MIT, 2 Stanford University, 3 National University of Singapore
{alet,ddoblar}@mit.edu

Abstract
Progress in machine learning (ML) stems from a combination of data availability,
computational resources, and an appropriate encoding of inductive biases. Useful
biases often exploit symmetries in the prediction problem, such as convolutional
networks relying on translation equivariance. Automatically discovering these
useful symmetries holds the potential to greatly improve the performance of ML
systems, but still remains a challenge. In this work, we focus on sequential
prediction problems and take inspiration from Noether’s theorem to reduce the
problem of ﬁnding inductive biases to meta-learning useful conserved quantities.
We propose Noether Networks: a new type of architecture where a meta-learned
conservation loss is optimized inside the prediction function. We show, theoretically
and experimentally, that Noether Networks improve prediction quality, providing a
general framework for discovering inductive biases in sequential problems.

1

Introduction

The clever use of inductive biases to exploit symmetries has been at the heart of many landmark
achievements in machine learning, such as translation invariance in CNN image classiﬁcation [35],
permutation invariance in Graph Neural Networks [52] for drug design [57], or roto-translational
equivariance in SE3-transformers [25] for protein structure prediction [33]. However, for data
distributions of interest, there may be exploitable symmetries that are either unknown or difﬁcult
to describe with code. Progress has been made in automatically discovering symmetries for ﬁnite
groups [74], but meta-learning and exploiting general continuous symmetries has presented a major
challenge. In part, this is because symmetries describe the effect of counterfactuals about perturbations
to the data, which are not directly observable.
In this work, we propose to exploit symmetries in sequential prediction problems indirectly. We take
inspiration from Noether’s theorem [44], which loosely states the following:
For every continuous symmetry property of a dynamical system,
there is a corresponding quantity whose value is conserved in time.
For example, consider a system of planets interacting via gravity: this system is translation invariant
in all three cardinal directions (i.e. translating the entire system in the x,y, or z axis conserves the
laws of motion). Noether’s theorem asserts there must be a conserved quantity for each of these
symmetries; in this case, linear momentum. Similarly, the system has a time-invariance (i.e. the laws
of motion are the same today as they will be tomorrow). In this case, the corresponding conserved
quantity is the total energy of the system.
∗

Equal contribution. Our code is publicly available at https://lis.csail.mit.edu/noether.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

