No Regrets for Learning the Prior in Bandits

Soumya Basu
Google

Branislav Kveton
Google Research

Manzil Zaheer
Google Research

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind / University of Alberta

Abstract
We propose AdaTS, a Thompson sampling algorithm that adapts sequentially to
bandit tasks that it interacts with. The key idea in AdaTS is to adapt to an unknown
task prior distribution by maintaining a distribution over its parameters. When
solving a bandit task, that uncertainty is marginalized out and properly accounted
for. AdaTS is a fully-Bayesian algorithm that can be implemented efficiently in
several classes of bandit problems. We derive upper bounds on its Bayes regret that
quantify the loss due to not knowing the task prior, and show that it is small. Our
theory is supported by experiments, where AdaTS outperforms prior algorithms
and works well even in challenging real-world problems.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of maximizing the total reward, or minimizing the total regret, in a sequence of
stochastic bandit instances [29, 4, 31]. We consider a Bayesian version of the problem, where the
bandit instances are drawn from some distribution. More specifically, the learning agent interacts
with m bandit instances in m tasks, with one instance per task. The interaction with each task is for n
rounds and with K arms. The reward distribution of arm i ∈ [K] in task s ∈ [m] is pi (·; θs,∗ ), where
θs,∗ is a shared parameter of all arms in task s. When arm i is pulled in task s, the agent receives
a random reward from pi (·; θs,∗ ). The parameters θ1,∗ , . . . , θm,∗ are drawn independently of each
other from a task prior P (·; µ∗ ). The task prior is parameterized by an unknown meta-parameter
µ∗ , which is drawn from a meta-prior Q. The agent does not know µ∗ or θ1,∗ , . . . , θm,∗ . However, it
knows Q and the parametric forms of all distributions, which help it to learn about µ∗ . This is a form
of meta-learning [39, 40, 7, 8], where the agent learns to act from interactions with bandit instances.
A simple approach is to ignore the hierarchical structure of the problem and solve each bandit task
independently with some bandit algorithm, such as Thompson sampling (TS) [38, 11, 2, 37]. This
may be highly suboptimal. To illustrate this, imagine that arm 1 is optimal for any θ in the support of
P (·; µ∗ ). If µ∗ was known, any reasonable algorithm would only pull arm 1 and have zero regret over
any horizon. Likewise, a clever algorithm that learns µ∗ should eventually pull arm 1 most of the
time, and thus have diminishing regret as it interacts with a growing number of tasks. Two challenges
arise when designing the clever algorithm. First, can it be computationally efficient? Second, what is
the regret due to adapting to µ∗ ?
We make the following contributions. First, we propose a Thompson sampling algorithm for our
problem, which we call AdaTS. AdaTS maintains a distribution over the meta-parameter µ∗ , which
concentrates over time and is marginalized out when interacting with individual bandit instances.
Second, we propose computationally-efficient implementations of AdaTS for multi-armed bandits
[29, 4], linear bandits [14, 1], and combinatorial semi-bandits [19, 13, 26]. These implementations
are for specific reward distributions and conjugate task priors. Third, we bound the n-round Bayes
regret of AdaTS in linear bandits and semi-bandits, and multi-armed bandits as a special case. The
Bayes regret is defined by taking an expectation over all random quantities, including µ∗ ∼ Q. Our
bounds show that not knowing µ∗ has a minimal impact on the regret as the number of tasks grows,
√
√
of only Õ( mn). This is in a sharp contrast to prior work [28], where this is Õ( mn2 ). Finally,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

