Inverse-Weighted Survival Games

Xintian Han ∗
NYU
xintian.han@nyu.edu
Thomas Wies
NYU
wies@cs.nyu.edu

Mark Goldstein ∗
NYU
goldstein@nyu.edu

Adler J. Perotte
Columbia University
adler.perotte@columbia.edu

Aahlad Puli
NYU
aahlad@nyu.edu
Rajesh Ranganath
NYU
rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep models trained through maximum likelihood have achieved state-of-the-art
results for survival analysis. Despite this training scheme, practitioners evaluate
models under other criteria, such as binary classification losses at a chosen set of
time horizons, e.g. Brier score (BS) and Bernoulli log likelihood (BLL). Models
trained with maximum likelihood may have poor BS or BLL since maximum
likelihood does not directly optimize these criteria. Directly optimizing criteria like
BS requires inverse-weighting by the censoring distribution. However, estimating
the censoring model under these metrics requires inverse-weighting by the failure
distribution. The objective for each model requires the other, but neither are known.
To resolve this dilemma, we introduce Inverse-Weighted Survival Games. In these
games, objectives for each model are built from re-weighted estimates featuring the
other model, where the latter is held fixed during training. When the loss is proper,
we show that the games always have the true failure and censoring distributions
as a stationary point. This means models in the game do not leave the correct
distributions once reached. We construct one case where this stationary point is
unique. We show that these games optimize BS on simulations and then apply these
principles on real world cancer and critically-ill patient data.

1

Introduction

Survival analysis is the modeling of time-to-event distributions and is widely used in healthcare to
predict time from diagnosis to death, risk of disease recurrence, and changes in level of care. In
survival data, events, known as failures, are often right-censored, i.e., only a lower bound on the time
is observed, for instance, when a patient leaves a study before failing. Under certain assumptions,
maximum likelihood estimators are consistent for survival modeling [Kalbfleisch and Prentice, 2002].
Recently, deep survival models have obtained state-of-the-art results [Ranganath et al., 2016, Alaa
and van der Schaar, 2017, Katzman et al., 2018, Kvamme et al., 2019, Zhong and Tibshirani, 2019].
Common among these are discrete-time models [Yu et al., 2011, Lee et al., 2018, Fotso, 2018, Lee
et al., 2019, Ren et al., 2019, Kvamme and Borgan, 2019b, Kamran and Wiens, 2021, Goldstein
et al., 2020, Sloma et al., 2021] even when data are continuous because they can borrow classification
architectures and flexibly approximate continuous densities [Miscouridou et al., 2018].
Though training is often based on maximum likelihood, criteria such as Brier score (BS) and Bernoulli
log likelihood (BLL) have been used to evaluate survival models [Haider et al., 2020]. The BS and BLL
are classification losses adapted for survival by treating the model as a binary classifier at various time
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

