SSUL: Semantic Segmentation with Unknown Label
for Exemplar-based Class-Incremental Learning

Sungmin Cha1, 2∗, Beomyoung Kim3∗, YoungJoon Yoo2,3 , and Taesup Moon1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
NAVER AI Lab, 3 Face, NAVER Clova
sungmin.cha@snu.ac.kr, {beomyoung.kim, youngjoon.yoo}@navercorp.com,
tsmoon@snu.ac.kr
1

Abstract
This paper introduces a solid state-of-the-art baseline for a class-incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) problem. While the recent CISS algorithms utilize variants
of the knowledge distillation (KD) technique to tackle the problem, they failed to
fully address the critical challenges in CISS causing the catastrophic forgetting;
the semantic drift of the background class and the multi-label prediction issue. To
better address these challenges, we propose a new method, dubbed SSUL-M (Semantic Segmentation with Unknown Label with Memory), by carefully combining
techniques tailored for semantic segmentation. Specifically, we claim three main
contributions. (1) defining unknown classes within the background class to help to
learn future classes (help plasticity), (2) freezing backbone network and past classifiers with binary cross-entropy loss and pseudo-labeling to overcome catastrophic
forgetting (help stability), and (3) utilizing tiny exemplar memory for the first
time in CISS to improve both plasticity and stability. The extensively conducted
experiments show the effectiveness of our method, achieving significantly better
performance than the recent state-of-the-art baselines on the standard benchmark
datasets. Furthermore, we justify our contributions with thorough ablation analyses
and discuss different natures of the CISS problem compared to the traditional
class-incremental learning targeting classification. The official code is available at
https://github.com/clovaai/SSUL.

1

Introduction

Class incremental learning (CIL) problem, in which a learner should incrementally learn newly
arriving class objects while not “catastrophically” forgetting the past learned classes, is one of the
fundamental, yet still open, problems in machine learning. After the seminal work, [27], most of
the recent neural network-based CIL research has focused on the classification setting, and various
approaches have been proposed to address the main challenge of the problem, the so-called plasticitystability dilemma, e.g., [20, 30, 12, 1, 2, 8], to name a few.
The CIL framework has been extended to more complex semantic segmentation tasks [24, 3, 7],
motivated by the practical need in various applications such as autonomous driving. One of the key
additional difficulties of the class-incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) problem lies in the
semantic drift of the background class present in the incrementally arriving training data. Namely, the
label ‘background (BG)” is assigned to all the pixels not included in the current class object region.
The “BG” pixels belong to three categories: future object classes that the model does not yet observes,
past object classes that are already learned, and the true background.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

