Minimizing Polarization and Disagreement in Social
Networks via Link Recommendation
Liwang Zhu, Qi Bao, and Zhongzhi Zhang∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{19210240147, 20110240002, zhangzz}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Individual’s opinions are fundamentally shaped and evolved by their interactions
with other people, and social phenomena such as disagreement and polarization
are now tightly woven into daily life. The quantification and optimization of
these concepts have been the subject of much recent research behind a wealth of
high-impact data mining applications. In particular, researchers have addressed the
question of how such concepts can be optimized by influencing the opinion of a
small number of individuals or by designing the network from scratch.
Here, rather than a “design-from-scratch” approach or altering the initial opinion,
we study the optimization problem of recommending k new links to minimize
the sum of polarization and disagreement in a social network with n nodes and
m edges. We show that our objective function of this combinatorial optimization
problem is not submodular, although it is monotone. We propose a simple greedy
algorithm with a constant-factor approximation that solves the problem in cubic
running time, and we provide theoretical analysis of the approximation guarantee
for the algorithm. To overcome the computation challenge for large networks,
we also provide a fast algorithm with computation complexity e
O(mk−2 ) for any
e notation suppresses the poly(log n) factors. Extensive
 > 0, where the O(·)
experiments on real datasets demonstrate both the efficiency and effectiveness of
our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Social networks and social media play a prominent part in the propagation, evolution, and formulation of opinions [32], leading to fundamental changes in how humans share and shape opinions.
Particularly, in recent years, the tremendous prevalence of online social media platforms produces
various social phenomena, such as polarization and disagreement. The identification [48] and optimization [50] of these quantities are fundamental tasks behind a myriad of high-impact data mining
applications, and thus have received considerable attention.
We focus on the phenomena of disagreement and polarization. Disagreement [39, 16] characterizes
how much acquaintances disagree in their opinions, globally across the network. Polarization [39,
36, 16] measures how equilibrium expressed opinions deviate from their average. However, existing
recommender systems, trained on real-data, with the goal to increase user engagement may stop the
user from being exposed to diverse opinions and naturally end up creating “echo-chambers”. In other
words, the recommended links minimizing disagreement may lead to greater polarization [39] since
connections between users with similar mindsets are preferred for such systems. Yet, exposure to
diverse content is necessary to obtain a complete picture about a topic [27]. Thus, there is a need
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

