Never Go Full Batch
(in Stochastic Convex Optimization)

Idan Amir
Department of EE
Tel Aviv University
idanamir@mail.tau.ac.il

Yair Carmon
Blavatnik School of CS
Tel Aviv University
ycarmon@tauex.tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of CS, Tel Aviv U
and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Roi Livni
Department of EE
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study the generalization performance of full-batch optimization algorithms
for stochastic convex optimization: these are first-order methods that only access
the exact gradient of the empirical risk (rather than gradients with respect to
individual data points), that include a wide range of algorithms such as gradient
descent, mirror descent, and their regularized and/or accelerated variants. We
provide a new separation result showing that, while algorithms such as stochastic
gradient descent can generalize and optimize the population risk to within ε after
𝑂 (1/ε2 ) iterations, full-batch methods either need at least Ω (1/ε4 ) iterations or
exhibit a dimension-dependent sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) is a fundamental problem that received considerable attention
from the machine learning community in recent years [28, 15, 4, 11, 2]. In this problem, we assume
a learner that is provided with a finite sample of convex functions drawn i.i.d. from an unknown
distribution. The learner’s goal is to minimize the expected function. Owing to its simplicity, it
serves as an almost ideal theoretical model for studying generalization properties of optimization
algorithms ubiquitous in practice, particularly first-order methods which utilize only first derivatives
of the loss rather than higher-order ones.
One prominent approach for SCO—and learning more broadly—is to consider the empirical risk
(the average objective over the sample) and apply a first-order optimization algorithm to minimize it.
The problem of learning is then decoupled into controlling the optimization error over the empirical
risk (training error) and bounding the difference between the empirical error and the expected error
(generalization error).
In convex optimization, the convergence of different first-order methods has been researched extensively for many years (e.g., [26, 25, 5]), and we currently have a very good understanding of this
setting in terms of upper as well lower bounds on worst-case complexity. However, in SCO where
the generalization error must also be taken into account, our understanding is still lacking. In fact,
this is one of the few theoretical learning models where the optimization method affects not only the
optimization error but also the generalization error (distinctively from models such as PAC learning
and generalized linear models). In particular, it has been shown [28, 15] that some minima of the
empirical risk may obtain large generalization error, while other minima have a vanishingly small
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

