Using Random Effects to Account for
High-Cardinality Categorical Features and Repeated
Measures in Deep Neural Networks

Giora Simchoni
Department of Statistics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel, 69978
gsimchoni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Saharon Rosset
Department of Statistics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel, 69978
saharon@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
High-cardinality categorical features are a major challenge for machine learning
methods in general and for deep learning in particular. Existing solutions such as
one-hot encoding and entity embeddings can be hard to scale when the cardinality
is very high, require much space, are hard to interpret or may overfit the data. A
special scenario of interest is that of repeated measures, where the categorical
feature is the identity of the individual or object, and each object is measured
several times, possibly under different conditions (values of the other features).
We propose accounting for high-cardinality categorical features as random effects
variables in a regression setting, and consequently adopt the corresponding negative
log likelihood loss from the linear mixed models (LMM) statistical literature and integrate it in a deep learning framework. We test our model which we call LMMNN
on simulated as well as real datasets with a single categorical feature with high
cardinality, using various baseline neural networks architectures such as convolutional networks and LSTM, and various applications in e-commerce, healthcare and
computer vision. Our results show that treating high-cardinality categorical features
as random effects leads to a significant improvement in prediction performance
compared to state of the art alternatives. Potential extensions such as accounting
for multiple categorical features and classification settings are discussed. Our code
and simulations are available at https://github.com/gsimchoni/lmmnn

1

Introduction

In recent years deep neural networks (DNNs) have served as the method of choice for learning
complex non-linear relations between features of large datasets and for hard prediction tasks. Yet,
despite their advanced machinery such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and convolutional layers,
DNNs (as other machine learning tools) do not readily lend themselves to handling categorical
features of high cardinality. Such features are often seen in modeling tasks, a good recent example
would be Lin et al. [16] who used electronic medical records (EMR) of hospital patients to predict
hospital readmission, and had to deal with the patient’s diagnosis as a categorical feature with
thousands of levels. In a recent review Hancock and Khoshgoftaar [13] surveyed the approaches
taken by DNN practitioners for turning the levels of categorical features into numeric form, of which
the most used approaches are one-hot encoding (OHE) and entity embeddings. OHE and embeddings
also appear as the go-to solution in one of the most cited handbooks of machine learning by Géron
[9]. See Section 4 for a more detailed discussion of these approaches.
A different approach for handling high-cardinality categorical features is that of linear mixed models
(LMM), see e.g. McCulloch et al. [18]. In the LMM framework statisticians differentiate between
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

