Vector-valued Gaussian Processes on Riemannian
Manifolds via Gauge Independant Projected Kernels

Michael Hutchinson∗1
So Takao∗5

4

Alexander Terenin∗2, 3
Yee Whye Teh1

Viacheslav Borovitskiy∗4
Marc Peter Deisenroth5

1
University of Oxford 2 University of Cambridge 3 Imperial College London
St. Petersburg State University 5 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University College London

Abstract
Gaussian processes are machine learning models capable of learning unknown
functions in a way that represents uncertainty, thereby facilitating construction
of optimal decision-making systems. Motivated by a desire to deploy Gaussian
processes in novel areas of science, a rapidly-growing line of research has focused
on constructively extending these models to handle non-Euclidean domains, including Riemannian manifolds, such as spheres and tori. We propose techniques
that generalize this class to model vector fields on Riemannian manifolds, which
are important in a number of application areas in the physical sciences. To do so,
we present a general recipe for constructing gauge independent kernels, which
induce Gaussian vector fields, i.e. vector-valued Gaussian processes coherent with
geometry, from scalar-valued Riemannian kernels. We extend standard Gaussian
process training methods, such as variational inference, to this setting. This enables
vector-valued Gaussian processes on Riemannian manifolds to be trained using
standard methods and makes them accessible to machine learning practitioners.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes are an effective model class for learning unknown functions. They are particularly
attractive for use within data-efficient decision systems, including Bayesian optimization [3, 32, 39],
model-based reinforcement learning [34, 7], and active learning [21]. In these settings, Gaussian
processes can represent and propagate uncertainty, as well as encode inductive biases as prior
information in order to drive data efficiency. A key aspect of prior information is the geometry of
the domain on which the Gaussian process is defined, which often encodes key properties, such as
symmetry. Following the growing deployment of Gaussian processes, a number of recent works have
focused on how to define Gaussian processes on non-Euclidean domains in ways that reflect their
geometric structure [2, 1].
In many applications, such as climate science, quantities of interest are vector-valued. For example,
global wind velocity modeling must take into account both speed and direction, and is represented by a
vector field. On geometric domains, the mathematical properties of vector fields can differ noticeably
from their Euclidean counterparts: for instance, one can prove that every smooth vector field on a
sphere must vanish in at least one point [26]. Behavior such as this simultaneously highlights the
need to represent geometry correctly when modeling vector-valued data, and presents a number of
non-trivial technical challenges in constructing models that are mathematically sound.
∗

Equal contribution. Code: https://github.com/MJHutchinson/ExtrinsicGaugeIndependantVectorGPs.
For a general implementation, see https://github.com/GPflow/GeometricKernels/.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

