A unified framework for bandit multiple testing

Ziyu Xu
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
xzy@cmu.edu

Ruodu Wang
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
University of Waterloo, Canada
wang@uwaterloo.ca

Aaditya Ramdas
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
aramdas@cmu.edu

Abstract
In bandit multiple hypothesis testing, each arm corresponds to a different null
hypothesis that we wish to test, and the goal is to design adaptive algorithms
that correctly identify large set of interesting arms (true discoveries), while
only mistakenly identifying a few uninteresting ones (false discoveries). One
common metric in non-bandit multiple testing is the false discovery rate (FDR). We
propose a unified, modular framework for bandit FDR control that emphasizes the
decoupling of exploration and summarization of evidence. We utilize the powerful
martingale-based concept of “e-processes” to ensure FDR control for arbitrary
composite nulls, exploration rules and stopping times in generic problem settings.
In particular, valid FDR control holds even if the reward distributions of the arms
could be dependent, multiple arms may be queried simultaneously, and multiple
(cooperating or competing) agents may be querying arms, covering combinatorial
semi-bandit type settings as well. Prior work has considered in great detail the
setting where each arm’s reward distribution is independent and sub-Gaussian, and
a single arm is queried at each step. Our framework recovers matching sample
complexity guarantees in this special case, and performs comparably or better in
practice. For other settings, sample complexities will depend on the finer details of
the problem (composite nulls being tested, exploration algorithm, data dependence
structure, stopping rule) and we do not explore these; our contribution is to show
that the FDR guarantee is clean and entirely agnostic to these details.

1

Introduction to bandit multiple hypothesis testing

Scientific experimentation is often a sequential process. To test a single null hypothesis — with “null”
capturing the setting of no scientific interest, and the alternative being scientifically interesting — scientists typically collect an increasing amount of experimental data in order to gather sufficient evidence
such that they can potentially reject the null hypothesis (i.e. make a scientific discovery) with a high degree of statistical confidence. As long as the collected evidence remains thin, they do not reject the null
hypothesis and do not proclaim a discovery. Since executing each additional unit of data (stemming from
an experiment or trial) has an associated cost (in the form of time, money, resources), the scientist would
like to stop as soon as possible. This becomes increasingly prevalent when the scientist is testing multiple hypotheses at the same time, and investing resources into testing one means divesting it from another.
For example, consider the case of a scientist at a pharmaceutical company who wants to discover
which of several drug candidates under consideration are truly effective (i.e. testing a hypothesis of
whether each candidate has greater than baseline effect) through an adaptive sequential assignment
of drug candidates to participants. Performing follow up studies on each discovery is expensive, so
the scientist does not want to make many “false discoveries” i.e. drugs that did not have an actual
effect, but were proclaimed to have one by the scientist. To achieve these goals, one could imagine
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

