Decoupling the Depth and Scope of
Graph Neural Networks

Hanqing Zeng
USC
zengh@usc.edu

Muhan Zhang
Peking University, BIGAI
muhan@pku.edu.cn

Andrey Malevich
Facebook AI
amalevich@fb.com

Yinglong Xia
Facebook AI
yxia@fb.com

Rajgopal Kannan
US ARL
rajgopal.kannan.civ@mail.mil

Long Jin
Facebook AI
longjin@fb.com

Ajitesh Srivastava
USC
ajiteshs@usc.edu
Viktor Prasanna
USC
prasanna@usc.edu

Ren Chen
Facebook AI
renchen@fb.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have limited scalability with respect to the graph and model sizes. On large graphs, increasing the model depth
often means exponential expansion of the scope (i.e., receptive field). Beyond just
a few layers, two fundamental challenges emerge: 1. degraded expressivity due to
oversmoothing, and 2. expensive computation due to neighborhood explosion. We
propose a design principle to decouple the depth and scope of GNNs – to generate
representation of a target entity (i.e., a node or an edge), we first extract a localized
subgraph as the bounded-size scope, and then apply a GNN of arbitrary depth on
top of the subgraph. A properly extracted subgraph consists of a small number
of critical neighbors, while excluding irrelevant ones. The GNN, no matter how
deep it is, smooths the local neighborhood into informative representation rather
than oversmoothing the global graph into “white noise”. Theoretically, decoupling
improves the GNN expressive power from the perspectives of graph signal processing (GCN), function approximation (GraphSAGE) and topological learning
(GIN). Empirically, on seven graphs (with up to 110M nodes) and six backbone
GNN architectures, our design achieves significant accuracy improvement with
orders of magnitude reduction in computation and hardware cost.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have now become the state-of-the-art models for graph mining [48,
13, 58], facilitating applications such as social recommendation [35, 52, 37], knowledge understanding
[40, 38, 59] and drug discovery [43, 32]. With the numerous architectures proposed [22, 12, 44, 49],
it still remains an open question how to effectively scale up GNNs with respect to both the model size
and graph size. There are two fundamental obstacles when we increase the number of GNN layers:
• Expressivity challenge (i.e., oversmoothing [30, 36, 39, 17]): iterative mixing of neighbor
features collapses embedding vectors of different nodes into a fixed, low-dimensional subspace.
Correspondence to: Muhan Zhang, muhan@pku.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

