Online Control of Unknown Time-Varying Dynamical
Systems

Edgar Minasyan
Princeton University, Google AI Princeton
minasyan@princeton.edu
Max Simchowitz
MIT
msimchow@mit.edu

Paula Gradu
UC Berkeley
pgradu@berkeley.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University, Google AI Princeton
ehazan@princeton.edu

Abstract
We study online control of time-varying linear systems with unknown dynamics in
the nonstochastic control model. At a high level, we demonstrate that this setting
is qualitatively harder than that of either unknown time-invariant or known timevarying dynamics, and complement our negative results with algorithmic upper
bounds in regimes where sublinear regret is possible. More specifically, we study
regret bounds with respect to common classes of policies: Disturbance Action
(SLS), Disturbance Response (Youla), and linear feedback policies. While these
three classes are essentially equivalent for LTI systems, we demonstrate that these
equivalences break down for time-varying systems.
We prove a lower bound that no algorithm can obtain sublinear regret with respect
to the first two classes unless a certain measure of system variability also scales
sublinearly in the horizon. Furthermore, we show that offline planning over the
state linear feedback policies is NP-hard, suggesting hardness of the online learning
problem.
On the positive side, we give an efficient algorithm that attains a sublinear regret
bound against the class of Disturbance Response policies up to the aforementioned
system variability term. In fact, our algorithm enjoys sublinear adaptive regret
bounds, which is a strictly stronger metric than standard regret and is more appropriate for time-varying systems. We sketch extensions to Disturbance Action
policies and partial observation, and propose an inefficient algorithm for regret
against linear state feedback policies.

1

Introduction

The control of linear time-invariant (LTI) dynamical systems is well-studied and understood. This
includes classical methods from optimal control such as LQR and LQG, as well as robust H∞
control. Recent advances study regret minimization and statistical complexity for online linear
control, in both stochastic and adversarial perturbation models. Despite this progress, rigorous
mathematical guarantees for nonlinear control remain elusive: nonlinear control is both statistically
and computationally intractable in general.
In the face of these limitations, recent research has begun to study the rich continuum of settings
which lie between LTI systems and generic nonlinear ones. The hope is to provide efficient and
robust algorithms to solve the most general control problems that are tractable, and at the same time,
to characterize precisely at which degree of nonlinearity no further progress can be made.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

