Challenges and Opportunities in High-dimensional
Variational Inference
Akash Kumar Dhaka*
Aalto University, Silo AI
akash.dhaka@aalto.fi

Alejandro Catalina*
Aalto University
alejandro.catalina@aalto.fi

Manushi Welandawe
Boston University
manushi.welandawe@bu.edu
Michael Riis Andersen
Technical University of Denmark
miri@dtu.dk

Jonathan H. Huggins
Boston University
huggins@bu.edu

Aki Vehtari
Aalto University
aki.vehtari@aalto.fi

Abstract
Current black-box variational inference (BBVI) methods require the user to make
numerous design choices—such as the selection of variational objective and approximating family—yet there is little principled guidance on how to do so. We
develop a conceptual framework and set of experimental tools to understand the
effects of these choices, which we leverage to propose best practices for maximizing posterior approximation accuracy. Our approach is based on studying
the pre-asymptotic tail behavior of the density ratios between the joint distribution and the variational approximation, then exploiting insights and tools from
the importance sampling literature. Our framework and supporting experiments
help to distinguish between the behavior of BBVI methods for approximating
low-dimensional versus moderate-to-high-dimensional posteriors. In the latter case,
we show that mass-covering variational objectives are difficult to optimize and do
not improve accuracy, but flexible variational families can improve accuracy and
the effectiveness of importance sampling—at the cost of additional optimization
challenges. Therefore, for moderate-to-high-dimensional posteriors we recommend
using the (mode-seeking) exclusive KL divergence since it is the easiest to optimize,
and improving the variational family or using model parameter transformations
to make the posterior and optimal variational approximation more similar. On
the other hand, in low-dimensional settings, we show that heavy-tailed variational
families and mass-covering divergences are effective and can increase the chances
that the approximation can be improved by importance sampling.

1

Introduction

A great deal of progress has been made in black-box variational inference (BBVI) methods for
Bayesian posterior approximation, but the interplay between the approximating family, divergence
measure, gradient estimators and stochastic optimizer is non-trivial – and even more so for highdimensional posteriors [1, 10, 29, 31]. While the main focus in the machine learning literature has
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

