IRM—when it works and when it doesn’t:
A test case of natural language inference

Yana Dranker1
He He2
yanadr@campus.technion.ac.il hhe@nyu.edu
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Yonatan Belinkov1∗
belinkov@technion.ac.il
2

New York University

Abstract
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) is a recently proposed framework for outof-distribution (o.o.d) generalization. Most of the studies on IRM so far have
focused on theoretical results, toy problems, and simple models. In this work, we
investigate the applicability of IRM to bias mitigation—a special case of o.o.d
generalization—in increasingly naturalistic settings and deep models. Using natural
language inference (NLI) as a test case, we start with a setting where both the
dataset and the bias are synthetic, continue with a natural dataset and synthetic bias,
and end with a fully realistic setting with natural datasets and bias. Our results
show that in naturalistic settings, learning complex features in place of the bias
proves to be difficult, leading to a rather small improvement over empirical risk
minimization. Moreover, we find that in addition to being sensitive to random
seeds, the performance of IRM also depends on several critical factors, notably
dataset size, bias prevalence, and bias strength, thus limiting IRM’s advantage
in practical scenarios. Our results highlight key challenges in applying IRM to
real-world scenarios, calling for a more naturalistic characterization of the problem
setup for o.o.d generalization.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models show strong performance when tested on data from the same distribution
they were trained on, matching or even surpassing humans (Zhang et al., 2017; Brinker et al., 2019).
However, this performance often stems from relying on spurious correlations rather than human-like
reasoning, causing these models to “break” in real world scenarios (Geirhos et al., 2018; McCoy
et al., 2019). A recent method called Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM; Arjovsky et al. 2020) aims
to learn causal features whose correlation with the label is invariant across different distributions, thus
leading to better out-of-distribution (o.o.d) generalization. IRM splits the training data into different
subsets, or environments, across which varying spurious correlations cause distribution shifts. The
goal is to learn a representation that yields the same optimal classifier for all environments.
Although several studies (Choe et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2020a; Kamath et al., 2021) have investigated
IRM and its variants, the empirical results so far have mainly focused on synthetic settings and simpler
models (e.g., shallow multilayer-perceptrons, bag-of-words models). This motivates us to investigate
IRM in natural settings with complex models. We take natural language inference (NLI) as a test case,
where the model needs to predict if a hypothesis sentence is entailed by the premise sentence. While
theoretically requiring deep language understanding, many NLI datasets contain biases, or spurious
correlations between superficial features and labels (Gururangan et al., 2018; Poliak et al., 2018;
Tsuchiya, 2018), such as word overlap correlating with the entailment label. Such heuristics allow
models to perform superficially well on the benchmark, but fail catastrophically when these heuristics
∗

Supported by the Viterbi Fellowship in the Center for Computer Engineering at the Technion.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

