Topology-Imbalance Learning
for Semi-Supervised Node Classification

Deli Chen1,2 , Yankai Lin1 , Guangxiang Zhao2 , Xuancheng Ren2 ,
Peng Li1 , Jie Zhou1 , Xu Sun2
1
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
2
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
{delichen, yankailin, patrickpli,withtomzhou}@tencent.com
{zhaoguangxiang,renxc,xusun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The class imbalance problem, as an important issue in learning node representations,
has drawn increasing attention from the community. Although the imbalance
considered by existing studies roots from the unequal quantity of labeled examples
in different classes (quantity imbalance), we argue that graph data expose a unique
source of imbalance from the asymmetric topological properties of the labeled
nodes, i.e., labeled nodes are not equal in terms of their structural role in the
graph (topology imbalance). In this work, we first probe the previously unknown
topology-imbalance issue, including its characteristics, causes, and threats to semisupervised node classification learning. We then provide a unified view to jointly
analyzing the quantity- and topology- imbalance issues by considering the node
influence shift phenomenon with the Label Propagation algorithm. In light of our
analysis, we devise an influence conflict detection–based metric Totoro to measure
the degree of graph topology imbalance and propose a model-agnostic method
ReNode to address the topology-imbalance issue by re-weighting the influence
of labeled nodes adaptively based on their relative positions to class boundaries.
Systematic experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of our
method in relieving topology-imbalance issue and promoting semi-supervised
node classification. The further analysis unveils varied sensitivity of different
graph neural networks (GNNs) to topology imbalance, which may serve as a new
perspective in evaluating GNN architectures.1

1

Introduction

Graph is a widely-used data structure [51], where the nodes are connected to each other through
natural or handcrafted edges. Similar to other data structures, the representation learning for node classification faces the challenge of quantity-imbalance issue, where the labeling size varies among classes
and the decision boundaries of trained classifiers are mainly decided by the majority classes [46].
There have been a series of studies [35, 11, 49] handling the Quantity-Imbalance Node Representation
Learning (short as QINL). However, different with other data structures, graph-structured data suffers
from another aspect of the imbalance problem: the imbalance caused by the asymmetric and uneven
topology of labeled nodes, where the decision boundaries are driven by the labeled nodes close to the
topological class boundaries (left of Figure 1) thus interfering with the model learning.
Present Work. For the first time, we recognize the Topology-Imbalance Node Representation
Learning (short as TINL) as a graph-specific imbalance learning topic, which mainly focus on the
1

The code is available at https://github.com/victorchen96/ReNode.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

