A2 -N ET: Learning Attribute-Aware Hash Codes for
Large-Scale Fine-Grained Image Retrieval
Xiu-Shen Wei1,2 , Yang Shen1 , Xuhao Sun1 , Han-Jia Ye2 , Jian Yang1∗
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

Abstract
Our work focuses on tackling large-scale fine-grained image retrieval as ranking
the images depicting the concept of interests (i.e., the same sub-category labels)
highest based on the fine-grained details in the query. It is desirable to alleviate
the challenges of both fine-grained nature of small inter-class variations with large
intra-class variations and explosive growth of fine-grained data for such a practical
task. In this paper, we propose an Attribute-Aware hashing Network (A2 -N ET)
for generating attribute-aware hash codes to not only make the retrieval process
efficient, but also establish explicit correspondences between hash codes and visual
attributes. Specifically, based on the captured visual representations by attention,
we develop an encoder-decoder structure network of a reconstruction task to unsupervisedly distill high-level attribute-specific vectors from the appearance-specific
visual representations without attribute annotations. A2 -N ET is also equipped with
a feature decorrelation constraint upon these attribute vectors to enhance their representation abilities. Finally, the required hash codes are generated by the attribute
vectors driven by preserving original similarities. Qualitative experiments on five
benchmark fine-grained datasets show our superiority over competing methods.
More importantly, quantitative results demonstrate the obtained hash codes can
strongly correspond to certain kinds of crucial properties of fine-grained objects.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained image retrieval in computer vision aims to retrieve images belonging to multiple subordinate categories of a super-category (aka a meta-category), e.g., different species of animals/plants [36],
different models of cars [20], different kinds of retail products [39], etc. Its key challenge therefore
lies with understanding fine-grained visual differences that sufficiently discriminate between objects
that are highly similar in overall appearance, but differ in fine-grained features. Also, fine-grained
retrieval still demands ranking all the instances so that images depicting the concept of interest (e.g.,
the same sub-category label) are ranked highest based on the fine-grained details in the query.
In particular, with the explosive growth of fine-grained data in real applications [1, 14, 26, 36, 39],
fine-grained hashing, as a promising solution for dealing with large-scale fine-grained retrieval tasks,
has proven to be able to greatly reduce the storage cost and increase the query speed [8, 18] benefiting
from the learned compact binary hash code representations. However, although previous works,
∗

Corresponding author. X.-S. Wei, Y. Shen, X. Sun and J. Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent
Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of
Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology. This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province of China under Grant (BK20210340), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.
30920041111), and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund (CAAIXSJLJJ-2020-022A). The first two authors
contributed equally to this work.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

