S AL KG: Learning From Knowledge Graph
Explanations for Commonsense Reasoning

Aaron Chan♣ , Jiashu Xu♣ , Boyuan Long♣ ,
Soumya Sanyal♣ , Tanishq Gupta♢∗, Xiang Ren♣
♣
University of Southern California, ♢ IIT Delhi
{chanaaro, boyuanlo, jiashuxu, soumyasa, xiangren}@usc.edu,
Tanishq.Gupta.mt617@maths.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Augmenting pre-trained language models with knowledge graphs (KGs) has
achieved success on various commonsense reasoning tasks. However, for a given
task instance, the KG, or certain parts of the KG, may not be useful. Although
KG-augmented models often use attention to focus on specific KG components,
the KG is still always used, and the attention mechanism is never explicitly taught
which KG components should be used. Meanwhile, saliency methods can measure
how much a KG feature (e.g., graph, node, path) influences the model to make
the correct prediction, thus explaining which KG features are useful. This paper
explores how saliency explanations can be used to improve KG-augmented models’
performance. First, we propose to create coarse (Is the KG useful?) and fine (Which
nodes/paths in the KG are useful?) saliency explanations. Second, to motivate
saliency-based supervision, we analyze oracle KG-augmented models which directly use saliency explanations as extra inputs for guiding their attention. Third,
we propose S AL KG, a framework for KG-augmented models to learn from coarse
and/or fine saliency explanations. Given saliency explanations created from a task’s
training set, S AL KG jointly trains the model to predict the explanations, then solve
the task by attending to KG features highlighted by the predicted explanations. On
three commonsense QA benchmarks (CSQA, OBQA, CODAH) and a range of
KG-augmented models, we show that S AL KG can yield considerable performance
gains — up to 2.76% absolute improvement on CSQA. 2

1

Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) systems generally need common sense to function well in the
real world [15]. However, NLP tasks do not always provide the requisite commonsense knowledge
as input. Moreover, commonsense knowledge is seldom stated in natural language, making it hard
for pre-trained language models (PLMs) [11, 35] — i.e., text encoders — to learn common sense
from corpora alone [9, 38]. In contrast to corpora, a knowledge graph (KG) is a rich, structured
source of commonsense knowledge, containing numerous facts of the form (concept1, relation,
concept2). As a result, many methods follow the KG-augmented model paradigm, which augments
a text encoder with a graph encoder that reasons over the KG (Fig. 2). KG-augmented models have
outperformed text encoders on various commonsense reasoning (CSR) tasks, like question answering
(QA) (Fig. 1) [31, 5, 36, 61], natural language inference (NLI) [7, 57], and text generation [33, 65].
Since KGs do not have perfect knowledge coverage, they may not contain useful knowledge for
all task instances (e.g., if the KG in Fig. 1 only consisted of the gray nodes). Also, even if the
KG is useful overall for a given task instance, only some parts of the KG may be useful (e.g., the
∗
2

Work done while TG interned remotely at USC.
Code and data are available at: https://github.com/INK-USC/SalKG.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

