Improving Compositionality of Neural Networks by
Decoding Representations to Inputs

Mike Wu, Noah Goodman, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94303
{wumike,ngoodman,ermon}@stanford.edu

Abstract
In traditional software programs, it is easy to trace program logic from variables
back to input, apply assertion statements to block erroneous behavior, and compose
programs together. Although deep learning programs have demonstrated strong
performance on novel applications, they sacrifice many of the functionalities of
traditional software programs. With this as motivation, we take a modest first
step towards improving deep learning programs by jointly training a generative
model to constrain neural network activations to “decode” back to inputs. We call
this design a Decodable Neural Network, or DecNN. Doing so enables a form of
compositionality in neural networks, where one can recursively compose DecNN
with itself to create an ensemble-like model with uncertainty. In our experiments,
we demonstrate applications of this uncertainty to out-of-distribution detection,
adversarial example detection, and calibration — while matching standard neural
networks in accuracy. We further explore this compositionality by combining
DecNN with pretrained models, where we show promising results that neural
networks can be regularized from using protected features.

1

Introduction

Traditional hand-written computer programs are comprised of a computational graph of typed
variables with associated semantic meaning. This structure enables practitioners to interact with
programs in powerful ways (even if they are not the author) — such as debug code by tracing variables
back to inputs, apply assertions to block errors, and compose programs together for more complex
functionality. However, traditional software has its limitations: it is difficult to hand-write programs
to classify images or extract sentiment from natural language. For these functionalities, deep learning
and neural networks [41] have become the dominant approach [23, 2, 46].
While neural networks have made impressive progress on complex tasks, they come at a sacrifice of
many of the desirable properties of traditional software. Specifically, the closest approximation to
a “variable” in a neural network is an activation. Yet it is difficult to understand a neural network’s
computation from an activation value, and there is little to associate an activation with semantic
meaning. A practitioner cannot write assertion statements to constrain valid neural network logic:
checking the values that an activation takes is usually not enough to gauge correctness nor meaning.
Moreover, given multiple neural networks, composing them together requires retraining from scratch.
In this paper, we take a modest first step towards bridging the expressivity of deep learning with the
engineering practicality of traditional software. We aim to uncover new ways for practitioners to build
and use neural networks by leveraging compositionality. Specifically, we propose to train a neural
network classifier jointly with a generative model whose role is to map the classifier’s activations
back to the input, approximating invertibility. For any input, a neural network’s computation can
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

