Knowledge-inspired 3D Scene Graph Prediction in
Point Cloud
Shuai Li ∗
Beihang University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
lishuai@buaa.edu.cn

Shoulong Zhang
Beihang University
shoulong.zhang@buaa.edu.cn

Aimin Hao
Beihang University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
ham@buaa.edu.cn

Hong Qin ∗
Stony Brook University (SUNY)
qin@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Prior knowledge integration helps identify semantic entities and their relationships
in a graphical representation, however, its meaningful abstraction and intervention
remain elusive. This paper advocates a knowledge-inspired 3D scene graph prediction method solely based on point clouds. At the mathematical modeling level,
we formulate the task as two sub-problems: knowledge learning and scene graph
prediction with learned prior knowledge. Unlike conventional methods that learn
knowledge embedding and regular patterns from encoded visual information, we
propose to suppress the misunderstandings caused by appearance similarities and
other perceptual confusion. At the network design level, we devise a graph autoencoder to automatically extract class-dependent representations and topological
patterns from the one-hot class labels and their intrinsic graphical structures, so that
the prior knowledge can avoid perceptual errors and noises. We further devise a
scene graph prediction model to predict credible relationship triplets by incorporating the related prototype knowledge with perceptual information. Comprehensive
experiments confirm that, our method can successfully learn representative knowledge embedding, and the obtained prior knowledge can effectively enhance the
accuracy of relationship predictions. Our thorough evaluations indicate the new
method can achieve the state-of-the-art performance compared with other scene
graph prediction methods.

1

Introduction and Motivation

Scene graph has been studied as a viable means towards better interpretation of scene context, which
encodes the semantic elements and their complex relationships of a scene [16, 32, 33, 11, 31, 9]. As
an enriched scene structure representation, scene graph parsing from 3D data has recently interested
researchers in 3D vision for the tasks of scene understanding [2], VR/AR scene interactions [25], and
robot navigation [7]. However, the scanned 3D data has a intrinsic nature of incompleteness [1, 24],
geometrical similarity across categories, and other visual challenges. These perception errors result
in extra difficulties in object and relationship recognition purely based on visual inputs.
Fortunately, in cognitive psychology, besides visual perception, human beings also associate objects
and concepts with certain abstract symbolic class-dependent representations and regular combinations
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

