A/B/n Testing with Control in the Presence of
Subpopulations

Yoan Russac
CNRS, Inria, ENS
Université PSL
yoan.russac@ens.fr

Christina Katsimerou
Booking.com
christina.katsimerou@booking.com

Dennis Bohle
Booking.com
dennis.bohle@booking.com

Olivier Cappé
CNRS, Inria, ENS
Université PSL
olivier.cappe@cnrs.fr

Aurélien Garivier
UMPA, CNRS
Inria, ENS Lyon
aurelien.garivier@ens-lyon.fr

Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Abstract
Motivated by A/B/n testing applications, we consider a finite set of distributions
(called arms), one of which is treated as a control. We assume that the population
is stratified into homogeneous subpopulations. At every time step, a subpopulation
is sampled and an arm is chosen: the resulting observation is an independent draw
from the arm conditioned on the subpopulation. The quality of each arm is assessed
through a weighted combination of its subpopulation means. We propose a strategy
for sequentially choosing one arm per time step so as to discover as fast as possible
which arms, if any, have higher weighted expectation than the control. This strategy
is shown to be asymptotically optimal in the following sense: if τδ is the first
time when the strategy ensures that it is able to output the correct answer with
probability at least 1 − δ, then E[τδ ] grows linearly with log(1/δ) at the exact
optimal rate. This rate is identified in the paper in three different settings: (1)
when the experimenter does not observe the subpopulation information, (2) when
the subpopulation of each sample is observed but not chosen, and (3) when the
experimenter can select the subpopulation from which each response is sampled.
We illustrate the efficiency of the proposed strategy with numerical simulations on
synthetic and real data collected from an A/B/n experiment.

1

Introduction

A/B/n testing is a website optimization procedure where multiple versions of the content (called
"arms" below) are compared, often in order to find the one with the highest conversion rate. However,
many e-commerce companies use A/B/n testing not only to deploy the best product implementation,
but primarily to draw post-experiment inferences [11]. The decision-making involves, besides
experiment results, factors such as the cost of scaling-up a solution, external data, or whether the
implementation fits in a broader theme. In this setting, each of the arms better than the default product
(which we will refer to as the "control" arm) is a contender for being deployed and the interest is not
only in the best arm.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

