Generalizable Imitation Learning from Observation
via Inferring Goal Proximity

Youngwoon Lee1∗† Andrew Szot2∗ Shao-Hua Sun1 Joseph J. Lim1‡
1
University of Southern California 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
https://clvrai.com/gpil

Abstract
Task progress is intuitive and readily available task information that can guide
an agent closer to the desired goal. Furthermore, a task progress estimator can
generalize to new situations. From this intuition, we propose a simple yet effective
imitation learning from observation method for a goal-directed task using a learned
goal proximity function as a task progress estimator for better generalization to
unseen states and goals. We obtain this goal proximity function from expert demonstrations and online agent experience, and then use the learned goal proximity
as a dense reward for policy training. We demonstrate that our proposed method
can robustly generalize compared to prior imitation learning methods on a set of
goal-directed tasks in navigation, locomotion, and robotic manipulation, even with
demonstrations that cover only a part of the states.

1

Introduction

Humans are effective at learning a task from demonstrations and applying the learned behaviors to
other situations. We achieve this by extracting the underlying structure of the task when observing
others fulfilling the task, instead of simply memorizing the demonstrator’s low-level actions [4, 18].
This high-level task structure generalizes to new situations and thus helps us to quickly learn the task
in new situations. One intuitive and readily available instance of such high-level task structure is task
progress, measuring how much of the task the agent completed. Inspired by this insight, we propose
a novel imitation learning method that utilizes task progress for better generalization to unseen states
and goals.
Typical learning from demonstration (LfD) approaches [13, 35] greedily imitate the expert policy and
thus suffer from accumulated errors causing a drift away from states seen in the demonstrations [38].
To make the imitation policy more robust to states not in demonstrations, adversarial imitation
learning methods [14, 17] encourage the agent to stay near the expert trajectories using a learned
reward that distinguishes expert and agent behaviors. However, such learned reward functions often
overfit to the expert demonstrations by learning spurious correlations between task-irrelevant features
and expert/agent labels [52], and thus suffer from generalization to slightly different initial and
goal configurations from the ones seen in the demonstrations (e.g. holdout goal regions or larger
perturbation in goal sampling).
To learn a more generalizable and informative reward from demonstrations, we propose an imitation
learning from observation (LfO) method, which learns a task progress estimator and uses the
task progress estimate as a dense reward for training a policy as illustrated in Figure 1. Unlike
discriminating expert and agent behaviors by predicting binary labels in prior adversarial imitation
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: lee504@usc.edu and aszot3@gatech.edu
This work was partially carried out during an internship at NAVER AI Lab.
‡
AI Advisor at NAVER AI Lab.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

