Mosaicking to Distill:
Knowledge Distillation from Out-of-Domain Data

Gongfan Fang1,4 , Yifan Bao1 , Jie Song1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Donglin Xie1
Chengchao Shen3 , Mingli Song1∗
1
Zhejiang University, 2 National University of Singapore, 3 Central South University
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{fgf,yifanbao,sjie,donglinxie,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn
xinchao@nus.edu.sg, scc.cs@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to craft a compact student model that imitates the
behavior of a pre-trained teacher in a target domain. Prior KD approaches, despite
their gratifying results, have largely relied on the premise that in-domain data is
available to carry out the knowledge transfer. Such an assumption, unfortunately,
in many cases violates the practical setting, since the original training data or
even the data domain is often unreachable due to privacy or copyright reasons.
In this paper, we attempt to tackle an ambitious task, termed as out-of-domain
knowledge distillation (OOD-KD), which allows us to conduct KD using only
OOD data that can be readily obtained at a very low cost. Admittedly, OODKD is by nature a highly challenging task due to the agnostic domain gap. To
this end, we introduce a handy yet surprisingly efficacious approach, dubbed
as MosaicKD. The key insight behind MosaicKD lies in that, samples from various
domains share common local patterns, even though their global semantic may vary
significantly; these shared local patterns, in turn, can be re-assembled analogous
to mosaic tiling, to approximate the in-domain data and to further alleviating the
domain discrepancy. In MosaicKD, this is achieved through a four-player min-max
game, in which a generator, a discriminator, a student network, are collectively
trained in an adversarial manner, partially under the guidance of a pre-trained
teacher. We validate MosaicKD over classification and semantic segmentation
tasks across various benchmarks, and demonstrate that it yields results much
superior to the state-of-the-art counterparts on OOD data. Our code is available at
https://github.com/zju-vipa/MosaicKD.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation (KD) has emerged as a popular paradigm for model compression and knowledge transfer, attracting attention from various research communities [18, 41, 47, 15]. The goal of KD
is to train a lightweight model, known as the student, by imitating a pre-trained but more cumbersome
model, known as the teacher, so that the student masters the expertise of the teacher. In recent years,
KD has demonstrated encouraging results over various machine learning applications, including but
not limited to computer vision [6, 29], data mining [2], and natural language processing [46, 20]
Nevertheless, the conventional setup for KD has largely relied on the premise that, data from at least
the same domain, if not the original training data, is available to train the student. This seeminglymind assumption, paradoxically, imposes a major constraint for conventional KD approaches: in
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

