Efficient Hierarchical Bayesian Inference for
Spatio-temporal Regression Models in Neuroimaging

Ali Hashemi1,2 , Yijing Gao3 , Chang Cai3,4 , Sanjay Ghosh3 ,
Klaus-Robert Müller2,5,6,7 , Srikantan S. Nagarajan3 , and Stefan Haufe1,8,9,10
1
Uncertainty, Inverse Modeling and Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany.
2
Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany.
3
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, USA.
4
National Engineering Research Center for E-Learning, Central China Normal University, China.
5
BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Berlin, Germany.
6
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, South Korea.
7
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany.
8
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Berlin, Germany.
9
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
10
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany.

Abstract
Several problems in neuroimaging and beyond require inference on the parameters
of multi-task sparse hierarchical regression models. Examples include M/EEG
inverse problems, neural encoding models for task-based fMRI analyses, and
climate science. In these domains, both the model parameters to be inferred and
the measurement noise may exhibit a complex spatio-temporal structure. Existing
work either neglects the temporal structure or leads to computationally demanding
inference schemes. Overcoming these limitations, we devise a novel flexible
hierarchical Bayesian framework within which the spatio-temporal dynamics of
model parameters and noise are modeled to have Kronecker product covariance
structure. Inference in our framework is based on majorization-minimization
optimization and has guaranteed convergence properties. Our highly efficient
algorithms exploit the intrinsic Riemannian geometry of temporal autocovariance
matrices. For stationary dynamics described by Toeplitz matrices, the theory
of circulant embeddings is employed. We prove convex bounding properties
and derive update rules of the resulting algorithms. On both synthetic and real
neural data from M/EEG, we demonstrate that our methods lead to improved
performance.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models for regression problems, where both the model parameters and
the observation noise can have complex spatio-temporal correlation structure, are prevalent in
neuroscience, neuroimaging and beyond [1]. Example domains where these models are being
applied include Gaussian process inference [2], sparse signal recovery and multi-task learning [3–6],
array signal processing [7], fMRI analysis [8], climate science [9], computer hardware monitoring
[10], and brain-computer interfaces (e.g. [11, 12]). The focus in this paper will be on brain source
imaging (BSI) [13], i.e. the reconstruction of brain source activity from non-invasive magneto- or
electroetoencephalography (M/EEG) sensors [14]. Although a number of generative models that
encompass spatio-temporal correlations have been proposed within the BSI regression problem,
inference solutions have either imposed specific simplifications and model constraints [15–17]
or have ignored temporal correlations overall [5], and therefore not fully addressed the inherent
spatio-temporal problem structure.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

