Directional Message Passing on Molecular Graphs
via Synthetic Coordinates

Johannes Gasteiger, Chandan Yeshwanth, Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{j.gasteiger,yeshwant,guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Graph neural networks that leverage coordinates via directional message passing
have recently set the state of the art on multiple molecular property prediction
tasks. However, they rely on atom position information that is often unavailable,
and obtaining it is usually prohibitively expensive or even impossible. In this
paper we propose synthetic coordinates that enable the use of advanced GNNs
without requiring the true molecular configuration. We propose two distances as
synthetic coordinates: Distance bounds that specify the rough range of molecular
configurations, and graph-based distances using a symmetric variant of personalized
PageRank. To leverage both distance and angular information we propose a method
of transforming normal graph neural networks into directional MPNNs. We show
that with this transformation we can reduce the error of a normal graph neural
network by 55 % on the ZINC benchmark. We furthermore set the state of the art
on ZINC and coordinate-free QM9 by incorporating synthetic coordinates in the
SMP and DimeNet++ models. Our implementation is available online. 1

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have set the state of the art on many tasks of molecular machine
learning, such as the prediction of quantum mechanical properties (Gilmer et al., 2017), solubility
(Wu et al., 2018), or the generation of new molecules (Jin et al., 2020). Thanks to their fast inference
time, good generalization and scalability, GNNs are thus promising to revolutionize large parts of
chemistry, from ab-initio quantum mechanical simulations and reaction kinetics to synthesis planning
and drug discovery. Atom positions are central to many of these tasks, but unavailable in most cases.
Many tasks in chemistry instead use a more coarse-grained representation: The molecular graph.
Unfortunately, this representation makes many predictive tasks substantially harder, and GNNs have
performed significantly better when they have access to the exact molecular configuration (Gilmer
et al., 2017). Missing atom positions furthermore preclude the use of many advanced GNNs that
were developed with coordinates in mind.
In this work we aim to fill in this information with well-defined coordinates constructed purely from
the molecular graph. Regular approximation methods for generating atom positions often do not
benefit model performance, due to the fundamental ambiguity of molecular configurations. The
energy landscape of molecules can have multiple local minima, and a molecule can be in any of
multiple different minima, known as conformers. In this work, we propose to circumvent this problem
by incorporating the conformational ambiguity via empirical distance bounds. Instead of yielding a
potentially wrong configuration, these bounds only estimate the range of viable molecular geometries.
They are thus valid regardless of which state the molecule was in when generating the data.
1

https://www.daml.in.tum.de/synthetic-coordinates

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

