Overcoming the Convex Barrier for Simplex Inputs

Harkirat Singh
University of Oxford
harkirat@robots.ox.ac.uk
Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford
phst@robots.ox.ac.uk

M. Pawan Kumar
DeepMind
mpawan@deepmind.com
Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham
DeepMind
dvij@google.com

Abstract
Recent progress in neural network verification has challenged the notion of a convex
barrier, that is, an inherent weakness in the convex relaxation of the output of
a neural network. Specifically, there now exists a tight relaxation for verifying
the robustness of a neural network to `∞ input perturbations, as well as efficient
primal and dual solvers for the relaxation. Buoyed by this success, we consider
the problem of developing similar techniques for verifying robustness to input
perturbations within the probability simplex. We prove a somewhat surprising
result that, in this case, not only can one design a tight relaxation that overcomes
the convex barrier, but the size of the relaxation remains linear in the number of
neurons, thereby leading to simpler and more efficient algorithms. We establish
the scalability of our overall approach via the specification of `1 robustness for
CIFAR-10 and MNIST classification, where our approach improves the state of the
art verified accuracy by up to 14.4%. Furthermore, we establish its accuracy on
a novel and highly challenging task of verifying the robustness of a multi-modal
(text and image) classifier to arbitrary changes in its textual input.

1

Introduction

Verification refers to the challenging computational problem of determining whether a neural network
satisfies a given specification. Perhaps the most popular specification is to prove or disprove that a
neural network classifier is robust to perturbations of the input that lie within an `p ball [de Palma
et al., 2021a, Wong and Kolter, 2018, Zhang et al., 2018, Weng et al., 2018, Mirman et al., 2018,
Dvijotham et al., 2018], with impressive state of the art results recently achieved in Wang et al. [2021].
The ability to verify neural networks would open the door to better understanding their nature, and
allow us to apply deep learning in safety critical domains where errors can have a large cost. Given
the importance of the problem, it is unsurprising that it has attracted considerable atttention from the
machine learning and automated verification communities [Katz et al., 2017, Ehlers, 2017].
Early work in verification lead to the notion of a convex barrier, that is, a limitation in the tightness
of the bounds obtainable by the convex relaxation of the output of a neural network [Salman et al.,
2019]. This weakness was seen as a primary reason for the slow convergence of branch-and-bound
algorithms for verification, which rely on convex relaxations to compute the bounds, on a large
number of specifications on standard datasets. However, recent work has been able to successfully
overcome this barrier. Specifically, Anderson et al. [2019] proposed a tight relaxation that precisely
defines the convex hull of a composition of a linear function of a vector within an `∞ ball with the
ReLU non-linearity. While their relaxation has a large number of constraints (exponential in the
size of the vector), they provide an efficient algorithm for identifying the most violated constraint
at any infeasible point. This enables the use of efficient cutting plane algorithms to solve the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

