The convergence rate of regularized learning in games:
From bandits and uncertainty to optimism and beyond

Angeliki Giannou
Electrical and Computer Engineering
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
giannouangeliki@gmail.com

Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
emvlatakis@cs.columbia.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG &
Criteo AI Lab
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we examine the convergence rate of a wide range of regularized
methods for learning in games. To that end, we propose a unified algorithmic template that we call “follow the generalized leader” (FTGL), and which includes as
special cases the canonical “follow the regularized leader” algorithm, its optimistic
variants, extra-gradient schemes, and many others. The proposed framework is
also sufficiently flexible to account for several different feedback models – from
full information to bandit feedback. In this general setting, we show that FTGL
algorithms converge locally to strict Nash equilibria at a rate which does not depend
on the level of uncertainty faced by the players, but only on the geometry of the
regularizer near the equilibrium. In particular, we show that algorithms based on
entropic regularization – like the exponential weights algorithm – enjoy a linear
convergence rate, while Euclidean projection methods converge to equilibrium in a
finite number of iterations, even with bandit feedback.

1

Introduction

In the presence of uncertainty, the players of a game may not have full knowledge of its structure, “or
the ability and inclination to go through any complex reasoning process to calculate an equilibrium.
But the participants are still supposed to adapt by accumulating empirical information on the relative
advantages of the various pure strategies at their disposal”. This aphorism – originally due to Nash
[34, p. 21] – constitutes the driving principle of game-theoretic learning, and highlights one of the
field’s most central questions: Does learning with empirical observations lead to a Nash equilibrium?
And, if so, at what rate?
These questions have been at the forefront of game-theoretic research ever since the early days
of the field, and they have recently received renewed attention via their connection to multi-agent
reinforcement learning [43], generative adversarial networks [18], auctions [44], and many other
applications where online decision-making plays a major role. Still, any attempt to provide a positive
answer to these questions must wrestle with a major roadblock: the well-known impossibility result
of Hart and Mas-Colell [19] shows that there are no uncoupled dynamics that converge to Nash
equilibrium in all games, thus shattering any hope of obtaining a universal convergence result.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), .

