Spherical Motion Dynamics:
Learning Dynamics of Normalized Neural Network
using SGD and Weight Decay

Ruosi Wan
Megvii Technology
wanruosi@megvii.com

Zhanxing Zhu
University of Edinburgh
zhanxing.zhu@ed.ac.uk
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Xiangyu Zhang
Megvii Technology
zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

Jian Sun
Megvii Technology
sunjian@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we comprehensively reveal the learning dynamics of normalized
neural network using Stochastic Gradient Descent (with momentum) and Weight
Decay (WD), named as Spherical Motion Dynamics (SMD). Most related works
on this topic focus on studying “effective learning rate" using “equilibrium" assumption, i.e. assuming weight norm has converge to a fixed value. However, their
discussion on why equilibrium can be reached is either absent or unjustified. To
clarify the mechanism behind, our work directly explores the cause of equilibrium,
which should be regarded as a special state of SMD. Specifically, 1) we introduce
the assumptions that can lead to equilibrium state in SMD, and prove equilibrium
can be reached in a linear rate regime; 2) we propose “angular update" as a substitute for effective learning rate to depict the state of SMD, and derive the theoretical
value of angular update in equilibrium state; 3) we verify our assumptions and
theoretical results on various large-scale computer vision tasks including ImageNet
and MSCOCO with standard settings. Experiment results show our theoretical
findings agree well with empirical observations. Furthermore, we provide intuitive
interpretations, showing how the behavior of angular update in SMD affects the
optimization of neural network, and yields unexpected phenomenon in practice.
We believe our findings and theoretical results can deepen our understanding on
current training techniques for deep neural network.

1

Introduction

Normalization techniques (e.g. Batch Normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) or its variants) are
one of the most commonly adopted techniques for training deep neural networks (DNN). A typical
normalization can be formulated as following: consider a single unit in a neural network, the input is
X, the weight of linear layer is w (bias is included in w), then its output is
y(X; w; γ; β) = g(

Xw − µ(Xw)
γ + β),
σ(wX)

(1)

where g is a nonlinear activation function like ReLU or sigmoid, µ, σ are mean and standard deviation
computed across specific dimension of Xw (like Batch Normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015),
Layer Normalization Ba et al. (2016), Group Normalization (Wu & He, 2018), etc.). β, γ are learnable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

