Towards a Unified Information-Theoretic
Framework for Generalization
Mahdi Haghifam∗
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite†
Mila

Shay Moran
Technion,
Google Research

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the expressiveness of the “conditional mutual information” (CMI) framework of Steinke and Zakynthinou [1] and the prospect of using it
to provide a unified framework for proving generalization bounds in the realizable
setting. We first demonstrate that one can use this framework to express non-trivial
(but sub-optimal) bounds for any learning algorithm that outputs hypotheses from
a class of bounded VC dimension. We then explore two directions of strengthening
optimal bounds for VC classes?
this bound: (i) Can the CMI framework express optimal
(ii) Can the CMI framework be used to analyze algorithms whose output hypothesis
unrestricted (i.e. has an unbounded VC dimension)?
space is unrestricted
With respect to Item (i) we prove that the CMI framework yields the optimal bound
on the expected risk of Support Vector Machines (SVMs) for learning halfspaces.
This result is an application of our general result showing that stable compression
schemes [2] of size k have uniformly bounded CMI of order O(k).
We further show that an inherent limitation of proper learning of VC classes
contradicts the existence of a proper learner with constant CMI, and it implies a
negative resolution to an open problem of Steinke and Zakynthinou [3]. We further
study the CMI of empirical risk minimizers (ERMs) of class H and show that it is
possible to output all consistent classifiers (version space) with bounded CMI if
and only if H has a bounded star number [4].
With respect to Item (ii) we prove a general reduction showing that “leave-one-out”
analysis is expressible via the CMI framework. As a corollary we investigate the
CMI of the one-inclusion-graph algorithm proposed by Haussler et al. [5]. More
generally, we show that the CMI framework is universal in the sense that for every
consistent algorithm and data distribution, the expected risk vanishes as the number
of samples diverges if and only if its evaluated CMI has sublinear growth with the
number of samples.

1

Introduction

In this work, we study the expressiveness of generalization bounds in terms of information-theoretic
measures of dependence between the output of a learning algorithm and input data. Informationtheoretic techniques for proving generalization bounds are powerful; they can provide generalization
∗
†

Part of the work was done the author was an intern at Element AI, a ServiceNow company.
This work was carried out while the author was at ServiceNow. It was finalized at Google Brain.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

