Understanding the Effect of Stochasticity
in Policy Optimization

Jincheng Mei 1 3∗ Bo Dai 3 Chenjun Xiao 1 3 Csaba Szepesvári 2 1† ∗ Dale Schuurmans 3 1†
1

University of Alberta

2

DeepMind

3

Google Research, Brain Team

†

equal advising

Abstract
We study the effect of stochasticity in on-policy policy optimization, and make the
following four contributions. First, we show that the preferability of optimization
methods depends critically on whether stochastic versus exact gradients are used.
In particular, unlike the true gradient setting, geometric information cannot be
easily exploited in the stochastic case for accelerating policy optimization without
detrimental consequences or impractical assumptions. Second, to explain these
findings we introduce the concept of committal rate for stochastic policy optimization, and show that this can serve as a criterion for determining almost sure
convergence to global optimality. Third, we show that in the absence of external
oracle information, which allows an algorithm to determine the difference between
optimal and sub-optimal actions given only on-policy samples, there is an inherent
trade-off between exploiting geometry to accelerate convergence versus achieving
optimality almost surely. That is, an uninformed algorithm either converges to
a globally optimal policy with probability 1 but at a rate no better than O(1/t),
or it achieves faster than O(1/t) convergence but then must fail to converge to
the globally optimal policy with some positive probability. Finally, we use the
committal rate theory to explain why practical policy optimization methods are
sensitive to random initialization, then develop an ensemble method that can be
guaranteed to achieve near-optimal solutions with high probability.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization is a central problem in reinforcement learning (RL) that provides a foundation
for both policy-based and actor-critic RL methods. Until recently it had generally been assumed
that methods based on following the policy gradient (PG) [1] could not be guaranteed to converge
to globally optimal solutions, given that the policy value function is not concave. However, this
assumption has been contradicted by recent findings that policy gradient methods can indeed prove
to converge to global optima, at least in the tabular setting. In particular, the standard softmax PG
method with a constant learning rate has been shown to converge to a globally optimal policy at
a Θ(1/t) rate for finite MDPs [2], albeit with challenging problem and initialization dependent
constants [3, 4]. Several techniques have been developed to further improve standard PG and achieve
better rates and constants. For example, adding entropy regularization has been shown to produce
faster O(e−c·t ) convergence (c > 0) to the optimal regularized policy [2, 5, 6]. By exploiting natural
geometries based on Bregman divergences, natural PG (NPG) or mirror descent (MD) have been
shown to achieve better constants than standard PG [7, 5] and faster O(e−c·t ) rates, with [5, 6] and
without regularization [8]. Alternative policy parameterizations, such as the escort parameterization,
have been shown to improve the constants achieved by softmax and yield faster plateau escaping [3].
∗

Correspondence to: Jincheng Mei and Csaba Szepesvári {jmei2,szepesva}@ualberta.ca

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

