Cycle Self-Training for Domain Adaptation
Hong Liu
Dept of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University

Jianmin Wang
School of Software, BNRist
Tsinghua University

Mingsheng Long⇤
School of Software, BNRist
Tsinghua University

hongliu9903@gmail.com

jimwang@tsinghua.edu.cn

mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Mainstream approaches for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) learn domaininvariant representations to narrow the domain shift, which are empirically effective
but theoretically challenged by the hardness or impossibility theorems. Recently,
self-training has been gaining momentum in UDA, which exploits unlabeled target
data by training with target pseudo-labels. However, as corroborated in this work,
under distributional shift, the pseudo-labels can be unreliable in terms of their large
discrepancy from target ground truth. In this paper, we propose Cycle Self-Training
(CST), a principled self-training algorithm that explicitly enforces pseudo-labels to
generalize across domains. CST cycles between a forward step and a reverse step
until convergence. In the forward step, CST generates target pseudo-labels with
a source-trained classifier. In the reverse step, CST trains a target classifier using
target pseudo-labels, and then updates the shared representations to make the target
classifier perform well on the source data. We introduce the Tsallis entropy as a
confidence-friendly regularization to improve the quality of target pseudo-labels.
We analyze CST theoretically under realistic assumptions, and provide hard cases
where CST recovers target ground truth, while both invariant feature learning and
vanilla self-training fail. Empirical results indicate that CST significantly improves
over the state-of-the-arts on visual recognition and sentiment analysis benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Transferring knowledge from a source domain with rich supervision to an unlabeled target domain is
an important yet challenging problem. Since deep neural networks are known to be sensitive to subtle
change in underlying distributions [70], models trained on one labeled dataset often fail to generalize
to another unlabeled dataset [58, 1]. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) addresses the challenge
of distributional shift by adapting the source model to the unlabeled target data [50, 43].
The mainstream paradigm for UDA is feature adaptation, a.k.a. domain alignment. By reducing the
distance of the source and target feature distributions, these methods learn invariant representations to
facilitate knowledge transfer between domains [34, 22, 36, 54, 37, 73], with successful applications in
various areas such as computer vision [63, 27, 77] and natural language processing [75, 49]. Despite
their popularity, the impossibility theories [6] uncovered intrinsic limitations of learning invariant
representations when it comes to label shift [74, 32] and shift in the support of domains [29].
Recently, self-training (a.k.a. pseudo-labeling) [21, 78, 30, 32, 47, 68] has been gaining momentum
as a promising alternative to feature adaptation. Originally tailored to semi-supervised learning,
self-training generates pseudo-labels of unlabeled data, and jointly trains the model with source labels
and target pseudo-labels [31, 39, 30]. However, the distributional shift in UDA makes pseudo-labeling
more difficult. Directly using all pseudo-labels is risky due to accumulated error and even trivial
solution [14]. Thus previous works tailor self-training to UDA by selecting trustworthy pseudo-labels.
Using confidence threshold or reweighting, recent works try to alleviate the negative effect of domain
⇤

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

