Manipulating SGD with Data Ordering Attacks

Ilia Shumailov
University of Cambridge &
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
ilia.shumailov@cl.cam.ac.uk

Zakhar Shumaylov
University of Cambridge
zs334@cam.ac.uk

Dmitry Kazhdan
University of Cambridge
dk525@cam.ac.uk

Yiren Zhao
University of Cambridge
yiren.zhao@cl.cam.ac.uk

Nicolas Papernot
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
nicolas.papernot@utoronto.ca

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Ross Anderson
University of Cambridge &
University of Edinburgh
ross.anderson@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning is vulnerable to a wide variety of attacks. It is now well understood that by changing the underlying data distribution, an adversary can poison
the model trained with it or introduce backdoors. In this paper we present a novel
class of training-time attacks that require no changes to the underlying dataset or
model architecture, but instead only change the order in which data are supplied to
the model. In particular, we find that the attacker can either prevent the model from
learning, or poison it to learn behaviours specified by the attacker. Furthermore,
we find that even a single adversarially-ordered epoch can be enough to slow down
model learning, or even to reset all of the learning progress. Indeed, the attacks
presented here are not specific to the model or dataset, but rather target the stochastic nature of modern learning procedures. We extensively evaluate our attacks on
computer vision and natural language benchmarks to find that the adversary can
disrupt model training and even introduce backdoors.

1

Introduction

The data-driven nature of modern machine learning (ML) training routines puts pressure on data
supply pipelines, which become increasingly more complex. It is common to find separate disks
or whole content distribution networks dedicated to servicing massive datasets. Training is often
distributed across multiple workers. This emergent complexity gives a perfect opportunity for an
attacker to disrupt ML training, while remaining covert. In the case of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), it assumes uniform random sampling of items from the training dataset, yet in practice this
randomness is rarely tested or enforced. Here, we focus on adversarial data sampling.
It is now well known that malicious actors can poison data and introduce backdoors, forcing ML
models to behave differently in the presence of triggers [12]. While such attacks have been shown to
pose a real threat, they have so far required the attacker to perturb the dataset used for training.
We now show that by simply changing the order in which batches or data points are supplied to a
model during training, an attacker can affect model behaviour. More precisely, we show that it is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

