Representer Point Selection via Local Jacobian
Expansion for Post-hoc Classifier Explanation of
Deep Neural Networks and Ensemble Models

Yi Sui
University of Toronto
yi.sui@mail.utoronto.ca

Ga Wu∗
Borealis AI
ga.wu@borealisai.ca

Scott Sanner†
University of Toronto
ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Explaining the influence of training data on machine learning model predictions
is a critical tool for debugging models through data curation. A recent appealing
and efficient approach for this task was provided via the concept of Representer
Point Selection (RPS), i.e. a method the leverages the dual form of l2 regularized
optimization in the last layer of the neural network to identify the contribution
of training points to the prediction. However, two key drawbacks of RPS-l2 are
that they (i) lead to disagreement between the originally trained network and the
RPS-l2 regularized network modification and (ii) often yield a static ranking of
training data for test points in the same class, independent of the test point being
classified. Inspired by the RPS-l2 approach, we propose an alternative method
based on a local Jacobian Taylor expansion (LJE). We empirically compared
RPS-LJE with the original RPS-l2 on image classification (with ResNet), text
classification recurrent neural networks (with Bi-LSTM), and tabular classification
(with XGBoost) tasks. Quantitatively, we show that RPS-LJE slightly outperforms
RPS-l2 and other state-of-the-art data explanation methods by up to 3% on a data
debugging task. More critically, we qualitatively observe that RPS-LJE provides
stable and individualized explanations that are more coherent to each test data point.
Overall, RPS-LJE represents a novel approach to RPS-l2 that provides a powerful
tool for sample-based model explanation and debugging.

1

Introduction

Deep learning as well as ensemble methods such as XGBoost [2] have revolutionized the field of
machine learning and led to unprecedented levels of accuracy in a variety of data-driven prediction
applications. However, it can be extremely challenging to debug these complex methodologies when
they make incorrect predictions. The first step in this debugging process is explaining the prediction,
which can stem from a variety of interpretive processes. For example, we may seek to understand the
key features [13, 16] or salient regions [18, 20] that led to a prediction, or in a more recent line of
work, to understand the influence of the training data on test data predictions [1, 11, 15, 23].
In this paper we focus on a particularly appealing (and efficient) method for understanding the impact
of training data on test predictions, namely Representer Point Selection (RPS) [23], which leverages
an application of the representer theorem [17] to deep neural networks. Specifically, it uses the dual
form of l2 regularized optimization in the last layer of the neural network to identify the contribution
of training data to the test prediction. Compared to model-agnostic approaches [1, 9, 10] that estimate
∗
†

Contributions were made while the author was at the University of Toronto.
Affiliate to Vector Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Toronto.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

