Bellman Eluder Dimension: New Rich Classes of RL
Problems, and Sample-Efficient Algorithms

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Qinghua Liu
Princeton University
qinghual@princeton.edu

Sobhan Miryoosefi
Princeton University
miryoosefi@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Finding the minimal structural assumptions that empower sample-efficient learning is one of the most important research directions in Reinforcement Learning
(RL). This paper advances our understanding of this fundamental question by introducing a new complexity measure—Bellman Eluder (BE) dimension. We show
that the family of RL problems of low BE dimension is remarkably rich, which
subsumes a vast majority of existing tractable RL problems including but not limited to tabular MDPs, linear MDPs, reactive POMDPs, low Bellman rank problems as well as low Eluder dimension problems. This paper further designs a new
optimization-based algorithm—G OLF, and reanalyzes a hypothesis eliminationbased algorithm—O LIVE [proposed in 1]. We prove that both algorithms learn
the near-optimal policies of low BE dimension problems in a number of samples that is polynomial in all relevant parameters, but independent of the size of
state-action space. Our regret and sample complexity results match or improve
the best existing results for several well-known subclasses of low BE dimension
problems.

1

Introduction

Modern Reinforcement Learning (RL) commonly engages practical problems with an enormous
number of states, where function approximation must be deployed to approximate the true value
function using functions from a prespecified function class. Function approximation, especially
based on deep neural networks, lies at the heart of the recent practical successes of RL in domains
such as Atari [2], Go [3], robotics [4], and dialogue systems [5].
Despite its empirical success, RL with function approximation raises a new series of theoretical
challenges when comparing to the classic tabular RL: (1) generalization, to generalize knowledge
from the visited states to the unvisited states due to the enormous state space. (2) limited expressiveness, to handle the complicated issues where true value functions or intermediate steps computed in
the algorithm can be functions outside the prespecified function class. (3) exploration, to address
the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation when above challenges are present.
Consequently, most existing theoretical results on efficient RL with function approximation rely on
relatively strong structural assumptions. For instance, many require that the MDP admits a linear
approximation [6–8], or that the model is precisely Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) [9–11]. Most
of these structural assumptions rarely hold in practical applications. This naturally leads to one of
the most fundamental questions in RL.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

