Learning Debiased Representation via
Disentangled Feature Augmentation

Jungsoo Lee*1,2 Eungyeup Kim*1,2 Juyoung Lee2 Jihyeon Lee1 Jaegul Choo1
1
KAIST AI, 2 Kakao Enterprise, South Korea
1
{bebeto, eykim94, gina3833, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr,
2

{bebeto.lee, josh.ey, michael.jy}@kakaoenterprise.com

Abstract
Image classification models tend to make decisions based on peripheral attributes
of data items that have strong correlation with a target variable (i.e., dataset bias).
These biased models suffer from the poor generalization capability when evaluated on unbiased datasets. Existing approaches for debiasing often identify and
emphasize those samples with no such correlation (i.e., bias-conflicting) without
defining the bias type in advance. However, such bias-conflicting samples are
significantly scarce in biased datasets, limiting the debiasing capability of these
approaches. This paper first presents an empirical analysis revealing that training
with “diverse” bias-conflicting samples beyond a given training set is crucial for
debiasing as well as the generalization capability. Based on this observation, we
propose a novel feature-level data augmentation technique in order to synthesize
diverse bias-conflicting samples. To this end, our method learns the disentangled
representation of (1) the intrinsic attributes (i.e., those inherently defining a certain
class) and (2) bias attributes (i.e., peripheral attributes causing the bias), from a
large number of bias-aligned samples, the bias attributes of which have strong
correlation with the target variable. Using the disentangled representation, we
synthesize bias-conflicting samples that contain the diverse intrinsic attributes of
bias-aligned samples by swapping their latent features. By utilizing these diversified
bias-conflicting features during the training, our approach achieves superior classification accuracy and debiasing results against the existing baselines on synthetic
and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Despite the recent advancement of deep neural networks, they often rely overly on the correlation
between peripheral attributes and labels, referred to as dataset bias [1], especially when such strong
bias is found in a given dataset. A majority of samples in the biased dataset exhibit visual attributes
that are not innate but frequently co-occur with target labels (i.e., bias attributes). For example, most
of the bird images in the training dataset may contain the background as the blue sky, while the birds
may still be found in different places. Thus, the model trained with such a biased dataset is likely to
learn the bias attributes more than intrinsic attributes, the innate visual attributes that inherently define
a certain class, e.g., the wings of birds. This causes the model to learn shortcuts for classification [2],
failing to generalize on the images with no such correlations (e.g., birds on grounds or grass) during
the test phase. Throughout the paper, bias-aligned samples correspond to data items containing a
strong correlation between bias attributes and labels (e.g., birds in the sky), while bias-conflicting
samples indicate the other cases that are rarely found (e.g., birds on grounds).
To tackle such a task, previous studies often define a specific bias type (e.g., color and texture) in
advance [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], which enables them to design a debiasing network tailored for the
predefined bias type. For example, Bahng et al. [6] leverage BagNet [11], which has limited size
* indicates equal contribution. The order of first authors was chosen by tossing a coin.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

