Asymptotics of representation learning
in finite Bayesian neural networks

Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth1,2 , Abdulkadir Canatar1,2 , Benjamin S. Ruben3 ,
Cengiz Pehlevan2,4
1
Department of Physics, 2 Center for Brain Science, 3 Biophysics Graduate Program,
4
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
{jzavatoneveth,canatara,benruben}@g.harvard.edu
cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Recent works have suggested that finite Bayesian neural networks may sometimes
outperform their infinite cousins because finite networks can flexibly adapt their
internal representations. However, our theoretical understanding of how the learned
hidden layer representations of finite networks differ from the fixed representations
of infinite networks remains incomplete. Perturbative finite-width corrections to
the network prior and posterior have been studied, but the asymptotics of learned
features have not been fully characterized. Here, we argue that the leading finitewidth corrections to the average feature kernels for any Bayesian network with
linear readout and Gaussian likelihood have a largely universal form. We illustrate
this explicitly for three tractable network architectures: deep linear fully-connected
and convolutional networks, and networks with a single nonlinear hidden layer.
Our results begin to elucidate how task-relevant learning signals shape the hidden
layer representations of wide Bayesian neural networks.

1

Introduction

The expressive power of deep neural networks critically depends on their ability to learn to represent
the features of data [1–24]. However, the structure of their hidden layer representations is only
theoretically well-understood in certain infinite-width limits, in which these representations cannot
flexibly adapt to learn data-dependent features [3–11, 24]. In the Bayesian setting, these representations are described by fixed, deterministic kernels [3–11]. As a result of this inflexibility, recent
works have suggested that finite Bayesian neural networks (henceforth BNNs) may generalize better
than their infinite counterparts because of their ability to learn representations [10].
Theoretical exploration of how finite and infinite BNNs differ has largely focused on the properties
of the prior and posterior distributions over network outputs [12–17]. In particular, several works
have studied the leading perturbative finite-width corrections to these distributions [12–16]. Yet, the
corresponding asymptotic corrections to the feature kernels, which measure how representations
evolve from layer to layer, have only been studied in a few special cases [16]. Therefore, the structure
of these corrections, as well as their dependence on network architecture, remain poorly understood.
In this paper, we make the following contributions towards the goal of a complete understanding of
feature learning at asymptotically large but finite widths:
• We argue that the leading finite-width corrections to the posterior statistics of the hidden
layer kernels of any BNN with a linear readout layer and Gaussian likelihood have a largely
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

