Nearly Minimax Optimal Reinforcement
Learning for Discounted MDPs
Jiafan He
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
jiafanhe19@ucla.edu

Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the reinforcement learning problem for discounted Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) under the tabular setting. We propose a model-based algorithm
named UCBVI-γ, which is based on the optimism in the face of uncertainty
principle
and the Bernstein-type
bonus. We show that UCBVI-γ achieves an
√

e SAT /(1 − γ)1.5 regret, where S is the number of states, A is the number
O
of actions, γ is the discount factor and T is the number of steps. In addition, we
construct a class
√ of hard MDPs and
 show that for any algorithm, the expected regret
e SAT /(1 − γ)1.5 . Our upper bound matches the minimax lower
is at least Ω
bound up to logarithmic factors, which suggests that UCBVI-γ is nearly minimax
optimal for discounted MDPs.

1

Introduction

The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is designing algorithms to learn the optimal policy through
interactions with the unknown dynamic environment. Markov decision process (MDPs) plays a central
role in reinforcement learning due to their ability to describe the time-independent state transition
property. More specifically, the discounted MDP is one of the standard MDPs in reinforcement
learning to describe sequential tasks without interruption or restart. For discounted MDPs, with a
generative model [12], several algorithms with near-optimal sample complexity have been proposed.
More specifically, Azar et al. [3] proposed an Empirical QVI algorithm which achieves the optimal
sample complexity to find the optimal value function. Sidford et al. [22] proposed a sublinear
randomized value iteration algorithm that achieves a near-optimal sample complexity to find the
optimal policy, and Sidford et al. [23] further improved it to reach the optimal sample complexity.
Since generative model is a powerful oracle that allows the algorithm to query the reward function
and the next state for any state-action pair (s, a), it is natural to ask whether there exist online RL
algorithms (without generative model) that achieve optimality.
To measure an online RL algorithm, a widely used notion is regret, which is defined as the summation
of sub-optimality gaps over time steps. The regret is firstly introduced for episodic and infinitehorizon average-reward MDPs and later extended to discounted MDPs by [15, 30, 35, 35]. Liu and
Su [15] proposed a double Q-learning algorithm with the UCB exploration (Double Q-learning),
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

