Contextual Similarity Aggregation with Self-attention
for Visual Re-ranking

Jianbo Ouyang1∗ Hui Wu1∗ Min Wang2† Wengang Zhou1,2† Houqiang Li1,2
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{ouyjb,wh241300}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
wangmin@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In content-based image retrieval, the first-round retrieval result by simple visual
feature comparison may be unsatisfactory, which can be refined by visual re-ranking
techniques. In image retrieval, it is observed that the contextual similarity among
the top-ranked images is an important clue to distinguish the semantic relevance.
Inspired by this observation, in this paper, we propose a visual re-ranking method
by contextual similarity aggregation with self-attention. In our approach, for each
image in the top-K ranking list, we represent it into an affinity feature vector by
comparing it with a set of anchor images. Then, the affinity features of the top-K
images are refined by aggregating the contextual information with a transformer
encoder. Finally, the affinity features are used to recalculate the similarity scores
between the query and the top-K images for re-ranking of the latter. To further
improve the robustness of our re-ranking model and enhance the performance of
our method, a new data augmentation scheme is designed. Since our re-ranking
model is not directly involved with the visual feature used in the initial retrieval,
it is ready to be applied to retrieval result lists obtained from various retrieval
algorithms. We conduct comprehensive experiments on four benchmark datasets
to demonstrate the generality and effectiveness of our proposed visual re-ranking
method.

1

Introduction

In instance image retrieval, the goal is to efficiently identify images containing the same object
or describing the same scene with the query image from a large corpus of images. Towards this
goal, many works have emerged in recent years [42, 21, 36, 26, 24]. With the development of
deep learning, a great number of methods leverage convolutional neural network (CNN) as feature
extractor [38, 3, 44, 4, 14, 34, 25, 35, 45] to replace or combine with the classic SIFT feature [23].
Generally, the performance of the initial retrieval results by simple comparison of visual feature may
not be satisfactory. To refine it, many visual re-ranking techniques have been proposed [9, 19, 48].
Popular visual re-ranking techniques include query expansion, geometric context verification, kNNbased re-ranking, and diffusion-based methods, etc. Query Expansion (QE) [9, 10, 39, 34, 30]
computes an average feature of the query and the top-ranked images to update the original query
* The first and second authors contribute equally to this work.
†

Corresponding authors: Min Wang and Wengang Zhou
Code will be released at https://github.com/MCC-WH/CSA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

