Semi-supervised Dense Keypoints
using Unlabeled Multiview Images

Zhixuan Yu
University of Minnesota
yu000064@umn.edu

Haozheng Yu
University of Minnesota
yu000424@umn.edu

Sujoy Ganguly
Unity
sujoy.ganguly@unity3d.com

Long Sha
TuSimple
long.sha@tusimple.ai
Hyun Soo Park
University of Minnesota
hspark@umn.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a new end-to-end semi-supervised framework to learn a dense
keypoint detector using unlabeled multiview images. A key challenge lies in finding
the exact correspondences between the dense keypoints in multiple views since the
inverse of the keypoint mapping can be neither analytically derived nor differentiated. This limits applying existing multiview supervision approaches used to learn
sparse keypoints that rely on the exact correspondences. To address this challenge,
we derive a new probabilistic epipolar constraint that encodes the two desired
properties. (1) Soft correspondence: we define a matchability, which measures
a likelihood of a point matching to the other image’s corresponding point, thus
relaxing the requirement of the exact correspondences. (2) Geometric consistency:
every point in the continuous correspondence fields must satisfy the multiview
consistency collectively. We formulate a probabilistic epipolar constraint using a
weighted average of epipolar errors through the matchability thereby generalizing
the point-to-point geometric error to the field-to-field geometric error. This generalization facilitates learning a geometrically coherent dense keypoint detection
model by utilizing a large number of unlabeled multiview images. Additionally,
to prevent degenerative cases, we employ a distillation-based regularization by
using a pretrained model. Finally, we design a new neural network architecture,
made of twin networks, that effectively minimizes the probabilistic epipolar errors
of all possible correspondences between two view images by building affinity
matrices. Our method shows superior performance compared to existing methods,
including non-differentiable bootstrapping in terms of keypoint accuracy, multiview
consistency, and 3D reconstruction accuracy.

1

Introduction

The spatial arrangement of keypoints of dynamic organisms characterizes their complex pose, providing a computational representation of the way they behave. Recently, computer vision models
offer fine grained behavioral modeling through dense keypoints that establish an injective mapping
from the image coordinates to the continuous body surface of humans [8] and chimpanzees [36].
These models predict the continuous keypoint field from an image, supervised by a set of densely
annotated keypoints, which shows remarkable performance on real-world imagery and brings out
a number of applications including 3D mesh reconstruction [54, 53, 35, 50, 7, 21], texture/style
transfer [26, 37], and geometry learning [14, 1]. Nonetheless, attaining such densely annotated data
is labor intensive, and more importantly, the quality of the annotations is fundamentally bounded
by the visual ambiguity of keypoints, e.g., points on textureless shirt. This visual ambiguity leads
to a suboptimal model when applying it to out-of-sample distributions. In this paper, we present a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

