Network-to-Network Regularization: Enforcing
Occam’s Razor to Improve Generalization

Rohan Ghosh and Mehul Motani
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
N.1 Institute for Health
Institute of Data Science
National University of Singapore
rghosh92@gmail.com, motani@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
What makes a classifier have the ability to generalize? There have been a lot
of important attempts to address this question, but a clear answer is still elusive.
Proponents of complexity theory find that the complexity of the classifier’s function
space is key to deciding generalization, whereas other recent work reveals that
classifiers which extract invariant feature representations are likely to generalize
better. Recent theoretical and empirical studies, however, have shown that even
within a classifier’s function space, there can be significant differences in the ability
to generalize. Specifically, empirical studies have shown that among functions
which have a good training data fit, functions with lower Kolmogorov complexity
(KC) are likely to generalize better, while the opposite is true for functions of
higher KC. Motivated by these findings, we propose, in this work, a novel measure
of complexity called Kolmogorov Growth (KG), which we use to derive new generalization error bounds that only depend on the final choice of the classification
function. Guided by the bounds, we propose a novel way of regularizing neural
networks by constraining the network trajectory to remain in the low KG zone
during training. Minimizing KG while learning is akin to applying the Occam’s
razor to neural networks. The proposed approach, called network-to-network regularization, leads to clear improvements in the generalization ability of classifiers.
We verify this for three popular image datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100)
across varying training data sizes. Empirical studies find that conventional training
of neural networks, unlike network-to-network regularization, leads to networks
of high KG and lower test accuracies. Furthermore, we present the benefits of
N2N regularization in the scenario where the training data labels are noisy. Using
N2N regularization, we achieve competitive performance on MNIST, CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 datasets with corrupted training labels, significantly improving
network performance compared to standard cross-entropy baselines in most cases.
These findings illustrate the many benefits obtained from imposing a function
complexity prior like Kolmogorov Growth during the training process.

1

Introduction and Motivation

On the surface, the problem of learning to generalize well over unseen data seems an impossible
task. Classification is inherently a problem in function estimation, and the finite information that the
training data samples impart seems hardly enough to be able to correctly guess the behaviour of the
function over the unseen data samples outside the training set. However, assumption of a structured
ground truth label function, which is the unknown function which generates the ground truth label
for any datapoint, leads to more optimistic outlook on the problem. Without the assumption of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

