Cardinality-Regularized Hawkes-Granger Model

Tsuyoshi Idé
IBM Research, T. J. Watson Research Center
tide@us.ibm.com

Georgios Kollias
IBM Research, T. J. Watson Research Center
gkollias@us.ibm.com

Dzung T. Phan
IBM Research, T. J. Watson Research Center
phandu@us.ibm.com

Naoki Abe
IBM Research, T. J. Watson Research Center
nabe@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We propose a new sparse Granger-causal learning framework for temporal event
data. We focus on a specific class of point processes called the Hawkes process. We
begin by pointing out that most of the existing sparse causal learning algorithms for
the Hawkes process suffer from a singularity in maximum likelihood estimation. As
a result, their sparse solutions can appear only as numerical artifacts. In this paper,
we propose a mathematically well-defined sparse causal learning framework based
on a cardinality-regularized Hawkes process, which remedies the pathological
issues of existing approaches. We leverage the proposed algorithm for the task
of instance-wise causal event analysis, where sparsity plays a critical role. We
validate the proposed framework with two real use-cases, one from the power grid
and the other from the cloud data center management domain.

1

Introduction

The Hawkes process [14] is one of the most popular models for analyzing temporal events in the
machine learning (ML) community. It has been applied in a variety of application areas including
analysis of human activities on social networks [23, 36, 39, 15, 38, 22, 2, 44], healthcare event
analysis [6, 12], search query analysis [21, 20], and even water pipe maintenance [48]. In the
studies of Hawkes processes, there have been two major milestones to date. One is the minorizationmaximization (MM) algorithm [16]. The other is Granger causal analysis through Hawkes processes.
The first milestone was marked by Veen and Schoenberg [42]. Based on the intuition of branching
process of earthquake aftershocks, they introduced the first MM-based maximum likelihood algorithm,
which is often loosely referred to as EM (expectation-maximization) due to their similarity (See
Eq. (14) and the discussion below). As their paper pointed out, the standard gradient-based maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) of multivariate Hawkes processes suffered from numerical stability
issues, limiting their applicability in practice.
The second milestone was achieved by a few pioneers including Kim et al. [18] who first proposed an
approach to Granger causal learning through the Hawkes process; Zhou et al. [51] who introduced
`1 regularized MLE of a multivariate Hawkes process in the context of Granger causal analysis; and
Eichler et al. [9] who theoretically established the equivalence between the Hawkes-based causality
and the Granger causality [13].
Given these achievements and the well-known importance of sparsity in Granger causal learning [3,
24], the MM algorithm combined with a sparsity-enforcing regularizer would seem to be a promising
path for Granger-causal analysis for stochastic events. This is especially true when the main interest
is in analyzing causal triggering mechanism of event instances since the MM framework provides
instance-wise triggering probabilities as a side product. Interestingly, however, the likelihood
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

