Learning Generalized Gumbel-max Causal
Mechanisms
Guy Lorberbom⇤
Technion
Haifa, Israel
guy_lorber@campus.technion.ac.il
Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto
& Vector Institute
Toronto, ON, Canada
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Daniel Tarlow
Google Research
Montreal, QC, Canada
dtarlow@google.com

Daniel D. Johnson⇤
Google Research
Toronto, ON, Canada
ddjohnson@google.com
Tamir Hazan
Technion
Haifa, Israel
tamir.hazan@technion.ac.il

Abstract
To perform counterfactual reasoning in Structural Causal Models (SCMs), one
needs to know the causal mechanisms, which provide factorizations of conditional
distributions into noise sources and deterministic functions mapping realizations of
noise to samples. Unfortunately, the causal mechanism is not uniquely identified
by data that can be gathered by observing and interacting with the world, so there
remains the question of how to choose causal mechanisms. In recent work, Oberst
& Sontag (2019) propose Gumbel-max SCMs, which use Gumbel-max reparameterizations as the causal mechanism due to an intuitively appealing counterfactual
stability property. In this work, we instead argue for choosing a causal mechanism that is best under a quantitative criteria such as minimizing variance when
estimating counterfactual treatment effects. We propose a parameterized family of
causal mechanisms that generalize Gumbel-max. We show that they can be trained
to minimize counterfactual effect variance and other losses on a distribution of
queries of interest, yielding lower variance estimates of counterfactual treatment
effect than fixed alternatives, also generalizing to queries not seen at training time.

1

Introduction

Pearl [2009] presents a “ladder of causation” that distinguishes three levels of causal concepts:
associational (level 1), interventional (level 2), and counterfactual (level 3). As an illustrative
example, suppose we wish to compare two treatments for a patient in a hospital. Level 1 corresponds
to information learnable from passive observation, e.g. correlations between treatments given in the
past and their outcomes. Level 2 coresponds to active intervention, e.g. choosing which treatment to
give to a new patient, and measuring the distribution of outcomes it causes (called an interventional
distribution). Level 3 corresponds to reasoning about hypothetical interventions given that some other
outcome actually occurred (called a counterfactual distribution): given that the patient recovered
after receiving a specific treatment, what would have happened if they received a different one? The
three levels are distinct in the sense that it is generally not possible to uniquely determine higher
level models from lower level information [Bareinboim et al., 2020]. In particular, although we can
determine level 2 information (such as the average effect of each treatment) by actively intervening
⇤

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

