A Continuized View on Nesterov Acceleration for
Stochastic Gradient Descent and Randomized Gossip

Mathieu Even1,? , Raphaël Berthier1,? , Francis Bach1 , Nicolas Flammarion2 ,
Pierre Gaillard3 , Hadrien Hendrikx1 , Laurent Massoulié1,4 and Adrien Taylor1
?
1

Equal contributions

Inria - Département d’informatique de l’ENS, PSL Research University, Paris, France
2

3

School of Computer and Communication Sciences
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
4

MSR-Inria Joint Centre

Abstract
We introduce the “continuized” Nesterov acceleration, a close variant of Nesterov
acceleration whose variables are indexed by a continuous time parameter. The
two variables continuously mix following a linear ordinary differential equation
and take gradient steps at random times. This continuized variant benefits from
the best of the continuous and the discrete frameworks: as a continuous process,
one can use differential calculus to analyze convergence and obtain analytical
expressions for the parameters; and a discretization of the continuized process
can be computed exactly with convergence rates similar to those of Nesterov
original acceleration. We show that the discretization has the same structure
as Nesterov acceleration, but with random parameters. We provide continuized
Nesterov acceleration under deterministic as well as stochastic gradients, with
either additive or multiplicative noise. Finally, using our continuized framework
and expressing the gossip averaging problem as the stochastic minimization of a
certain energy function, we provide the first rigorous acceleration of asynchronous
gossip algorithms.

1

Introduction

In the last decades, the emergence of numerous applications in statistics, machine learning and signal
processing has led to a renewed interest in first-order optimization methods [10]. They enjoy a low
iteration cost necessary to the analysis of large datasets. The performance of first-order methods was
largely improved thanks to acceleration techniques (see the review by d’Aspremont et al. [14] and
the many references therein), starting with the seminal work of Nesterov [42].
Let f : Rd → R be a convex and differentiable function, minimized at x∗ ∈ Rd . We assume
throughout the paper that f is L-smooth, i.e.,
∀x, y ∈ Rd ,

f (y) ⩽ f (x) + h∇f (x), y − xi +

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

L
ky − xk2 .
2

(1)

