Perceptual Score: What Data Modalities
Does Your Model Perceive?
Itai Gat
Technion

Idan Schwartz
Technion
NetApp

Alexander Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Machine learning advances in the last decade have relied significantly on largescale datasets that continue to grow in size. Increasingly, those datasets also contain
different data modalities. However, large multi-modal datasets are hard to annotate,
and annotations may contain biases that we are often unaware of. Deep-net-based
classifiers, in turn, are prone to exploit those biases and to find shortcuts. To study
and quantify this concern, we introduce the perceptual score, a metric that assesses
the degree to which a model relies on the different subsets of the input features,
i.e., modalities. Using the perceptual score, we find a surprisingly consistent trend
across four popular datasets: recent, more accurate state-of-the-art multi-modal
models for visual question-answering or visual dialog tend to perceive the visual
data less than their predecessors. This trend is concerning as answers are hence
increasingly inferred from textual cues only. Using the perceptual score also helps
to analyze model biases by decomposing the score into data subset contributions.
We hope to spur a discussion on the perceptiveness of multi-modal models and
also hope to encourage the community working on multi-modal classifiers to start
quantifying perceptiveness via the proposed perceptual score.

1

Introduction

Machine learning advances over the last decade are remarkable. Challenges that seemed daunting
merely ten years ago are now a breeze, and new applications that we barely dared to dream about
seem achievable within the next few years. Indeed, accuracy metrics on tasks like visual question
answering and reasoning suggest significant improvements.
Reported improvements are to a large extent due to the availability of large datasets [1–3], computational performance advances, e.g., for GPUs, and a better understanding about how to encode
inductive biases into deep-nets, e.g., by using rectified linear units [4], normalization [5], skip connections [6], transformers [7], etc. However, importantly, developed deep-net architectures are not
guaranteed to solve a given task. There is a chance that they may instead exploit dataset biases.
This concern is surely in part due to non-robust training techniques, and a plethora of methods
improve classifier robustness [8–10]. However, datasets play an important role in controlling the
extracted bias as well. For instance, if correct answers in a question-answering task are significantly
shorter than incorrect ones, classifier training should not use answer length as a cue. Although this
seems reasonable, for audio-visual scene aware dialog, Schwartz et al. [11] find for example that
in many cases the question alone is sufficient to generate a scene-aware dialog response, avoiding
the need to look at the video. Hence, in order to assess the suitability of a classifier, we need to
understand how much it relies on different data modalities.
To quantify how much a classifier relies on its different input modalities, we introduce the perceptual
score. The perceptual score assesses the degree to which a model relies on a modality. To do so the
perceptual score permutes the features of a modality across samples in the test set after the classifier
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

