Neural Algorithmic Reasoners are Implicit Planners
Andreea Deac⇤
Mila – Québec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
Pierre-Luc Bacon
Mila – Québec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Petar Veličković
DeepMind

Ognjen Milinković
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

Jian Tang
Mila – Québec AI Institute
HEC Montréal

Mladen Nikolić
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

Abstract
Implicit planning has emerged as an elegant technique for combining learned models of the world with end-to-end model-free reinforcement learning. We study the
class of implicit planners inspired by value iteration, an algorithm that is guaranteed to yield perfect policies in fully-specified tabular environments. We find that
prior approaches either assume that the environment is provided in such a tabular
form—which is highly restrictive—or infer “local neighbourhoods” of states to
run value iteration over—for which we discover an algorithmic bottleneck effect.
This effect is caused by explicitly running the planning algorithm based on scalar
predictions in every state, which can be harmful to data efficiency if such scalars
are improperly predicted. We propose eXecuted Latent Value Iteration Networks
(XLVINs), which alleviate the above limitations. Our method performs all planning
computations in a high-dimensional latent space, breaking the algorithmic bottleneck. It maintains alignment with value iteration by carefully leveraging neural
graph-algorithmic reasoning and contrastive self-supervised learning. Across eight
low-data settings—including classical control, navigation and Atari—XLVINs
provide significant improvements to data efficiency against value iteration-based
implicit planners, as well as relevant model-free baselines. Lastly, we empirically
verify that XLVINs can closely align with value iteration.

1

Introduction

Planning is an important aspect of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, and planning algorithms
are usually characterised by explicit modelling of the environment. Recently, several approaches
explore implicit planning [40, 30, 33, 37, 29, 17, 16]. Such approaches propose inductive biases in
the policy function to enable planning to emerge, while training the policy in a model-free manner.
Accordingly, implicit planners combine the effectiveness of large-scale neural network training with
the data efficiency promises of planning, making them a very attractive research direction.
Many popular implicit planners attempt to align with the computations of the value iteration (VI)
algorithm within a policy network [40, 30, 29, 13, 26]. As VI is a differentiable algorithm, guaranteed
to find the optimal policy, it can combine with gradient-based optimisation and provides useful
theoretical guarantees. We also recognise the potential of VI-inspired deep RL, hence it is our primary
topic of study here. However, applying VI assumes that the underlying RL environment (a) is tabular,
and that its (b) transition and (c) reward distributions are both fully known and provided upfront.
Such assumptions are unfortunately unrealistic for most environments of importance to RL research.
Very often the dynamics of the environment will not be even partially known, and the state space may
⇤

Work performed while the author was at DeepMind.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

