Instance-Conditioned GAN
Arantxa Casanova
Facebook AI Research
École Polytechnique de Montréal
Mila, Quebec AI Institute

Marlène Careil
Facebook AI Research
Télécom Paris

Michał Drożdżal⇤
Facebook AI Research

Jakob Verbeek
Facebook AI Research

Adriana Romero-Soriano⇤
Facebook AI Research
McGill University

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can generate near photo realistic images
in narrow domains such as human faces. Yet, modeling complex distributions of
datasets such as ImageNet and COCO-Stuff remains challenging in unconditional
settings. In this paper, we take inspiration from kernel density estimation
techniques and introduce a non-parametric approach to modeling distributions
of complex datasets. We partition the data manifold into a mixture of overlapping
neighborhoods described by a datapoint and its nearest neighbors, and introduce a
model, called instance-conditioned GAN (IC-GAN), which learns the distribution
around each datapoint. Experimental results on ImageNet and COCO-Stuff show
that IC-GAN significantly improves over unconditional models and unsupervised
data partitioning baselines. Moreover, we show that IC-GAN can effortlessly
transfer to datasets not seen during training by simply changing the conditioning
instances, and still generate realistic images. Finally, we extend IC-GAN to
the class-conditional case and show semantically controllable generation and
competitive quantitative results on ImageNet; while improving over BigGAN
on ImageNet-LT. Code and trained models to reproduce the reported results are
available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/ic_gan.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18] have shown impressive results in unconditional
image generation [27, 29]. Despite their success, GANs present optimization difficulties and can
suffer from mode collapse, resulting in the generator not being able to obtain a good distribution
coverage, and often producing poor quality and/or low diversity generated samples. Although many
approaches attempt to mitigate this problem – e.g. [20, 32, 35, 38] –, complex data distributions
such as the one in ImageNet [45] remain a challenge for unconditional GANs [33, 36]. Classconditional GANs [5, 39, 40, 56] ease the task of learning the data distribution by conditioning on
class labels, effectively partitioning the data. Although they provide higher quality samples than their
unconditional counterparts, they require labelled data, which may be unavailable or costly to obtain.
Several recent approaches explore the use of unsupervised data partitioning to improve GANs [2,
14, 17, 23, 33, 42]. While these methods are promising and yield visually appealing samples, their
quality is still far from those obtained with class-conditional GANs. These methods make use of
relatively coarse and non-overlapping data partitions, which oftentimes contain data points from
different types of objects or scenes. This diversity of data points may result in a manifold with low
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

