Deep Synoptic Monte Carlo Planning in
Reconnaissance Blind Chess
Gregory Clark
ML Collective, Google
gregoryclark@google.com

Abstract
This paper introduces deep synoptic Monte Carlo planning (DSMCP) for large
imperfect information games. The algorithm constructs a belief state with an
unweighted particle filter and plans via playouts that start at samples drawn from
the belief state. The algorithm accounts for uncertainty by performing inference on
“synopses,” a novel stochastic abstraction of information states. DSMCP is the basis
of the program Penumbra, which won the official 2020 reconnaissance blind chess
competition versus 33 other programs. This paper also evaluates algorithm variants
that incorporate caution, paranoia, and a novel bandit algorithm. Furthermore, it
audits the synopsis features used in Penumbra with per-bit saliency statistics.

1

Introduction

Choosing a Nash equilibrium strategy is rational when the opponent is able to identify and exploit
suboptimal behavior [Bowling and Veloso, 2001]. However, not all opponents are so responsive, and
computing a Nash equilibrium is intractable for many games. This paper presents deep synoptic
Monte Carlo planning (DSMCP), an algorithm for large imperfect information games that seeks a
best-response strategy rather than a Nash equilibrium strategy.
When opponents use fixed policies, an imperfect information game may be viewed as a partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP) with the opponents as part of the environment.
DSMCP treats playing against specific opponents as related offline reinforcement learning (RL)
problems and exploits predictability. Importantly, the structure of having opponents with imperfect
information is preserved in order to account for their uncertainty.
DSMCP uses sampling to break the “curse of dimensionality” [Pineau et al., 2006] in three ways:
sampling possible histories with a particle filter, sampling possible futures with upper confidence
bound tree search (UCT) [Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006], and sampling possible world states within
each information state uniformly. It represents information states with a generally-applicable stochastic abstraction technique that produces a “synopsis” from sampled world states. This paper assesses
DSMCP on reconnaissance blind chess (RBC), a large imperfect information chess variant.

2

Background

Significant progress has been made in recent years in both perfect and imperfect information settings.
For example, using deep neural networks to guide UCT has enabled monumental achievements in
abstract strategy games as well as computer games [Silver et al., 2016, 2017a,b, Schrittwieser et al.,
2019, Wu, 2020, Tomašev et al., 2020]. This work employs deep learning in a similar fashion.
Recent advancements in imperfect information games are also remarkable. Several programs have
reached superhuman performance in Poker [Moravčík et al., 2017, Brown and Sandholm, 2018, 2019,
Brown et al., 2020]. In particular, ReBeL [Brown et al., 2020] combines RL and search by converting
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

