Uncertainty-Driven Loss for Single Image
Super-Resolution

Qian Ning1 , Weisheng Dong1∗, Xin Li2 , Jinjian Wu1 , Guangming Shi1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Lane Dep. of CSEE, West Virginia University, Morgantown WV 26506, USA
ningqian@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {wsdong,jinjian.wu}@mail.xidian.edu.cn
xin.li@mail.wvu.edu, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In low-level vision such as single image super-resolution (SISR), traditional MSE or
L1 loss function treats every pixel equally with the assumption that the importance
of all pixels is the same. However, it has been long recognized that texture and edge
areas carry more important visual information than smooth areas in photographic
images. How to achieve such spatial adaptation in a principled manner has been
an open problem in both traditional model-based and modern learning-based
approaches toward SISR. In this paper, we propose a new adaptive weighted
loss for SISR to train deep networks focusing on challenging situations such
as textured and edge pixels with high uncertainty. Specifically, we introduce
variance estimation characterizing the uncertainty on a pixel-by-pixel basis into
SISR solutions so the targeted pixels in a high-resolution image (mean) and their
corresponding uncertainty (variance) can be learned simultaneously. Moreover,
uncertainty estimation allows us to leverage conventional wisdom such as sparsity
prior for regularizing SISR solutions. Ultimately, pixels with large certainty (e.g.,
texture and edge pixels) will be prioritized for SISR according to their importance
to visual quality. For the first time, we demonstrate that such uncertainty-driven
loss can achieve better results than MSE or L1 loss for a wide range of network
architectures. Experimental results on three popular SISR networks show that
our proposed uncertainty-driven loss has achieved better PSNR performance than
traditional loss functions without any increased computation during testing. The
code is available at https://see.xidian.edu.cn/faculty/wsdong/Projects/UDL-SR.htm

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims at reconstructing high-resolution (HR) images from their
corresponding degraded low-resolution (LR) images. Since the publication of super-resolution with
convolutional neural network (SRCNN) [1], there has been a flurry of works on deep learning-based
approaches toward SISR - e.g., EDSR [2], DPDNN [3], RCAN [4], SAN [5], and MoG-DUN [6].
The unifying theme along this line of research appears to be that deeper, bigger, and more complex
networks can achieve improved SISR performance by facilitating the reconstruction of high-frequency
details such as textures and edges in photographic images. Such improvement has been achieved
by novel network architectures (e.g., skip connections [2]), new attention mechanism (e.g., residue
channel attention [4]), and closed-loop supervision [7]. Surprisingly, most of these existing methods
have adopted MSE or L1 loss to optimize the parameters of networks.
The commonly used practice, such as MSE or L1 loss, treats every pixel equally regardless of whether
the pixel is in texture/edge regions or smooth areas. The optimality of such non-adaptive loss function
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

