SIMILAR: Submodular Information Measures Based
Active Learning In Realistic Scenarios

Suraj Kothawade
University of Texas at Dallas
suraj.kothawade@utdallas.edu

Nathan Beck
University of Texas at Dallas
nathan.beck@utdallas.edu

Krishnateja Killamsetty
University of Texas at Dallas
krishnateja.killamsetty@utdallas.edu

Rishabh Iyer
University of Texas at Dallas
rishabh.iyer@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Active learning has proven to be useful for minimizing labeling costs by
selecting the most informative samples. However, existing active learning
methods do not work well in realistic scenarios such as imbalance or rare classes,
out-of-distribution data in the unlabeled set, and redundancy. In this work, we
propose S IMILAR (Submodular Information Measures based actIve LeARning), a
unified active learning framework using recently proposed submodular information
measures (SIM) as acquisition functions. We argue that S IMILAR not only works in
standard active learning but also easily extends to the realistic settings considered
above and acts as a one-stop solution for active learning that is scalable to large
real-world datasets. Empirically, we show that S IMILAR significantly outperforms
existing active learning algorithms by as much as ≈ 5% − 18% in the case of rare
classes and ≈ 5% − 10% in the case of out-of-distribution data on several image
classification tasks like CIFAR-10, MNIST, and ImageNet. S IMILAR is available
as a part of the DISTIL toolkit: https://github.com/decile-team/distil.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have had a lot of
success in a wide variety of domains. However,
they require large labeled datasets which are
often taxing, time-consuming, and expensive to
obtain. Active learning (AL) [12, 13, 39, 3, 9] is
a promising approach to solve this problem. It
aims to select the most informative data points
from an unlabeled dataset to be labeled in an
adaptive manner with a human in the loop. The
goal of AL is to achieve maximum accuracy of
the model while minimizing the number of data
points required to be labeled.

(a) Rare Classes

(b) Redundancy

(c) Out-of-distribution

Figure 1: Motivating scenarios for realistic active
Current AL methods have been tested in rel- learning: (a) rare classes: digits 5 and 8 are rare;
atively simple, clean, and balanced datasets. (b) redundancy: digits 0 and 1 are redundant; (c)
However, real-world datasets are not clean and out-of-distribution (OOD): letters A, R, B, F in
have a number of characteristics that makes digit classification.
learning from them challenging [10, 46, 47, 38,
1, 8]. Firstly, these real-world datasets are imbalanced, and some classes are very rare (e.g., Fig 1(a)). Examples of this imbalance are medical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

