Light Field Networks: Neural Scene Representations
with Single-Evaluation Rendering

Vincent Sitzmann1,∗
sitzmann@mit.edu
William T. Freeman1,3
billf@mit.edu
1

MIT CSAIL

2

Semon Rezchikov2,∗
skr@math.columbia.edu
Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,4,5
jbt@mit.edu

Columbia University 3 IAFI 4 MIT BCS
vsitzmann.github.io/lfns/

Frédo Durand1
fredo@mit.edu
5

CBMM

Abstract
Inferring representations of 3D scenes from 2D observations is a fundamental problem of computer graphics, computer vision, and artificial intelligence. Emerging
3D-structured neural scene representations are a promising approach to 3D scene
understanding. In this work, we propose a novel neural scene representation, Light
Field Networks or LFNs, which represent both geometry and appearance of the
underlying 3D scene in a 360-degree, four-dimensional light field parameterized
via a neural network. Rendering a ray from an LFN requires only a single network
evaluation, as opposed to hundreds of evaluations per ray for ray-marching or
volumetric based renderers in 3D-structured neural scene representations. In the
setting of simple scenes, we leverage meta-learning to learn a prior over LFNs
that enables multi-view consistent light field reconstruction from as little as a
single image observation. This results in dramatic reductions in time and memory
complexity, and enables real-time rendering. The cost of storing a 360-degree
light field via an LFN is two orders of magnitude lower than conventional methods
such as the Lumigraph. Utilizing the analytical differentiability of neural implicit
representations and a novel parameterization of light space, we further demonstrate
the extraction of sparse depth maps from LFNs.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem across computer graphics, computer vision, and artificial intelligence is to
infer a representation of a scene’s 3D shape and appearance given impoverished observations such
as 2D images of the scene. Recent contributions have advanced the state of the art for this problem
significantly. First, neural implicit representations have enabled efficient representation of local 3D
scene properties by mapping a 3D coordinate to local properties of the 3D scene at that coordinate [1–
6]. Second, differentiable neural renderers allow for the inference of these representations given only
2D image observations [3, 4]. Finally, leveraging meta-learning approaches such as hypernetworks or
gradient-based meta-learning has enabled the learning of distributions of 3D scenes, and therefore
reconstruction given only a single image observation [3]. This has enabled a number of applications,
such as novel view synthesis [7, 3, 6], 3D reconstruction [5, 3] semantic segmentation [8, 9], and
SLAM [10]. However, 3D-structured neural scene representations come with a major limitation:
Their rendering is prohibitively expensive, on the order of tens of seconds for a single 256 × 256
image for state-of-the-art approaches. In particular, parameterizing the scene in 3D space necessitates
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

