SILG: The Multi-environment Symbolic Interactive
Language Grounding Benchmark
Victor Zhong1,3 , Austin W. Hanjie2 , Sida I. Wang3 , Karthik Narasimhan2 and Luke Zettlemoyer1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Washington
2
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
3
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Existing work in language grounding typically study single environments. How do
we build unified models that apply across multiple environments? We propose the
multi-environment Symbolic Interactive Language Grounding benchmark (SILG),
which unifies a collection of diverse grounded language learning environments
under a common interface. SILG consists of grid-world environments that require
generalization to new dynamics, entities, and partially observed worlds (RTFM,
Messenger, NetHack), as well as symbolic counterparts of visual worlds that require interpreting rich natural language with respect to complex scenes (ALFWorld,
Touchdown). Together, these environments provide diverse grounding challenges in
richness of observation space, action space, language specification, and plan complexity. In addition, we propose the first shared model architecture for RL on these
environments, and evaluate recent advances such as egocentric local convolution,
recurrent state-tracking, entity-centric attention, and pretrained LM using SILG.
Our shared architecture achieves comparable performance to environment-specific
architectures. Moreover, we find that many recent modelling advances do not result
in significant gains on environments other than the one they were designed for. This
highlights the need for a multi-environment benchmark. Finally, the best models
significantly underperform humans on SILG, which suggests ample room for future
work. We hope SILG enables the community to quickly identify new methodologies for language grounding that generalize to a diverse set of environments and
their associated challenges.

1

Introduction

An ideal language-conditioned agent should interpret language in diverse environments with varying observation space, action space, language, and plan complexity. However, existing languagegrounding literature typically focuses on single environments, and proposes methodological contributions specific to those environments [35, 51]. In order to determine which contributions are
environment-specific and which apply across multiple environments, it is critical to develop universal
models that can be easily evaluated in many different settings.
To facilitate this research, we present the multi-environment Symbolic Interactive Language Grounding Benchmark (SILG). We focus on symbolic environments with semantic symbols instead of raw
visual observations for efficiency, interpretability, and emphasis on abstractions over perception.
SILG consists of diverse environments including grid-worlds RTFM [58], Messenger [22], and
NetHack [34], which require generalization to new dynamics (i.e. how entities behave), entity references, and partially observed worlds. SILG also contains symbolic counterparts of visual grounding
Corresponding author Victor Zhong vzhong@cs.washington.edu
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

