EIGNN: Efficient Infinite-Depth Graph Neural
Networks
Juncheng Liu

Kenji Kawaguchi Bryan Hooi Yiwei Wang
National University of Singapore
{juncheng,kenji,bhooi}@comp.nus.edu.sg
wangyw_seu@foxmail.com, xkxiao@nus.edu.sg

Xiaokui Xiao

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are widely used for modelling graph-structured
data in numerous applications. However, with their inherently finite aggregation
layers, existing GNN models may not be able to effectively capture long-range
dependencies in the underlying graphs. Motivated by this limitation, we propose
a GNN model with infinite depth, which we call Efficient Infinite-Depth Graph
Neural Networks (EIGNN), to efficiently capture very long-range dependencies.
We theoretically derive a closed-form solution of EIGNN which makes training
an infinite-depth GNN model tractable. We then further show that we can achieve
more efficient computation for training EIGNN by using eigendecomposition.
The empirical results of comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets show that EIGNN has a better ability to capture long-range dependencies than recent baselines, and consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance.
Furthermore, we show that our model is also more robust against both noise and
adversarial perturbations on node features.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data are ubiquitous in the real world. To model and learn from such data, graph representation learning aims to produce meaningful node representations by simultaneously considering
the graph topology and node attributes. It has attracted growing interest in recent years, as well as
numerous real-world applications [32].
In particular, graph neural networks (GNNs) are a widely used approach for node, edge, and graph
prediction tasks. Recently, many GNN models have been proposed (e.g., graph convolutional network
[14], graph attention network [26], simple graph convolution [30]). Most modern GNN models
follow a “message passing” scheme: they iteratively aggregate the hidden representations of every
node with those of the adjacent nodes to generate new hidden representations, where each iteration is
parameterized as a neural network layer with learnable weights.
Despite the success existing GNN models achieve on many different scenarios, they lack the ability
to capture long-range dependencies. Specifically, for a predefined number of layers T , these models
cannot capture dependencies with a range longer than T -hops away from any given node. A
straightforward strategy to capture long-range dependencies is to stack a large number of GNN layers
for receiving “messages” from distant nodes. However, existing work has observed poor empirical
performance when stacking more than a few layers [16], which has been referred to as oversmoothing.
This has been attributed to various reasons, including node representations becoming indistinguishable
as depth increases. Besides oversmoothing, GNN models with numerous layers require excessive
computational cost in practice since they need to repeatedly propagate representations across many
layers. For these two reasons, simply stacking many layers for GNNs is not a suitable way to capture
long-range dependencies.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

