Generalization Guarantee of SGD for Pairwise
Learning

1

Yunwen Lei1 Mingrui Liu2 Yiming Ying3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom
2
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Albany, USA
y.lei@bham.ac.uk mingruil@gmu.edu yying@albany.edu

Abstract
Recently, there is a growing interest in studying pairwise learning since it includes
many important machine learning tasks as specific examples, e.g., metric learning,
AUC maximization and ranking. While stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is an
efficient method, there is a lacking study on its generalization behavior for pairwise
learning. In this paper, we present a systematic study on the generalization analysis
of SGD for pairwise learning to understand the balance between generalization
and optimization. We develop a novel high-probability generalization bound for
uniformly-stable algorithms to incorporate the variance information for better
generalization, based on which we establish the first nonsmooth learning algorithm
to achieve almost optimal high-probability and dimension-independent excess risk
bounds with O(n) gradient computations. We consider both convex and nonconvex
pairwise learning problems. Our stability analysis for convex problems shows
how the interpolation can help generalization. We establish a uniform convergence
of gradients, and apply it to derive the first excess risk bounds on population
gradients for nonconvex pairwise learning. Finally, we extend our stability analysis
to pairwise learning with gradient-dominated problems.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be formulated as learning with pairwise loss functions, where
the performance of the associated models needs to be quantified on a pair of training examples.
Representative problems include AUC maximization [14, 25, 42, 63, 66], metric learning [8, 31],
ranking [1, 13] and learning with minimum error entropy loss functions [29]. For example, in
supervised metric learning we wish to find a distance function between pairs of examples so that
examples within the same class are relatively close while examples from different classes are far
apart from each other. In ranking, we aim to find a function to predict the ordering of examples. This
motivates the recent growing interest in a unifying study of these problems, under the framework of
pairwise learning [29, 32, 40, 58].
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a workhorse for machine learning due to its cheap computation
complexity, simplicity and efficiency [7, 20, 49, 53, 62, 65]. SGD iteratively updates the model based
on stochastic gradients computed on one or several randomly selected training examples, which
can achieve sample-size independent iteration complexity for a prescribed optimization accuracy.
This is especially attractive for pairwise learning as the objective function involves O(n2 ) terms for
problems with n training examples. An important problem on SGD is to understand its generalization
performance, i.e., how the models trained by SGD would behave on testing examples. While there are
some interesting work on the generalization analysis of SGD for pointwise learning [9, 10, 28, 36, 39],
there is much less work on SGD for pairwise learning. A notable difference between pairwise learning
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

