A Variational Perspective on Diffusion-Based
Generative Models and Score Matching
Chin-Wei Huang, Jae Hyun Lim, Aaron Courville
University of Montreal & Mila
{chin-wei.huang, jae.hyun.lim, aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca

Abstract
Discrete-time diffusion-based generative models and score matching methods
have shown promising results in modeling high-dimensional image data. Recently, Song et al. (2021) show that diffusion processes that transform data into
noise can be reversed via learning the score function, i.e. the gradient of the logdensity of the perturbed data. They propose to plug the learned score function into
an inverse formula to define a generative diffusion process. Despite the empirical
success, a theoretical underpinning of this procedure is still lacking. In this work,
we approach the (continuous-time) generative diffusion directly and derive a variational framework for likelihood estimation, which includes continuous-time normalizing flows as a special case, and can be seen as an infinitely deep variational
autoencoder. Under this framework, we show that minimizing the score-matching
loss is equivalent to maximizing a lower bound of the likelihood of the plug-in
reverse SDE proposed by Song et al. (2021), bridging the theoretical gap.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling can be thought of as inverting an inference process. If the inference process
is invertible, then one can focus on transforming the data into a tractable distribution (Dinh et al.,
2016). If the inference process is deterministic yet non-invertible, one could learn to invert it stochastically (Dinh et al., 2019; Nielsen et al., 2020). Most generally, both inference and generation can be
stochastic. This is known as the variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014, VAE).
Under the variational framework, one has a lot of flexibility in choosing the generative and inference models. Recent work on diffusion-based modeling (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020)
can be thought of as removing one degree of freedom, by freezing the inference path. The inference model is a fixed discrete-time Markov chain, that slowly transforms the data into a tractable
prior, such as the standard normal distribution. The generative model is another Markov chain that
is trained to revert this process iteratively. Diffusion-based models have been shown to perform
remarkably well on image synthesis (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), rivaling the performance of stateof-the-art Generative Adversarial Networks (Brock et al., 2018).
Song et al. (2021) connect diffusion-based model and score matching (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005),
by looking at the stochastic differential equation (SDE) associated with the inference process. They
realize that the dynamic of the inference process can be inverted if one has access to the score
function of the perturbed data, by solving another SDE reversed in time. They then propose to learn
the score function of the inference process and substitute the approximate score into the formula of
the reverse SDE to obtain a generative model. We call the resulting generative model the plug-in
reverse SDE.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

