It Has Potential: Gradient-Driven Denoisers for
Convergent Solutions to Inverse Problems

Regev Cohen
Verily Research, Israel
regevcohen@google.com

Yochai Blau
Google Research, Israel
yochaib@google.com

Daniel Freedman
Verily Research, Israel
danielfreedman@google.com

Ehud Rivlin
Verily Research, Israel
ehud@google.com

Abstract
In recent years there has been increasing interest in leveraging denoisers for solving
general inverse problems. Two leading frameworks are regularization-by-denoising
(RED) and plug-and-play priors (PnP) which incorporate explicit likelihood functions with priors induced by denoising algorithms. RED and PnP have shown
state-of-the-art performance in diverse imaging tasks when powerful denoisers
are used, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, the study of
their convergence remains an active line of research. Recent works derive the
convergence of RED and PnP methods by treating CNN denoisers as approximations for maximum a posteriori (MAP) or minimum mean square error (MMSE)
estimators. Yet, state-of-the-art denoisers cannot be interpreted as either MAP
or MMSE estimators, since they typically do not exhibit symmetric Jacobians.
Furthermore, obtaining stable inverse algorithms often requires controlling the
Lipschitz constant of CNN denoisers during training. Precisely enforcing this
constraint is impractical, hence, convergence cannot be completely guaranteed.
In this work, we introduce image denoisers derived as the gradients of smooth
scalar-valued deep neural networks, acting as potentials. This ensures two things:
(1) the proposed denoisers display symmetric Jacobians, allowing for MAP and
MMSE estimators interpretation; (2) the denoisers may be integrated into RED
and PnP schemes with backtracking step size, removing the need for enforcing
their Lipschitz constant. To show the latter, we develop a simple inversion method
that utilizes the proposed denoisers. We theoretically establish its convergence to
stationary points of an underlying objective function consisting of the learned potentials. We numerically validate our method through various imaging experiments,
showing improved results compared to standard RED and PnP methods, and with
additional provable stability.

1

Introduction

General Recovery Inverse problems aim to recover an unknown signal from its observed corrupted
or compressed version. This fundamental task appears in a variety of fields such as machine learning,
signal processing, computer vision and medical imaging. When a model for the degradation process
is available, one may derive a data fidelity term which relates the measurements to the unknown
signal through a forward operator. However, this term alone typically leads to ill-posed optimization
problems with unstable solutions, requiring the incorporation of additional knowledge of the desired
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

