Who Leads and Who Follows in Strategic
Classification?
Tijana Zrnic∗
University of California, Berkeley
tijana.zrnic@berkeley.edu

Eric Mazumdar∗
California Institute of Technology
mazumdar@caltech.edu

S. Shankar Sastry
University of California, Berkeley
sastry@eecs.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
As predictive models are deployed into the real world, they must increasingly
contend with strategic behavior. A growing body of work on strategic classification
treats this problem as a Stackelberg game: the decision-maker “leads” in the
game by deploying a model, and the strategic agents “follow” by playing their
best response to the deployed model. Importantly, in this framing, the burden of
learning is placed solely on the decision-maker, while the agents’ best responses
are implicitly treated as instantaneous. In this work, we argue that the order of play
in strategic classification is fundamentally determined by the relative frequencies at
which the decision-maker and the agents adapt to each other’s actions. In particular,
by generalizing the standard model to allow both players to learn over time, we
show that a decision-maker that makes updates faster than the agents can reverse
the order of play, meaning that the agents lead and the decision-maker follows.
We observe in standard learning settings that such a role reversal can be desirable
for both the decision-maker and the strategic agents. Finally, we show that a
decision-maker with the freedom to choose their update frequency can induce
learning dynamics that converge to Stackelberg equilibria with either order of play.

1

Introduction

Individuals interacting with a decision-making algorithm often adapt strategically to the decision
rule in order to achieve a desirable outcome. While such strategic adaptation might increase the
individuals’ utility, it also breaks the statistical patterns that justify the decision rule’s deployment.
This widespread phenomenon, often known as Goodhart’s law, can be summarized as: “When a
measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure” [49].
A growing body of work known as strategic classification [14, 19, 28] models this phenomenon as
a two-player game in which a decision-maker “leads” and strategic agents subsequently “follow.”
Specifically, the decision-maker first deploys a decision rule, and the agents then take a strategic
action so as to optimize their outcome according to the deployed rule, subject to natural manipulation
costs. For example, a bank might make lending decisions using applicants’ credit scores. Knowing
this mechanism, loan applicants might sign up for a large number of credit cards in an effort to
strategically increase their credit score at little effort.
One of the main goals in the literature is to develop strategy-robust decision rules; that is, rules that
remain meaningful even after the agents have adapted to them. Recent work has studied strategies for
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

