Parametric Complexity Bounds for Approximating
PDEs with Neural Networks
Tanya Marwah, Zachary C. Lipton, Andrej Risteski
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
{tmarwah, zlipton, aristesk}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent experiments have shown that deep networks can approximate solutions to
high-dimensional PDEs, seemingly escaping the curse of dimensionality. However,
questions regarding the theoretical basis for such approximations, including the
required network size remain open. In this paper, we investigate the representational
power of neural networks for approximating solutions to linear elliptic PDEs with
Dirichlet boundary conditions. We prove that when a PDE’s coefficients are
representable by small neural networks, the parameters required to approximate
its solution scale polynomially with the input dimension d and proportionally
to the parameter counts of the coefficient networks. To this end, we develop a
proof technique that simulates gradient descent (in an appropriate Hilbert space)
by growing a neural network architecture whose iterates each participate as subnetworks in their (slightly larger) successors, and converge to the solution of the
PDE. We bound the size of the solution showing a polynomial dependence on d
and no dependence on the volume of the domain.

1

Introduction

A partial differential equation (PDE) relates a multivariate function defined over some domain to
its partial derivatives. Typically, one’s goal is to solve for the (unknown) function, often subject
to additional constraints, such as the function’s value on the boundary of the domain. PDEs are
ubiquitous in both the natural and social sciences, where they model such diverse processes as heat
diffusion [7, 32], fluid dynamics [2, 39], and financial markets [6, 10]. Because most PDEs of interest
lack closed-form solutions, computational approximation methods remain a vital and an active field of
research [1]. For low-dimensional functions, dominant approaches include the finite differences and
finite element methods [26], which discretize the domain. After partitioning the domain into a mesh,
these methods solve for the function value at the vertices of the mesh. However, these techniques scale
exponentially with the input dimension, rendering them unsuitable for high-dimensional problems.
Following breakthroughs in deep learning for approximating high-dimensional functions in such
diverse domains as computer vision [21, 33] and natural language processing [3, 9, 40], a burgeoning
line of research leverages neural networks to approximate solutions to PDEs. This line of work has
produced promising empirical results for common PDEs such as the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman and
Black-Scholes equations [17, 16, 37]. Because they do not explicitly discretize the domain, and
given their empirical success on high-dimensional problems, these methods appear not to suffer the
curse of dimensionality. However, these methods are not well understood theoretically, leaving open
questions about when they are applicable, what their performance depends on, and just how many
parameters are required to approximate the solution to a given PDE.
Over the past three years, several theoretical works have investigated questions of representational
power under various assumptions. Exploring a variety of settings, [22], [16], and [19], proved that the
number of parameters required to approximate a solution to a PDE exhibits a less than exponential
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

