Multi-Armed Bandits with Bounded Arm-Memory:
Near-Optimal Guarantees for Best-Arm
Identification and Regret Minimization

Arnab Maiti ∗
Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, India
arnabmaiti@iitkgp.ac.in

Vishakha Patil
Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India
patilv@iisc.ac.in

Arindam Khan
Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India
arindamkhan@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We study the Stochastic Multi-armed Bandit problem under bounded arm-memory.
In this setting, the arms arrive in a stream, and the number of arms that can be
stored in the memory at any time, is bounded. The decision-maker can only pull
arms that are present in the memory. We address the problem from the perspective
of two standard objectives: 1) regret minimization, and 2) best-arm identification.
For regret minimization, we settle an important open question by showing an almost
tight guarantee. We show Ω(T 2/3 ) cumulative regret in expectation for single-pass
algorithms for arm-memory size of (n − 1), where n is the number of arms. For
best-arm identification, we provide an (ε, δ)-PAC algorithm with arm-memory size
of O(log∗ n) and O( εn2 · log( 1δ )) optimal sample complexity.

1

Introduction

The Stochastic Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem is a classical framework used to capture decisionmaking in uncertain environments. In this model, a decision-maker is faced with n choices (called
arms) and has to sequentially choose one of the n arms (referred to as pulling an arm). Based on
the pulled arm, the decision-maker gets a reward drawn from a corresponding reward distribution
unknown to the decision-maker. Starting with the seminal work of Robbins [26], MAB has been
extensively studied with one of the following two goals: regret minimization and best-arm identification. See, e.g. [7] for a textbook treatment of the area. In addition to being theoretically interesting,
MAB also finds numerous practical applications in diverse areas, including online advertising [31],
crowd-sourcing [32], and clinical trials [9]. Hence, the study of MAB and its variants is of paramount
interest in multiple fields, including online learning and reinforcement learning.
In many applications of the MAB problem, the number of arms (set of advertisements, crowd-workers,
etc.) could be huge. Thus, the MAB problem with a large set of arms has received significant attention
in recent years. Starting with the formative work of Berry et al. [6] and Herschkorn et al. [16] which
studied the MAB problem with infinitely many arms, to the more recent work of Kleinberg et al. [20]
which studies the MAB problem where the set of arms form a metric space, this variant has remained
an active and prominent area of research. Large number of arms may enforce a constraint that the
algorithm may not be able to store all the arms in the memory simultaneously. Additionally, as is
common in these applications, the arms could arrive online, i.e., the algorithm may not have access to
the entire set of arms at the beginning.
The streaming model, first formalized in the pioneering work of Alon et al. [3], has been developed
to handle data streams where a huge amount of data arrives online and an algorithm has access
∗

A part of this work was done when the author was an undergraduate summer intern at IISc, Bangalore.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

