Functional Neural Networks for
Parametric Image Restoration Problems

Fangzhou Luo
McMaster University
luof1@mcmaster.ca

Xiaolin Wu∗
McMaster University
xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Yanhui Guo
McMaster University
guoy143@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Almost every single image restoration problem has a closely related parameter,
such as the scale factor in super-resolution, the noise level in image denoising,
and the quality factor in JPEG deblocking. Although recent studies on image
restoration problems have achieved great success due to the development of deep
neural networks, they handle the parameter involved in an unsophisticated way.
Most previous researchers either treat problems with different parameter levels as
independent tasks, and train a specific model for each parameter level; or simply
ignore the parameter, and train a single model for all parameter levels. The two
popular approaches have their own shortcomings. The former is inefficient in
computing and the latter is ineffective in performance. In this work, we propose
a novel system called functional neural network (FuncNet) to solve a parametric
image restoration problem with a single model. Unlike a plain neural network,
the smallest conceptual element of our FuncNet is no longer a floating-point
variable, but a function of the parameter of the problem. This feature makes it
both efficient and effective for a parametric problem. We apply FuncNet to superresolution, image denoising, and JPEG deblocking. The experimental results show
the superiority of our FuncNet on all three parametric image restoration tasks over
the state of the arts.

1

Introduction

Image restoration [40] is a classical yet still active topic in low-level computer vision, which estimates
the original image from a degraded measurement. For example, single image super-resolution [16]
estimates the high-resolution image from a downsampled one, image denoising [4] estimates the clean
image from a noisy one, and JPEG deblocking [7] estimates the original image from a compressed
one. It is a challenging ill-posed inverse problem which aims to recover the information lost to the
image degradation process [3], and it is also important since it is an essential step in various image
processing and computer vision applications [71, 58, 2, 33, 46, 31, 20].
Almost every single image restoration problem has a closely related parameter, such as the scale factor
in super-resolution, the noise level in image denoising, and the quality factor in JPEG deblocking.
The parameter in an image restoration problem tends to have a strong connection with the image
degradation process. In the super-resolution problem, the blur kernel of the downsampling process is
determined by the scale factor [62]. In the image denoising problem, the standard deviation of the
additive white Gaussian noise is determined by the noise level [11]. In the JPEG deblocking problem,
the quantization table for DCT coefficients is determined by the quality factor [42]. When we try to
restore the clean image from a corrupt one, we might know the value of the corresponding parameter
for various reasons. In the super-resolution problem, the scale factor is specified by users [28]. In
the image denoising problem, the noise level could be measured by other devices [43, 37]. In the
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

