Rebooting ACGAN: Auxiliary Classifier GANs
with Stable Training

Minguk Kang

Woohyeon Shim

Minsu Cho

Jaesik Park

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{mgkang, wh.shim, mscho, jaesik.park}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGAN) generate realistic images by
incorporating class information into GAN. While one of the most popular cGANs is
an auxiliary classifier GAN with softmax cross-entropy loss (ACGAN), it is widely
known that training ACGAN is challenging as the number of classes in the dataset
increases. ACGAN also tends to generate easily classifiable samples with a lack of
diversity. In this paper, we introduce two cures for ACGAN. First, we identify that
gradient exploding in the classifier can cause an undesirable collapse in early training, and projecting input vectors onto a unit hypersphere can resolve the problem.
Second, we propose the Data-to-Data Cross-Entropy loss (D2D-CE) to exploit
relational information in the class-labeled dataset. On this foundation, we propose
the Rebooted Auxiliary Classifier Generative Adversarial Network (ReACGAN).
The experimental results show that ReACGAN achieves state-of-the-art generation
results on CIFAR10, Tiny-ImageNet, CUB200, and ImageNet datasets. We also
verify that ReACGAN benefits from differentiable augmentations and that D2D-CE
harmonizes with StyleGAN2 architecture. Model weights and a software package
that provides implementations of representative cGANs and all experiments in our
paper are available at https://github.com/POSTECH-CVLab/PyTorch-StudioGAN.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [1] are known for the forefront approach to generating
high-fidelity images of diverse categories [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Behind the sensational generation
ability of GANs, there has been tremendous effort to develop adversarial objectives free from the
vanishing gradient problem [10, 11, 12], regularizations for stabilizing adversarial training [11, 13,
14, 3, 15, 16, 17], and conditioning techniques to support the adversarial training using category
information of the dataset [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. Subsequently, the conditioning
techniques have become the de facto standard for high-quality image generation. The models with the
conditioning methods are called conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGAN), and cGANs
can be divided into two groups depending on the discriminator’s conditioning way: classifier-based
GANs [18, 20, 23, 25, 27] and projection-based GANs [19, 3, 4, 28].
The classifier-based GANs facilitate an auxiliary classifier to generate class-specific images by
penalizing the generator if the synthesized images are not consistent with the conditioned labels.
ACGAN [18] has been one of the widely used classifier-based GANs for its simple design and
satisfactory generation performance. While ACGAN can exploit class information by pushing
and pulling classifier’s weights (proxies) against image embeddings [23], it is well known that
ACGAN training is prone to collapsing at the early stage of training as the number of classes
increases [19, 23, 25, 27]. In addition, the generator of ACGAN tends to generate easily classifiable
images at the cost of reduced diversity [18, 19, 27]. Projection-based GANs, on the other hand, have
shown cutting-edge generation results on datasets with a large number of categories. SNGAN [3],
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

