The Implicit Bias of Minima Stability:
A View from Function Space

Rotem Mulayoff
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
rotem.mulayof@gmail.com

Tomer Michaeli
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Daniel Soudry
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Abstract
The loss terrains of over-parameterized neural networks have multiple global minima. However, it is well known that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can stably
converge only to minima that are sufficiently flat w.r.t. SGD’s step size. In this
paper we study the effect that this mechanism has on the function implemented
by the trained model. First, we extend the existing knowledge on minima stability
to non-differentiable minima, which are common in ReLU nets. We then use our
stability results to study a single hidden layer univariate ReLU network. In this
setting, we show that SGD is biased towards functions whose second derivative
(w.r.t the input) has a bounded weighted L1 norm, and this is regardless of the
initialization. In particular, we show that the function implemented by the network upon convergence gets smoother as the learning rate increases. The weight
multiplying the second derivative is larger around the center of the support of the
training distribution, and smaller towards its boundaries, suggesting that a trained
model tends to be smoother at the center of the training distribution.

1

Introduction

Understanding the overwhelming success of deep learning requires unveiling the mechanisms that
allow over-parametrized models to generalize well, a phenomenon that is in sharp contrast to classical
wisdom. It has been suggested that one of the sources for this behavior is the implicit bias that training
algorithms have towards certain solutions. Implicit biases of generic optimization methods had been
known for decades [49] and have also been discussed in the context of neural network training already
in [30]. However, their dramatic effect on modern deep learning has only recently started to unveil
[36, 57]. For example, in binary classification tasks with linearly separable data, it has been shown
that among all global minima, gradient descent (GD) converges to the maximum margin separator
[48]. Similarly, in over-parametrized linear regression, GD converges to the minimum norm solution
when initialized at zero [57].
Implicit biases were recently studied in many different settings, including in linear convolutional
networks [16], matrix and tensor factorization [14, 41], with weight normalization [54] and with
various loss functions [15]. Some works have drawn analogies between these biases and traditional
regularization schemes. For example, it has been conjectured that the implicit bias of GD can be
expressed as some regularization term that is added to the training loss [14]. This turned out to be
true for several settings, such as over-parametrized linear regression with the quadratic loss [57],
matrix factorization under certain assumptions [26], and linear classification on separable data using
losses with an exponential tail [48]. But recent work has pointed out that this is not true in general,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

