Representation Learning on Spatial Networks

Liang Zhao
Department of Computer Science
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
liang.zhao@emory.edu

Zheng Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
zheng.zhang@emory.edu

Abstract
Spatial networks are networks for which the nodes and edges are constrained by
geometry and embedded in real space, which has crucial effects on their topological properties. Although tremendous success has been achieved in spatial and
network representation separately in recent years, there exist very little works
on the representation of spatial networks. Extracting powerful representations
from spatial networks requires the development of appropriate tools to uncover
the pairing of both spatial and network information in the appearance of node
permutation invariant, and rotation and translation invariant. Hence it can not
be modeled merely with either spatial or network models individually. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a generic framework for spatial network representation learning. Specifically, a provably information-lossless and
rotation-translation invariant representation of spatial information on networks
is presented. Then a higher-order spatial network convolution operation that
adapts to our proposed representation is introduced. To ensure efficiency, we
also propose a new approach that relied on sampling random spanning trees to
reduce the time and space complexity from O(N 3 ) to O(N ). We demonstrate
the strength of our proposed framework through extensive experiments on both
synthetic and real-world datasets. The code for the proposed model is available at
https://github.com/rollingstonezz/SGMP_code.

1

Introduction

Spatial data and network data are both popular types of data in modern big data era. The study of
spatial data focuses on the properties of continuous spatial entities under specific geometry, while
analysis of network data investigates the properties of discrete objects and their pairwise relationship.
Spanning these two data types, spatial networks is a
crucial type of data structure that nodes occupy positions in a Euclidean space, where spatial patterns
and constraints may have a strong effect on their
connectivity patterns [6]. Understanding the mechanism of organizing spatial networks has significant
importance for a broad range of fields [29], ranging
from micro-scale (e.g., molecule structure [94]), to
middle-scale (e.g., biological neural network [31]),
to macro-scale (e.g., mobility networks [18]). Effectively learning the representations of spatial networks is extremely challenging due to the close
interactions between network and spatial topology, Figure 1: Spatial network contains not only the inforthe incompatibility between the treatments for dis- mation of network topology and spatial topology but
crete and continuous data, and particular properties also their interaction.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

