Conformal Time-Series Forecasting

Kamilė Stankevičiūtė
University of Oxford
University of Cambridge
ks830@cam.ac.uk

Ahmed M. Alaa
University of California, Los Angeles
ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Current approaches for (multi-horizon) time-series forecasting using recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) focus on issuing point estimates, which are insufficient
for informing decision-making in critical application domains wherein uncertainty
estimates are also required. Existing methods for uncertainty quantification in RNNbased time-series forecasts are limited as they may require significant alterations
to the underlying architecture, may be computationally complex, may be difficult
to calibrate, may incur high sample complexity, and may not provide theoretical
validity guarantees for the issued uncertainty intervals. In this work, we extend
the inductive conformal prediction framework to the time-series forecasting setup,
and propose a lightweight uncertainty estimation procedure to address the above
limitations. With minimal exchangeability assumptions, our approach provides
uncertainty intervals with theoretical guarantees on frequentist coverage for any
multi-horizon forecast predictor and any dataset. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the conformal forecasting framework by comparing it with existing baselines on
a variety of synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Time-series forecasting tasks are central to a broad range of application domains, including stock
price predictions [1, 2], service demand forecasting [3, 4], and medical prognoses [5–7]. Recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) and their variants (e.g., LSTM, GRU, etc.) constitute an instrumental class of
models that are most commonly used to carry out time-series forecasting tasks [8, 9]. These models,
however, are usually used to issue point predictions—i.e., singular estimates of the future values
of a time-series. In many high-stakes applications—such as finance and medicine—these are not
enough; estimates of uncertainty are also required for accurate risk assessment and decision-making
[10]. For example, clinical practitioners need to make treatment decisions accounting for all potential
scenarios, where less likely scenarios may have graver consequences and require more care compared
to the more likely scenarios [11, 12].
While various methods for uncertainty estimation in standard feed-forward neural networks have
been recently proposed [13–15], equivalent methods for RNN-based time-series models are still
under-explored. Existing solutions include Bayesian recurrent neural networks [16–18], quantile
regression models [3, 19], latent variable models with deep state-space architectures [6, 20], and
post-hoc uncertainty estimates using bootstrapping, jackknife or other ensembling procedures [21–
23]. Each of these solutions has its own limitations: Bayesian models may be difficult to calibrate,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

