Localization with Sampling-Argmax

Jiefeng Li

Tong Chen

Ruiqi Shi Yujing Lou Yong-Lu Li Cewu Lu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ljf_likit,chentong1023, gzfoxie, louyujing, yonglu_li, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Soft-argmax operation is commonly adopted in detection-based methods to localize
the target position in a differentiable manner. However, training the neural network
with soft-argmax makes the shape of the probability map unconstrained. Consequently, the model lacks pixel-wise supervision through the map during training,
leading to performance degradation. In this work, we propose sampling-argmax,
a differentiable training method that imposes implicit constraints to the shape of
the probability map by minimizing the expectation of the localization error. To
approximate the expectation, we introduce a continuous formulation of the output
distribution and develop a differentiable sampling process. The expectation can
be approximated by calculating the average error of all samples drawn from the
output distribution. We show that sampling-argmax can seamlessly replace the
conventional soft-argmax operation on various localization tasks. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of the proposed method.
Code is available at https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/sampling-argmax.

1

Introduction

Localizing the target position from the input is a fundamental task in the field of computer vision.
Common approaches to localization can be divided into two categories: regression-based and
detection-based. Detection-based methods show superiority over regression-based methods and
demonstrate impressive performance on a wide variety of tasks [41, 34, 40, 7, 15, 9, 17, 12, 32, 18, 31].
Probability maps (also referred to as heat maps) are predicted in detection-based methods to indicate
the likelihood of the target position. The position with the highest probability is retrieved from the
probability map with the argmax operation. However, the argmax operation is not differentiable and
suffers from quantization error. For accurate localization and end-to-end learning, soft-argmax [4, 3]
is proposed as an approximation of argmax. It has found a wide range of applications in human pose
estimation [34, 21, 22, 35], facial landmark localization [9, 20, 1], stereo matching [41, 13, 2] and
object keypoint estimation [31].
Nevertheless, the mechanism of training networks with soft-argmax is rarely studied. The conventional training strategy is to minimize the error between the output coordinate from soft-argmax and
the ground truth position. However, this strategy is deficient since it only provides constraints to the
expectation of the probability map, not to its shape. As shown in Figure 1, these two maps have the
same mean values, but the bottom one is more concentrated. In well-calibrated probability maps,
positions that locate closer to the ground truth have higher probabilities. Reliable confidence scores
of localization results could be provided, which is essential in unconstrained real-world applications
and downstream tasks. Besides, imposing constraints on the probability map can provide supervised
pixel-wise gradients and facilitate the learning process.
Prior work [28] attempts to shape the probability map by introducing hand-crafted regularizations.
The variance regularization encourages the variance of the probability map to get close to the predefined variance. The Gaussian regularization forces the probability map to resemble a Gaussian
distribution. We argue that these variants are overconstrained. The hand-crafted constraints are not
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

