RelaySum for Decentralized Deep Learning
on Heterogeneous Data

Thijs Vogels∗
EPFL

Lie He∗
EPFL

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
EPFL

Anastasia Koloskova
EPFL
Sebastian U. Stich
EPFL

Tao Lin
EPFL
Martin Jaggi
EPFL

Abstract
In decentralized machine learning, workers compute model updates on their local
data. Because the workers only communicate with few neighbors without central coordination, these updates propagate progressively over the network. This
paradigm enables distributed training on networks without all-to-all connectivity,
helping to protect data privacy as well as to reduce the communication cost of
distributed training in data centers. A key challenge, primarily in decentralized
deep learning, remains the handling of differences between the workers’ local data
distributions. To tackle this challenge, we study the RelaySum mechanism for
information propagation in decentralized learning. RelaySum uses spanning trees
to distribute information exactly uniformly across all workers with finite delays
depending on the distance between nodes. In contrast, the typical gossip averaging
mechanism only distributes data uniformly asymptotically while using the same
communication volume per step as RelaySum. We prove that RelaySGD, based on
this mechanism, is independent of data heterogeneity and scales to many workers,
enabling highly accurate decentralized deep learning on heterogeneous data. Our
code is available at http://github.com/epfml/relaysgd.

1

Introduction

Ever-growing datasets lay at the foundation of the recent breakthroughs in machine learning. Learning
algorithms therefore must be able to leverage data distributed over multiple devices, in particular
for reasons of efficiency and data privacy. There are various paradigms for distributed learning, and
they differ mainly in how the devices collaborate in communicating model updates with each other.
In the all-reduce paradigm, workers average model updates with all other workers at every training
step. In federated learning [24], workers perform local updates before sending them to a central
server that returns their global average to the workers. Finally, decentralized learning significantly
generalizes the two previous scenarios. Here, workers communicate their updates with only few
directly-connected neighbors in a network, without the help of a server.
Decentralized learning offers strong promise for new applications, allowing any group of agents to
collaboratively train a model while respecting the data locality and privacy of each contributor [25].
At the same time, it removes the single point of failure in centralized systems such as in federated
learning [12], improving robustness, security, and privacy. Even from a pure efficiency standpoint,
decentralized communication patterns can speed up training in data centers [2].
In decentralized learning, workers share their local stochastic gradient updates with the others
through gossip communication [41]. They send their updates to their neighbors, which iteratively
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors thijs.vogels@epfl.ch and lie.he@epfl.ch.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

