Infinite Time Horizon Safety of
Bayesian Neural Networks

Mathias Lechner∗
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
mlechner@ist.ac.at

Ðord̄e Žikelić∗
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
dzikelic@ist.ac.at

Krishnendu Chatterjee
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
kchatterjee@ist.ac.at

Thomas A. Henzinger
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
tah@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) place distributions over the weights of a neural
network to model uncertainty in the data and the network’s prediction. We consider
the problem of verifying safety when running a Bayesian neural network policy
in a feedback loop with infinite time horizon systems. Compared to the existing
sampling-based approaches, which are inapplicable to the infinite time horizon
setting, we train a separate deterministic neural network that serves as an infinite
time horizon safety certificate. In particular, we show that the certificate network
guarantees the safety of the system over a subset of the BNN weight posterior’s
support. Our method first computes a safe weight set and then alters the BNN’s
weight posterior to reject samples outside this set. Moreover, we show how to
extend our approach to a safe-exploration reinforcement learning setting, in order to
avoid unsafe trajectories during the training of the policy. We evaluate our approach
on a series of reinforcement learning benchmarks, including non-Lyapunovian
safety specifications.

1

Introduction

The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) across different domains has created the desire to apply
them in safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles [28, 30] and healthcare systems [41].
The fundamental challenge for the deployment of DNNs in these domains is certifying their safety [3].
Thus, formal safety verification of DNNs in isolation and closed control loops [26, 23, 17, 43, 13]
has become an active research topic.
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) are a family of neural networks that place distributions over
their weights [36]. This allows learning uncertainty in the data and the network’s prediction, while
preserving the strong modelling capabilities of DNNs [32]. In particular, BNNs can learn arbitrary
data distributions from much simpler (e.g. Gaussian) weight distributions. This makes BNNs very
appealing for robotic and medical applications [33] where uncertainty is a central component of data.
Despite the large body of literature on verifying safety of DNNs, the formal safety verification of
BNNs has received less attention. Notably, [8, 45, 34] have proposed sampling-based techniques for
obtaining probabilistic guarantees about BNNs. Although these approaches provide some insight
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

