ResNEsts and DenseNEsts: Block-based DNN Models
with Improved Representation Guarantees

Kuan-Lin Chen1 , Ching-Hua Lee1 , Harinath Garudadri2 , and Bhaskar D. Rao1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Qualcomm Institute
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
{kuc029,chl438,hgarudadri,brao}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Models recently used in the literature proving residual networks (ResNets) are
better than linear predictors are actually different from standard ResNets that have
been widely used in computer vision. In addition to the assumptions such as
scalar-valued output or single residual block, the models fundamentally considered
in the literature have no nonlinearities at the final residual representation that
feeds into the final affine layer. To codify such a difference in nonlinearities and
reveal a linear estimation property, we define ResNEsts, i.e., Residual Nonlinear
Estimators, by simply dropping nonlinearities at the last residual representation
from standard ResNets. We show that wide ResNEsts with bottleneck blocks can
always guarantee a very desirable training property that standard ResNets aim to
achieve, i.e., adding more blocks does not decrease performance given the same
set of basis elements. To prove that, we first recognize ResNEsts are basis function
models that are limited by a coupling problem in basis learning and linear prediction.
Then, to decouple prediction weights from basis learning, we construct a special
architecture termed augmented ResNEst (A-ResNEst) that always guarantees no
worse performance with the addition of a block. As a result, such an A-ResNEst
establishes empirical risk lower bounds for a ResNEst using corresponding bases.
Our results demonstrate ResNEsts indeed have a problem of diminishing feature
reuse; however, it can be avoided by sufficiently expanding or widening the input
space, leading to the above-mentioned desirable property. Inspired by the densely
connected networks (DenseNets) that have been shown to outperform ResNets,
we also propose a corresponding new model called Densely connected Nonlinear
Estimator (DenseNEst). We show that any DenseNEst can be represented as a
wide ResNEst with bottleneck blocks. Unlike ResNEsts, DenseNEsts exhibit the
desirable property without any special architectural re-design.

1

Introduction

Constructing deep neural network (DNN) models by stacking layers unlocks the field of deep learning,
leading to the early success in computer vision, such as AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al., 2012], ZFNet
[Zeiler and Fergus, 2014], and VGG [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015]. However, stacking more
and more layers can suffer from worse performance [He and Sun, 2015, Srivastava et al., 2015, He
et al., 2016a]; thus, it is no longer a valid option to further improve DNN models. In fact, such a
degradation problem is not caused by overfitting, but worse training performance [He et al., 2016a].
When neural networks become sufficiently deep, optimization landscapes quickly transition from
being nearly convex to being highly chaotic [Li et al., 2018]. As a result, stacking more and more
layers in DNN models can easily converge to poor local minima (see Figure 1 in [He et al., 2016a]).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

