HELP: Hardware-Adaptive Efficient Latency
Prediction for NAS via Meta-Learning

Hayeon Lee1∗ Sewoong Lee1∗ Song Chong1 Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2 , Seoul, South Korea
{hayeon926, dltpdnd21, songchong, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
For deployment, neural architecture search should be hardware-aware, in order to
satisfy the device-specific constraints (e.g., memory usage, latency and energy consumption) and enhance the model efficiency. Existing methods on hardware-aware
NAS collect a large number of samples (e.g., accuracy and latency) from a target
device, either builds a lookup table or a latency estimator. However, such approach
is impractical in real-world scenarios as there exist numerous devices with different
hardware specifications, and collecting samples from such a large number of devices will require prohibitive computational and monetary cost. To overcome such
limitations, we propose Hardware-adaptive Efficient Latency Predictor (HELP),
which formulates the device-specific latency estimation problem as a meta-learning
problem, such that we can estimate the latency of a model’s performance for a
given task on an unseen device with a few samples. To this end, we introduce novel
hardware embeddings to embed any devices considering them as black-box functions that output latencies, and meta-learn the hardware-adaptive latency predictor
in a device-dependent manner, using the hardware embeddings. We validate the
proposed HELP for its latency estimation performance on unseen platforms, on
which it achieves high estimation performance with as few as 10 measurement
samples, outperforming all relevant baselines. We also validate end-to-end NAS
frameworks using HELP against ones without it, and show that it largely reduces
the total time cost of the base NAS method, in latency-constrained settings. Code
is available at https://github.com/HayeonLee/HELP.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [39, 1, 25, 22, 21, 36, 5], which aims to search for the optimal
architecture for a given task, has achieved a huge practical success by overcoming the sub-optimality
of manual architecture designs. However, for NAS to be truly practical in real-world scenarios, it
should be hardware-aware. That is, we need to search for the neural architectures that satisfy diverse
device constraints (e.g., memory footprint, inference latency, and energy consumption). Due to the
practical importance of the problem, many existing works propose to take into account the hardware
efficiency constraints (mostly latency) in the search process [29, 3, 34, 32, 6, 2, 37, 4, 33].
However, one of the main challenges with such hardware-aware NAS is that collecting training
samples (e.g., architecture-latency pairs on each target device) to build reliable prediction models for
the efficiency metrics, is computationally costly or requires the knowledge of the hardware devices.
Existing hardware-aware NAS methods usually require a large number of samples (e.g., 5k) and
train metric predictors for each device from scratch. Additionally, most works [29, 3, 34, 32, 6] are
task-specific, and thus such collection of performance samples should be done from scratch, for a
new task. Thus, the sample collection process is prohibitively costly when we consider real-world
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

