Towards Lower Bounds on the Depth
of ReLU Neural Networks
Amitabh Basu
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA
basu.amitabh@jhu.edu

Christoph Hertrich
Technische Universität Berlin
Berlin, Germany
christoph.hertrich@posteo.de
Marco Di Summa
Università degli Studi di Padova
Padua, Italy
disumma@math.unipd.it

Martin Skutella
Technische Universität Berlin
Berlin, Germany
martin.skutella@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
We contribute to a better understanding of the class of functions that is represented
by a neural network with ReLU activations and a given architecture. Using techniques from mixed-integer optimization, polyhedral theory, and tropical geometry,
we provide a mathematical counterbalance to the universal approximation theorems
which suggest that a single hidden layer is sufficient for learning tasks. In particular,
we investigate whether the class of exactly representable functions strictly increases
by adding more layers (with no restrictions on size). This problem has potential
impact on algorithmic and statistical aspects because of the insight it provides into
the class of functions represented by neural hypothesis classes. However, to the
best of our knowledge, this question has not been investigated in the neural network
literature. We also present upper bounds on the sizes of neural networks required
to represent functions in these neural hypothesis classes.

1

Introduction

A core problem in machine learning or statistical pattern recognition is the estimation of an unknown
data distribution with access to i.i.d. samples from the distribution. It is well-known that there is
a tension between how much prior information one has about the data distribution and how many
samples one needs to solve the problem with high confidence (or equivalently, how much variance
one has in one’s estimate). This is referred to as the bias-variance trade-off or the bias-complexity
trade-off. Neural networks provide a way to turn this bias/complexity knob in a controlled manner
that has been studied for decades going back to the idea of a perceptron by Rosenblatt [1958]. This is
done by modifying the architecture of a neural network class of functions, which has two parameters:
depth and size. As one increases these parameters, the class of functions becomes more expressive.
In terms of the bias-variance trade-off, the “bias” decreases as the class of functions becomes more
expressive, but the “variance” or “complexity” increases.
So-called universal approximation theorems [Cybenko, 1989, Hornik, 1991, Anthony and Bartlett,
1999] show that even with a single hidden layer, i.e., when the depth of the architecture is the smallest
possible value, one can essentially reduce the “bias” as much as one desires, by increasing the
size of the network or the number of neurons used in the neural network. Nevertheless, it can be
advantageous both theoretically and empirically to increase the depth because a substantial reduction
in the size can be achieved; Telgarsky [2016a], Eldan and Shamir [2016], Arora et al. [2018] is a
small sample of recent work in this direction. To get a better quantitative handle on these trade-offs,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

