Physics-Aware Downsampling with Deep Learning
for Scalable Flood Modeling

Niv Giladi1,2

Zvika Ben-Haim1

Sella Nevo1

Yossi Matias1

Daniel Soudry2

1

2

Google Research
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

{giladiniv, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com
{zvika, sellanevo, yossi}@google.com

Abstract
Background. Floods are the most common natural disaster in the world, affecting
the lives of hundreds of millions. Flood forecasting is therefore a vitally important
endeavor, typically achieved using physical water flow simulations, which rely
on accurate terrain elevation maps. However, such simulations, based on solving
partial differential equations, are computationally prohibitive on a large scale. This
scalability issue is commonly alleviated using a coarse grid representation of the
elevation map, though this representation may distort crucial terrain details, leading
to significant inaccuracies in the simulation.
Contributions. We train a deep neural network to perform physics-informed downsampling of the terrain map: we optimize the coarse grid representation of the
terrain maps, so that the flood prediction will match the fine grid solution. For the
learning process to succeed, we configure a dataset specifically for this task. We
demonstrate that with this method, it is possible to achieve a significant reduction
in computational cost, while maintaining an accurate solution. A reference implementation accompanies the paper as well as documentation and code for dataset
reproduction.

1

Introduction

A physical process is a time-evolving phenomenon marked by gradual transitions through a series of
states, following physical rules. Scientists attempt to model these physical processes by employing
analytical descriptions that correspond to the underlying physics of these processes. Commonly,
the analytical descriptions, or physical models, such as conservation laws, are in the form of partial
differential equations (PDEs). Physical models are the backbone behind modeling phenomena such
as weather forecasts, flood forecasting, aerodynamics, chemical processes, and more. Traditionally,
these physical models are solved numerically, as no closed form solution is available for most
problems. One typical numerical method is to discretize the PDEs using a Taylor expansion and
repeatedly integrate in time over short intervals. However, solving PDEs numerically on a large scale
is challenging because of the need to resolve spatiotemporal features over many scales.
In this paper, we focus on hydraulic models, which are a widely used physical models. The goal of
these models is to simulate the flow of water in a given environment. We are specifically interested
in simulating water flow through a floodplain in order to predict inundation, i.e., where and to what
extent will flooding occur. Specifically, in inundation modeling we are given an elevation map of
the terrain, boundary conditions, initial conditions — and we wish to predict, the water height in
each pixel at some future time t, with maximum accuracy and minimum computational cost. Such
prediction is an important task in operational flood alert systems [5, 43, 10].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

