Does Knowledge Distillation Really Work?
Samuel Stanton
NYU

Pavel Izmailov
NYU

Alexander A. Alemi
Google Research

Polina Kirichenko
NYU
Andrew Gordon Wilson
NYU

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a popular technique for training a small student network
to emulate a larger teacher model, such as an ensemble of networks. We show
that while knowledge distillation can improve student generalization, it does not
typically work as it is commonly understood: there often remains a surprisingly
large discrepancy between the predictive distributions of the teacher and the student,
even in cases when the student has the capacity to perfectly match the teacher.
We identify difficulties in optimization as a key reason for why the student is
unable to match the teacher. We also show how the details of the dataset used for
distillation play a role in how closely the student matches the teacher — and that
more closely matching the teacher paradoxically does not always lead to better
student generalization.

1

Introduction

Large, deep networks can learn representations that generalize well. While smaller, more efficient
networks lack the inductive biases to find these representations from training data alone, they may
have the capacity to represent these solutions [e.g., 2, 18, 32, 45]. Influential work on knowledge
distillation [22] argues that Bucilă et al. [5] “demonstrate convincingly that the knowledge acquired
by a large ensemble of models [the teacher] can be transferred to a single small model [the student]”.
Indeed this quote encapsulates the conventional narrative of knowledge distillation: a student model
learns a high-fidelity representation of a larger teacher, enabled by the teacher’s soft labels.
Conversely, in Figure 1 we show that with modern architectures knowledge distillation can lead to
students with very different predictions from their teachers, even when the student has the capacity to
perfectly match the teacher. Indeed, it is becoming well-known that in self-distillation the student
fails to match the teacher and, paradoxically, student generalization improves as a result [14, 40].
However, when the teacher is a large model (e.g. a deep ensemble) improvements in fidelity translate
into improvements in generalization, as we show in Figure 1(b). For these large models there is still a
significant accuracy gap between student and teacher, so fidelity is aligned with generalization.
We will distinguish between fidelity, the ability of a student to match a teacher’s predictions, and
generalization, the performance of a student in predicting unseen, in-distribution data. We show that
in many cases it is surprisingly difficult to obtain good student fidelity. In Section 5 we investigate
the hypothesis that low fidelity is an identifiability problem that can be solved by augmenting the
distillation dataset. In Section 6 we investigate the hypothesis that low fidelity is an optimization
problem resulting in a failure of the student to match the teacher even on the original training dataset.
We present a summary of our conclusions in Section 7.
Does knowledge distillation really work? In short: Yes, in the sense that it often improves student
generalization. No, in that knowledge distillation often fails to live up to its name, transferring very
limited knowledge from teacher to student.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

