Finding Regions of Heterogeneity in Decision-Making
via Expected Conditional Covariance

Justin Lim∗
MIT CSAIL and IMES
Cambridge, MA
justinl@mit.edu

Christina X Ji∗
MIT CSAIL and IMES
Cambridge, MA
cji@mit.edu

Saul Blecker
NYU Langone
New York, NY
saul.blecker@nyulangone.org

Michael Oberst∗
MIT CSAIL and IMES
Cambridge, MA
moberst@mit.edu

Leora Horwitz
NYU Langone
New York, NY
leora.horwitz@nyulangone.org

David Sontag
MIT CSAIL and IMES
Cambridge, MA
dsontag@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Individuals often make different decisions when faced with the same context,
due to personal preferences and background. For instance, judges may vary in
their leniency towards certain drug-related offenses, and doctors may vary in
their preference for how to start treatment for certain types of patients. With
these examples in mind, we present an algorithm for identifying types of contexts
(e.g., types of cases or patients) with high inter-decision-maker disagreement. We
formalize this as a causal inference problem, seeking a region where the assignment
of decision-maker has a large causal effect on the decision. Our algorithm finds such
a region by maximizing an empirical objective, and we give a generalization bound
for its performance. In a semi-synthetic experiment, we show that our algorithm
recovers the correct region of heterogeneity accurately compared to baselines.
Finally, we apply our algorithm to real-world healthcare datasets, recovering
variation that aligns with existing clinical knowledge.

1

Introduction

Understanding heterogeneity in decision-making is an established problem in medicine (Birkmeyer
et al., 2013; Corallo et al., 2014; De Jong et al., 2006), consumer choice (Ortega et al., 2011; Scarpa
et al., 2005), and law (Kang et al., 2012; Kleinberg et al., 2018; Arnold et al., 2018). In the context of
medicine, this is referred to as the study of practice variation (Atsma et al., 2020; Cabana et al., 1999),
where it is often observed that doctors, facing the same clinical context, will make different decisions.
Likewise, in a legal context, judges often differ in their leniency in their decisions regarding bail
(Kleinberg et al., 2018), juvenile incarceration (Aizer and Doyle Jr, 2013), the use of alternatives to
incarceration (Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2013), and incarceration length (Kling, 2006). In some
scenarios this variation may be justified: The best medical treatment may not be obvious. In others, it
may be grossly unfair, as in the case of racial bias in bail decisions (Arnold et al., 2018).
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

