Understanding the Limits of Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation via Data Poisoning

Akshay Mehra1 , Bhavya Kailkhura2 , Pin-Yu Chen3 and Jihun Hamm1
1
Tulane University 2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 3 IBM Research
{amehra, jhamm3}@tulane.edu, kailkhura1@llnl.gov, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) enables cross-domain learning without
target domain labels by transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain
whose distribution differs from that of the target. However, UDA is not always
successful and several accounts of ‘negative transfer’ have been reported in the
literature. In this work, we prove a simple lower bound on the target domain error
that complements the existing upper bound. Our bound shows the insufficiency
of minimizing source domain error and marginal distribution mismatch for a
guaranteed reduction in the target domain error, due to the possible increase of
induced labeling function mismatch. This insufficiency is further illustrated through
simple distributions for which the same UDA approach succeeds, fails, and may
succeed or fail with an equal chance. Motivated from this, we propose novel
data poisoning attacks to fool UDA methods into learning representations that
produce large target domain errors. We evaluate the effect of these attacks on
popular UDA methods using benchmark datasets where they have been previously
shown to be successful. Our results show that poisoning can significantly decrease
the target domain accuracy, dropping it to almost 0% in some cases, with the
addition of only 10% poisoned data in the source domain. The failure of these UDA
methods demonstrates their limitations at guaranteeing cross-domain generalization
consistent with our lower bound. Thus, evaluating UDA methods in adversarial
settings such as data poisoning provides a better sense of their robustness to data
distributions unfavorable for UDA.

1

Introduction

The problem of domain adaptation (DA) arises when the training and the test data distributions
are different, violating the common assumption of supervised learning. In this paper, we focus on
unsupervised DA (UDA), which is a special case of DA when no labeled information from the target
domain is available. This setting is useful for applications where obtaining large-scale well-curated
datasets is both time-consuming and costly. The seminal works [1, 2] proved an upper bound on a
classifier’s target domain error in the UDA setting leading to several algorithms for learning in this
setting. Many of these algorithms rely on learning a domain invariant representation by minimizing
the error on the source domain and a divergence measure between the marginal feature distributions of
the source and target domains. Popular divergence measures include total variation distance, JensenShannon divergence [9, 32, 37], Wasserstein distance [29, 15, 7], and maximum mean discrepancy
[19, 17, 20]. The success of these algorithms is argued in terms of minimization of the upper bound
proposed in [1] along with an improvement in the target domain accuracy on benchmark UDA tasks.
Despite this success on benchmark datasets, some works [9, 16, 36, 33] have presented evidence of
the failure of these methods in different scenarios. Recent works have explained this apparent failure
of UDA methods by proposing new upper bounds [36, 6, 14, 34] on the target domain error while
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

