NAS-Bench-x11 and the Power of Learning Curves

1

Shen Yan∗ 1 , Colin White∗2 , Yash Savani3 , Frank Hutter4,5
Michigan State University, 2 Abacus.AI, 3 Carnegie Mellon University,
4
University of Freiburg, 5 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
While early research in neural architecture search (NAS) required extreme computational resources, the recent releases of tabular and surrogate benchmarks have
greatly increased the speed and reproducibility of NAS research. However, two
of the most popular benchmarks do not provide the full training information for
each architecture. As a result, on these benchmarks it is not possible to run many
types of multi-fidelity techniques, such as learning curve extrapolation, that require
evaluating architectures at arbitrary epochs. In this work, we present a method
using singular value decomposition and noise modeling to create surrogate benchmarks, NAS-Bench-111, NAS-Bench-311, and NAS-Bench-NLP11, that output the
full training information for each architecture, rather than just the final validation
accuracy. We demonstrate the power of using the full training information by
introducing a learning curve extrapolation framework to modify single-fidelity
algorithms, showing that it leads to improvements over popular single-fidelity algorithms which claimed to be state-of-the-art upon release. Our code and pretrained
models are available at https://github.com/automl/nas-bench-x11.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, algorithms for neural architecture search (NAS) have been used to automatically
find architectures that achieve state-of-the-art performance on various datasets [82, 53, 38, 13]. In
2019, there were calls for reproducible and fair comparisons within NAS research [34, 57, 75, 36]
due to both the lack of a consistent training pipeline between papers and experiments with not enough
trials to reach statistically significant conclusions. These concerns spurred the release of tabular
benchmarks, such as NAS-Bench-101 [76] and NAS-Bench-201 [11], created by fully training all
architectures in search spaces of size 423 624 and 6 466, respectively. These benchmarks allow
researchers to easily simulate NAS experiments, making it possible to run fair NAS comparisons
and to run enough trials to reach statistical significance at very little computational cost or carbon
emissions [17]. Recently, to extend the benefits of tabular NAS benchmarks to larger, more realistic
NAS search spaces which cannot be evaluated exhaustively, it was proposed to construct surrogate
benchmarks [60]. The first such surrogate benchmark is NAS-Bench-301 [60], which models
the DARTS [38] search space of size 1018 architectures. It was created by fully training 60 000
architectures (both drawn randomly and chosen by top NAS methods) and then fitting a surrogate
model that can estimate the performance of all of the remaining architectures. Since 2019, dozens of
papers have used these NAS benchmarks to develop new algorithms [67, 55, 73, 64, 59].
An unintended side-effect of the release of these benchmarks is that it became significantly easier to
devise single fidelity NAS algorithms: when the NAS algorithm chooses to evaluate an architecture,
the architecture is fully trained and only the validation accuracy at the final epoch of training is
outputted. This is because NAS-Bench-301 only contains the architectures’ accuracy at epoch 100,
∗
Equal contribution. Correspondence to yanshen6@msu.edu, colin@abacus.ai, ysavani@cs.cmu.edu,
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

