Noether’s Learning Dynamics:
Role of Symmetry Breaking in Neural Networks

1

Hidenori Tanaka1⇤ , Daniel Kunin2
Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA
2
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

Abstract
In nature, symmetry governs regularities, while symmetry breaking brings texture.
In artificial neural networks, symmetry has been a central design principle to
efficiently capture regularities in the world, but the role of symmetry breaking is not
well understood. Here, we develop a theoretical framework to study the geometry
of learning dynamics in neural networks, and reveal a key mechanism of explicit
symmetry breaking behind the efficiency and stability of modern neural networks.
To build this understanding, we model the discrete learning dynamics of gradient
descent using a continuous-time Lagrangian formulation, in which the learning
rule corresponds to the kinetic energy and the loss function corresponds to the
potential energy. Then, we identify kinetic symmetry breaking (KSB), the condition
when the kinetic energy explicitly breaks the symmetry of the potential function.
We generalize Noether’s theorem known in physics to take into account KSB and
derive the resulting motion of the Noether charge: Noether’s Learning Dynamics
(NLD). Finally, we apply NLD to neural networks with normalization layers
and reveal how KSB introduces a mechanism of implicit adaptive optimization,
establishing an analogy between learning dynamics induced by normalization
layers and RMSProp. Overall, through the lens of Lagrangian mechanics, we have
established a theoretical foundation to discover geometric design principles for the
learning dynamics of neural networks.
(b) Classical Mechanics
With the rapid increase in available data and computa- (a) Learning Dynamics
tional power, artificial neural networks have become an
essential tool both in science and engineering. To obtain
q
q
an accurate model, one has to overcome the challenge of
Parameter space
q
q Physical space
tuning millions of randomly initialized parameters q 2 RN
q
q
to minimize the loss function f (q) 2 R, a measure of the Figure 1: Learning dynamics in analdiscrepancy between the model’s predictions from the in- ogy to classical mechanics. (a) Learnput data and the provided truth. In minimizing the loss, ing dynamics of a neural network in pathe learning rule specifies how to iteratively update these rameter space. (b) Motion of a particle
parameters based on the recent trajectory and the local in physical space.
geometry of the non-convex loss landscape. We can represent the repeated updates of the millions of parameters
during learning as discrete movements of a point in high-dimensional parameter space (Fig. 1a). The
architecture shapes the static loss landscape and the learning rule governs the motion of the model
through parameter space during training. However, it is the complex interaction of the architecture
and learning rule which determines the final state of the trained model. Inspired by tools and ideas
from classical mechanics (Fig. 1b), we develop a theoretical framework which unifies the effects of
the architecture and learning rule on the geometry of the learning dynamics.
2

N

1

0

1

0

* Correspondence to: Hidenori Tanaka <hidenori.tanaka@ntt-research.com>
2
Work done during an internship at Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

