Dynaboard: An Evaluation-As-A-Service Platform
for Holistic Next-Generation Benchmarking
Zhiyi Ma†⇤ Kawin Ethayarajh‡⇤ Tristan Thrush†⇤ Somya Jain†
Ledell Wu†

Robin Jia†

†

Christopher Potts‡ Adina Williams†
Facebook AI; ‡ Stanford University
dynabench@fb.com

Douwe Kiela†

Abstract
We introduce Dynaboard, an evaluation-as-a-service framework for hosting benchmarks and conducting holistic model comparison, integrated with the Dynabench
platform. Our platform evaluates NLP models directly instead of relying on selfreported metrics or predictions on a single dataset. Under this paradigm, models
are submitted to be evaluated in the cloud, circumventing the issues of reproducibility, accessibility, and backwards compatibility that often hinder benchmarking in
NLP. This allows users to interact with uploaded models in real time to assess
their quality, and permits the collection of additional metrics such as memory use,
throughput, and robustness, which – despite their importance to practitioners –
have traditionally been absent from leaderboards. On each task, models are ranked
according to the Dynascore, a novel utility-based aggregation of these statistics,
which users can customize to better reflect their preferences, placing more/less
weight on a particular axis of evaluation or dataset. As state-of-the-art NLP models
push the limits of traditional benchmarks, Dynaboard offers a standardized solution
for a more diverse and comprehensive evaluation of model quality.

1

Introduction

Benchmarks have been critical to driving progress in AI: they provide a standard by which models
are measured, they support direct comparisons of different proposals, and they provide clear-cut goals
for the research community. This has led to an outpouring of new benchmarks designed not only to
evaluate models on new tasks, but also to address weaknesses in existing models [49, 55, 34], and
expose artifacts in existing benchmarks [42, 19, 25, 33, 22, 37]. These efforts are helping to provide
us with a more realistic picture of how much progress the field has made.
To date, the metrics by which we assess system performance have received much less systematic
attention. Even as the benchmarks have changed, the community has continued to rely heavily on
accuracy as the sole primary metric. This gives rise to a “leaderboard culture” in which accuracy is
the only thing that matters, even in contexts in which other pressures – e.g., compactness, fairness,
efficiency – are clearly important [60, 6, 16, 63, 68, 38, 2, 51, 17]. Recently, Ethayarajh and
Jurafsky [17] provided a microeconomic framing of the problem: leaderboard viewers are consumers
of models, and each viewer has their own set of preferences: some care only about accuracy, others
value compactness in addition to accuracy, and so on. Static leaderboards that only rank by model
performance thus have a scoring function that is misaligned with the preferences of most users.
Moreover, merely focusing on a single metric, such as accuracy, limits the scope of possible issues
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

