A Surrogate Objective Framework for
Prediction+Optimization with Soft Constraints

Kai Yan∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
kaiyan3@illinois.edu
Chuan Luo
Microsoft Research
Beijing, china
chuan.luo@microsoft.com

Jie Yan
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
jiey@microsoft.com

Liting Chen∗
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
98chenliting@gmail.com

Qingwei Lin†
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
qlin@microsoft.com

Dongmei Zhang
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
dongmeiz@microsoft.com

Abstract
Prediction+optimization is a common real-world paradigm where we have to predict problem parameters before solving the optimization problem. However, the
criteria by which the prediction model is trained are often inconsistent with the
goal of the downstream optimization problem. Recently, decision-focused prediction approaches, such as SPO+ and direct optimization, have been proposed
to fill this gap. However, they cannot directly handle the soft constraints with
the max operator required in many real-world objectives. This paper proposes
a novel analytically differentiable surrogate objective framework for real-world
linear and semi-definite negative quadratic programming problems with soft linear
and non-negative hard constraints. This framework gives the theoretical bounds
on constraints’ multipliers, and derives the closed-form solution with respect to
predictive parameters and thus gradients for any variable in the problem. We
evaluate our method in three applications extended with soft constraints: synthetic
linear programming, portfolio optimization, and resource provisioning, demonstrating that our method outperforms traditional two-staged methods and other
decision-focused approaches.

1

Introduction

Mathematical optimization (a.k.a. mathematical programming), e.g., linear and quadratic programming, has been widely applied in decision-making processes, such as resource scheduling [1], goods
production planning [2], portfolio optimization [3], and power scheduling [4]. In practice, problem
parameters (e.g., goods demands, and equity returns) are often contextual and predicted by models
with observed features (e.g., history time series). With the popularity of machine learning techniques
and increasing available data, prediction+optimization has become a normal paradigm [5].
∗

Contributed during internship at Microsoft Research. † Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

