The Utility of Explainable AI in Ad Hoc
Human-Machine Teaming

Rohan Paleja1 , Muyleng Ghuy1 , Nadun R. Arachchige1 , Reed Jensen2 , Matthew Gombolay1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 MIT Lincoln Laboratory
1
Atlanta, GA 30332, 2 Lexington, MA 02420
{rpaleja3, mghuy3, nkra3}@gatech.edu, rjensen@ll.mit.edu mgombolay3@gatech.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in machine learning have led to growing interest in Explainable
AI (xAI) to enable humans to gain insight into the decision-making of machine
learning models. Despite this recent interest, the utility of xAI techniques has not
yet been characterized in human-machine teaming. Importantly, xAI offers the
promise of enhancing team situational awareness (SA) and shared mental model
development, which are the key characteristics of effective human-machine teams.
Rapidly developing such mental models is especially critical in ad hoc humanmachine teaming, where agents do not have a priori knowledge of others’ decisionmaking strategies. In this paper, we present two novel human-subject experiments
quantifying the benefits of deploying xAI techniques within a human-machine
teaming scenario. First, we show that xAI techniques can support SA (p < 0.05).
Second, we examine how different SA levels induced via a collaborative AI policy
abstraction affect ad hoc human-machine teaming performance. Importantly, we
find that the benefits of xAI are not universal, as there is a strong dependence on
the composition of the human-machine team. Novices benefit from xAI providing
increased SA (p < 0.05) but are susceptible to cognitive overhead (p < 0.05). On
the other hand, expert performance degrades with the addition of xAI-based support
(p < 0.05), indicating that the cost of paying attention to the xAI outweighs the
benefits obtained from being provided additional information to enhance SA. Our
results demonstrate that researchers must deliberately design and deploy the right
xAI techniques in the right scenario by carefully considering human-machine team
composition and how the xAI method augments SA.

1

Introduction

Collaborative robots (i.e., "cobots") and machine learning-based virtual agents are increasingly
entering the human workspace with the aim of increasing productivity, enhancing safety, and improving the quality of our lives [16, 22]. In the envisage of ubiquitous cobots, these agents will
dynamically interact with a wide variety of people in dynamic and novel contexts. Ad hoc teaming
characterizes this type of scenario, where multiple unacquainted agents (in this case, humans and
cobots) with varying capabilities must collectively collaborate to accomplish a shared goal [33, 52].
Ad hoc teaming presents a significant challenge in that agents are unaware of the capabilities and
behaviors of other agents, and lack the opportunity to develop a team identity, shared mental models,
and trust [9, 10, 57]. For example, the human may not be aware of the cobot’s possible actions
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. This material is
based upon work supported by the United States Air Force under Air Force Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0001.
Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Air Force.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

