Analytical Study of Momentum-Based Acceleration
Methods in Paradigmatic High-Dimensional
Non-Convex Problems
Stefano Sarao Mannelli
Department of Experimental Psychology
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
stefano.saraomannelli@psy.ox.ac.uk

Pierfrancesco Urbani
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA
Institut de physique théorique
Gif-sur-Yvette, France
pierfrancesco.urbani@ipht.fr

Abstract
The optimization step in many machine learning problems rarely relies on vanilla
gradient descent but it is common practice to use momentum-based accelerated
methods. Despite these algorithms being widely applied to arbitrary loss functions,
their behaviour in generically non-convex, high dimensional landscapes is poorly
understood. In this work, we use dynamical mean field theory techniques to
describe analytically the average dynamics of these methods in a prototypical
non-convex model: the (spiked) matrix-tensor model. We derive a closed set
of equations that describe the behaviour of heavy-ball momentum and Nesterov
acceleration in the infinite dimensional limit. By numerical integration of these
equations, we observe that these methods speed up the dynamics but do not improve
the algorithmic threshold with respect to gradient descent in the spiked model.

1

Introduction

In many computer science applications one of the critical steps is the minimization of a cost function.
Apart from very few exceptions, the simplest way to approach the problem is by running local
algorithms that move down in the cost landscape and hopefully approach a minimum at a small cost.
The simplest algorithm of this kind is gradient descent, that has been used since the XIX century to
address optimization problems [1]. Later on, faster and more stable algorithms have been developed:
second order methods [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] where information from the Hessian is used to adapt the
descent to the local geometry of the cost landscape, and first order methods based on momentum
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12] that introduce inertia in the algorithm and provably speed up convergence in a variety
of convex problems. In the era of deep-learning and large datasets, the research has pushed towards
memory efficient algorithms, in particular stochastic gradient descent that trades off computational
and statistical efficiency [13, 14], and momentum-based methods are very used in practice [15].
Which algorithm is the best in practice seems not to have a simple answer and there are instances
where a class of algorithms outperforms the other and vice-versa [16]. Most of the theoretical
literature on momentum-based methods concerns convex problems [17, 18, 19, 20, 21] and, despite
these methods have been successfully applied to a variety of problems, only recently high dimensional
non-convex settings have been considered [22, 23, 24]. Furthermore, with few exceptions [25], the
majority of these studies focus on worst-case analysis while empirically one could also be interested
in the behaviour of such algorithms on typical instances of the optimization problem, formulated in
terms of a generative model extracted from a probability distribution.
The main contribution of this paper is the analytical description of the average evolution of momentumbased methods in two simple non-convex, high-dimensional, optimization problems. First we consider
the mixed p-spin model [26, 27], a paradigmatic random high-dimensional optimization problem.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

