Second-Order Neural ODE Optimizer

Guan-Horng Liu, Tianrong Chen, Evangelos A. Theodorou
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
{ghliu, tianrong.chen, evangelos.theodorou}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel second-order optimization framework for training the emerging deep continuous-time models, specifically the Neural Ordinary Differential
Equations (Neural ODEs). Since their training already involves expensive gradient
computation by solving a backward ODE, deriving efficient second-order methods
becomes highly nontrivial. Nevertheless, inspired by the recent Optimal Control
(OC) interpretation of training deep networks, we show that a specific continuoustime OC methodology, called Differential Programming, can be adopted to derive
backward ODEs for higher-order derivatives at the same O(1) memory cost. We
further explore a low-rank representation of the second-order derivatives and show
that it leads to efficient preconditioned updates with the aid of Kronecker-based
factorization. The resulting method – named SNOpt – converges much faster than
first-order baselines in wall-clock time, and the improvement remains consistent
across various applications, e.g. image classification, generative flow, and timeseries prediction. Our framework also enables direct architecture optimization,
such as the integration time of Neural ODEs, with second-order feedback policies,
strengthening the OC perspective as a principled tool of analyzing optimization in
deep learning. Our code is available at https://github.com/ghliu/snopt.

Introduction

0

0.5k

1k

Time-Series Prediction (ArtWR)

70

Train Loss

100

Accuracy (%)

Train Loss

Image Classification (CIFAR10)

35
0

0.5k

Wall-Clock Time (sec)

1k

100
10 2
0

1.8k

2.6k

5.4k

Accuracy (%)

1

80

Adam
SGD

40
0

1.8k

Wall-Clock Time (sec)

2.6k

5.4k

SNOpt
(ours)

Figure 1: Our second-order method (SNOpt; green solid curves) achieves superior convergence
compared to first-order methods (SGD, Adam) on various Neural-ODE applications.
Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018) have received tremendous attention over recent years. Inspired by
taking the continuous limit of the “discrete” residual transformation, xk+1 = xk + F (xk , θ), they
propose to directly parameterize the vector field of an ODE as a deep neural network (DNN), i.e.
dx(t)
= F (t, x(t), θ), x(t0 ) = xt0 ,
(1)
dt
m
n
where x(t) ∈ R and F (·, ·, θ) is a DNN parameterized by θ ∈ R . This provides a powerful
paradigm connecting modern machine learning to classical differential equations (Weinan, 2017) and
has since then achieved promising results on time series analysis (Rubanova et al., 2019; Kidger et al.,
2020b), reversible generative flow (Grathwohl et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2019), image classification
(Zhuang et al., 2020, 2021), and manifold learning (Lou et al., 2020; Mathieu & Nickel, 2020).
Due to the continuous-time representation, Neural ODEs feature a distinct optimization process (see
Fig. 2) compared to their discrete-time counterparts, which also poses new challenges. First, the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

