Neural Dubber: Dubbing for Videos
According to Scripts

Chenxu Hu1 , Qiao Tian2 , Tingle Li1,3 , Yuping Wang2 , Yuxuan Wang2 , Hang Zhao1,3∗
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
https://tsinghua-mars-lab.github.io/NeuralDubber/

Abstract
Dubbing is a post-production process of re-recording actors’ dialogues, which
is extensively used in filmmaking and video production. It is usually performed
manually by professional voice actors who read lines with proper prosody, and in
synchronization with the pre-recorded videos. In this work, we propose Neural
Dubber, the first neural network model to solve a novel automatic video dubbing
(AVD) task: synthesizing human speech synchronized with the given video from
the text. Neural Dubber is a multi-modal text-to-speech (TTS) model that utilizes
the lip movement in the video to control the prosody of the generated speech.
Furthermore, an image-based speaker embedding (ISE) module is developed for
the multi-speaker setting, which enables Neural Dubber to generate speech with a
reasonable timbre according to the speaker’s face. Experiments on the chemistry
lecture single-speaker dataset and LRS2 multi-speaker dataset show that Neural
Dubber can generate speech audios on par with state-of-the-art TTS models in terms
of speech quality. Most importantly, both qualitative and quantitative evaluations
show that Neural Dubber can control the prosody of synthesized speech by the
video, and generate high-fidelity speech temporally synchronized with the video.

1

Introduction

Dubbing is a post-production process of re-recording actors’ dialogues in a controlled environment
(i.e., a sound studio), which is extensively used in filmmaking and video production. There are two
common application scenarios for dubbing. The first one is replacing previous dialogues because
poor sound quality is very common for speech recorded on noise location or the scene itself is too
challenging to record high-quality audio. The second one is replacing the actor’ voices in foreignlanguage films with those of other performers speaking the audience’s language. For example, an
English video needs to be dubbed into Chinese if it is shown in China.
In this paper, we mainly focus on the first application scenario, also known as “automated dialogue
replacement (ADR)”, in which the professional voice actor watches original performance in the
pre-recorded video, and re-records each line to match the lip movement with proper prosody such as
stress, intonation and rhythm, which allows their speech to be synchronized with the pre-recorded
video. In this scenario, the lip motion (viseme) in the video is consistent with the given scripts
(phoneme), and the pre-recorded high-definition video can not modified during the ADR process.
While dubbing is an impressive ability of professional voice actors, we aim to achieve this ability
computationally. We name this novel task automatic video dubbing (AVD): synthesizing human
speech that is temporally synchronized with the given video according to the corresponding text. The
main challenges of the task are two-fold: (1) temporal synchronization between synthesized speech
∗

Corresponding to hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

