Self-Adaptable Point Processes with Nonparametric
Time Decays

Zhimeng Pan, Zheng Wang, Jeff M. Phillips, and Shandian Zhe
School of Computing, University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{z.pan,wzhut}@utah.edu, jeffp@cs.utah.edu, zhe@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Many applications involve multi-type event data. Understanding the complex
influences of the events on each other is critical to discover useful knowledge
and to predict future events and their types. Existing methods either ignore or
partially account for these influences. Recent works use recurrent neural networks
to model the event rate. While being highly expressive, they couple all the temporal dependencies in a black-box and can hardly extract meaningful knowledge.
More important, most methods assume an exponential time decay of the influence
strength, which is over-simplified and can miss many important strength varying
patterns. To overcome these limitations, we propose SPRITE, a Self-adaptable
Point pRocess wIth nonparametric Time dEcays, which can decouple the influences
between every pair of the events and capture various time decays of the influence
strengths. Specifically, we use an embedding to represent each event type and
model the event influence as an unknown function of the embeddings and time
span. We derive a general construction that can cover all possible time-decaying
functions. By placing Gaussian process (GP) priors over the latent functions and
using Gauss-Legendre quadrature to obtain the integral in the construction, we
can flexibly estimate all kinds of time-decaying influences, without restricting to
any specific form or imposing derivative constraints that bring learning difficulties.
We then use weight space augmentation of GPs to develop an efficient stochastic
variational learning algorithm. We show the advantages of our approach in both
the ablation study and real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Events of multiple types are ubiquitous, such as in online shopping, social networking and biological
signal transduction. Understanding the complex influences of those events on each other, including
excitation, inhibition, and how the strength of these influences varies with time, is crucial to discover
useful knowledge and to predict future events and their types, which can benefit many applications,
e.g., marketing analysis, biological study, and early warnings of catastrophes.
While many excellent works have been proposed for event modeling and analysis (Blundell et al.,
2012; Linderman and Adams, 2014; Xu et al., 2016; Tan et al., 2016; Xu and Zha, 2017; Zhang et al.,
2020a), most of them are inadequate to capture complex influences between the events. The classical
Poisson processes simply ignore these influences and assume independent increments. Although
Hawkes processes (HP) can estimate the mutual excitation between the events, they ignore the
inhibition effect, which is common in real world. More important, existing methods (Xu et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2020a), even for those considering both the excitation and inhibition, mostly assume
an exponential time decay of the influence strength, which is over-simplified and can miss many
other decay patterns. While recent works have also used recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Du et al.,
2016; Mei and Eisner, 2017) to model the event rate and hence are highly expressive, they couple
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

