Exploring Forensic Dental Identification with
Deep Learning

Yuan Liang1,2 , Weikun Han1 , Liang Qiu1 , Chen Wu1 , Yiting Shao1 , Kun Wang1∗, Lei He1∗
1
University of California, Los Angeles
2
Topaz Labs
liangyuandg@ucla.edu

Abstract
Dental forensic identification targets to identify persons with dental traces. The
task is vital for the investigation of criminal scenes and mass disasters because
of the resistance of dental structures and the wide-existence of dental imaging.
However, no widely accepted automated solution is available for this labour-costly
task. In this work, we pioneer to study deep learning for dental forensic identification based on panoramic radiographs. We construct a comprehensive benchmark
with various dental variations that can adequately reflect the difficulties of the task.
By considering the task’s unique challenges, we propose FoID, a deep learning
method featured by: (i) clinical-inspired attention localization, (ii) domain-specific
augmentations that enable instance discriminative learning, and (iii) transformerbased self-attention mechanism that dynamically reasons the relative importance
of attentions. We show that FoID can outperform traditional approaches by at
least 22.98% in terms of Rank-1 accuracy, and outperform strong CNN baselines
by at least 10.50% in terms of mean Average Precision (mAP). Moreover, extensive ablation studies verify the effectiveness of each building blocks of FoID.
Our work can be a first step towards the automated system for forensic identification among large-scale multi-site databases. Also, the proposed techniques,
e.g., self-attention mechanism, can also be meaningful for other identification
tasks, e.g., pedestrian re-identification. Related data and codes can be found at
https://github.com/liangyuandg/FoID.

1

Introduction

Forensic identification targets to identify living or deceased persons by analyzing their trace evidences.
The identification with dental data is particularly vital for the investigation of criminal scenes,
accidents and mass disasters for at least two reasons [30, 27]: (i) dental patterns can be highly
identifying while their traces are widely archived than other methodologies e.g., DNA profiling
[4, 45, 59]. For instance, around 1.4 billion dental X-rays were performed in 2019 in the U.S.2 ;
(ii) dental structures are more resistant to damages than other body tissues including bones [7, 46].
In the current practice, forensic dental examinations are mostly done by the visual comparison of
radiographs [46, 45] between a target entity (person) and those from databases. Due to the lack
of widely accepted automated solutions, such examination cannot scale up to large databases, and
its results are vulnerable to oversights and/or mistakes [19, 39]. This work pioneers to study deep
learning for forensic identification with dental panoramic radiographs — one of the most common
dental traces nowadays [59].
∗
2

Corresponding authors
https://idataresearch.com/product/dental-imaging-market/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

