Adversarial Robustness with
Non-uniform Perturbations
Ecenaz Erdemir
Imperial College London
e.erdemir17@imperial.ac.uk

Jeffrey Bickford
Amazon Web Services
jbick@amazon.com

Luca Melis
Amazon Web Services
lucmeli@amazon.com

Sergül Aydöre
Amazon Web Services
saydore@amazon.com

Abstract
Robustness of machine learning models is critical for security related applications,
where real-world adversaries are uniquely focused on evading neural network based
detectors. Prior work mainly focus on crafting adversarial examples (AEs) with
small uniform norm-bounded perturbations across features to maintain the requirement of imperceptibility. However, uniform perturbations do not result in realistic
AEs in domains such as malware, finance, and social networks. For these types of
applications, features typically have some semantically meaningful dependencies.
The key idea of our proposed approach1 is to enable non-uniform perturbations that
can adequately represent these feature dependencies during adversarial training.
We propose using characteristics of the empirical data distribution, both on correlations between the features and the importance of the features themselves. Using
experimental datasets for malware classification, credit risk prediction, and spam
detection, we show that our approach is more robust to real-world attacks. Finally,
we present robustness certification utilizing non-uniform perturbation bounds, and
show that non-uniform bounds achieve better certification.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are commonly used in a wide-variety of security-critical applications
such as self-driving cars, spam detection, malware detection and medical diagnosis [1]. However,
DNNs have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (AEs), which are perturbed inputs
designed to fool the machine learning systems [2–4]. To mitigate this problem, a line of research has
focused on adversarial robustness of DNNs as well as the certification of these methods [1, 5–10].
Adversarial training (AT) is one of the most effective empirical defenses against adversarial attacks
[1, 11]. The goal during training is to minimize the loss of the DNN when perturbed samples are
used. This way, the model becomes robust to real-world adversarial attacks. Though these empirical
defenses do not provide theoretically provable guarantees, they have been shown to be robust against
the strongest known attacks [12]. Some of the most common state-of-the-art adversarial attacks, such
as projected gradient descent (PGD) [1] and fast gradient sign method (FGSM) [12], perturb training
samples under a norm-ball constraint to maximize the loss of the network. The goal of certification,
on the other hand, is to report whether an AE exists within an `p norm centered at a given sample
with a fixed radius. Certified defense approaches introduce theoretical robustness guarantees against
norm-bounded perturbations [8, 9, 13, 14].
1

Code is available at https://github.com/amazon-research/adversarial-robustness-withnonuniform-perturbations
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

