Locally differentially private estimation of nonlinear
functionals of discrete distributions
Yann Issartel
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
Palaiseau 91120 Cedex, France
yann.issartel@ensae.fr

Cristina Butucea
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
Palaiseau 91120 Cedex, France
cristina.butucea@ensae.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating non-linear functionals of discrete distributions
in the context of local differential privacy. The initial data x1 , . . . , xn ∈ [K] are
supposed i.i.d. and distributed according to an unknown discrete distribution p =
(p1 , . . . , pK ). Only α-locally differentially private (LDP) samples z1 , ..., zn are
publicly available, where the term ’local’ means that each zi is produced using one
individual attribute xi . We exhibit privacy mechanisms (PM) that are sequentially
interactive (i.e. they are allowed to use already published confidential data) or
non-interactive. We describe the behavior of the quadratic risk for estimating the
PK
power sum functional Fγ = k=1 pγk , γ > 0 as a function of K, n and α. In the
non-interactive case, we study two plug-in type estimators of Fγ , for all γ > 0,
that are similar to the MLE analyzed by Jiao et al. [18] in the multinomial model.
However, due to the privacy constraint the rates we attain are slower and similar
to those obtained in the Gaussian model by Collier et al. [9]. In the sequentially
interactive case, we introduce for all γ > 1 a two-step procedure which attains
the parametric rate (nα2 )−1/2 when γ ≥ 2. We give lower bounds results over all
α-LDP mechanisms and all estimators using the private samples.

1

Introduction

Information theoretic measures have become of utmost importance and extensively used in information theory, image processing, physics, genetics and more recently in machine learning and statistics.
Such functionals of probability distributions are useful to design estimators, to choose most informative features in different algorithms, to test identity or closeness of distributions. Popular such
measures are the power-sum, the entropy and more general Rényi entropies of discrete distributions.
In this paper, we are interested in estimating the power sum functional Fγ (p) of a discrete distribution
p = (p1 , ..., pK ):
K
X γ
Fγ (p) =
pk , with power γ ∈ (0, ∞).
k=1

This instance of information measure has a tight connection with the famous Rényi entropy Hγ via
log F
the formula Hγ = 1−γγ .
In the statistical literature, smooth nonlinear functionals are often reduced via Taylor expansion to
several functionals of the type Fγ for positive integer values of γ (see monographs like e.g. [14] ).
PK
For example, the entropy H(p) = j=1 pj log(1/pj ) of the probability distribution p with finite
support and probabilities bounded away from 0 can be approximated via a Taylor expansion
to a
√
linear combination of Fγ for integer values of γ and estimated at parametric rate of 1/ n.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

