On the Bias-Variance-Cost Tradeoff of
Stochastic Optimization

Yifan Hu∗
UIUC
yifanhu3@illinois.edu

Xin Chen∗
UIUC
xinchen@illinois.edu

Niao He†
ETH Zürich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We consider stochastic optimization when one only has access to biased stochastic
oracles of the objective, and obtaining stochastic gradients with low biases comes
at high costs. This setting captures a variety of optimization paradigms widely
used in machine learning, such as conditional stochastic optimization, bilevel
optimization, and distributionally robust optimization. We examine a family of
multi-level Monte Carlo (MLMC) gradient methods that exploit a delicate trade-off
among the bias, the variance, and the oracle cost. We provide a systematic study of
their convergences and total computation complexities for strongly convex, convex,
and nonconvex objectives, and demonstrate their superiority over the naive biased
stochastic gradient method. Moreover, when applied to conditional stochastic
optimization, the MLMC gradient methods significantly improve the best-known
sample complexity in the literature.

1

Introduction

Solving modern machine learning tasks relies heavily on stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and many
of its variants. Whilst the vanilla SGD depends crucially on unbiased gradient oracles, constructing
unbiased gradient estimators can be very expensive or even impossible for many emerging machine
learning applications. Such applications include GANs with regularization [25], distributionally
robust optimization [26, 14], conditional stochastic optimization [20, 19], meta-learning [30, 11],
min-max optimization [32, 33], and bilevel optimization [16], just to name a few.
As an alternative, one often resorts to some natural biased gradient estimators. Existing work on
biased gradient methods [17, 1, 18, 7, 23] focuses on the iteration complexity given biased stochastic
oracles while ignoring the possibility of constructing refined stochastic oracles with lower bias at
a higher cost, e.g., more samples or more computation power. In this paper, we build a unified
framework to study the fundamental tradeoff among the bias, the variance, and the cost.
We study optimization problems of the general form
min F (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

and assume that one does not have access to unbiased gradient estimator of F (x) via simple Monte
Carlo sampling or simulation. Instead we assume that one can construct a sequence of approximations
∗
†

Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Optimization and Decision Intelligence (ODI) Group, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

