DualNet: Continual Learning, Fast and Slow

Quang Pham1 , Chenghao Liu2 , Steven C.H. Hoi 1,2
1
Singapore Management University
hqpham.2017@smu.edu.sg
2
Salesforce Research Asia
{chenghao.liu, shoi}@salesforce.com

Abstract
According to Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) theory [37] in neuroscience,
humans do effective continual learning through two complementary systems: a
fast learning system centered on the hippocampus for rapid learning of the specifics
and individual experiences, and a slow learning system located in the neocortex for
the gradual acquisition of structured knowledge about the environment. Motivated
by this theory, we propose a novel continual learning framework named “DualNet",
which comprises a fast learning system for supervised learning of pattern-separated
representation from specific tasks and a slow learning system for unsupervised representation learning of task-agnostic general representation via a Self-Supervised
Learning (SSL) technique. The two fast and slow learning systems are complementary and work seamlessly in a holistic continual learning framework. Our extensive
experiments on two challenging continual learning benchmarks of CORE50 and
miniImageNet show that DualNet outperforms state-of-the-art continual learning
methods by a large margin. We further conduct ablation studies of different SSL objectives to validate DualNet’s efficacy, robustness, and scalability. Code is publicly
available at https://github.com/phquang/DualNet.

1

Introduction

Humans have the remarkable ability to learn and accumulate knowledge over their lifetime to perform
different cognitive tasks. Interestingly, such a capability is attributed to the complex interactions
among different interconnected brain regions [14]. One prominent model is the Complementary
Learning Systems (CLS) theory [37, 30] which suggests the brain can achieve such behaviors via
two learning systems of the “hippocampus" and the “neocortex." Particularly, the hippocampus
focuses on fast learning of pattern-separated representation of specific experiences. Via the memory
consolidation process, the hippocampus’s memories are transferred to the neocortex over time to
form a more general representation that supports long-term retention and generalization to new
experiences. The two fast and slow learning systems always interact to facilitate fast learning and
long-term remembering. Although deep neural networks have achieved impressive results [31], they
often require having access to a large amount of i.i.d data while performing poorly on the continual
learning scenarios over streams of task [19, 29, 36]. Therefore, the main focus of this study is
exploring how the CLS theory can motivate a general continual learning framework with a better
trade-off between alleviating catastrophic forgetting and facilitating knowledge transfer.
In literature, several continual learning strategies are inspired from the CLS theory principles,
from using the episodic memory [36] to improving the representation [26, 44]. However, such
techniques mostly use a single backbone to model both the the hippocampus and neocortex, which
binds two representation types into the same network. Moreover, such networks are trained to
minimize the supervised loss, they lack a separate and specific slow learning component that supports
general representation learning. During continual learning, the representation obtained by repeatedly
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

