Model-Based Domain Generalization
Alexander Robey
George J. Pappas
Hamed Hassani
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
{arobey1,pappasg,hassani}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Despite remarkable success in a variety of applications, it is well-known that deep
learning can fail catastrophically when presented with out-of-distribution data.
Toward addressing this challenge, we consider the domain generalization problem,
wherein predictors are trained using data drawn from a family of related training
domains and then evaluated on a distinct and unseen test domain. We show that
under a natural model of data generation and a concomitant invariance condition,
the domain generalization problem is equivalent to an infinite-dimensional constrained statistical learning problem; this problem forms the basis of our approach,
which we call Model-Based Domain Generalization. Due to the inherent challenges in solving constrained optimization problems in deep learning, we exploit
nonconvex duality theory to develop unconstrained relaxations of this statistical
problem with tight bounds on the duality gap. Based on this theoretical motivation,
we propose a novel domain generalization algorithm with convergence guarantees.
In our experiments, we report improvements of up to 30% over state-of-the-art
domain generalization baselines on several benchmarks including ColoredMNIST,
Camelyon17-WILDS, FMoW-WILDS, and PACS. Our code is publicly available
at the following link: https://github.com/arobey1/mbdg.

1

Introduction

Despite well-documented success in numerous applications [1–4], the complex prediction rules
learned by modern machine learning methods can fail catastrophically when presented with outof-distribution (OOD) data [5–9]. Indeed, rapidly growing bodies of work conclusively show that
state-of-the-art methods are vulnerable to distributional shifts arising from spurious correlations
[10–12], adversarial attacks [13–17], sub-populations [18–21], and naturally-occurring variation
[22–24]. This failure mode is particularly pernicious in safety-critical applications, wherein the
shifts that arise in fields such as medical imaging [25–28], autonomous driving [29–31], and robotics
[32–34] are known to lead to unsafe behavior. And while some progress has been made toward
addressing these vulnerabilities, the inability of modern machine learning methods to generalize to
OOD data is one of the most significant barriers to deployment in safety-critical applications [35, 36].
In the last decade, the domain generalization community has emerged in an effort to improve the
OOD performance of machine learning methods [37–40]. In this field, predictors are trained on data
drawn from a family of related training domains and then evaluated on a distinct and unseen test
domain. Although a variety of approaches have been proposed for this setting [41, 42], it was recently
shown that that no existing domain generalization algorithm can significantly outperform empirical
risk minimization (ERM) [43] over the training domains when ERM is properly tuned and equipped
with state-of-the-art architectures [44, 45] and data augmentation techniques [46]. Therefore, due to
the prevalence of OOD data in safety critical applications, it is of the utmost importance that new
algorithms be proposed which can improve the OOD performance of machine learning methods.
In this paper, we introduce a new framework for domain generalization which we call Model-Based
Domain Generalization (MBDG). The key idea in our framework is to first learn transformations
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

