Explaining Latent Representations with a Corpus of
Examples

Jonathan Crabbé
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zq224@maths.cam.ac.uk

Fergus Imrie
UCLA
imrie@g.ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
UCLA
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Modern machine learning models are complicated. Most of them rely on convoluted
latent representations of their input to issue a prediction. To achieve greater
transparency than a black-box that connects inputs to predictions, it is necessary
to gain a deeper understanding of these latent representations. To that aim, we
propose SimplEx: a user-centred method that provides example-based explanations
with reference to a freely selected set of examples, called the corpus. SimplEx uses
the corpus to improve the user’s understanding of the latent space with post-hoc
explanations answering two questions: (1) Which corpus examples explain the
prediction issued for a given test example? (2) What features of these corpus
examples are relevant for the model to relate them to the test example? SimplEx
provides an answer by reconstructing the test latent representation as a mixture of
corpus latent representations. Further, we propose a novel approach, the Integrated
Jacobian, that allows SimplEx to make explicit the contribution of each corpus
feature in the mixture. Through experiments on tasks ranging from mortality
prediction to image classification, we demonstrate that these decompositions are
robust and accurate. With illustrative use cases in medicine, we show that SimplEx
empowers the user by highlighting relevant patterns in the corpus that explain
model representations. Moreover, we demonstrate how the freedom in choosing
the corpus allows the user to have personalized explanations in terms of examples
that are meaningful for them.

1

Introduction and related work

How can we make a machine learning model convincing? If accuracy is undoubtedly necessary,
it is rarely sufficient. As these models are used in critical areas such as medicine, finance and the
criminal justice system, their black-box nature appears as a major issue [1, 2, 3]. With the necessity
to address this problem, the landscape of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) developed [4, 5].
A first approach in XAI is to focus on white-box models that are interpretable by design. However,
restricting to a class of inherently interpretable models often comes at the cost of lower prediction
accuracy [6]. In this work, we rather focus on post-hoc explainability techniques. These methods
aim at improving the interpretability of black-box models by complementing their predictions with
various kinds of explanations. In this way, it is possible to understand the prediction of a model
without sacrificing its prediction accuracy.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

