Parametrized Quantum Policies
for Reinforcement Learning

Sofiene Jerbi
Institute for Theoretical Physics,
University of Innsbruck
sofiene.jerbi@uibk.ac.at

Casper Gyurik
LIACS,
Leiden University

Hans J. Briegel
Institute for Theoretical Physics,
University of Innsbruck

Simon C. Marshall
LIACS,
Leiden University

Vedran Dunjko
LIACS,
Leiden University

Abstract
With the advent of real-world quantum computing, the idea that parametrized
quantum computations can be used as hypothesis families in a quantum-classical
machine learning system is gaining increasing traction. Such hybrid systems have
already shown the potential to tackle real-world tasks in supervised and generative
learning, and recent works have established their provable advantages in special
artificial tasks. Yet, in the case of reinforcement learning, which is arguably most
challenging and where learning boosts would be extremely valuable, no proposal
has been successful in solving even standard benchmarking tasks, nor in showing a
theoretical learning advantage over classical algorithms. In this work, we achieve
both. We propose a hybrid quantum-classical reinforcement learning model using
very few qubits, which we show can be effectively trained to solve several standard
benchmarking environments. Moreover, we demonstrate, and formally prove, the
ability of parametrized quantum circuits to solve certain learning tasks that are
intractable to classical models, including current state-of-art deep neural networks,
under the widely-believed classical hardness of the discrete logarithm problem.

1

Introduction

Hybrid quantum machine learning models constitute one of the most promising applications of
near-term quantum computers [1, 2]. In these models, parametrized and data-dependent quantum
computations define a hypothesis family for a given learning task, and a classical optimization
algorithm is used to train them. For instance, parametrized quantum circuits (PQCs) [3] have already
proven successful in classification [4–8], generative modeling [9, 10] and clustering [11] problems.
Moreover, recent results have shown proofs of their learning advantages in artificially constructed
tasks [6, 12], some of which are based on widely believed complexity-theoretic assumptions [12–15].
All these results, however, only consider supervised and generative learning settings.
Arguably, the largest impact quantum computing can have is by providing enhancements to the
hardest learning problems. From this perspective, reinforcement learning (RL) stands out as a field
that can greatly benefit from a powerful hypothesis family. This is showcased by the boost in learning
performance that deep neural networks (DNNs) have provided to RL [16], which enabled systems
like AlphaGo [17], among other achievements [18, 19]. Nonetheless, the true potential of near-term
quantum approaches in RL remains very little explored. The few existing works [20–23] have failed
so far at solving classical benchmarking tasks using PQCs and left open the question of their ability
to provide a learning advantage.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

