SSAL: Synergizing between Self-Training and
Adversarial Learning for Domain Adaptive Object
Detection
Muhammad Akhtar Munir1∗ , Muhammad Haris Khan2 , M. Saquib Sarfraz3,4 , Mohsen Ali1
{akhtar.munir@itu.edu.pk} {muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae}
{muhammad.sarfraz@kit.edu} {mohsen.ali@itu.edu.pk}
1

Information Technology University of Punjab, 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence,
3
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 4 Daimler TSS

Abstract
We study adapting trained object detectors to unseen domains manifesting significant variations of object appearance, viewpoints and backgrounds. Most current
methods align domains by either using image or instance-level feature alignment
in an adversarial fashion. This often suffers due to the presence of unwanted
background and as such lacks class-specific alignment. A common remedy to promote class-level alignment is to use high confidence predictions on the unlabelled
domain as pseudo labels. These high confidence predictions are often fallacious
since the model is poorly calibrated under domain shift. In this paper, we propose
to leverage model’s predictive uncertainty to strike the right balance between adversarial feature alignment and class-level alignment. Specifically, we measure
predictive uncertainty on class assignments and the bounding box predictions.
Model predictions with low uncertainty are used to generate pseudo-labels for
self-supervision, whereas the ones with higher uncertainty are used to generate tiles
for an adversarial feature alignment stage. This synergy between tiling around the
uncertain object regions and generating pseudo-labels from highly certain object
regions allows us to capture both the image and instance level context during the
model adaptation stage. We perform extensive experiments covering various domain shift scenarios. Our approach improves upon existing state-of-the-art methods
with visible margins.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural network based object detectors have shown promising results, through
learning representative features from large annotated datasets [7, 32, 10]. However, like other
supervised deep learning methods, object detection methods trained on the source domain do not
generalize adequately to a new target domain. This problem, known as domain shift [49] could
be exhibited by change in style, camera pose, or object size and orientation, or the number or
location of objects in the scene, among other things. Often, collecting large annotated dataset for
fine-tuning the model to the target domain is expensive, error prone and in many cases not possible.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is a promising research direction towards solving this
problem by transferring knowledge from a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target domain.
∗

Corresponding author, Intelligent Machines Lab, Department of Computer Science, Information Technology University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. Email: akhtar.munir@itu.edu.pk Project Page:
http://im.itu.edu.pk/synergizing-domain-adaptation/
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

