Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation via
Adaptive Equalization Learning
Hanzhe Hu1,4⇤ Fangyun Wei2† Han Hu2 Qiwei Ye2 Jinshi Cui1 Liwei Wang1,3†
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Zhejiang Lab
huhz@pku.edu.cn {fawe, hanhu, qiwye}@microsoft.com
{cjs, wanglw}@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the limited and even imbalanced data, semi-supervised semantic segmentation tends to have poor performance on some certain categories, e.g., tailed
categories in Cityscapes dataset which exhibits a long-tailed label distribution.
Existing approaches almost all neglect this problem, and treat categories equally.
Some popular approaches such as consistency regularization or pseudo-labeling
may even harm the learning of under-performing categories, that the predictions or
pseudo labels of these categories could be too inaccurate to guide the learning on the
unlabeled data. In this paper, we look into this problem, and propose a novel framework for semi-supervised semantic segmentation, named adaptive equalization
learning (AEL). AEL adaptively balances the training of well and badly performed
categories, with a confidence bank to dynamically track category-wise performance
during training. The confidence bank is leveraged as an indicator to tilt training
towards under-performing categories, instantiated in three strategies: 1) adaptive
Copy-Paste and CutMix data augmentation approaches which give more chance
for under-performing categories to be copied or cut; 2) an adaptive data sampling
approach to encourage pixels from under-performing category to be sampled; 3) a
simple yet effective re-weighting method to alleviate the training noise raised by
pseudo-labeling. Experimentally, AEL outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by
a large margin on the Cityscapes and Pascal VOC benchmarks under various data
partition protocols. Code is available at https://github.com/hzhupku/SemiSeg-AEL.

1

Introduction

Supervised semantic segmentation requires pixel-level labeling, which is expensive and timeconsuming. This paper is interested in semi-supervised semantic segmentation, which can greatly
reduce the efforts of pixel-level annotation, yet may maintain reasonably high accuracy. One problem
of common semantic segmentation datasets is that the pixel categories tend to be imbalanced, e.g., the
pixel amount of head classes can be hundreds of times larger than that of tailed classes in the widely
used Cityscapes dataset [1]. The situation is more serious in the semi-supervised setting where tailed
classes may have extremely few samples. We note that recent approaches are mainly dedicated to the
design of consistency regularization [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and pseudo-labeling [8], almost all of which
neglect the imbalance problem and treat each category equally, leading to a biased training. These
approaches may even harm the learning of tailed classes, as inaccurate predictions or pseudo labels
of under-performing categories could falsely guide the learning on unlabeled data.
* This work is done when Hanzhe Hu was an intern in MSRA. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

