Primer: Searching for Efficient Transformers
for Language Modeling

David R. So, Wojciech Mańke, Hanxiao Liu, Zihang Dai, Noam Shazeer, Quoc V. Le
Google Research, Brain Team
{davidso, wojciechm, hanxiaol, zihangd, noam, qvl}@google.com

Abstract
Large Transformer models have been central to recent advances in natural language
processing. The training and inference costs of these models, however, have grown
rapidly and become prohibitively expensive. Here we aim to reduce the costs of
Transformers by searching for a more efficient variant. Compared to previous
approaches, our search is performed at a lower level, over the primitives that define
a Transformer TensorFlow program. We identify an architecture, named Primer,
that has a smaller training cost than the original Transformer and other variants
for auto-regressive language modeling. Primer’s improvements can be mostly
attributed to two simple modifications: squaring ReLU activations and adding a
depthwise convolution layer after each Q, K, and V projection in self-attention.
Experiments show Primer’s gains over Transformer increase as compute scale
grows and follow a power law with respect to quality at optimal model sizes. We
also verify empirically that Primer can be dropped into different codebases to
significantly speed up training without additional tuning. For example, at a 500M
parameter size, Primer improves the original T5 architecture on C4 auto-regressive
language modeling, reducing the training cost by 4X. Furthermore, the reduced
training cost means Primer needs much less compute to reach a target one-shot
performance. For instance, in a 1.9B parameter configuration similar to GPT-3 XL,
Primer uses 1/3 of the training compute to achieve the same one-shot performance
as Transformer. We open source our models and several comparisons in T5 to help
with reproducibility.1

1

Introduction

Transformers [1] have been used extensively in many NLP advances over the past few years (e.g., [2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7]). With scaling, Transformers have produced increasingly better performance [3, 7, 8, 9],
but the costs of training larger models have become prohibitively expensive.
In this paper, we aim to reduce the training costs of Transformer language models. To this end,
we propose searching for more efficient alternatives to Transformer by modifying its TensorFlow
computation graph [10]. Given a search space of TensorFlow programs, we use evolution [11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17] to search for models that achieve as low of a validation loss as possible given a fixed
amount of training compute. An advantage of using TensorFlow programs as the search space is that it
is easier to find simple low-level improvements to optimize Transformers. We focus on decoder-only
auto-regressive language modeling (LM), because of its generality and success [18, 7, 19, 20, 21].2
1

https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/primer
We provide details of our primitives search in TensorFlow, but the same approach can also be applied to
other deep learning libraries.
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

