Kernelized Heterogeneous Risk Minimization

1

Jiashuo Liu1,∗, Zheyuan Hu2,* , Peng Cui1,†, Bo Li3 and Zheyan Shen1
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{liujiashuo77,zyhu2001}@gmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn,
libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn, shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The ability to generalize under distributional shifts is essential to reliable machine
learning, while models optimized with empirical risk minimization usually fail on
non-i.i.d testing data. Recently, invariant learning methods for out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization propose to find causally invariant relationships with multienvironments. However, modern datasets are frequently multi-sourced without
explicit source labels, rendering many invariant learning methods inapplicable. In
this paper, we propose Kernelized Heterogeneous Risk Minimization (KerHRM)
algorithm, which achieves both the latent heterogeneity exploration and invariant
learning in kernel space, and then gives feedback to the original neural network by
appointing invariant gradient direction. We theoretically justify our algorithm and
empirically validate the effectiveness of our algorithm with extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

Traditional machine learning algorithms which optimize the empirical risk often suffer from poor
generalization performance under distributional shifts caused by latent heterogeneity or selection
biases that widely exist in real-world data[9, 20]. How to guarantee a machine learning algorithm
with good generalization ability on data drawn out-of-distribution is of paramount significance,
especially in high-stake applications such as financial analysis, criminal justice and medical diagnosis,
etc.[13, 18], which is known as the out-of-distribution(OOD) generalization problem[1].
To ensure the OOD generalization ability, invariant learning methods assume the existence of the
causally invariant correlations and exploit them through given environments, which makes their
performances heavily dependent on the quality of environments. Further, the requirements for the
environment labels are too strict to meet with, since real-world datasets are frequently assembled by
merging data from multiple sources without explicit source labels. Recently, several works[5, 15] to
relax such restrictions have been proposed. Creager et al.[5] directly infer the environments according
to a given biased model first and then performs invariant learning. But the two stages cannot be jointly
optimized and the quality of inferred environments depends heavily on the pre-provided biased model.
Further, for complicated data, using invariant representation for environment inference is harmful,
since the environment-specific features are gradually discarded, causing the extinction of latent
heterogeneity and rendering data from different latent environments undistinguishable. Liu et al.[15]
design a mechanism where two interactive modules for environment inference and invariant learning
respectively can promote each other. However, it can only deal with scenarios where invariant and
variant features are decomposed on raw feature level, and will break down when the decomposition
can only be performed in representation space(e.g., image data).
∗
†

Equal Contributions
Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

