Safe Policy Optimization with Local Generalized
Linear Function Approximations

Akifumi Wachi
IBM Research
akifumi.wachi@ibm.com

Yunyue Wei
Tsinghua University
weiyy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yanan Sui
Tsinghua University
ysui@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Safe exploration is a key to applying reinforcement learning (RL) in safety-critical
systems. Existing safe exploration methods guaranteed safety under the assumption
of regularity, and it has been difficult to apply them to large-scale real problems.
We propose a novel algorithm, SPO-LF, that optimizes an agent’s policy while
learning the relation between a locally available feature obtained by sensors and
environmental reward/safety using generalized linear function approximations. We
provide theoretical guarantees on its safety and optimality. We experimentally
show that our algorithm is 1) more efficient in terms of sample complexity and computational cost and 2) more applicable to large-scale problems than previous safe
RL methods with theoretical guarantees, and 3) comparably sample-efficient and
safer compared with existing advanced deep RL methods with safety constraints.

1

Introduction

Applying reinforcement learning (RL) to applications with unknown safety constraints is challenging
as RL is inherently an exploratory process and requires agents to learn the whole environment first.
Though there has been a surge of attempts to incorporate safety in RL [3, 6, 11, 16], it is essentially
difficult for most of the algorithms to guarantee safety, especially in the exploration phase. If a single
mistake could lead to catastrophic failures, conventional algorithms cannot be directly applied.
To guarantee safety while learning an environment, safe exploration problems have been actively
studied as a sub-field of safe RL [17]. A mainstream safe-exploration method is to utilize a Gaussian
process (GP, [24]) under problem settings in which the agent can observe only the safety function
value of its current state. Since the agent cannot get any information on the neighboring states, it
is necessary to assume desirable properties for the function. Specifically, Sui et al. [31] assumed
that a safety function is Lipschitz continuous and has regularity that can be captured by appropriate
kernel functions. However, these assumptions do not hold in many environments. For example, in
the context of autonomous driving, the degree of safety varies steeply depending on the presence or
absence of other vehicles and pedestrians. Also, previous work on GP-based safe exploration suffers
from inconsistency between their theoretical guarantees and computational cost. Previous work has
proved the completeness of the predicted safe region [34] and the optimality of the acquired policy
[36], after a large number of samples. However, the computational cost of GP is known to be large.
Hence, it is hard to achieve theoretically guaranteed performance in a large environment.
Based on the fact that robots are equipped with sensors, it is more reasonable to formulate the
problem assuming that robots can obtain “feature vectors” for inferring the degree of safety of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

