On Path Integration of Grid Cells:
Group Representation and Isotropic Scaling

Ruiqi Gao1∗
ruiqigao@ucla.edu

Jianwen Xie2
jianwen@ucla.edu

Song-Chun Zhu1,4,5
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
1 Department of Statistics, UCLA

Xue-Xin Wei3
weixx@utexas.edu

Ying Nian Wu1
ywu@stat.ucla.edu
2 Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research

3 Department of Neuroscience, UT Austin

4 Department of Computer Science, UCLA

5 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)

Abstract
Understanding how grid cells perform path integration calculations remains a
fundamental problem. In this paper, we conduct theoretical analysis of a general
representation model of path integration by grid cells, where the 2D self-position
is encoded as a higher dimensional vector, and the 2D self-motion is represented
by a general transformation of the vector. We identify two conditions on the
transformation. One is a group representation condition that is necessary for
path integration. The other is an isotropic scaling condition that ensures locally
conformal embedding, so that the error in the vector representation translates
conformally to the error in the 2D self-position. Then we investigate the simplest
transformation, i.e., the linear transformation, uncover its explicit algebraic and
geometric structure as matrix Lie group of rotation, and explore the connection
between the isotropic scaling condition and a special class of hexagon grid patterns.
Finally, with our optimization-based approach, we manage to learn hexagon grid
patterns that share similar properties of the grid cells in the rodent brain. The
learned model is capable of accurate long distance path integration. Code is
available at https://github.com/ruiqigao/grid-cell-path.

1

Introduction

Imagine walking in the darkness. Purely based on the sense of self-motion, one can gain a sense
of self-position by integrating the self motion - a process often referred to as path integration [10,
14, 21, 15, 27]. While the exact neural underpinning of path integration remains unclear, it has been
hypothesized that the grid cells [21, 17, 40, 24, 23, 12] in the mammalian medial entorhinal cortex
(mEC) may be involved in this process [20, 30, 22]. The grid cells are so named because individual
neurons exhibit striking firing patterns that form hexagonal grids when the agent (such as a rat)
navigates in a 2D open field [18, 21, 16, 6, 34, 5, 7, 11, 29, 1]. The grid cells also interact with the
place cells in the hippocampus [28]. Unlike a grid cell that fires at the vertices of a lattice, a place
cell often fires at a single (or a few) locations.
The purpose of this paper is to understand how the grid cells may perform path integration calculations.
We study a general optimization-based representational model in which the 2D self-position is
∗ The author is now a Research Scientist at Google Brain team.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

