Recurrence along Depth: Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks with Recurrent Layer Aggregation

Jingyu Zhao, Yanwen Fang and Guodong Li
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
The University of Hong Kong
{gladys17, u3545683}@connect.hku.hk, gdli@hku.hk

Abstract
This paper introduces a concept of layer aggregation to describe how information
from previous layers can be reused to better extract features at the current layer.
While DenseNet is a typical example of the layer aggregation mechanism, its
redundancy has been commonly criticized in the literature. This motivates us to
propose a very light-weighted module, called recurrent layer aggregation (RLA), by
making use of the sequential structure of layers in a deep CNN. Our RLA module
is compatible with many mainstream deep CNNs, including ResNets, Xception
and MobileNetV2, and its effectiveness is verified by our extensive experiments on
image classification, object detection and instance segmentation tasks. Specifically,
improvements can be uniformly observed on CIFAR, ImageNet and MS COCO
datasets, and the corresponding RLA-Nets can surprisingly boost the performances
by 2-3% on the object detection task. This evidences the power of our RLA module
in helping main CNNs better learn structural information in images.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved notable success in computer vision tasks,
crediting to their ability to extract high-level features from input images. Due to rapid growth in the
depth of CNNs in recent years, the problem of how to pass information efficiently through layers often
arises when designing deep architectures. Residual connections [20, 21], or skip connections, are
now cornerstone components that act as information pathways to give layers direct access to previous
ones and make training feasible with hundreds of layers. In a deep feature hierarchy, higher-level
features learned by the network are built upon simpler ones, but not necessarily on the layer right
before it [17]. This conjecture can be supported by the stochastic depth training method [27], where
layers randomly gain access to previous ones. Furthermore, it is discovered that entire layers can be
removed from ResNets without impacting the performance. This observation incubated the dense
connectivity in DenseNets [28, 29], where layers in a stage have direct access to all previous layers
through fully connected skip connections.
We introduce a concept of layer aggregation to systematically study network designs on feature
reuse, and a typical example is DenseNet. However, within a densely-connected stage, the number of
network parameters grows quadratically with respect to the number of layers. These highly redundant
parameters may extract similar features multiple times [7], and limit the number of channels to store
new information. This motivates us to propose a very light-weighted recurrent layer aggregation
(RLA) module with much fewer parameters. Specifically, we use recurrent connections to replace
dense connectivity and achieve a parameter count independent of the network depth. The RLA
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

