Diversity Enhanced Active Learning with Strictly
Proper Scoring Rules

Wei Tan
Monash University
wei.tan2@monash.edu

Lan Du∗
Monash University
lan.du@monash.edu

Wray Buntine
Monash University
wray.buntine@monash.edu

Abstract
We study acquisition functions for active learning (AL) for text classification.
The Expected Loss Reduction (ELR) method focuses on a Bayesian estimate
of the reduction in classification error, recently updated with Mean Objective
Cost of Uncertainty (MOCU). We convert the ELR framework to estimate the
increase in (strictly proper) scores like log probability or negative mean square
error, which we call Bayesian Estimate of Mean Proper Scores (BEMPS2 ). We
also prove convergence results borrowing techniques used with MOCU. In order
to allow better experimentation with the new acquisition functions, we develop a
complementary batch AL algorithm, which encourages diversity in the vector of
expected changes in scores for unlabelled data. To allow high performance text
classifiers, we combine ensembling and dynamic validation set construction on
pretrained language models. Extensive experimental evaluation then explores how
these different acquisition functions perform. The results show that the use of mean
square error and log probability with BEMPS yields robust acquisition functions,
which consistently outperform the others tested.

1

Introduction

Classification has extensive uses and deep learning has substantially improved its performance, but
a major hurdle for its use is the paucity of labelled or annotated data. The data labelling process
performed by domain experts is expensive and tedious to produce, especially in the medical field,
where due to lack of expertise and privacy issues, annotation costs are time-consuming and expensive
[11]. Active Learning (AL) is an approach to speeding up learning by judiciously selecting data to be
annotated [27]. AL is perhaps the simplest of all human-in-the-loop learning approaches, because the
only interaction is the (expert) human providing a class label, yet for even in the simplest of tasks,
classification, a general theory of AL is not agreed on.
Moreover, in practical situations, one needs to consider many issues when designing an AL system
with deep learning: the expense to retrain deep neural networks and the use of validation data for
training [31], transformer language models [16], batch mode AL with diversity [22], and consideration
of expert capabilities and costs [8, 43]. Also important in experimental work is the need for realistic
labelling sizes, with practitioners we work with saying expert annotation may allow a budget of up to
1000 data points, rarely more. Using large batch sizes (e.g., 1000 in [1, 20]) can thus be impractical.
Our fundamental research contribution is to suggest what makes a good acquisition function for the
uncertainty component, without any batching. While there are many recent methods looking at the
uncertainty diversity trade-off for batch AL [22], few recently have focused on understanding the
uncertainty side alone. A substantial advance is a recent theoretical framework, Mean Objective
∗
2

Corresponding author
Our implementation of BEMPS can be downloaded from https://github.com/davidtw999/BEMPS.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

