Labeling Trick: A Theory of Using Graph Neural
Networks for Multi-Node Representation Learning

Muhan Zhang1,2,∗ Pan Li3,† Yinglong Xia4 Kai Wang4 Long Jin4
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
3
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
4
Facebook AI

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a theory of using graph neural networks (GNNs) for multinode representation learning (where we are interested in learning a representation
for a set of more than one node, such as link). We know that GNN is designed to
learn single-node representations. When we want to learn a node set representation
involving multiple nodes, a common practice in previous works is to directly
aggregate the single-node representations obtained by a GNN into a joint node
set representation. In this paper, we show a fundamental constraint of such an
approach, namely the inability to capture the dependence between nodes in the
node set, and argue that directly aggregating individual node representations does
not lead to an effective joint representation for multiple nodes. Then, we notice that
a few previous successful works for multi-node representation learning, including
SEAL, Distance Encoding, and ID-GNN, all used node labeling. These methods
first label nodes in the graph according to their relationships with the target node
set before applying a GNN. Then, the node representations obtained in the labeled
graph are aggregated into a node set representation. By investigating their inner
mechanisms, we unify these node labeling techniques into a single and most general
form—labeling trick. We prove that with labeling trick a sufficiently expressive
GNN learns the most expressive node set representations, thus in principle solves
any joint learning tasks over node sets. Experiments on one important two-node
representation learning task, link prediction, verified our theory. Our work explains
the superior performance of previous node-labeling-based methods, and establishes
a theoretical foundation of using GNNs for multi-node representation learning.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [1–10] have achieved great successes in recent years. While GNNs
have been well studied for single-node tasks (such as node classification) and whole-graph tasks
(such as graph classification), using GNNs to predict a set of multiple nodes is less studied and less
understood. Among such multi-node representation learning problems, link prediction (predicting
the link existence/class/value between a set of two nodes) is perhaps the most important one due to
its wide applications in practice, including friend recommendation in social networks [11], movie
recommendation in Netflix [12], protein interaction prediction [13], drug response prediction [14],
knowledge graph completion [15], etc. In this paper, we use link prediction as a medium to study
GNN’s multi-node representation learning ability. Note that although our examples and experiments
are all around link prediction, our theory applies generally to all multi-node representation learning
problems such as triplet [16], motif [17] and subgraph [18] prediction tasks.
∗
†

Corresponding author: Muhan Zhang (muhan@pku.edu.cn). Work done as a research scientist at Facebook.
Pan Li inspires the study of labeling tricks, proves Theorem 2, and helps check the theoretical framework.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

