COHESIV: Contrastive Object and Hand
Embeddings for Segmentation In Video

Dandan Shan∗
University of Michigan
dandans@umich.edu

Richard E.L. Higgins∗
University of Michigan
relh@umich.edu

David F. Fouhey
University of Michigan
fouhey@umich.edu

Abstract
In this paper we learn to segment hands and hand-held objects from motion. Our
system takes a single RGB image and hand location as input to segment the
hand and hand-held object. For learning, we generate responsibility maps that
show how well a hand’s motion explains other pixels’ motion in video. We use
these responsibility maps as pseudo-labels to train a weakly-supervised neural
network using an attention-based similarity loss and contrastive loss. Our system
outperforms alternate methods, achieving good performance on the 100DOH,
EPIC-KITCHENS, and HO3D datasets.

1

Introduction

We invite you to pick up an object in your vicinity and bring it towards you. As you hold the object
and move your hand, the object moves coherently, and is roughly rigidly attached to a coordinate
frame in your hand. While your adult brain does not need this signal and can readily differentiate
the object in your hand from both your hand and the background even if you hold your hand still,
how did you learn to do this? One answer [42] is that as a human you have time locked modalities of
your own hand’s configuration via proprioception and vision, and your hand and the object share a
“common fate” [47]. The goal of this paper is to operationalize this idea by learning to segment hand
and in-hand objects (irrespective of name) from a single image by learning from video data.
This goal poses many challenges for current computer vision. While there has been a longstanding
interest in learning segmentation and object individuation from motion cues in vision [41, 34, 11], the
general case of being broadly able to segment everything has not made substantial progress. While
there has, of course, been substantial progress on instance segmentation for particular categories (for
instance MaskRCNN [21]) powered by large segmentation datasets [28], the space of categories that
one can pick up is vast. Indeed, recent work that aims to reconstruct in-hand objects via segmentation
losses [7] reconstructs a few objects by finding category correspondences (e.g., tennis racket masks
are used for knives). At the same time, while there is work on understanding hands, including contact
state [32], and detecting boxes around held generic objects [40], there is no work on segmenting
objects, much less work that learns from video data. In sum – segmenting lots of generic objects is
still challenging, and segmenting generic objects in contact is no exception.
Our approach makes progress on this challenging problem by assuming a small amount of knowledge
about humans. We assume we can estimate landmarks on hands [37], identify whether they are
holding something [40], as well as identify which pixels belong to people [23]. This small amount of
information guides understanding of the the deluge of information from optical flow [43]. Rather
than segmenting the full 3D motions of 3D objects from the flow, we instead only have to identify
whether the flow is better explained by a moving hand or a background. Moreover, by knowing about
an ubiquitous object (the hand), we show we can learn about many less ubiquitous objects.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

