Coresets for Clustering with Missing Values

Vladimir Braverman
Johns Hopkins University
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang
Peking University
shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn

Robert Krauthgamer
Weizmann Institute of Science
robert.krauthgamer@weizmann.ac.il

Xuan Wu
Johns Hopkins University
wu3412790@gmail.com

Abstract
We provide the first coreset for clustering points in Rd that have multiple missing
values (coordinates). Previous coreset constructions only allow one missing coordinate. The challenge in this setting is that objective functions, like k-M EANS,
are evaluated only on the set of available (non-missing) coordinates, which varies
across points. Recall that an -coreset of a large dataset is a small proxy, usually a
reweighted subset of points, that (1 + )-approximates the clustering objective for
every possible center set.
Our coresets for k-M EANS and k-M EDIAN clustering have size
(jk)O(min(j,k)) (−1 d log n)2 , where n is the number of data points, d is
the dimension and j is the maximum number of missing coordinates for each data
point. We further design an algorithm to construct these coresets in near-linear
time, and consequently improve a recent quadratic-time PTAS for k-M EANS with
missing values [Eiben et al., SODA 2021] to near-linear time.
We validate our coreset construction, which is based on importance sampling and
is easy to implement, on various real data sets. Our coreset exhibits a flexible
tradeoff between coreset size and accuracy, and generally outperforms the uniformsampling baseline. Furthermore, it significantly speeds up a Lloyd’s-style heuristic
for k-M EANS with missing values.

1

Introduction

We consider coresets and approximation algorithms for k-clustering problems, particularly k-M EANS1
and more generally (k, z)-C LUSTERING (see Definition 2.1), for points in Rd with missing values
(coordinates). The presence of missing values in data sets is a common phenomenon, and dealing
with it is a fundamental challenge in data science. While data imputation is a very popular method for
handling missing values, it often requires prior knowledge which might not be available, or statistical
assumptions on the missing values that might be difficult to verify [All01, LR19]. In contrast, our
worst-case approach does not requires any prior knowledge. Specifically, in our context of clustering,
the distance dist(x, c) between a clustering center point c and a data point x is evaluated only on
the available (i.e., non-missing) coordinates. Similar models that aim to minimize clustering costs
using only the available coordinates have been proposed in previous work [HB01, Wag04, CCB16,
WLH+ 19], and some other relevant works were discussed in a survey [HC10].
Clustering under this distance function, which is evaluated only on the available coordinates, is a
formidable computational challenge, because distances do not satisfy the triangle inequality, and
In the usual k-M EANS problem (without missing coordinates), the input is a data set X ⊂ Rd and the goal
is to find a center set C ⊂ Rd , |C| = k that minimizes the sum of squared distances from every x ∈ X to C.
1

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

