Skyformer: Remodel Self-Attention with Gaussian
Kernel and Nyström Method

Yifan Chen∗, Qi Zeng∗, Heng Ji, Yun Yang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{yifanc10, qizeng2, hengji, yy84}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Transformers are expensive to train due to the quadratic time and space complexity
in the self-attention mechanism. On the other hand, although kernel machines
suffer from the same computation bottleneck in pairwise dot products, several
approximation schemes have been successfully incorporated to considerably reduce
their computational cost without sacrificing too much accuracy. In this work,
we leverage the computation methods for kernel machines to alleviate the high
computational cost and introduce Skyformer, which replaces the softmax structure
with a Gaussian kernel to stabilize the model training and adapts the Nyström
method to a non-positive semidefinite matrix to accelerate the computation. We
further conduct theoretical analysis by showing that the matrix approximation
error of our proposed method is small in the spectral norm. Experiments on Long
Range Arena benchmark show that the proposed method is sufficient in getting
comparable or even better performance than the full self-attention while requiring
fewer computation resources.

1

Introduction

The cost of language model training increases exponentially. Among different models, Transformerbased language models [Vaswani et al., 2017, Devlin et al., 2019, Liu et al., 2019, Lewis et al., 2020]
are shown to enjoy state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances on many Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks despite their enormous training cost. One of the computation bottlenecks lies in the
self-attention mechanism, which is known to be resource-intensive with quadratic time and space
complexity (O(n) where n is the input sequence length). Consequently, Transformers cannot support
long sequence processing and large batch size with limited resources.
The challenge of improving computational efficiency of Transformers has motivated several recent
studies on attention acceleration, using either sparse attention pattern [Qiu et al., 2020, Child et al.,
2019, Zaheer et al., 2020, Beltagy et al., 2020, Kitaev et al., 2020] or low-rank approximation
[Choromanski et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2020]. However, there is usually a lack of theoretical analysis
on the approximation error of these methods due to the complex softmax structure, which makes the
theoretical comparison between the efficiency of each method infeasible. It is also unclear in theory
how to set the hyper-parameters of those methods to attain a desired level of approximation accuracy.
Another issue of Transformers is the training instability that small perturbations in parameter updates
tend to be amplified, resulting in significant disturbances in the model output [Liu et al., 2020a].
Transformers on some NLP tasks have shown to be sensitive to hyper-parameters, learning schedulers,
or even random seeds, which usually demands a time-costly grid search for the best configuration
in real-world applications. It has also been observed in our experiments that a slight change in the
learning rate may cause the failure of convergence for some models. We conjecture that the instability
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

