Well-tuned Simple Nets Excel on Tabular Datasets

Arlind Kadra
Department of Computer Science
University of Freiburg
kadraa@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Frank Hutter
Department of Computer Science
University of Freiburg &
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Marius Lindauer
Institute for Information Processing
Leibniz University Hannover
lindauer@tnt.uni-hannover.de
Josif Grabocka
Department of Computer Science
University of Freiburg
grabocka@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Tabular datasets are the last “unconquered castle” for deep learning, with traditional
ML methods like Gradient-Boosted Decision Trees still performing strongly even
against recent specialized neural architectures. In this paper, we hypothesize that
the key to boosting the performance of neural networks lies in rethinking the joint
and simultaneous application of a large set of modern regularization techniques.
As a result, we propose regularizing plain Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) networks
by searching for the optimal combination/cocktail of 13 regularization techniques
for each dataset using a joint optimization over the decision on which regularizers
to apply and their subsidiary hyperparameters.
We empirically assess the impact of these regularization cocktails for MLPs in a
large-scale empirical study comprising 40 tabular datasets and demonstrate that
(i) well-regularized plain MLPs significantly outperform recent state-of-the-art
specialized neural network architectures, and (ii) they even outperform strong
traditional ML methods, such as XGBoost.

1

Introduction

In contrast to the mainstream in deep learning (DL), in this paper, we focus on tabular data, a
domain that we feel is understudied in DL. Nevertheless, it is of great relevance for many practical
applications, such as climate science, medicine, manufacturing, finance, recommender systems, etc.
During the last decade, traditional machine learning methods, such as Gradient-Boosted Decision
Trees (GBDT) [5], dominated tabular data applications due to their superior performance, and the
success story DL has had for raw data (e.g., images, speech, and text) stopped short of tabular data.
Even in recent years, the existing literature still gives mixed messages on the state-of-the-art status of
deep learning for tabular data. While some recent neural network methods [1, 46] claim to outperform
GBDT, others confirm that GBDT are still the most accurate method on tabular data [48, 26]. The
extensive experiments on 40 datasets we report indeed confirm that recent neural networks [1, 46, 11]
do not outperform GBDT when the hyperparameters of all methods are thoroughly tuned.
We hypothesize that the key to improving the performance of neural networks on tabular data lies in
exploiting the recent DL advances on regularization techniques (reviewed in Section 3), such as data
augmentation, decoupled weight decay, residual blocks and model averaging (e.g., dropout or snapshot
ensembles), or on learning dynamics (e.g., look-ahead optimizer or stochastic weight averaging).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

