Perturbation-based Regret Analysis of Predictive
Control in Linear Time Varying Systems
Yiheng Lin
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
yihengl@caltech.edu

Yang Hu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
huy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Guanya Shi
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
gshi@caltech.edu

Haoyuan Sun
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
hsun2@caltech.edu

Guannan Qu
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
gqu@caltech.edu

Adam Wierman
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study predictive control in a setting where the dynamics are time-varying and
linear, and the costs are time-varying and well-conditioned. At each time step, the
controller receives the exact predictions of costs, dynamics, and disturbances for
the future : time steps. We show that when the prediction window : is sufficiently
large, predictive control is input-to-state stable and achieves a dynamic regret of
$ (_ : )), where _ < 1 is a positive constant. This is the first dynamic regret bound
on the predictive control of linear time-varying systems. We also show a variation
of predictive control obtains the first competitive bound for the control of linear
time-varying systems: 1 + $ (_ : ). Our results are derived using a novel proof
framework based on a perturbation bound that characterizes how a small change to
the system parameters impacts the optimal trajectory.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of predictive control in a linear time-varying (LTV) system, where the dynamics
is given by G C+1 = C G C + ⌫C D C + F C . Here, G C is the state, D C is the control action, and F C is the
disturbance or exogenous input. At each time step C, the online controller incurs a time-varying state
cost 5C (G C ) and control cost 2 C (D C 1 ), and then decides its next control action D C . In deciding D C the
controller makes use of predictions of the next : future disturbances, cost functions, and dynamical
matrices, and seeks to minimize its total cost on a finite horizon ). Our main results bound the
dynamic regret and competitive ratio of predictive controllers in this LTV setting.
Recently, a growing literature has sought to design controllers that achieve learning guarantees
such as static regret [1, 2], dynamic regret [3, 4], and competitive ratio [5]. The most relevant
† Yiheng Lin, Yang Hu, Haoyuan Sun, Guanya Shi, and Guannan Qu contributed equally to this work.

‡ This work was supported by NSF grants CNS-2106403, NGSDI-2105648, and AitF-1637598, with additional support from Amazon AWS, PIMCO, and the Resnick Sustainability Insitute. Yiheng Lin was supported
by Kortschak Scholars program.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

