Improved Guarantees for Offline Stochastic Matching
via New Ordered Contention Resolution Schemes
Brian Brubach
Computer Science Department
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
bb100@wellesley.edu

Nathaniel Grammel
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
ngrammel@umd.edu

Will Ma
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
wm2428@gsb.columbia.edu

Aravind Srinivasan
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
asriniv1@umd.edu

Abstract
Matching is one of the most fundamental and broadly applicable problems across
many domains. In these diverse real-world applications, there is often a degree
of uncertainty in the input which has led to the study of stochastic matching
models. Here, each edge in the graph has a known, independent probability of
existing derived from some prediction. Algorithms must probe edges to determine
existence and match them irrevocably if they exist. Further, each vertex may
have a patience constraint denoting how many of its neighboring edges can be
probed. We present new ordered contention resolution schemes yielding improved
approximation guarantees for some of the foundational problems studied in this area.
For stochastic matching with patience constraints in general graphs, we provide
a 0.382-approximate algorithm, significantly improving over the previous best
0.31-approximation of Baveja et al. (2018). When the vertices do not have patience
constraints, we describe a 0.432-approximate random order probing algorithm
with several corollaries such as an improved guarantee for the Prophet Secretary
problem under Edge Arrivals. Finally, for the special case of bipartite graphs with
unit patience constraints on one of the partitions, we show a 0.632-approximate
algorithm that improves on the recent 1/3-guarantee of Hikima et al. (2021).

1

Introduction

The offline stochastic matching problem is about finding a maximum matching on a weighted graph.
However, each edge e is active independently according to a known probability pe , and only active
edges can be matched. The set of active edges is initially unknown. An edge whose endpoints are
unmatched can be probed to determine whether it is active, and if so, it is irrevocably inserted into
the matching. The objective is to sequentially probe the edges in a way to maximize the expected
weighted matching at the end.
Matching problems arise in numerous deployed AI systems, especially those dealing with allocation
and scheduling. See, for example, the works of Ahmadi et al. (2020); Ahmed et al. (2017); Brubach
et al. (2020, 2021b); Baveja et al. (2018) for applications to advertising, e-commerce, organ exchange,
online dating, peer review, school matching, and hiring; and Hikima et al. (2021); Nanda et al.
(2020); Xu et al. (2019) for applications to ride sharing, crowdsourcing (worker-task assignment), and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

