On Empirical Risk Minimization with Dependent
and Heavy-Tailed Data

Abhishek Roy∗

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian†

Murat A. Erdogdu‡

Abstract
In this work, we establish risk bounds for the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
with both dependent and heavy-tailed data-generating processes. We do so by
extending the seminal works [Men15, Men18] on the analysis of ERM with heavytailed but independent and identically distributed observations, to the strictly stationary exponentially β-mixing case. Our analysis is based on explicitly controlling
the multiplier process arising from the interaction between the noise and the function evaluations on inputs. It allows for the interaction to be even polynomially
heavy-tailed, which covers a significantly large class of heavy-tailed models beyond what is analyzed in the learning theory literature. We illustrate our results by
deriving rates of convergence for the high-dimensional linear regression problem
with dependent and heavy-tailed data.

1

Introduction

Given a random vector (X, Y ) ∈ Rd × R, with joint distribution (X, Y ) ∼ π, and a class of closed,
convex set of functions F ⊂ L2 (π), the objective in statistical learning theory is to find the best
function in the set F that maps the input X to the target Y . The quality of this mapping is measured
by a user-defined loss function ℓ : R → R+ ∪ {0}. The most well-studied approach for the above
task is that of risk minimization, where the best function is defined as the one that minimizes the
expected loss over the set F:
f ∗ = argmin P ℓf := argmin Eπ [ℓ (f (X) − Y )] .
f ∈F

f ∈F

The above problem requires the knowledge of the distribution π which is typically unknown in
practice. However, we are usually given observations Zi = (Xi , Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , N , from the
distribution π which leads to the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) procedure defined as
N
1 X
fˆ = argmin PN ℓf := argmin
ℓ (f (Xi ) − Yi ) .
N i=1
f ∈F
f ∈F

The convergence of the empirical risk minimizer fˆ to the true risk minimizer f ∗ is typically analyzed
by considering the underlying empirical process, a topic which dates back to the seminal work
of [VC71]; see also [VDVW96, vdG00, BBM05, Kol06, Kol11]. In a representative analysis in this
∗

Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis.abroy@ucdavis.edu. Research of this author
was supported in part by NSF TRIPODS grant CCF-1934568
†
Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis. kbala@ucdavis.edu. Research of this author
was supported in part by UC Davis CeDAR (Center for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Research)
Innovative Data Science Seed Funding Program.
‡
Department of Computer Science and Department of Statistical Sciences at the University of Toronto, and
Vector Institute. erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu. Research of this author was supported in part by NSERC Grant
[2019-06167], Connaught New Researcher Award, CIFAR AI Chairs program, and CIFAR AI Catalyst grant
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

