Two Sides of Meta-Learning Evaluation:
In vs. Out of Distribution
Amrith Setlur1∗

Oscar Li2∗

Virginia Smith2

asetlur@cs.cmu.edu oscarli@cmu.edu smithv@cmu.edu
2
Language Technologies Institute
Machine Learning Department
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University

1

Abstract
We categorize meta-learning evaluation into two settings: in-distribution [ID],
in which the train and test tasks are sampled iid from the same underlying task
distribution, and out-of-distribution [OOD], in which they are not. While most metalearning theory and some FSL applications follow the ID setting, we identify that
most existing few-shot classification benchmarks instead reflect OOD evaluation,
as they use disjoint sets of train (base) and test (novel) classes for task generation.
This discrepancy is problematic because—as we show on numerous benchmarks—
meta-learning methods that perform better on existing OOD datasets may perform
significantly worse in the ID setting. In addition, in the OOD setting, even though
current FSL benchmarks seem befitting, our study highlights concerns in 1) reliably
performing model selection for a given meta-learning method, and 2) consistently
comparing the performance of different methods. To address these concerns,
we provide suggestions on how to construct FSL benchmarks to allow for ID
evaluation as well as more reliable OOD evaluation. Our work† aims to inform
the meta-learning community about the importance and distinction of ID vs. OOD
evaluation, as well as the subtleties of OOD evaluation with current benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning considers learning algorithms that can perform well over a distribution of tasks [19, 37].
To do so, a meta-learning method first learns from a set of tasks sampled from a training task
distribution (meta-training), and then evaluates the quality of the learned algorithm using tasks from
a test task distribution (meta-testing). The test task distribution can be the same as the training
task distribution (a scenario we term in-distribution generalization evaluation or ID evaluation) or a
different task distribution (out-of-distribution generalization evaluation or OOD evaluation).
In this work, we argue that there is a need to carefully consider current meta-learning practices
in light of this ID vs. OOD categorization. In particular, meta-learning is commonly evaluated
on few-shot learning (FSL) benchmarks, which aim to evaluate meta-learning methods’ ability to
learn sample-efficient algorithms. Current benchmarks primarily focus on image classification and
provide training tasks constructed from a set of train (base) classes that are completely disjoint and
sometimes extremely different from the test (novel) classes used for test tasks. As we discuss in
Section 3, this design choice imposes a natural shift in the train and test task distribution that makes
current benchmarks reflective of OOD generalization. However, there are a number of reasons to
also consider the distinct setting of ID evaluation. First, whether in terms of methodology or theory,
many works motivate and analyze meta-learning under the assumption that train and test tasks are
sampled iid from the same distribution (see Section 2). Second, we identify a growing number of
applications, such as federated learning, where there is in fact a need for sample-efficient algorithms
∗

Authors contributed equally to this paper.
Code available at https://github.com/ars22/meta-learning-eval-id-vs-ood.

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

