Efficient Generalization
with Distributionally Robust Learning

Soumyadip Ghosh, Mark S. Squillante
Mathematical Sciences, IBM Research AI
Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 20198, USA
ghoshs, mss@us.ibm.com

Ebisa D. Wollega
Department of Engineering
Colorado State University-Pueblo
Pueblo, CO 81001, USA
ewolleg@csupueblo.edu

Abstract
Distributionally robust learning (DRL) is increasingly seen as a viable method to
train machine learning models for improved model generalization. These minimax
formulations, however, are more difficult to solve. We provide a new stochastic
gradient descent algorithm to efficiently solve this DRL formulation. Our approach
applies gradient descent to the outer minimization formulation and estimates the
gradient of the inner maximization based on a sample average approximation. The
latter uses a subset of the data sampled without replacement in each iteration, progressively increasing the subset size to ensure convergence. We rigorously establish
convergence to a near-optimal solution under standard regularity assumptions and,
for strongly convex losses, match the best known O(−1 ) rate of convergence up
to a known threshold. Empirical results demonstrate the significant benefits of our
approach over previous work in improving learning for model generalization.

1

Introduction

Consider a general formulation of the distributionally robust learning (DRL) problem of active
interest. Let X denote a sample space, P denote a probability distribution on X, and Θ ⊆ Rd
denote a parameter space. Let us define LP (θ) := EP [l(θ, ξ)] to be the expectation with respect
to (w.r.t.) P of a loss function l : Θ × X → R representing the estimation error for a learning
model with parameters θ ∈ Θ over data ξ ∈ X. Further define the worst-case expected loss
function R(θ) := EP ∗ (θ) [l(θ, ξ)] = supP ∈P {LP (θ)}, which maximizes the loss LP over a welldefined set of measures RP. Letting Pb denote a base distribution, this set often takes the form
P = {P | D(P, Pb ) ≤ ρ, dP (ξ) = 1, P (ξ) ≥ 0} where D(·, ·) is a distance function on the space
of probability distributions on X and the constraints limit the feasible candidates to be within a
distance of ρ from Pb . We seek to find parameters θ ∈ Θ that solve the DRL problem formulated as
n
o
n
o
∗
R(θrob
) = min R(θ) = min sup {LP (θ)} ,
(1)
θ∈Θ

θ∈Θ

P ∈P

for a given X and P. In practice, training with DRL amounts to dynamically reweighing the data using
the inner optima P ∗ (θ) at any value the parameters θ take over the space Θ. The inner maximization
problem sets these weights to emphasize data that experience high loss at θ. This reweighing approach
arises from solid theoretical foundations and can provide strong guarantees on model generalization.
DRL and Model Generalization: In machine learning, optimal values for the model parameters
θ are calculated from a finite training dataset (of size N ) and this model is then used for inference
over other test datasets, all of which are typically assumed to be identically distributed [33, 34].
The equal-weight empirical distribution UN = {1/N } over the finite training dataset is the nonparametric maximum likelihood estimator [23] of the (unknown) distribution underlying the datasets.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

