Residual2Vec: Debiasing graph embedding
with random graphs

Sadamori Kojaku1 , Jisung Yoon2 , Isabel Constantino3 , Yong-Yeol Ahn1,3,4

1
Center for Complex Networks and
Systems Research, Luddy School of
Informatics, Computing and
Engineering, Indiana University, USA

2
Department of Industrial
Management and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and
Technology, South Korea

4
Connection Science
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA

3
Indiana University
Network Science Institute
Indiana University, USA

{skojaku, imconsta, yyahn}@iu.edu, jisung.yoon92@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph embedding maps a graph into a convenient vector-space representation for graph analysis and machine learning applications. Many graph
embedding methods hinge on a sampling of context nodes based on random
walks. However, random walks can be a biased sampler due to the structural
properties of graphs. Most notably, random walks are biased by the degree
of each node, where a node is sampled proportionally to its degree. The
implication of such biases has not been clear, particularly in the context
of graph representation learning. Here, we investigate the impact of the
random walks’ bias on graph embedding and propose residual2vec, a general
graph embedding method that can debias various structural biases in graphs
by using random graphs. We demonstrate that this debiasing not only
improves link prediction and clustering performance but also allows us to
explicitly model salient structural properties in graph embedding.

1

Introduction

On average, your friends tend to be more popular than you. This is a mathematical necessity
known as the friendship paradox, which arises due to a sampling bias, i.e., popular people
have many friends and thus are likely to be on your friend list [1]. Beyond being a fun
trivia, the friendship paradox is a fundamental property of graphs: following an edge is a
biased sampling that preferentially samples nodes based on nodes’ degree (i.e., the number
of neighbors). The fact that random walk is used as the default sampling paradigm across
many graph embedding methods raises important questions: what are the implications of
this sampling bias in graph embedding? If it is undesirable, how can we debias it?
Graph embedding maps a graph into a dense vector representation, enabling a direct
application of many machine learning algorithms to graph analysis [2]. A widely used
framework is to turn a graph into a “sentence of nodes” and then feed the sentence to
word2vec [3–6]. A crucial difference from word embedding is that, rather than using given
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

