Nonuniform Negative Sampling and Log Odds
Correction with Rare Events Data
HaiYing Wang
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
haiying.wang@uconn.edu

Aonan Zhang
ByteDance Inc.
aonan.zhang@bytedance.com

Chong Wang
ByteDance Inc.
chong.wang@bytedance.com

Abstract
We investigate the issue of parameter estimation with nonuniform negative sampling for imbalanced data. We first prove that, with imbalanced data, the available
information about unknown parameters is only tied to the relatively small number
of positive instances, which justifies the usage of negative sampling. However,
if the negative instances are subsampled to the same level of the positive cases,
there is information loss. To maintain more information, we derive the asymptotic
distribution of a general inverse probability weighted (IPW) estimator and obtain
the optimal sampling probability that minimizes its variance. To further improve
the estimation efficiency over the IPW method, we propose a likelihood-based
estimator by correcting log odds for the sampled data and prove that the improved
estimator has the smallest asymptotic variance among a large class of estimators. It
is also more robust to pilot misspecification. We validate our approach on simulated data as well as a real click-through rate dataset with more than 0.3 trillion
instances, collected over a period of a month. Both theoretical and empirical results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Imbalanced data are ubiquitous in scientific fields and applications with binary response outputs,
where the number of instances in the positive class is much smaller than that in the negative class. For
example, in online search or recommendation systems where billions of impressions appear each day,
non-click impressions usually dominate. Using these non-click impressions as negative instances is
prevalent and proved to be useful especially in modern machine learning systems [21, 12, 4, 9, 14].
A common approach to address imbalanced data is to balance it by subsampling the negative class
[6, 19] and/or up-sampling the positive class [2, 10, 20, 5], and a great deal of attentions have been
drawn to this problem, see [15, 17, 3, 7, 23, 27, 1, 25, 8, 18, 30], and the references therein.
In this paper, we focus on subsampling the negative class, i.e., negative sampling, while keeping
all rare positive instances. This is beneficial for modern online learning systems, where negative
sampling significantly reduces data volume in distributed storage while saving training time for
multiple downstream models. Rare events data and negative sampling are studied in [30], but it
focused on linear logistic regression and only considered uniform sampling. We approach this
problem under general binary response models from the perspective of optimal subsampling, which
aims to minimize the asymptotic variance of the IPW estimator [32, 28, 31, 33]. This topic was not
well investigated neither for imbalanced data nor for negative sampling. In addition, existing optimal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

