A Framework to Learn with Interpretation

Jayneel Parekh 1 , Pavlo Mozharovskyi 1 , Florence d’Alché-Buc 1
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
{jayneel.parekh,pavlo.mozharovskyi,florence.dalche}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
To tackle interpretability in deep learning, we present a novel framework to jointly
learn a predictive model and its associated interpretation model. The interpreter
provides both local and global interpretability about the predictive model in terms of
human-understandable high level attribute functions, with minimal loss of accuracy.
This is achieved by a dedicated architecture and well chosen regularization penalties.
We seek for a small-size dictionary of high level attribute functions that take
as inputs the outputs of selected hidden layers and whose outputs feed a linear
classifier. We impose strong conciseness on the activation of attributes with an
entropy-based criterion while enforcing fidelity to both inputs and outputs of
the predictive model. A detailed pipeline to visualize the learnt features is also
developed. Moreover, besides generating interpretable models by design, our
approach can be specialized to provide post-hoc interpretations for a pre-trained
neural network. We validate our approach against several state-of-the-art methods
on multiple datasets and show its efficacy on both kinds of tasks.

1

Introduction

Interpretability in machine learning systems [16, 37, 42] has recently attracted a large amount of
attention. This is due to the increasing adoption of these tools in every area of automated decisionmaking, including critical domains such as law [25], healthcare [48] or defence. Besides robustness,
fairness and safety, it is considered as an essential component to ensure trustworthiness in predictive
models that exhibit a growing complexity. Explainability and interpretability are often used as
synonyms in the literature, referring to the ability to provide human-understandable insights on the
decision process. Throughout this paper, we opt for interpretability as in [15] and leave the term
explainability for the ability to provide logical explanations or causal reasoning, both requiring more
sophisticated frameworks [17, 19, 44]. To address the long-standing challenge of interpreting models
such as deep neural networks [43, 10, 9], two main approaches have been developed in literature:
post-hoc approaches and “by design methods”.
Post-hoc approaches [7, 41, 38, 45] generally analyze a pre-trained system locally and attempt to
interpret its decisions. “Interpretable by design” [3, 1] methods aim at integrating the interpretability
objective into the learning process. They generally modify the structure of predictor function itself
or add to the loss function regularizing penalties to enforce interpretability. Both approaches offer
different types of advantages and drawbacks. Post-hoc approaches guarantee not affecting the
performance of the pre-trained system but are however criticized for computational costs, robustness
and faithfulness of interpretations [54, 28, 5]. Interpretable systems by-design on the other hand,
although preferred for interpretability, face the challenge of not losing out on performance.
Here, we adopt another angle to learning interpretable models. As a starting point, we consider
that prediction (computing ŷ the model’s output for a given input) and interpretation (giving a
human-understandable description of properties of the input that lead to ŷ) are two distinct but
strongly related tasks. On one hand, they do not involve the same criteria for the assessment of their
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

