Online and Offline Reinforcement Learning by
Planning with a Learned Model

Julian Schrittwieser∗
DeepMind
swj@google.com
Mohammadamin Barekatain
DeepMind
barekatain@google.com

Thomas Hubert∗
DeepMind
tkhubert@google.com

Amol Mandhane
DeepMind
mandhane@google.com

Ioannis Antonoglou
DeepMind
University College London
ioannisa@google.com

David Silver
DeepMind
University College London
davidsilver@google.com

Abstract
Learning efficiently from small amounts of data has long been the focus of modelbased reinforcement learning, both for the online case when interacting with the
environment and the offline case when learning from a fixed dataset. However, to
date no single unified algorithm has demonstrated state-of-the-art results in both
settings. In this work, we describe the Reanalyse algorithm which uses modelbased policy and value improvement operators to compute new improved training
targets on existing data points, allowing efficient learning for data budgets varying
by several orders of magnitude. We further show that Reanalyse can also be used to
learn entirely from demonstrations without any environment interactions, as in the
case of offline Reinforcement Learning (offline RL). Combining Reanalyse with the
MuZero algorithm, we introduce MuZero Unplugged, a single unified algorithm for
any data budget, including offline RL. In contrast to previous work, our algorithm
does not require any special adaptations for the off-policy or offline RL settings.
MuZero Unplugged sets new state-of-the-art results in the RL Unplugged offline
RL benchmark as well as in the online RL benchmark of Atari in the standard 200
million frame setting.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning holds the promise of learning useful policies from many existing
real-world datasets in a wide range of important problems such as robotics, healthcare or education
(Levine et al., 2020). Learning effectively from offline data is crucial for such tasks where interaction
with the environment is costly or comes with safety concerns, but a large amount of logged and other
offline data is often available.
A wide variety of effective reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for the online case have been
described, achieving impressive results in video games (Mnih et al., 2015), robotic control (Akkaya
et al., 2019) and many other problems. However, applying these online RL algorithms to offline data
often remains challenging due to off-policy issues, with the best results in offline RL so far obtained
by specialised offline algorithms (Kumar et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2020). At the
same time, model-based reinforcement learning (RL) has long focused on learning efficiently from
little data, even going as far as learning completely within a model of the environment (Hafner et al.,
2018) - an approach ideally suited for offline RL.
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

