Autoformer: Decomposition Transformers with
Auto-Correlation for Long-Term Series Forecasting

Haixu Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long (B)
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{whx20,xjh20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Extending the forecasting time is a critical demand for real applications, such as
extreme weather early warning and long-term energy consumption planning. This
paper studies the long-term forecasting problem of time series. Prior Transformerbased models adopt various self-attention mechanisms to discover the long-range
dependencies. However, intricate temporal patterns of the long-term future prohibit
the model from finding reliable dependencies. Also, Transformers have to adopt the
sparse versions of point-wise self-attentions for long series efficiency, resulting in
the information utilization bottleneck. Going beyond Transformers, we design Autoformer as a novel decomposition architecture with an Auto-Correlation mechanism.
We break with the pre-processing convention of series decomposition and renovate
it as a basic inner block of deep models. This design empowers Autoformer with
progressive decomposition capacities for complex time series. Further, inspired by
the stochastic process theory, we design the Auto-Correlation mechanism based on
the series periodicity, which conducts the dependencies discovery and representation aggregation at the sub-series level. Auto-Correlation outperforms self-attention
in both efficiency and accuracy. In long-term forecasting, Autoformer yields stateof-the-art accuracy, with a 38% relative improvement on six benchmarks, covering
five practical applications: energy, traffic, economics, weather and disease. Code is
available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/Autoformer.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has been widely used in energy consumption, traffic and economics planning,
weather and disease propagation forecasting. In these real-world applications, one pressing demand
is to extend the forecast time into the far future, which is quite meaningful for the long-term planning
and early warning. Thus, in this paper, we study the long-term forecasting problem of time series,
characterizing itself by the large length of predicted time series. Recent deep forecasting models
[41, 17, 20, 28, 23, 29, 19, 35] have achieved great progress, especially the Transformer-based models.
Benefiting from the self-attention mechanism, Transformers obtain great advantage in modeling
long-term dependencies for sequential data, which enables more powerful big models [7, 11].
However, the forecasting task is extremely challenging under the long-term setting. First, it is
unreliable to discover the temporal dependencies directly from the long-term time series because
the dependencies can be obscured by entangled temporal patterns. Second, canonical Transformers
with self-attention mechanisms are computationally prohibitive for long-term forecasting because
of the quadratic complexity of sequence length. Previous Transformer-based forecasting models
[41, 17, 20] mainly focus on improving self-attention to a sparse version. While performance is
significantly improved, these models still utilize the point-wise representation aggregation. Thus, in
the process of efficiency improvement, they will sacrifice the information utilization because of the
sparse point-wise connections, resulting in a bottleneck for long-term forecasting of time series.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

