Terra: Imperative-Symbolic Co-Execution of
Imperative Deep Learning Programs

Taebum Kim
Seoul National University, FriendliAI
k.taebum@snu.ac.kr,
ktaebum@friendli.ai

Eunji Jeong∗
Samsung Research
eun-ji.jeong@samsung.com

Geon-Woo Kim
Seoul National University, FriendliAI
gwsshs22@snu.ac.kr,
gwsshs22@friendli.ai

Yunmo Koo
Seoul National University, FriendliAI
mpbb03@snu.ac.kr,
yunmorning@friendli.ai

Sehoon Kim∗
University of California, Berkeley
sehoonkim@berkeley.edu

Gyeong-In Yu
Seoul National University
gyeongin@snu.ac.kr

Byung-Gon Chun†
Seoul National University, FriendliAI
bgchun@snu.ac.kr,
bgchun@friendli.ai

Abstract
Imperative programming allows users to implement their deep neural networks
(DNNs) easily and has become an essential part of recent deep learning (DL) frameworks. Recently, several systems have been proposed to combine the usability of
imperative programming with the optimized performance of symbolic graph execution. Such systems convert imperative Python DL programs to optimized symbolic
graphs and execute them. However, they cannot fully support the usability of imperative programming. For example, if an imperative DL program contains a Python
feature with no corresponding symbolic representation (e.g., third-party library
calls or unsupported dynamic control flows) they fail to execute the program. To
overcome this limitation, we propose Terra, an imperative-symbolic co-execution
system that can handle any imperative DL programs while achieving the optimized
performance of symbolic graph execution. To achieve this, Terra builds a symbolic
graph by decoupling DL operations from Python features. Then, Terra conducts the
imperative execution to support all Python features, while delegating the decoupled
operations to the symbolic execution. We evaluated Terra’s performance improvement and coverage with ten imperative DL programs for several DNN architectures.
The results show that Terra can speed up the execution of all ten imperative DL
programs, whereas AutoGraph, one of the state-of-the-art systems, fails to execute
five of them.

∗
†

Work done at Seoul National University
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

