Explaining Hyperparameter Optimization
via Partial Dependence Plots
Julia Moosbauer⇤, Julia Herbinger⇤ , Giuseppe Casalicchio, Marius Lindauer, Bernd Bischl
Department of Statistics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany
Institute of Information Processing, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany
{julia.moosbauer, julia.herbinger, giuseppe.casalicchio,
bernd.bischl}@stat.uni-muenchen.de
lindauer@tnt.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
Automated hyperparameter optimization (HPO) can support practitioners to obtain
peak performance in machine learning models. However, there is often a lack of
valuable insights into the effects of different hyperparameters on the final model
performance. This lack of explainability makes it difficult to trust and understand
the automated HPO process and its results. We suggest using interpretable machine
learning (IML) to gain insights from the experimental data obtained during HPO
with Bayesian optimization (BO). BO tends to focus on promising regions with
potential high-performance configurations and thus induces a sampling bias. Hence,
many IML techniques, such as the partial dependence plot (PDP), carry the risk of
generating biased interpretations. By leveraging the posterior uncertainty of the
BO surrogate model, we introduce a variant of the PDP with estimated confidence
bands. We propose to partition the hyperparameter space to obtain more confident
and reliable PDPs in relevant sub-regions. In an experimental study, we provide
quantitative evidence for the increased quality of the PDPs within sub-regions.

1

Introduction

Most machine learning (ML) algorithms are highly configurable. Their hyperparameters must be
chosen carefully, as their choice often impacts the model performance. Even for experts, it can be
challenging to find well-performing hyperparameter configurations. Automated machine learning
(AutoML) systems and methods for automated HPO have been shown to yield considerable efficiency
compared to manual tuning by human experts [Snoek et al., 2012]. However, these approaches
mainly return a well-performing configuration and leave users without insights into decisions of
the optimization process. Questions about the importance of hyperparameters or their effects on
the resulting performance often remain unanswered. Not all data scientists trust the outcome of an
AutoML system due to the lack of transparency [Drozdal et al., 2020]. Consequently, they might not
deploy an AutoML model, despite all performance gains. Providing insights into the search process
may help increase trust and facilitate interactive and exploratory processes: A data scientist could
monitor the AutoML process and make changes to it (e.g., restricting or expanding the search space)
already during optimization to anticipate unintended results.
Transparency, trust, and understanding of the inner workings of an AutoML system can be increased
by interpreting the internal surrogate model of an AutoML approach. For example, BO trains a
surrogate model to approximate the relationship between hyperparameter configurations and model
performance. It is used to guide the optimization process towards the most promising regions of the
hyperparameter space. Hence, surrogate models implicitly contain information about the influence of
⇤

These authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

