On Optimal Interpolation in Linear Regression

Eduard Oravkin
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
eduard.oravkin@stats.ox.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Understanding when and why interpolating methods generalize well has recently
been a topic of interest in statistical learning theory. However, systematically
connecting interpolating methods to achievable notions of optimality has only
received partial attention. In this paper, we investigate the question of what is the
optimal way to interpolate in linear regression using functions that are linear in the
response variable (as the case for the Bayes optimal estimator in ridge regression)
and depend on the data, the population covariance of the data, the signal-to-noise
ratio and the covariance of the prior for the signal, but do not depend on the value
of the signal itself nor the noise vector in the training data. We provide a closedform expression for the interpolator that achieves this notion of optimality and
show that it can be derived as the limit of preconditioned gradient descent with a
specific initialization. We identify a regime where the minimum-norm interpolator
provably generalizes arbitrarily worse than the optimal response-linear achievable
interpolator that we introduce, and validate with numerical experiments that the
notion of optimality we consider can be achieved by interpolating methods that only
use the training data as input in the case of an isotropic prior. Finally, we extend the
notion of optimal response-linear interpolation to random features regression under
a linear data-generating model that has been previously studied in the literature.

1

Introduction

Establishing mathematical understanding for the good generalization properties of interpolating
methods, i.e. methods that fit the training data perfectly, has attracted significant interest in recent
years. Motivated by the quest to explain the generalization performance of neural networks which
have zero training error, for example even on randomly corrupted data (Zhang et al., 2017), this area
of research has established results for a variety of models. For instance, in kernel regression, Liang
and Rakhlin (2020) provide a data-dependent upper bound on the generalization performance of the
minimum-norm interpolator. By analyzing the upper bound, they show that small generalization
error of the minimum-norm interpolator occurs in a regime with favourable curvature of the kernel,
particular decay of the eigenvalues of the kernel and data population covariance matrices and,
importantly, in an overparametrized setting. In random features regression, Mei and Montanari
(2019) showed that for large signal-to-noise ratio and in the limit of large overparametrization, the
optimal regularization is zero, i.e. the optimal ridge regressor is an interpolator. Liang and Sur (2020)
characterized the precise high-dimensional asymptotic generalization of interpolating minimum`1 -norm classifiers and boosting algorithms which maximize the `1 margin. Bartlett et al. (2020)
isolated a setting of benign overfitting in linear regression, dependent on notions of effective rank of
the population covariance matrix, in which the minimum-norm interpolator has small generalization
error. Similarly, this regime of benign overfitting occurs with large overparametrization.
Linear models, in particular, provide a fundamental playground to understand interpolators. On
the one hand, in overparametrized regimes, interpolators in linear models are seen to reproduce
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

