A single gradient step finds adversarial examples on
random two-layers neural networks
Sébastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research

Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri
UC Berkeley

Gauthier Gidel⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal

Rémi Tachet des Combes
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Daniely and Schacham [2020] recently showed that gradient descent finds adversarial examples on random undercomplete two-layers ReLU neural networks. The
term “undercomplete” refers to the fact that their proof only holds when the number
of neurons is a vanishing fraction of the ambient dimension. We extend their result
to the overcomplete case, where the number of neurons is larger than the dimension
(yet also subexponential in the dimension). In fact we prove that a single step of
gradient descent suffices. We also show this result for any subexponential width
random neural network with smooth activation function.

1

Introduction

We study the random two-layers neural network model, f : Rd ! R defined by
k

1 X
f (x) = p
a` (w` · x) ,
k `=1

(1)

where : R ! R is a fixed non-linearity, the weight vectors w` 2 Rd are i.i.d. from a Gaussian
N 0, d1 Id (so they are roughly unit norm vectors), and the coefficients a` 2 R are independent
from the weight vectors and i.i.d. uniformly
p distributed in { 1, +1}. With this parametrization, the
central limit theorem says that, for x 2 d · Sd 1 (so that w` · x ⇠ N (0, 1)) and large width k, the
distribution of f (x) is approximately a centered Gaussian with variance EX⇠N (0,1) [ (X)2 ].
Our goal is to study the concept of adversarial examples in this random model. We say that 2 Rd
is an adversarial perturbation at x 2 Rd if k k ⌧ kxk and sign(f (x)) 6= sign(f (x + )). In this
case, we call x + an adversarial example. Our main result is that, while |f (x)| = O(1) with high
probability, a single gradient step on f (i.e., a perturbation of the form = ⌘rf (x) for some ⌘ 2 R)
p = 1. Note, here that gradients
suffices to find such adversarial examples, with roughly k k ' kxk
d
are taken with respect to the input to the network as opposed to the weights of the network. We prove
this statement for networks of subexponential width (e.g., k ⌧ exp(o(d))) with both smooth and
ReLU activation functions. We first state our result for smooth activation functions in the following
theorem.
Theorem 1. Let 2 (0, 1) and be non-constant, Lipschitz and with Lipschitz derivative. There
exists constants C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 depending on such that the following holds true. Assume k
⇤

Canada CIFAR AI Chair

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

