Joint Inference for Neural Network Depth and
Dropout Regularization

Kishan K C1
Rui Li1∗
Mahdi Gilany2
2
Rochester Institute of Technology
Queens University
1
2
{kk3671, rxlics}@rit.edu
mahdi.gilany@queensu.ca
1

Abstract
Dropout regularization methods prune a neural network’s pre-determined backbone
structure to avoid overfitting. However, a deep model still tends to be poorly
calibrated with high confidence on incorrect predictions. We propose a unified
Bayesian model selection method to jointly infer the most plausible network depth
warranted by data, and perform dropout regularization simultaneously. In particular,
to infer network depth we define a beta process over the number of hidden layers
which allows it to go to infinity. Layer-wise activation probabilities induced by
the beta process modulate neuron activation via binary vectors of a conjugate
Bernoulli process. Experiments across domains show that by adapting network
depth and dropout regularization to data, our method achieves superior performance
comparing to state-of-the-art methods with well-calibrated uncertainty estimates. In
continual learning, our method enables neural networks to dynamically evolve their
depths to accommodate incrementally available data beyond their initial structures,
and alleviate catastrophic forgetting.

1

Introduction

Both dropout regularization and network depth are critical to the success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4]. Finely tuned or selected structures empower DNNs with proper model capacity
that can not only efficiently capture statistical regularities in data but also avoid being deceived by
random noise into “discovering” non-existent relationships.
Dropout as an effective regularization method sparsifies a neural network’s structure by randomly
deleting neurons along with their connections in training to prevent it from overfitting [5, 6]. Recent
studies extend the method from a Bayesian perspective to allow automatic tuning of the dropout
probability in large models [4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Although dropout and its variants can effectively
govern model capacity, without uncertainty calibration deep models tend to be overly confident with
their predictions [3, 12]. Probabilistic inference approaches for network structure selection propose
to bypass or down-weight certain hidden layers to reduce training cost and build smaller models
that perform just as well as larger ones [3, 13, 14, 15]. These methods lead to more efficient or
better-calibrated models only by reducing the depth of a pre-determined network structure. They
cannot scale the network structure up to accommodate incrementally available data beyond the upper
limit of its capacity.
We thus propose a novel Bayesian model selection framework to jointly infer network depth and
perform dropout regularization simultaneously. In particular, we model the depth of a network
structure as a stochastic process by defining the beta process [16, 17] over the number of hidden
layers to enable it to go to infinity in theory, as in Figure 1(a) (left). The beta process induces
layer-wise activation probabilities, which allows its conjugate Bernoulli process to generate a binary
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

