Learning to Combine Per-Example Solutions for
Neural Program Synthesis

Disha Shrivastava ∗
Mila, Université de Montréal
Google Research

Hugo Larochelle
Mila, Université de Montréal
Google Research
CIFAR Fellow

Daniel Tarlow
Mila, McGill University
Google Research

Abstract
The goal of program synthesis from examples is to find a computer program
that is consistent with a given set of input-output examples. Most learning-based
approaches try to find a program that satisfies all examples at once. Our work,
by contrast, considers an approach that breaks the problem into two stages: (a)
find programs that satisfy only one example, and (b) leverage these per-example
solutions to yield a program that satisfies all examples. We introduce the Cross
Aggregator neural network module based on a multi-head attention mechanism
that learns to combine the cues present in these per-example solutions to synthesize
a global solution. Evaluation across programs of different lengths and under two
different experimental settings reveal that when given the same time budget, our
technique significantly improves the success rate over PCCoder [30] and other
ablation baselines. The code, data and trained models for our work can be found at:
https://github.com/shrivastavadisha/N-PEPS.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis from examples tackles the problem of coming up with a computer program that
satisfies a given set of Input-Output (IO) examples. Since the space of possible programs is large, an
exhaustive search can be extremely time-consuming. Therefore, development of systems for program
synthesis that can come up with a solution (program satisfying the given IO examples) within a
limited time, such that it is practical for real-world applications, is a challenging task.
Neural-guided program synthesis systems [4, 30] try to expedite the search by using a neural network
conditioned on the IO examples as a learned heuristic for the search procedure. In these systems, a
neural network outputs probabilities over programs or properties of programs (e.g. functions). These
probabilities are then utilized to guide a search like depth-first or beam search. These systems try
to find a program that satisfies all IO examples simultaneously, which under most of the settings
can be hard. What if instead, we try to find this program in parts? To understand this motivation,
imagine a process wherein a programmer is asked to write a program that satisfies a set of unit test
cases. They may begin by figuring out a program that satisfies a subset of unit test cases first, and
later modifying the program to incorporate other corner cases. Shi et al. [26] uses this intuition to
iteratively refine a program by mining fragments of Java code from partial solutions, based on a set
of rules and predefined heuristics. Gupta et al. [12] also uses the same intuition, but in a different
application for program repair.
In this work, we consider breaking the complex problem of finding a program that satisfies all N
given IO examples (called the global solution) into N smaller, easy to solve sub-problems, where
each sub-problem involves finding a program satisfying only one IO example (called per-example
∗

Correspondence to: <dishu.905@gmail.com>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

