Scalable Bayesian GPFA with automatic relevance
determination and discrete noise models
Kristopher T. Jensen*

Ta-Chu Kao* Jasmine T. Stone Guillaume Hennequin
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
{ktj21, tck29, jts58, gjeh2}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Latent variable models are ubiquitous in the exploratory analysis of neural population recordings, where they allow researchers to summarize the activity of large
populations of neurons in lower dimensional ‘latent’ spaces. Existing methods can
generally be categorized into (i) Bayesian methods that facilitate flexible incorporation of prior knowledge and uncertainty estimation, but which typically do not scale
to large datasets; and (ii) highly parameterized methods without explicit priors
that scale better but often struggle in the low-data regime. Here, we bridge this
gap by developing a fully Bayesian yet scalable version of Gaussian process factor
analysis (bGPFA), which models neural data as arising from a set of inferred latent
processes with a prior that encourages smoothness over time. Additionally, bGPFA
uses automatic relevance determination to infer the dimensionality of neural activity directly from the training data during optimization. To enable the analysis
of continuous recordings without trial structure, we introduce a novel variational
inference strategy that scales near-linearly in time and also allows for non-Gaussian
noise models appropriate for electrophysiological recordings. We apply bGPFA to
continuous recordings spanning 30 minutes with over 14 million data points from
primate motor and somatosensory cortices during a self-paced reaching task. We
show that neural activity progresses from an initial state at target onset to a reachspecific preparatory state well before movement onset. The distance between these
initial and preparatory latent states is predictive of reaction times across reaches,
suggesting that such preparatory dynamics have behavioral relevance despite the
lack of externally imposed delay periods. Additionally, bGPFA discovers latent
processes that evolve over slow timescales on the order of several seconds and
contain complementary information about reaction time. These timescales are
longer than those revealed by methods which focus on individual movement epochs
and may reflect fluctuations in e.g. task engagement.

1

Introduction

The adult human brain contains upwards of 100 billion neurons [3]. Yet many of our day-to-day
behaviors such as navigation, motor control, and decision making can be described in much lower
dimensional spaces. Accordingly, recent studies across a range of cognitive and motor tasks have
shown that neural population activity can often be accurately summarised by the dynamics of a
“latent state” evolving in a low-dimensional space [7, 8, 13, 38, 43]. Inferring and investigating these
latent processes can therefore help us understand the underlying representations and computations
implemented by the brain [20]. To this end, numerous latent variable models have been developed and
used to analyze the activity of populations of simultaneously recorded neurons. These models range
from simple linear projections such as PCA to sophisticated non-linear and temporally correlated
models [10, 16, 22, 43, 50].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

