STORM+: Fully Adaptive SGD with Momentum for
Nonconvex Optimization

Kfir Y. Levy ∗
Technion
kfirylevy@technion.ac.il

Ali Kavis
EPFL
ali.kavis@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this work we investigate stochastic non-convex optimization problems where
the objective is an expectation over smooth loss functions, and the goal is to find
an approximate stationary point. The most popular approach to handling such
problems is variance reduction techniques, which are also known to obtain tight
convergence rates, matching the lower bounds in this case. Nevertheless, these
techniques require a careful maintenance of anchor points in conjunction with appropriately selected “mega-batchsizes". This leads to a challenging hyperparameter
tuning problem, that weakens their practicality. Recently, [Cutkosky and Orabona,
2019] have shown that one can employ recursive momentum in order to avoid the
use of anchor points and large batchsizes, and still obtain the optimal rate for this
setting. Yet, their method called STORM crucially relies on the knowledge of
the smoothness, as well a bound on the gradient norms. In this work we propose
STORM+ , a new method that is completely parameter-free, does not require large
batch-sizes, and obtains the optimal O(1/T 1/3 ) rate for finding an approximate
stationary point. Our work builds on the STORM algorithm, in conjunction with a
novel approach to adaptively set the learning rate and momentum parameters.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade non-convex models have become principal tools in ML (Machine Learning),
and in data-science. This predominantly includes deep models, as well as Phase Retrieval [Candes
et al., 2015], non-negative matrix factorization [Hoyer, 2004], and matrix completion problems [Ge
et al., 2016] among others.
The main workhorse for training ML models is SGD (stochastic gradient descent) and its numerous
variants. One parameter that significantly affects the SGD performance is the learning rate, which
often requires a careful and costly hyper-parameter tuning. Adaptive approaches to setting the learning
rate like AdaGrad [Duchi et al., 2011] and Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] as well as non-adaptive
heuristics [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017, He et al., 2019] are very popular in modern ML applications,
yet these methods also require some tuning of hyper-parameters like momentum and the scale of the
learning rate schedule.
A popular SGD heuristic that has proven to be crucial in many applications is the use of momentum,
i.e., the use of a weighted average of past gradients instead of the current gradient [Sutskever et al.,
2013, Kingma and Ba, 2014]. Although adaptive approaches to setting the momentum have been
investigated in the past [Srinivasan et al., 2018, Hameed et al., 2016], principled and theoreticallygrounded approaches to doing so are less investigated. Another aspect that has not been extensively
studied, which we take into account in this work, is the interplay between learning rate and momentum.
∗

A Viterbi fellow. Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

