MADE: Exploration via Maximizing Deviation from
Explored Regions
Tianjun Zhang⇤ 1

Paria Rashidinejad⇤1

Jiantao Jiao1

Joseph E. Gonzalez1
1

Yuandong Tian2

Stuart Russell1

University of California, Berkeley

{tianjunz,paria.rashidinejad,jiantao,russell}@berkeley.edu
2

Facebook AI Research
yuandong@fb.com

Abstract
In online reinforcement learning (RL), efficient exploration remains particularly
challenging in high-dimensional environments with sparse rewards. In lowdimensional environments, where tabular parameterization is possible, count-based
upper confidence bound (UCB) exploration methods achieve minimax near-optimal
rates. However, it remains unclear how to efficiently implement UCB in realistic RL
tasks that involve nonlinear function approximation. To address this, we propose a
new exploration approach via maximizing the deviation of the occupancy of the
next policy from the explored regions. We add this term as an adaptive regularizer
to the standard RL objective to trade off between exploration and exploitation.
We pair the new objective with a provably convergent algorithm, giving rise to a
new intrinsic reward that adjusts existing bonuses. The proposed intrinsic reward
is easy to implement and combine with other existing RL algorithms to conduct
exploration. As a proof of concept, we evaluate the new intrinsic reward on tabular
examples across a variety of model-based and model-free algorithms, showing
improvements over count-only exploration strategies. When tested on navigation
and locomotion tasks from MiniGrid and DeepMind Control Suite benchmarks, our
approach significantly improves sample efficiency over state-of-the-art methods.2

1

Introduction

Online RL is a useful tool for an agent to learn how to perform tasks, particularly when expert demonstrations are unavailable and reward information needs to be used instead [92]. To learn a satisfactory
policy, an RL agent needs to effectively balance between exploration and exploitation, which remains
a central question in RL [23, 15]. Exploration is particularly challenging in environments with sparse
rewards. One popular approach to exploration is based on intrinsic motivation, often applied by
adding an intrinsic reward (or bonus) to the extrinsic reward provided by the environment. In provable
exploration methods, bonus often captures the value estimate uncertainty and the agent takes an
action that maximizes the upper confidence bound (UCB) [5, 8, 41, 48, 44]. In tabular setting, UCB
bonuses are often constructed based on either Hoeffding’s inequality, which only uses visitation
counts, or Bernstein’s inequality, which uses value function variance in addition to visitation counts.
⇤

2

Equal Contribution.
Our code is available at https://github.com/tianjunz/MADE.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

