Sliced Mutual Information:
A Scalable Measure of Statistical Dependence
Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University
goldfeld@cornell.edu

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Abstract
Mutual information (MI) is a fundamental measure of statistical dependence, with
a myriad of applications to information theory, statistics, and machine learning.
While it possesses many desirable structural properties, the estimation of highdimensional MI from samples suffers from the curse of dimensionality. Motivated
by statistical scalability to high dimensions, this paper proposes sliced MI (SMI)
as a surrogate measure of dependence. SMI is defined as an average of MI terms
between one-dimensional random projections. We show that it preserves many
of the structural properties of classic MI, while gaining scalable computation and
efficient estimation from samples. Furthermore, and in contrast to classic MI, SMI
can grow as a result of deterministic transformations. This enables leveraging
SMI for feature extraction by optimizing it over processing functions of raw data
to identify useful representations thereof. Our theory is supported by numerical
studies of independence testing and feature extraction, which demonstrate the
potential gains SMI offers over classic MI for high-dimensional inference.

1

Introduction

Mutual information (MI) is a universal measure of dependence between random variables, defined as
✓
◆
Z
dPX,Y
I(X; Y ) :=
log
dPX,Y ,
(1)
dPX ⌦ PY
X ⇥Y

where (X, Y ) ⇠ PX,Y and dP/dQ is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of P with respect to (w.r.t.)
Q. It possesses many desirable properties, such as meaningful units (bits or nats), nullification if
and only if (iff) X and Y are independent, convenient variational forms, and invariance to bijections.
In fact, MI can be obtained axiomatically as a unique (up to a multiplicative constant) functional
satisfying several natural ‘informativeness’ conditions [1]. As such, it found a variety of applications
in communications, information theory, and statistics [1, 2]. More recently, it was adopted as a figure
of merit for studying [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] and designing [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] machine learning models.
MI is a functional of the joint distribution PX,Y of the considered random variables. In practice,
this distribution is often not known and only samples from it are available, thereby necessitating
estimation of I(X; Y ). While this topic has received considerable attention [14, 15, 16, 17, 18], MI
is fundamentally hard to estimate in high-dimensional settings due to an exponentially large (in
dimension) sample complexity [19]. Motivated by statistical efficiency in high dimensions and
inspired by recent slicing techniques of statistical divergences [20, 21, 22, 23], this paper introduces
sliced MI (SMI) as a surrogate notion of informativeness. We show that SMI inherits many of the
properties of classic MI, while allowing for efficient estimation. Furthermore, in certain aspects, SMI
is more compatible with modern machine learning practice than classic MI. In particular, deterministic
transformations of the random variables can increase SMI, e.g., if the resulting codomains have more
informative slices (in classic MI sense ). This enables using SMI as a figure of merit for feature
extraction by identifying transformation (e.g., NN parameters) that maximize it.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

