PreferenceNet: Encoding Human Preferences in
Auction Design with Deep Learning

Neehar Peri*, Michael J. Curry*, Samuel Dooley, John P. Dickerson
Center for Machine Learning, University of Maryland
peri@umiacs.umd.edu, {curry, sdooley1, john}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
The design of optimal auctions is a problem of interest in economics, game theory, and computer science. Despite decades of effort, strategyproof, revenuemaximizing auction designs are still not known outside of restricted settings.
However, recent methods using deep learning have shown some success in approximating optimal auctions, recovering several known solutions and outperforming
strong baselines when optimal auctions are not known. In addition to maximizing revenue, auction mechanisms may also seek to encourage socially desirable
constraints such as allocation fairness or diversity. However, these philosophical
notions neither have standardization nor do they have widely accepted formal
definitions. In this paper, we propose PreferenceNet, an extension of existing
neural-network-based auction mechanisms to encode constraints using (potentially
human-provided) exemplars of desirable allocations. In addition, we introduce a
new metric to evaluate an auction allocations’ adherence to such socially desirable
constraints and demonstrate that our proposed method is competitive with current
state-of-the-art neural-network based auction designs. We validate our approach
through human subject research and show that we are able to effectively capture
real human preferences. Our code is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Auctions are an essential tool in many marketplaces, including those in electricity [8], advertising
[14], and telecommunications [9, 26]. The design of auctions with desirable properties is thus an
important theoretical and practical problem. A typical assumption is that bidders may choose to bid
strategically and will successfully anticipate the behavior of other bidders. This results in a potentially
complicated Bayes-Nash equilibrium which may be difficult to predict. To evade this problem, a
common requirement is that an auction should be strategyproof (i.e. bidders should be incentivized to
truthfully share their valuations regardless of other bidders’ actions).
If the goal of an auction is to maximize the total welfare of all participants, the Vickrey-ClarkeGroves (VCG) mechanism is both strategyproof and welfare-maximizing [40, 7, 20]. Intuitively, in
many cases the VCG mechanism corresponds to a second-price auction. If the goal is to maximize
the revenue gained, the problem is more challenging. Myerson’s work completely characterizes
strategyproof, revenue-maximizing auctions for a single item [29]. Beyond this case, results are
more limited. Some results are known for the “multiple-good monopolist” problem, in which the
auctioneer sells multiple items to a single bidder [11, 12, 24, 31, 28, 21, 18]. In addition, designing
auctions for the related but weaker notion of Bayes-Nash incentive compatibility is reasonably well
understood [2, 3, 4].
There has been significant difficulty in designing strategyproof auctions involving multiple items
and multiple bidders. [41] shares significant, but limited results which solve the case in which items
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work. 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

