Learning to dehaze with polarization

1

Chu Zhou1 Minggui Teng2 Yufei Han5 Chao Xu1 Boxin Shi2,3,4∗
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University
2
Nat’l Eng. Lab for Video Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
5
School of Info. and Comm. Eng., Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhou_chu, minggui_teng, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn,
hanyufei@bupt.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Haze, a common kind of bad weather caused by atmospheric scattering, decreases
the visibility of scenes and degenerates the performance of computer vision algorithms. Single-image dehazing methods have shown their effectiveness in a large
variety of scenes, however, they are based on handcrafted priors or learned features,
which do not generalize well to real-world images. Polarization information can be
used to relieve its ill-posedness, however, real-world images are still challenging
since existing polarization-based methods usually assume that the transmitted light
is not significantly polarized, and they require specific clues to estimate necessary
physical parameters. In this paper, we propose a generalized physical formation
model of hazy images and a robust polarization-based dehazing pipeline without
the above assumption or requirement, along with a neural network tailored to the
pipeline. Experimental results show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both synthetic data and real-world hazy images.

1

Introduction

When taking photos in hazy environments, the visibility and color fidelity of recorded scenes are
usually contaminated, because the captured images often contain a superposition of two unknown
components: the transmitted light (an attenuated fraction of original scene radiance), and the airlight
(ambient light scattered towards the viewer). It is highly ill-posed to separate them in a single hazy
image as it requires estimating multiple unknowns from a single observation. Handcrafted priors from
natural image statistics [21, 15, 1] have been wildly used to solve this problem. With the development
of deep neural networks, learning-based methods (e.g., CNN-based [24, 65, 7, 82] and GAN-based
[79, 5]) have also been adopted to recover the haze-free images by extracting image features from a
large amount of training data. However, these methods do not generalize well to real-world images,
because they depend strongly on the image features extracted from training data and do not explicitly
consider useful constraints from physical image formation models.
For better generalization, multi-image dehazing methods have been proposed. They capture multiple
images from different viewpoints [38, 52, 84, 63], weather conditions [58, 55, 56, 57], or polarization
angles [77, 78, 53, 81, 76, 25, 54]. Although all of these multi-image dehazing methods can relieve
the ill-posedness, polarization-based ones have their unique advantages, since they directly utilize
the physical image formation model with less dependency on image features extracted from training
data. Nowadays, multiple polarized images can be conveniently captured in a single shot using a
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

