Continual World: A Robotic Benchmark For
Continual Reinforcement Learning
Maciej Wołczyk⇤
Jagiellonian University
Kraków, Poland
maciej.wolczyk@doctoral.uj.edu.pl
Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind
London, UK
razp@google.com

Łukasz Kuciński
Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw, Poland
lkucinski@impan.pl

Michał Zaj ˛
ac⇤
Jagiellonian University
Kraków, Poland
emzajac@gmail.com
Piotr Miłoś
Polish Academy of Sciences,
University of Oxford,
deepsense.ai
Warsaw, Poland
pmilos@impan.pl

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) — the ability to continuously learn, building on previously acquired knowledge — is a natural requirement for long-lived autonomous
reinforcement learning (RL) agents. While building such agents, one needs to
balance opposing desiderata, such as constraints on capacity and compute, the
ability to not catastrophically forget, and to exhibit positive transfer on new tasks.
Understanding the right trade-off is conceptually and computationally challenging,
which we argue has led the community to overly focus on catastrophic forgetting.
In response to these issues, we advocate for the need to prioritize forward transfer
and propose Continual World, a benchmark consisting of realistic and meaningfully
diverse robotic tasks built on top of Meta-World [54] as a testbed. Following an
in-depth empirical evaluation of existing CL methods, we pinpoint their limitations
and highlight unique algorithmic challenges in the RL setting. Our benchmark
aims to provide a meaningful and computationally inexpensive challenge for the
community and thus help better understand the performance of existing and future
solutions. Information about the benchmark, including the open-source code, is
available at https://sites.google.com/view/continualworld.

1

Introduction

Change is ubiquitous. Unsurprisingly, due to evolutionary pressure, humans can quickly adapt and
creatively reuse their previous experiences. In contrast, although biologically inspired, deep learning
(DL) models excel mostly in static domains that satisfy the i.i.d. assumption, as for example in
image processing [28, 49, 10, 40], language modelling [52, 11] or biological applications [47]. As
the systems are scaled up and deployed in open-ended settings, such assumptions are increasingly
questionable; imagine, for example, a robot that needs to adapt to the changing environment and
the wear-and-tear of its hardware. Continual learning (CL), an area that explicitly focuses on such
problems, has been gaining more attention recently. The progress in this area could offer enormous
advantages for deep neural networks [19] and move the community closer to the long-term goal of
building intelligent machines [20].
⇤

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

