VigDet: Knowledge Informed Neural Temporal Point
Process for Coordination Detection on Social Media
Yizhou Zhang∗, Karishma Sharma∗, Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science
Viterbi School of Engineering
University of Southern California
{zhangyiz,krsharma,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed an increasing use of coordinated accounts on social
media, operated by misinformation campaigns to influence public opinion and
manipulate social outcomes. Consequently, there is an urgent need to develop an
effective methodology for coordinated group detection to combat the misinformation on social media. However, the sparsity of account activities on social media
limits the performance of existing deep learning based coordination detectors as
they can not exploit useful prior knowledge. Instead, the detectors incorporated
with prior knowledge suffer from limited expressive power and poor performance.
Therefore, in this paper we propose a coordination detection framework incorporating neural temporal point process with prior knowledge such as temporal
logic or pre-defined filtering functions. Specifically, when modeling the observed
data from social media with neural temporal point process, we jointly learn a
Gibbs distribution of group assignment based on how consistent an assignment
is to (1) the account embedding space and (2) the prior knowledge. To address
the challenge that the distribution is hard to be efficiently computed and sampled
from, we design a theoretically guaranteed variational inference approach to learn
a mean-field approximation for it. Experimental results on a real-world dataset
show the effectiveness of our proposed method compared to state-of-the-art model
in both unsupervised and semi-supervised settings. We further apply our model
on a COVID-19 Vaccine Tweets dataset. The detection result suggests presence
of suspicious coordinated efforts on spreading misinformation about COVID-19
vaccines.

1

Introduction

Recent research reveals that the information diffusion on social media is heavily influenced by hidden
account groups [1, 30, 31], many of which are coordinated accounts operated by misinformation
campaigns (an example shown in Fig. 1a). This form of abuse to spread misinformation has been seen
in different fields, including politics (e.g. the election) [20] and healthcare (e.g. the ongoing COVID19 pandemic) [31]. This persistent abuse as well as the urgency to combat misinformation prompt us
to develop effective methodologies to uncover hidden coordinated groups from the diffusion cascade
of information on social media.
On social media, the diffusion cascade of a piece of information (like a tweet) can be considered
as a realization of a marked temporal point process where each mark of an event type corresponds
to an account. Therefore, we can formulate uncovering coordinated accounts as detecting mark
groups from observed point process data, which leads to a natural solution that first acquires account
∗

Equally contributed

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

