Credit Assignment in Neural Networks through
Deep Feedback Control
Alexander Meulemans∗, Matilde Tristany Farinha∗ , Javier García Ordóñez,
Pau Vilimelis Aceituno, João Sacramento, Benjamin F. Grewe
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich
ameulema@ethz.ch

Abstract
The success of deep learning sparked interest in whether the brain learns by using
similar techniques for assigning credit to each synaptic weight for its contribution
to the network output. However, the majority of current attempts at biologicallyplausible learning methods are either non-local in time, require highly specific
connectivity motifs, or have no clear link to any known mathematical optimization
method. Here, we introduce Deep Feedback Control (DFC), a new learning method
that uses a feedback controller to drive a deep neural network to match a desired
output target and whose control signal can be used for credit assignment. The
resulting learning rule is fully local in space and time and approximates GaussNewton optimization for a wide range of feedback connectivity patterns. To further
underline its biological plausibility, we relate DFC to a multi-compartment model
of cortical pyramidal neurons with a local voltage-dependent synaptic plasticity
rule, consistent with recent theories of dendritic processing. By combining dynamical system theory with mathematical optimization theory, we provide a strong
theoretical foundation for DFC that we corroborate with detailed results on toy
experiments and standard computer-vision benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The error backpropagation (BP) algorithm [1, 2, 3] is currently the gold standard to perform credit
assignment (CA) in deep neural networks. Although deep learning was inspired by biological neural
networks, an exact mapping of BP onto biology to explain learning in the brain leads to several
inconsistencies with experimental results that are not yet fully addressed [4, 5, 6]. First, BP requires
an exact symmetry between the weights of the forward and feedback pathways [5, 6], also called the
weight transport problem. Another issue of relevance is that, in biological networks, feedback also
changes each neuron’s activation and thus its immediate output [7, 8], which does not occur in BP.
Lillicrap et al. [9] convincingly showed that the weight transport problem can be sidestepped in
modest supervised learning problems by using random feedback connections. However, follow-up
studies indicated that random feedback paths cannot provide precise CA in more complex problems
[10, 11, 12, 13], which can be mitigated by learning feedback weights that align with the forward
pathway [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] or approximate its inverse [19, 20, 21, 22]. However, this precise
alignment imposes strict constraints on the feedback weights, whereas more flexible constraints could
provide the freedom to use feedback also for other purposes besides learning, such as attention and
prediction [8].
A complementary line of research proposes models of cortical microcircuits which propagate CA
signals through the network using dynamic feedback [23, 24, 25] or multiplexed neural codes [26],
thereby directly influencing neural activations with feedback. However, these models introduce
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

