Neural Rule-Execution Tracking Machine For
Transformer-Based Text Generation
Yufei Wang 1∗, Can Xu 2 , Huang Hu 2 , Chongyang Tao 2 , Stephen Wan 3 , Mark Dras 1 ,
Mark Johnson 1 , Daxin Jiang 2†
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia1
Microsoft Corporation, Beijing, China2
CSIRO Data61, Sydney, Australia3
yufei.wang@students.mq.edu.au, {mark.dras,mark.johnson}@mq.edu.au
{caxu,huahu,chongyang.tao,djiang}@microsoft.com
stephen.wan@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) neural text generation models, especially the
pre-trained ones (e.g., BART and T5), have exhibited compelling performance
on various natural language generation tasks. However, the black-box nature of
these models limits their application in tasks where specific rules (e.g., controllable constraints, prior knowledge) need to be executed. Previous works either
design specific model structures (e.g., Copy Mechanism corresponding to the rule
“the generated output should include certain words in the source input”) or implement specialized inference algorithms (e.g., Constrained Beam Search) to execute
particular rules through the text generation. These methods require the careful
design case-by-case and are difficult to support multiple rules concurrently. In
this paper, we propose a novel module named Neural Rule-Execution Tracking
Machine (NRETM) that can be equipped into various transformer-based generators
to leverage multiple rules simultaneously to guide the neural generation model
for superior generation performance in an unified and scalable way. Extensive
experiments on several benchmarks verify the effectiveness of our proposed model
in both controllable and general text generation tasks.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based neural language models (LMs), such as GPT/BART [1–3], have led a wave of new
trends in natural language generation, producing texts of prominent quality. They are trained roughly
on huge amounts of text corpora to reconstruct the full sentences (i.e., next coming tokens and missing
text fragments). Despite their success in varieties of NLP tasks, we argue that the black-box nature of
these models leads to inefficiently learning to follow constraints and incorporating prior knowledge.
In controllable text generation, most relevant studies [4–6] focus on controlling high-level text
attributes (e.g., topic, sentiment) or simply keyword/phrase. More complex fine-grained control
constraints such as “generate a sequence of tokens with ‘apple’ in the first sentence which has 15
words and ‘orange’ or ‘oranges’ in the fourth sentence” are less explored. A very recent work [7]
reveals that large-scale LMs do not learn to obey the underlying constraints reliably, even in a
quite simple constrained generation task (cover all the given keywords without hallucinating new
ones). In general text generation, existing works on various tasks reveal the benefit of incorporating
task-specific prior knowledge: machine translation [8] (e.g., each source phrase should be translated
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Microsoft STCA.
Corresponding author: Daxin Jiang (djiang@microsoft.com).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

