Directed Spectrum Measures Improve Latent
Network Models Of Neural Populations

Neil M. Gallagher
Department of Neurobiology
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
neil.gallagher@duke.edu

Kafui Dzirasa
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
Department of Neurobiology
Duke University
Durham, NC 27710
kafui.dzirasa@duke.edu

David Carlson
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
david.carlson@duke.edu

Abstract
Systems neuroscience aims to understand how networks of neurons distributed
throughout the brain mediate computational tasks. One popular approach to identify
those networks is to first calculate measures of neural activity (e.g. power spectra)
from multiple brain regions, and then apply a linear factor model to those measures.
Critically, despite the established role of directed communication between brain
regions in neural computation, measures of directed communication have been
rarely utilized in network estimation because they are incompatible with the implicit
assumptions of the linear factor model approach. Here, we develop a novel spectral
measure of directed communication called the Directed Spectrum (DS). We prove
that it is compatible with the implicit assumptions of linear factor models, and
we provide a method to estimate the DS. We demonstrate that latent linear factor
models of DS measures better capture underlying brain networks in both simulated
and real neural recording data compared to available alternatives. Thus, linear
factor models of the Directed Spectrum offer neuroscientists a simple and effective
way to explicitly model directed communication in networks of neural populations.

1

Introduction

A major goal in neuroscience is to characterize how populations of neurons work together to carry
out computational tasks [1]. A well-known example is the biological neural network that identifies
low-level visual features such as edges. That network sends signals from the retina to the lateral
geniculate nucleus, then from there to the primary visual cortex, then finally to higher cortical visual
processing regions [2, 3]. While some biological neural networks are well known, we expect that
the vast majority remain undiscovered due to the enormous variety of tasks the brain performs.
Many methods have been developed to help discover latent networks of neural populations (i.e.
brain networks) [4–6]. A key aspect of such methods is that they should be interpretable, meaning
that a neuroscientist must be able to use the model to draw conclusions about brain function [7].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

