End-to-End Weak Supervision
Salva Rühling Cachay1,2∗
1

Benedikt Boecking1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Artur Dubrawski1

Technical University of Darmstadt

Abstract
Aggregating multiple sources of weak supervision (WS) can ease the data-labeling
bottleneck prevalent in many machine learning applications, by replacing the
tedious manual collection of ground truth labels. Current state of the art approaches
that do not use any labeled training data, however, require two separate modeling
steps: Learning a probabilistic latent variable model based on the WS sources –
making assumptions that rarely hold in practice – followed by downstream model
training. Importantly, the first step of modeling does not consider the performance
of the downstream model. To address these caveats we propose an end-to-end
approach for directly learning the downstream model by maximizing its agreement
with probabilistic labels generated by reparameterizing prior probabilistic posteriors
with a neural network. Our results show improved performance over prior work in
terms of end model performance on downstream test sets, as well as in terms of
improved robustness to dependencies among weak supervision sources.

1

Introduction

The success of supervised machine learning methods relies on the availability of large amounts of
labeled data. The common process of manual data annotation by humans, especially when domain
experts need to be involved, is expensive, both in terms of effort and cost, and as such presents a
major bottleneck for deploying supervised learning methods to new domains and applications.
Recently, data programming, a paradigm that makes use of multiple sources of noisy labels, has
emerged as a promising alternative to manual data annotation [30]. It encompasses previous paradigms
such as distant supervision from external knowledge bases [29, 34], crowdsourcing [15, 26, 14, 42],
and general heuristic and rule-based labeling of data [23, 20]. In the data programming framework,
users encode domain knowledge into so called labeling functions (LFs), which are functions (e.g.
domain heuristics or knowledge base derived rules) that noisily label subsets of data. The main task
for learning from multiple sources of weak supervision is then to recover the sources’ accuracies
in order to estimate the latent true label, without access to ground truth data. In previous work
[30, 32, 19], this is achieved by first learning a generative probabilistic graphical model (PGM) over
the weak supervision sources and the latent true label to estimate probabilistic labels, which are then
used in the second step to train a downstream model via a noise-aware loss function.
Data programming has led to a wide variety of success stories in domains such as healthcare [18, 17]
and e-commerce [5], but the existing PGM based frameworks still come with a number of drawbacks.
The separate PGM does not take the predictions of the downstream model into account, and indeed
this model is trained independently of the PGM. In addition, current approaches for estimating the
unknown class label via a PGM need to rely on computationally expensive approximate sampling
methods [30], estimation of the full inverse of the LFs covariance matrix [32], or they need to
make strong independence assumptions [19]. Furthermore, existing prior work and the associated
theoretical analyses make assumptions that may not hold in practice [30, 32, 19], such as availability
∗

salvaruehling@gmail.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

