Beware of the Simulated DAG!
Causal Discovery Benchmarks May Be Easy To Game

Alexander G. Reisach1,2

Christof Seiler2,3

Sebastian Weichwald1

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering, Maastricht University, The Netherlands
3
Mathematics Centre Maastricht, Maastricht University, The Netherlands
2

Abstract
Simulated DAG models may exhibit properties that, perhaps inadvertently, render
their structure identifiable and unexpectedly affect structure learning algorithms.
Here, we show that marginal variance tends to increase along the causal order
for generically sampled additive noise models. We introduce varsortability as a
measure of the agreement between the order of increasing marginal variance and
the causal order. For commonly sampled graphs and model parameters, we show
that the remarkable performance of some continuous structure learning algorithms
can be explained by high varsortability and matched by a simple baseline method.
Yet, this performance may not transfer to real-world data where varsortability may
be moderate or dependent on the choice of measurement scales. On standardized
data, the same algorithms fail to identify the ground-truth DAG or its Markov
equivalence class. While standardization removes the pattern in marginal variance,
we show that data generating processes that incur high varsortability also leave a
distinct covariance pattern that may be exploited even after standardization. Our
findings challenge the significance of generic benchmarks with independently
drawn parameters. The code is available at https://github.com/Scriddie/
Varsortability.

1

Introduction

Causal structure learning aims to infer a causal model from data. Academic disciplines anywhere
from biology, medicine, finance, to machine learning are interested in causal models [Rothman et al.,
2008, Imbens and Rubin, 2015, Sanford and Moosa, 2012, Schölkopf, 2019]. Causal models not only
describe the observational joint distribution of variables but also formalize predictions under interventions and counterfactuals [Spirtes et al., 2000, Pearl, 2009, Peters et al., 2017]. Directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) are common to represent causal structure: nodes represent variables and directed
edges point from cause to effect representing the causal relationships. This graphical representation
rests on assumptions which have been critically questioned, for example by Dawid [2010]. Inferring
causal structure from observational data is difficult: Often we can only identify the DAG up to its
Markov equivalence class (MEC) and finding high-scoring DAGs is NP-hard [Chickering, 1996,
Chickering et al., 2004]. Here, we focus on learning the DAG of linear additive noise models (ANM).
Data scale and marginal variance may carry information about the data generating process. This
information can dominate benchmarking results, such as, for example, the outcome of the NeurIPS
Causality 4 Climate competition [Runge et al., 2020]. Here, the magnitude of regression coefficients
was informative about the existence of causal links such that ordinary regression-based methods on
raw data outperformed causal discovery algorithms [Weichwald et al., 2020]. Multiple prior works
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

