Towards a Theoretical Framework of
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Haotian Ye
Peking University
Pazhou Lab
haotianye@pku.edu.cn
Ruichen Li
Peking University
xk-lrc@pku.edu.cn

Chuanlong Xie
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
xie.chuanlong@huawei.com

Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Li.Zhenguo@huawei.com

Tianle Cai
Peking University
caitianle1998@pku.edu.cn

Liwei Wang
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD) data is one of the central problems
in modern machine learning. Recently, there is a surge of attempts to propose
algorithms that mainly build upon the idea of extracting invariant features. Although intuitively reasonable, theoretical understanding of what kind of invariance
can guarantee OOD generalization is still limited, and generalization to arbitrary
out-of-distribution is clearly impossible. In this work, we take the first step towards
rigorous and quantitative definitions of 1) what is OOD; and 2) what does it mean
by saying an OOD problem is learnable. We also introduce a new concept of expansion function, which characterizes to what extent the variance is amplified in the
test domains over the training domains, and therefore give a quantitative meaning
of invariant features. Based on these, we prove OOD generalization error bounds.
It turns out that OOD generalization largely depends on the expansion function.
As recently pointed out by [21], any OOD learning algorithm without a model
selection module is incomplete. Our theory naturally induces a model selection
criterion. Extensive experiments on benchmark OOD datasets demonstrate that our
model selection criterion has a significant advantage over baselines.

1

Introduction

One of the most fundamental assumptions of classic supervised learning is the “i.i.d. assumption”,
which states that the training and the test data are independent and identically distributed. However,
this assumption can be easily violated in a reality [8, 10, 11, 17, 38, 48, 56] where the test data
usually have a different distribution than the training data. This motivates the research on the out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization, or domain generalization problem, which assumes access only to
data drawn from a set Eavail of available domains during training, and the goal is to generalize to a
larger domain set Eall including unseen domains.
To generalize to OOD data, most existing algorithms attempt to learn features that are invariant to a
certain extent across training domains in the hope that such invariance also holds in unseen domains.
For example, distributional matching-based methods [20, 35, 55] seek to learn features that have
the same distribution across different domains; IRM [5] and its variants [1, 32, 33] learn feature
representations such that the optimal linear classifier on top of the representation matches across
domains.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

