Posterior Meta-Replay for Continual Learning

Christian Henning*, Maria R. Cervera*,
Francesco D’Angelo, Johannes von Oswald, Regina Traber,
Benjamin Ehret, Seijin Kobayashi, Benjamin F. Grewe, João Sacramento
*Equal contribution
Institute of Neuroinformatics
University of Zürich and ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
{henningc,mariacer}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Learning a sequence of tasks without access to i.i.d. observations is a widely studied
form of continual learning (CL) that remains challenging. In principle, Bayesian
learning directly applies to this setting, since recursive and one-off Bayesian updates yield the same result. In practice, however, recursive updating often leads
to poor trade-off solutions across tasks because approximate inference is necessary for most models of interest. Here, we describe an alternative Bayesian
approach where task-conditioned parameter distributions are continually inferred
from data. We offer a practical deep learning implementation of our framework
based on probabilistic task-conditioned hypernetworks, an approach we term posterior meta-replay. Experiments on standard benchmarks show that our probabilistic
hypernetworks compress sequences of posterior parameter distributions with virtually no forgetting. We obtain considerable performance gains compared to existing
Bayesian CL methods, and identify task inference as our major limiting factor.
This limitation has several causes that are independent of the considered sequential
setting, opening up new avenues for progress in CL.

1

Introduction

In recent years, a variety of continual learning (CL) algorithms have been developed to overcome the
need to train neural networks with an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sample. Most
CL literature focuses on the particular scenario of continually learning a sequence of T tasks with
datasets D(1) , . . . , D(T ) . Because only access to the current task is granted, successful training of a
discriminative model that captures p(Y | X) has to occur without an i.i.d. training sample from the
i.i.d.

overall joint D(1:T ) ∼ p(X)p(Y | X).
The advantages of a Bayesian approach for solving this problem are numerous and include the
ability to drop all i.i.d. assumptions across and within tasks in a mathematically sound way, the
ability to revisit tasks whenever new data becomes available, and access to principled uncertainty
estimates capturing both data and parameter uncertainty. Up until now, Bayesian approaches to CL
essentially focused on finding a combined posterior distribution via a recursive Bayesian update
p(W | D(1:T ) ) ∝ p(W | D(1:T −1) )p(D(T ) | W). Because the posterior of the previous task is used
as prior for the next task, these approaches are also known as prior-focused [17]. In theory, the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

