Automatic Data Augmentation for Generalization in
Reinforcement Learning

Roberta Raileanu
New York University
raileanu@cs.nyu.edu

Max Goldstein
New York University
mag1038@nyu.edu

Ilya Kostrikov
New York University
kostrikov@cs.nyu.edu

Denis Yarats
New York University
Facebook AI Research
denisyarats@cs.nyu.edu
Rob Fergus
New York University
fergus@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents often fail to generalize beyond their
training environments. To alleviate this problem, recent work has proposed the use
of data augmentation. However, different tasks tend to benefit from different types
of augmentations and selecting the right one typically requires expert knowledge.
In this paper, we introduce three approaches for automatically finding an effective
augmentation for any RL task. These are combined with two novel regularization
terms for the policy and value function, required to make the use of data augmentation theoretically sound for actor-critic algorithms. Our method achieves a new
state-of-the-art1 on the Procgen benchmark and outperforms popular RL algorithms
on DeepMind Control tasks with distractors. In addition, our agent learns policies
and representations which are more robust to changes in the environment that are
irrelevant for solving the task, such as the background. Our code is available at
https://github.com/rraileanu/auto-drac.

1

Introduction

Generalization to new environments remains a major challenge in deep reinforcement learning
(RL). Current methods fail to generalize to unseen environments even when trained on similar
settings [19, 51, 71, 11, 21, 12, 60]. This indicates that standard RL agents memorize specific
trajectories rather than learning transferable skills. Several strategies have been proposed to alleviate
this problem, such as the use of regularization [19, 71, 11, 28], data augmentation [11, 44, 69, 38, 41],
or representation learning [72, 74]. In this work, we focus on the use of data augmentation in RL. We
identify key differences between supervised learning and reinforcement learning which need to be
taken into account when using data augmentation in RL.
More specifically, we show that a naive application of data augmentation can lead to both theoretical
and practical problems with standard RL algorithms, such as unprincipled objective estimates and
poor performance. As a solution, we propose Data-regularized Actor-Critic or DrAC, a new
algorithm that enables the use of data augmentation with actor-critic algorithms in a theoretically
sound way. Specifically, we introduce two regularization terms which constrain the agent’s policy and
value function to be invariant to various state transformations. Empirically, this approach allows the
agent to learn useful behaviors (outperforming strong RL baselines) in settings in which a naive use
of data augmentation completely fails or converges to a sub-optimal policy. While we use Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO, Schulman et al. [56]) to describe and validate our approach, the method
1

in June 2020, at the time of making this work publicly available on arXiv. it has since been surpassed.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

