Dirichlet Energy Constrained Learning for Deep
Graph Neural Networks

Kaixiong Zhou
Rice University
Kaixiong.Zhou@rice.edu
Daochen Zha
Rice University
Daochen.Zha@rice.edu

Xiao Huang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
xiaohuang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Rui Chen
Samsung Research America
rui.chen1@samsung.com

Soo-Hyun Choi∗
Samsung Electronics
soohyunc@gmail.com

Li Li
Samsung Research America
li.li1@samsung.com

Xia Hu
Rice University
xia.hu@rice.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) integrate deep architectures and topological structure modeling in an effective way. However, the performance of existing GNNs
would decrease significantly when they stack many layers, because of the oversmoothing issue. Node embeddings tend to converge to similar vectors when
GNNs keep recursively aggregating the representations of neighbors. To enable
deep GNNs, several methods have been explored recently. But they are developed
from either techniques in convolutional neural networks or heuristic strategies.
There is no generalizable and theoretical principle to guide the design of deep
GNNs. To this end, we analyze the bottleneck of deep GNNs by leveraging the
Dirichlet energy of node embeddings, and propose a generalizable principle to
guide the training of deep GNNs. Based on it, a novel deep GNN framework –
Energetic Graph Neural Networks (EGNN) is designed. It could provide lower and
upper constraints in terms of Dirichlet energy at each layer to avoid over-smoothing.
Experimental results demonstrate that EGNN achieves state-of-the-art performance
by using deep layers.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [1] are promising deep learning tools to analyze networked data,
such as social networks [2, 3, 4], academic networks [5, 6, 7], and molecular graphs [8, 9, 10, 11].
Based on spatial graph convolutions, GNNs apply a recursive aggregation mechanism to update the
representation of each node by incorporating representations of itself and its neighbors [12]. A variety
of GNN variations have been explored for different real-world networks and applications [13, 14].
A key limitation of GNNs is that when we stack many layers, the performance would decrease
significantly. Experiments show that GNNs often achieve the best performance with less than 3
layers [15, 13]. As the layer number increases, the node representations will converge to indistinguishable vectors due to the recursive neighborhood aggregation and non-linear activation [16, 17].
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

