Consistency Regularization
for Variational Auto-Encoders
Samarth Sinha
Vector Institute
University of Toronto

Adji B. Dieng
Google Brain
Princeton University

Abstract
Variational auto-encoders (vaes) are a powerful approach to unsupervised learning.
They enable scalable approximate posterior inference in latent-variable models
using variational inference (vi). A vae posits a variational family parameterized by
a deep neural network—called an encoder—that takes data as input. This encoder is
shared across all the observations, which amortizes the cost of inference. However
the encoder of a vae has the undesirable property that it maps a given observation
and a semantics-preserving transformation of it to different latent representations.
This “inconsistency" of the encoder lowers the quality of the learned representations,
especially for downstream tasks, and also negatively affects generalization. In this
paper, we propose a regularization method to enforce consistency in vaes. The idea
is to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (kl) divergence between the variational distribution when conditioning on the observation and the variational distribution when
conditioning on a random semantic-preserving transformation of this observation.
This regularization is applicable to any vae. In our experiments we apply it to four
different vae variants on several benchmark datasets and found it always improves
the quality of the learned representations but also leads to better generalization.
In particular, when applied to the nouveau variational auto-encoder (nvae), our
regularization method yields state-of-the-art performance on mnist, cifar-10, and
celeba. We also applied our method to 3D data and found it learns representations
of superior quality as measured by accuracy on a downstream classification task.
Finally, we show our method can even outperform the triplet loss, an advanced and
popular contrastive learning-based method for representation learning. 1

1

Introduction

Variational auto-encoders (vaes) have significantly impacted research on unsupervised learning. They
have been used in several areas, including density estimation (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014), image generation (Gregor et al., 2015), text generation (Bowman et al., 2015; Fang
et al., 2019), music generation (Roberts et al., 2018), topic modeling (Miao et al., 2016; Dieng et al.,
2019), and recommendation systems (Liang et al., 2018). Vaes have also been used for different
representation learning problems such as semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al., 2014), anomaly
detection (An & Cho, 2015; Zimmerer et al., 2018), language modeling Bowman et al. (2015), active
learning (Sinha et al., 2019), continual learning (Achille et al., 2018), and motion prediction of agents
(Walker et al., 2016). This widespread application of vae representations makes it critical that we
focus on improving them.

vaes extend deterministic auto-encoders to probabilistic generative modeling. The encoder of a vae
parameterizes an approximate posterior distribution over latent variables of a generative model. The
encoder is shared between all observations, which amortizes the cost of posterior inference. Once
fitted, the encoder of a vae can be used to obtain low-dimensional representations of data, (e.g. for
1

Code for this work can be found at https://github.com/sinhasam/CRVAE

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

