Learning Diverse Policies in MOBA Games via
Macro-Goals
Yiming Gao1 Bei Shi1 Xueying Du1 Liang Wang1 Guangwei Chen1
Zhenjie Lian1 Fuhao Qiu1 Guoan Han1 Weixuan Wang1
Deheng Ye1 Qiang Fu1 Wei Yang1 Lanxiao Huang2
1
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent TiMi L1 Studio, Chengdu, China
{yatminggao,beishi,sherinedu,enginewang,gorvinchen,
leolian,frankfhqiu,guoanhan,waihinwang,dericye,
leonfu,willyang,jackiehuang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recently, many researchers have made successful progress in building the AI
systems for MOBA-game-playing with deep reinforcement learning, such as on
Dota 2 and Honor of Kings. Even though these AI systems have achieved or
even exceeded human-level performance, they still suffer from the lack of policy
diversity. In this paper, we propose a novel Macro-Goals Guided framework, called
MGG, to learn diverse policies in MOBA games. MGG abstracts strategies as
macro-goals from human demonstrations and trains a Meta-Controller to predict
these macro-goals. To enhance policy diversity, MGG samples macro-goals from
the Meta-Controller prediction and guides the training process towards these goals.
Experimental results on the typical MOBA game Honor of Kings demonstrate
that MGG can execute diverse policies in different matches and lineups, and also
outperform the state-of-the-art methods over 102 heroes.

1

Introduction

As a stepping stone of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), Game AI has achieved significant
progress in the past decade, including board games Silver et al. [2016], poker games Brown et al.
[2019]; Moravčík et al. [2017], Real-time Strategy (RTS) games Vinyals et al. [2019], etc. Especially,
Multi-player Online Battle Arena (MOBA) games have been regarded as a challenging problem in
Game AI and attracted massive attention from research communities because of the complicated
mechanisms such as imperfect information, large state-action space, and long-term sequential decision
making. Recently, OpenAI et al. [2019] develop the AI system on Dota 2, named OpenAI Five,
which defeats the Dota 2 world champion, i.e., Team OG, within a limited size of hero pool. It trains
with deep reinforcement learning and self-play. Ye et al. [2020a] build the AI system on another
popular MOBA game, Honor of Kings, which also defeats top e-sports players. Besides, compared
with OpenAI Five, their AI system enables playing full MOBA games, which extends the hero pool
size from 17 to 40 heroes, adds ban/pick capabilities, and addresses the scalability issue.
Even though existing AI systems have achieved or even exceeded human-level performance in MOBA
games, they still suffer from the lack of policy diversity. Agents during training are controlled by
the same hand-crafted reward signal and then present similar strategies even in different matches,
while strategies played by humans usually vary according to situations in the game. One of the
disadvantages is that we can counter the single learned policy after several attempts effortlessly. For
example, one team defeats OpenAI Five nine times with the same strategy in public tests1 . The
1

https://openai.com/projects/five/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

