The Future is Log-Gaussian: ResNets and Their
Infinite-Depth-and-Width Limit at Initialization

Mufan (Bill) Li∗
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Mihai Nica∗
University of Guelph,
Vector Institute

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Abstract
Theoretical results show that neural networks can be approximated by Gaussian
processes in the infinite-width limit. However, for fully connected networks, it has
been previously shown that for any fixed network width, n, the Gaussian approximation gets worse as the network depth, d, increases. Given that modern networks
are deep, this raises the question of how well modern architectures, like ResNets,
are captured by the infinite-width limit. To provide a better approximation, we study
ReLU ResNets in the infinite-depth-and-width limit, where both depth and width
tend to infinity as their ratio, d/n, remains constant. In contrast to the Gaussian
infinite-width limit, we show theoretically that the network exhibits log-Gaussian
behaviour at initialization in the infinite-depth-and-width limit, with parameters
depending on the ratio d/n. Using Monte Carlo simulations, we demonstrate that
even basic properties of standard ResNet architectures are poorly captured by the
Gaussian limit, but remarkably well captured by our log-Gaussian limit. Moreover,
our analysis reveals that ReLU ResNets at initialization are hypoactivated: fewer
than half of the ReLUs are activated. Additionally, we calculate the interlayer
correlations, which have the effect of exponentially increasing the variance of
the network output. Based on our analysis, we introduce Balanced ResNets, a
simple architecture modification, which eliminates hypoactivation and interlayer
correlations and is more amenable to theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

The characterization of infinite-width dynamics of gradient descent (GD) in terms of the so-called
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) [1–10] represented a major breakthrough in our understanding of deep
learning in the large-width regime. Before the identification of infinite-width limits, the theoretical
study of deep learning had long been hindered by the apparent analytical intractability of gradient
descent and variants acting on the nonconvex objectives used to train neural networks. Despite this
progress, evidence suggests that deep neural networks can outperform their infinite-width limits in
practice [11], particularly when the depth of the network is large. These observations motivate the
study of other approximations that may close the gap.
Several alternative limits have been proposed. Around the time of the discovery of the NTK limit,
mean-field limits were also characterized [12–15], and more recently have been linked with the NTK
limit [16]. Yang and Hu [17] describe a family of infinite-width limits indexed by the scaling limits
of initial weight variance, weight rescaling, and learning rates. This family includes both the NTK
and mean field limits. One motivation for studying these alternative limits is that they yield a notion
of feature learning, which provably does not occur in the NTK limit [17].
∗

Equal contribution authors.
Correspondence: mufan.li@mail.utoronto.ca; nicam@uoguelph.ca; daniel.roy@utoronto.ca.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

