Reinforcement Learning based Disease Progression
Model for Alzheimer’s Disease
Krishnakant V. Saboo
UIUC
ksaboo2@illinois.edu
Yurui Cao
UIUC
yuruic2@illinois.edu

Anirudh Choudhary
UIUC
ac67@illinois.edu

Gregory A. Worrell
Mayo Clinic
Worrell.Gregory@mayo.edu

David T. Jones
Mayo Clinic
Jones.David@mayo.edu

Ravishankar K. Iyer
UIUC
rkiyer@illinois.edu

Abstract
We model Alzheimer’s disease (AD) progression by combining differential equations (DEs) and reinforcement learning (RL) with domain knowledge. DEs provide
relationships between some, but not all, factors relevant to AD. We assume that the
missing relationships must satisfy general criteria about the working of the brain,
for e.g., maximizing cognition while minimizing the cost of supporting cognition.
This allows us to extract the missing relationships by using RL to optimize an
objective (reward) function that captures the above criteria. We use our model
consisting of DEs (as a simulator) and the trained RL agent to predict individualized
10-year AD progression using baseline (year 0) features on synthetic and real data.
The model was comparable or better at predicting 10-year cognition trajectories
than state-of-the-art learning-based models. Our interpretable model demonstrated,
and provided insights into, "recovery/compensatory" processes that mitigate the
effect of AD, even though those processes were not explicitly encoded in the model.
Our framework combines DEs with RL for modelling AD progression and has
broad applicability for understanding other neurological disorders.

1

Introduction

Models that describe Alzheimer’s disease (AD) progression through time, i.e., the evolution of factors
involved in the disease such as brain size, brain activity, pathology, and cognition (Fig. 1), are crucial
for mitigating this highly prevalent disease [1, 2]. Such models can enhance our understanding of the
disease processes and enable crucial applications like prediction of long-term cognition trajectories
for early detection. Our goal is to develop a model to predict an individual’s future AD progression at
1-year intervals based on their baseline (year 0) data. We address this goal by combining differential
equations that capture the relationships between some factors, and leveraging reinforcement learning
to extract the missing relationships by optimizing a domain knowledge-based reward function.
Differential1 equation (DE) based models can describe disease progression by expressing domain
knowledge as mathematical relationships between different factors [3, 4]. DE-based models have
several advantages which make them attractive for disease progression modelling. The interpretability
1

For simplicity, we use the term "differential equation" to denote algebraic and differential equations.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

