Correlated Stochastic Block Models:
Exact Graph Matching
with Applications to Recovering Communities

Miklós Z. Rácz
Department of ORFE
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
mracz@princeton.edu

Anirudh Sridhar
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
anirudhs@princeton.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of learning latent community structure from multiple correlated networks. First, we study the problem of learning the latent vertex correspondence between two edge-correlated stochastic block models, focusing on the regime
where the average degree is logarithmic in the number of vertices. We derive the
precise information-theoretic threshold for exact recovery: above the threshold
there exists an estimator that outputs the true correspondence with probability
close to 1, while below it no estimator can recover the true correspondence with
probability bounded away from 0. As an application of our results, we show how
one can exactly recover the latent communities using multiple correlated graphs in
parameter regimes where it is information-theoretically impossible to do so using
just a single graph.

1

Introduction

Learning community structure in networks is a ubiquitous inference task in several domains, including
biology [13, 41], sociology [26], and machine learning [57, 37, 60]. Recent decades have therefore
seen an explosion of work on the topic, leading to determining the fundamental information-theoretic
limits for learning communities in probabilistic generative models [1, 2, 3, 45, 44, 42, 46], as well
as algorithms that work well in practice [55, 33, 22]. Typically, such algorithms only leverage the
structure of the network (i.e., the configuration of node-node links). Increasingly, one often has
access to side information that can greatly improve the performance of inference algorithms.
There is a vast literature on designing algorithms that incorporate various types of side information to
aid in recovering communities in networks. The works [21, 38, 47, 32, 8, 63, 11, 56, 39] leverage
node-level information that is correlated with community memberships; here the sharp limits for
community detection were conjectured by Deshpande et al. [21] and recently proven by Lu and
Sen [38]. Another line of work [30, 5, 51, 52, 36, 4, 7, 43, 39] recovers communities from a multilayer network, where the different layers are conditionally independent given the same community
structure. Recently Ma and Nandy [39] synthesized these two strands of literature.
In contrast to prior work, we explore scenarios where the side information comes in the form of
multiple correlated networks, which is natural in several domains including social networks [49, 53,
35], computational biology [59], and machine learning [15, 14]. In the context of social networks,
for instance, many datasets are anonymized to protect the identity of users. Nevertheless, one may
be able to infer additional information about users from additional networks by noting that the
interaction patterns of the same set of users are likely to be similar across networks [49, 53, 35].
In computational biology, an important goal is to study the functional properties of protein groups
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

