Alignment Attention by Matching
Key and Query Distributions

Shujian Zhang

Xinjie Fan

Huangjie Zheng Korawat Tanwisuth Mingyuan Zhou
The University of Texas at Austin
{szhang19, xfan, huangjie.zheng, korawat.tanwisuth}@utexas.edu
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
The neural attention mechanism has been incorporated into deep neural networks
to achieve state-of-the-art performance in various domains. Most such models use
multi-head self-attention which is appealing for the ability to attend to information from different perspectives. This paper introduces alignment attention that
explicitly encourages self-attention to match the distributions of the key and query
within each head. The resulting alignment attention networks can be optimized as
an unsupervised regularization in the existing attention framework. It is simple to
convert any models with self-attention, including pre-trained ones, to the proposed
alignment attention. On a variety of language understanding tasks, we show the
effectiveness of our method in accuracy, uncertainty estimation, generalization
across domains, and robustness to adversarial attacks. We further demonstrate
the general applicability of our approach on graph attention and visual question
answering, showing the great potential of incorporating our alignment method into
various attention-related tasks.

1

Introduction

Attention-based mechanisms aggregate features with learnable weights to introduce useful inductive
biases for sequence models [1, 2]. Since the introduction of the self-attention based Transformer [3],
attention has become the foundation for many state-of-the-art models. Exploiting its computational
efficiency and scalability, it has been used to train unprecedented large models on big datasets [4].
Large attention-based models have been demonstrating their ability to learn good representations in
an unsupervised manner and benefit downstream analysis, with tremendous success in various natural
language processing (NLP) [4–9], compute vision [10, 11], and multi-modal learning tasks [12, 13].
Attention networks, including multi-head attention, are being effectively utilized to capture the
correlations between each pair of input tokens through individual or multiple attention functions.
More specifically, in a self-attention layer with H heads, assuming that the output of the previous layer
consists of n tokens, each of which is represented as a feature vector of dimension dmodel = d · H,
then each token feature vector will be transformed by a dmodel × d query projection matrix into
a query feature vector, by a dmodel × d key projection matrix into a key feature vector, and by a
dmodel × d value projection matrix into a value feature vector. The inner products of the ith query
feature vector with all n key feature vectors are then fed through a softmax function to define the
relative weights of the n keys to that query, which are used to aggregate the n value vectors into the
vector representation of the ith word token in a head.
Although such networks are simple to optimize and intuitive to understand, how the key and query
projection matrices should differ from each other has not been well-studied and understood. It is thus
The code is available at https://github.com/szhang42/alignment_attention
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

