The Flip Side of the Reweighted Coin:
Duality of Adaptive Dropout and Regularization

Daniel LeJeune
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
dlejeune@rice.edu

Hamid Javadi
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
hh35@rice.edu

Richard G. Baraniuk
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
richb@rice.edu

Abstract
Among the most successful methods for sparsifying deep (neural) networks are
those that adaptively mask the network weights throughout training. By examining
this masking, or dropout, in the linear case, we uncover a duality between such
adaptive methods and regularization through the so-called “η-trick” that casts both
as iteratively reweighted optimizations. We show that any dropout strategy that
adapts to the weights in a monotonic way corresponds to an effective subquadratic
regularization penalty, and therefore leads to sparse solutions. We obtain the effective penalties for several popular sparsification strategies, which are remarkably
similar to classical penalties commonly used in sparse optimization. Considering
variational dropout as a case study, we demonstrate similar empirical behavior
between the adaptive dropout method and classical methods on the task of deep
network sparsification, validating our theory.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, it is often valuable for models to be parsimonious or sparse for a variety of
reasons, from memory savings and computational speedups to model interpretability and generalizability. Classically, this is achieved by solving a regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problem of the form
minimize
w

Lpwq ` λΩpwq,

(1)

where L is the data-dependent empirical risk and Ω is a sparsity-inducing regularization penalty.
Ideally, Ωpwq is equal to }w}0 :“ # ti : wi ‰ 0u or a function of }w}0 [6], in which case an
appropriately chosen λ balances the trade-off between the suboptimality of L and the sparsity of
the solution. However, the use of }w}0 directly as a penalty is difficult, as it makes local search
impossible, so alternative approaches are necessary for high-dimensional problems. The classical
solution to this is to relax the problem using a smooth surrogate Ω that approximates }w}0 [5, 18].
When we know the regularization penalty Ω, we can understand the types of solutions they encourage; however, many popular methods for sparsifying deep (neural) networks do not appear to fit
the form (1). For example, variational dropout [27, 32], “`0 regularization” [29], and magnitude
pruning [45] are the only methods compared in a recent large-scale study by Gale et al. [15], and all
achieve sparsity by adaptively masking or scaling the parameters of the network while optimizing
the loss function in w. Although these methods are well-motivated heuristically, it is unclear how to
make a principled choice between them aside from treating them as black boxes and comparing their
empirical performance. However, if these methods could be cast as solutions to a regularized ERM
problem, then we could compare them on the basis of their regularization penalties.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

