Panoptic 3D Scene Reconstruction
From a Single RGB Image

Manuel Dahnert

Ji Hou

Matthias Nießner

Angela Dai

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Understanding 3D scenes from a single image is fundamental to a wide variety
of tasks, such as for robotics, motion planning, or augmented reality. Existing
works in 3D perception from a single RGB image tend to focus on geometric
reconstruction only, or geometric reconstruction with semantic segmentation or
instance segmentation. Inspired by 2D panoptic segmentation, we propose to unify
the tasks of geometric reconstruction, 3D semantic segmentation, and 3D instance
segmentation into the task of panoptic 3D scene reconstruction – from a single
RGB image, predicting the complete geometric reconstruction of the scene in the
camera frustum of the image, along with semantic and instance segmentations. We
thus propose a new approach for holistic 3D scene understanding from a single
RGB image which learns to lift and propagate 2D features from an input image to
a 3D volumetric scene representation. We demonstrate that this holistic view of
joint scene reconstruction, semantic, and instance segmentation is beneficial over
treating the tasks independently, thus outperforming alternative approaches.

1

Introduction

3D scene understanding from a single RGB image is fundamental to many downstream applications,
such as for robotics, motion planning, or augmented reality. From a photograph of a scene, one can
infer the underlying geometric structures and identify object and structural semantics, even from
such a partial, single view observation. Such an understanding is also fundamental towards enabling
higher-level interactions with environments, as estimating unseen geometry and semantics without
having to observe all parts of an object or scene is paramount for tasks such as robotic interactions,
augmented reality, or content creation.
Recently, significant advances have been made towards complete geometric reconstruction from
an RGB image input [10, 37], as well as reconstruction of object instances detected in the image
[15, 28, 32]; however, 3D semantic reconstruction and instance reconstruction have largely been
considered independently. We thus aim to unify the tasks of geometric reconstruction, 3D semantic
segmentation, and 3D instance segmentation from a single image, and inspired by the 2D panoptic
segmentation task [27], we call this task panoptic 3D scene reconstruction. Inspired by the unification
of the 2D semantic segmentation and instance segmentation tasks to panoptic segmentation in [27],
we similarly adopt a joint semantic segmentation of “stuff” and “things,” where “stuff” elements
do not have any distinct instances (e.g., structural elements such as walls and floors) and “things”
denote semantic objects with instance ids defining the distinct object instances. Thus, for panoptic
3D reconstruction, we aim to predict the surface geometry of the scene from an image, including
any missing regions from occlusion, and for each point on the predicted surface geometry, it must be
assigned a semantic label and an instance id. To evaluate a predicted panoptic reconstruction, we then
evaluate both the segmentation quality and recognition quality of the 3D object instance geometry
and geometry corresponding to structural semantic labels.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

