Towards Robust and Reliable Algorithmic Recourse

Sohini Upadhyay∗
Harvard University

Shalmali Joshi∗
Harvard University

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University

supadhyay@g.harvard.edu

shalmali@seas.harvard.edu

hlakkaraju@hbs.harvard.edu

Abstract
As predictive models are increasingly being deployed in high-stakes decision making (e.g., loan approvals), there has been growing interest in post-hoc techniques
which provide recourse to affected individuals. These techniques generate recourses under the assumption that the underlying predictive model does not change.
However, in practice, models are often regularly updated for a variety of reasons
(e.g., dataset shifts), thereby rendering previously prescribed recourses ineffective.
To address this problem, we propose a novel framework, RObust Algorithmic
Recourse (ROAR), that leverages adversarial training for finding recourses that
are robust to model shifts. To the best of our knowledge, this work proposes the
first ever solution to this critical problem. We also carry out theoretical analysis
which underscores the importance of constructing recourses that are robust to
model shifts: 1) We quantify the probability of invalidation for recourses generated
without accounting for model shifts. 2) We prove that the additional cost incurred
due to the robust recourses output by our framework is bounded. Experimental
evaluation on multiple synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrates the efficacy
of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) models are increasingly being deployed to make a
variety of highly consequential decisions ranging from bail and hiring decisions to loan approvals.
Consequently, there is growing emphasis on designing tools and techniques which can provide
recourse to individuals who have been adversely impacted by predicted outcomes [30]. For example,
when an individual is denied a loan by a predictive model deployed by a bank, they should be
provided with reasons for this decision, and also informed about what can be done to reverse it. When
providing a recourse to an affected individual, it is absolutely critical to ensure that the corresponding
decision making entity (e.g., bank) is able to honor that recourse and approve any re-application that
fully implements the recommendations outlined in the prescribed recourse Wachter et al. [31].
Several approaches in recent literature tackled the problem of providing recourses by generating local
(instance level) counterfactual explanations 2 [31, 26, 12, 21, 18]. For instance, Wachter et al. [31] proposed a gradient based approach which finds the closest modification (counterfactual) that can result
in the desired prediction. Ustun et al. [26] proposed an efficient integer programming based approach
to obtain actionable recourses in the context of linear classifiers. There has also been some recent
research that sheds light on the spuriousness of the recourses generated by counterfactual/contrastive
explanation techniques [31, 26] and advocates for causal approaches [3, 14, 15].
All the aforementioned approaches generate recourses under the assumption that the underlying
predictive models do not change. This assumption, however, may not hold in practice. Real world
∗

Equal contribution
Note that counterfactual explanations [31], contrastive explanations [13], and recourse [26] are used
interchangeably in prior literature. Counterfactual/contrastive explanations serve as a means to provide recourse
to individuals with unfavorable algorithmic decisions. We use these terms interchangeably to refer to the notion
introduced and defined by Wachter et al. [31]
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

