Ising Model Selection Using `1-Regularized Linear
Regression: A Statistical Mechanics Analysis

Xiangming Meng∗
Institute for Physics of Intelligence
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1, Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
meng@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Tomoyuki Obuchi
Department of Systems Science
Kyoto University
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
obuchi@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Yoshiyuki Kabashima
Institute for Physics of Intelligence
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1, Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
kaba@phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We theoretically analyze the typical learning performance of `1 -regularized linear
regression (`1 -LinR) for Ising model selection using the replica method from statistical mechanics. For typical random regular graphs in the paramagnetic phase, an
accurate estimate of the typical sample complexity of `1 -LinR is obtained. Remarkably, despite the model misspecification, `1 -LinR is model selection consistent
with the same order of sample complexity as `1 -regularized logistic regression
(`1 -LogR), i.e., M = O (log N ), where N is the number of variables of the Ising
model. Moreover, we provide an efficient method to accurately predict the nonasymptotic behavior of `1 -LinR for moderate M, N , such as precision and recall.
Simulations show a fairly good agreement between theoretical predictions and
experimental results, even for graphs with many loops, which supports our findings.
Although this paper mainly focuses on `1 -LinR, our method is readily applicable
for precisely characterizing the typical learning performances of a wide class of
`1 -regularized M -estimators including `1 -LogR and interaction screening.

1

Introduction

The advent of massive data across various scientific disciplines has led to the widespread use of
undirected graphical models, also known as Markov random fields (MRFs), as a tool for discovering
and visualizing dependencies among covariates in multivariate data [1]. The Ising model, originally
proposed in statistical physics, is one special class of binary MRFs with pairwise potentials and
has been widely used in different domains such as image analysis, social networking, gene network
analysis [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Among various applications, one fundamental problem of interest is called
Ising model selection, which refers to recovering the underlying graph structure of the original Ising
model from independent, identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples. A variety of methods have been
proposed [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], demonstrating the possibility of successful Ising
model selection even when the number of samples is smaller than that of the variables. Notably, it has
been demonstrated that for the `1 -regularized logistic regression (`1 -LogR) [10, 16] and interaction
screening (IS) [14, 15] estimators, M = O (log N ) samples suffice for an Ising model with N
spins under certain assumptions, which is consistent with respect to (w.r.t.) previously established
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

