To The Point: Correspondence-driven monocular 3D
category reconstruction

Filippos Kokkinos
Department of Computer Science
University College London
filippos.kokkinos@ucl.ac.uk

Iasonas Kokkinos
Department of Computer Science
University College London, Snap Inc.
i.kokkinos@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We present To The Point (TTP), a method for reconstructing 3D objects from
a single image using 2D to 3D correspondences learned from weak supervision.
We recover a 3D shape from a 2D image by first regressing the 2D positions
corresponding to the 3D template vertices and then jointly estimating a rigid
camera transform and non-rigid template deformation that optimally explain the 2D
positions through the 3D shape projection. By relying on 3D-2D correspondences
we use a simple per-sample optimization problem to replace CNN-based regression
of camera pose and non-rigid deformation and thereby obtain substantially more
accurate 3D reconstructions. We treat this optimization as a differentiable layer and
train the whole system in an end-to-end manner. We report systematic quantitative
improvements on multiple categories and provide qualitative results comprising
diverse shape, pose and texture prediction examples. Project website: https:
//fkokkinos.github.io/to_the_point/.

1

Introduction

Monocular 3D reconstruction of general categories is a task that humans perform with ease, yet
remains challenging for computer vision due to its inherently ill-posed nature: the observed 2D
image is the result of a confluence of multiple sources of variation, including non-rigid intra-category
shape variation, rigid transforms due to camera pose, as well as appearance variation. CNNs can
easily learn to discard appearance variation, yet the treatment of the geometric sources of variability
remains elusive. Even though strongly-supervised approaches have delivered compelling results e.g.
for human reconstruction [1], for general categories we need to rely on weaker forms of supervision
as well as self-supervision stemming from the know-how of computer vision.
3D vision has traditionally relied on correspondences to recover both rigid scenes from 2D images
for the Structure-from-Motion (SFM) problem [2, 3, 4] as well as the more challenging problem of
recovering Non-Rigid structure from 2D point tracks (NR-SFM) [5, 6, 7, 8]. In all those problems 3D
reconstruction is accomplished by minimizing the reprojection error between the 3D positions of the
inferred 3D scene and their 2D image correspondences. While these solutions have been developed
for the (potentially deformable) single-instance case, the idea of relying on correspondences to
supervise monocular 3D reconstruction has transpired in recent deep learning works.
CNN-driven monocular 3D category reconstruction [9, 10, 11, 12] has largely relied on selfsupervision for 3D recovery expressed in terms of correspondence-based loss terms. For instance
the geometric cycle loss terms of [13, 14, 15] are explicitly phrased in terms of correspondence
established from UV maps while the texture-driven loss terms of [9, 13, 12, 16, 11] are implicitly
relying on pixel correspondence. The common ground of such loss terms is that if the 3D shape
is predicted correctly, it should project to the image in a way that is consistent with the 2D observations, as measured in a pixel-by-pixel sense. These correspondence terms are typically used in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

