Generalized Depthwise-Separable Convolutions for
Adversarially Robust and Efficient Neural Networks

Hassan Dbouk & Naresh R. Shanbhag
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
{hdbouk2,shanbhag}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Despite their tremendous successes, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) incur
high computational/storage costs and are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations.
Recent works on robust model compression address these challenges by combining
model compression techniques with adversarial training. But these methods are
unable to improve throughput (frames-per-second) on real-life hardware while
simultaneously preserving robustness to adversarial perturbations. To overcome
this problem, we propose the method of Generalized Depthwise-Separable (GDWS)
convolution – an efficient, universal, post-training approximation of a standard 2D
convolution. GDWS dramatically improves the throughput of a standard pre-trained
network on real-life hardware while preserving its robustness. Lastly, GDWS is
scalable to large problem sizes since it operates on pre-trained models and doesn’t
require any additional training. We establish the optimality of GDWS as a 2D
convolution approximator and present exact algorithms for constructing optimal
GDWS convolutions under complexity and error constraints. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of GDWS via extensive experiments on CIFAR-10, SVHN, and
ImageNet datasets. Our code can be found at https://github.com/hsndbk4/
GDWS.

1

Introduction

Nearly a decade of research after the release of AlexNet [18] in 2012, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have unequivocally established themselves as the de facto classification algorithm for various
machine learning tasks [11, 38, 4]. The tremendous success of CNNs is often attributed to their
unrivaled ability to extract correlations from large volumes of data, allowing them to surpass human
level accuracy on some tasks such as image classification [11].
Today, the deployment of CNNs in safety-critical Edge applications is hindered due to their high
computational costs [11, 30, 31] and their vulnerability to adversarial samples [37, 5, 16]. Traditionally, those two problems have been addressed in isolation. Recently, very few bodies of works
[19, 35, 42, 6, 34, 7] have addressed the daunting task of designing both efficient and robust CNNs.
A majority of these methods focus on model compression, i.e. reducing the storage requirements of
CNNs. None have demonstrated their real-time benefits in hardware. For instance, Fig. 1a shows
recent robust pruning works HYDRA [34] and ADMM [42] achieve high compression ratios (up to
97×) but either fail to achieve high throughput measured in frames-per-second (FPS) or compromise
significantly on robustness. Furthermore, the overreliance of current robust complexity reduction
techniques on adversarial training (AT) [45, 21] increases their training time significantly (Fig. 1b).
This prohibits their application to complex ImageNet scale problems with stronger attack models,
such as union of norm-bounded perturbations [22]. Thus, there is critical need for methods to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

