Oracle-Efficient Regret Minimization in Factored
MDPs with Unknown Structure
Aviv Rosenberg
Tel-Aviv University
avivros007@gmail.com

Yishay Mansour
Tel-Aviv University and Google Research, Tel Aviv
mansour@tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study regret minimization in non-episodic factored Markov decision processes
(FMDPs), where all existing algorithms make the strong assumption that the
factored structure of the FMDP is known to the learner in advance. In this paper, we
provide the first algorithm that learns the structure of the FMDP while minimizing
the regret. Our algorithm is based on the optimism in face of uncertainty principle,
combined with a simple statistical method for structure learning, and can be
implemented efficiently given oracle-access to an FMDP planner. Moreover, we
give a variant of our algorithm that remains efficient even when the oracle is limited
to non-factored actions, which is the case with almost all existing approximate
planners. Finally, we leverage our techniques to prove a novel lower bound for the
known structure case, closing the gap to the regret bound of Chen et al. [2021].

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) considers an agent interacting with an unknown stochastic environment
with the aim of maximizing its expected cumulative reward. This is usually modeled by a Markov
decision process (MDP) with a finite number of states. The vast majority of provably-efficient RL has
focused on the tabular case, where the state space is assumed to be small. Starting with the UCRL2
algorithm [Jaksch et al., 2010], near-optimal regret bounds were proved [Azar et al., 2017, Fruit
et al., 2018, Jin et al., 2018, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019, Efroni et al., 2019]. Unfortunately, many
real-world RL applications involve problems with a huge state space, yielding the tabular MDP model
impractical as it requires the regret to unavoidably scale polynomially with the number of states.
In many practical scenarios, prior knowledge about the environment can be leveraged in order to
develop more efficient algorithms. A popular way to model additional knowledge about the structure
of the environment is by factored MDPs (FMDPs; Boutilier et al. [1995, 1999]). The state of an
FMDP is composed of d components, called factors, and each component is determined by only
m other factors, called its scope. FMDPs arise naturally in many applications like games, robotics,
image-based applications and production lines (where only neighbouring machines affect one another).
The common property of all these examples is the huge state space exponential in d, but the very
small scope size m (e.g., in images each pixel is a factor and it depends only on neighboring pixels).
The key benefit of FMDPs is the combinatorial state space that allows compact representation. That is,
although the number of states is exponential in d, the FMDP representation is only exponential in m
(which is much smaller) and polynomial in d. Early works [Kearns and Koller, 1999, Guestrin et al.,
2002, Strehl, 2007, Szita and Lőrincz, 2009] show that FMDPs also reduce the sample complexity
exponentially, thus avoiding polynomial dependence on the number of states. Recently, this was
further extended to algorithms with near-optimal regret bounds [Osband and Van Roy, 2014, Xu and
Tewari, 2020, Tian et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2021, Talebi et al., 2021]. However, all these works make
the strong assumption that the underlying FMDP structure is fully known to the learner in advance.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

