Global-aware Beam Search for Neural Abstractive
Summarization
Ye Ma1,4
1

Zixun Lan2,4

Lu Zong1,4∗

Kaizhu Huang3

Department of Financial and Actuarial Mathematics, School of Science
2
Department of Applied Mathematics, School of Science
3
Department of Intelligent Science, School of Advanced Technology
4
Laboratory for Intelligent Computing and Financial Technology
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, SIP, 215123 Suzhou, China

{ye.ma, lu.zong, kaizhu.huang}@xjtlu.edu.cn, zixun.lan19@student.xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
This study develops a calibrated beam-based algorithm with awareness of the global
attention distribution for neural abstractive summarization, aiming to improve the
local optimality problem of the original beam search in a rigorous way. Specifically,
a novel global protocol is proposed based on the attention distribution to stipulate
how a global optimal hypothesis should attend to the source. A global scoring
mechanism is then developed to regulate beam search to generate summaries in
a near-global optimal fashion. This novel design enjoys a distinctive property,
i.e., the global attention distribution could be predicted before inference, enabling
step-wise improvements on the beam search through the global scoring mechanism.
Extensive experiments on nine datasets show that the global (attention)-aware
inference significantly improves state-of-the-art summarization models even using
empirical hyper-parameters. The algorithm is also proven robust as it remains to
generate meaningful texts with corrupted attention distributions. The codes and a
comprehensive set of examples are available.2

1

Introduction

As the barriers exist from the auto-regressive design of neural probabilistic text generators to predicting the global optimum directly [30], the heuristic algorithm beam search that factorizes global
optimization to multiple local optimizations, has been popularly used for text decoding [24]. In
the original beam search setting, the global optimum is a hypothesis g of the highest probability
among all possible sentences, and consists of words in vocabulary V. Given the global optimum
at step t denoted as g≤t , the local optimums l≤t refer to K candidate sequences with the highest
probabilities at each step. While it is necessary to compromise on the beam size K  V to ensure
text quality [3, 25, 24] and search efficiency, beam search suffers from a major limitation due to
its local property. Concretely, assuming that the global optimal hypothesis is within the K local
optimal hypotheses of the highest probabilities, i.e. p(g≤t ) ≥ p(l≤t ), for all t until the termination
T , it operates solely with the local information available at each step. In practice, such assumption
may however fail in the case that the probability of the global optimum at step τ < T is less than
those of the local optimums, i.e. p(g≤τ ) < p(l≤τ ), but is adjusted to a higher level in the later steps,
p(g>τ |g≤τ ) > p(l>τ |l≤τ ) and p(g≤τ )p(g>τ |g≤τ ) > p(l≤τ )p(l>τ |l≤τ ). This often leads beam
search to get stuck in the local optimum from step τ onward in generating texts.
∗
2

corresponding author
https://github.com/yema2018/global_aware

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

