Learning Stable Deep Dynamics Models for Partially
Observed or Delayed Dynamical Systems

Andreas Schlaginhaufen∗
ETH Zürich
andreas.schlaginhaufen
@epfl.ch

Philippe Wenk
ETH Zürich
wenkph@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Florian Dörfler
ETH Zürich
dorfler@ethz.ch

Abstract
Learning how complex dynamical systems evolve over time is a key challenge in
system identification. For safety critical systems, it is often crucial that the learned
model is guaranteed to converge to some equilibrium point. To this end, neural
ODEs regularized with neural Lyapunov functions are a promising approach when
states are fully observed. For practical applications however, partial observations
are the norm. As we will demonstrate, initialization of unobserved augmented states
can become a key problem for neural ODEs. To alleviate this issue, we propose
to augment the system’s state with its history. Inspired by state augmentation in
discrete-time systems, we thus obtain neural delay differential equations. Based
on classical time delay stability analysis, we then show how to ensure stability
of the learned models, and theoretically analyze our approach. Our experiments
demonstrate its applicability to stable system identification of partially observed
systems and learning a stabilizing feedback policy in delayed feedback control.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we address the task of learning stable, partially observed, continuous-time dynamical
l
systems from data. More specifically, given access to a data set {(t0 , y0l ), . . . , (tN , yN
)}L
l=1 of noisy,
partial observations collected along L trajectories of an unknown, stable dynamical system,


, z(t) ∈ Rm
ż(t) = g (z(t))
x(t) = h(z(t))
, x(t) ∈ Rn , m ≥ n,
(1)

i.i.d.
y
2
= x(ti ) + i
, i ∼ N (0, σ ),
i
we would like to learn a model for the dynamics of x(t). Moreover, it should be ensured that the
model remains stable (we will be concerned with exponential convergence to 0) on unseen trajectories.
Learning such systems in a data-driven way is a key challenge in many disciplines, including robotics
[Wensing et al., 2017], continuous-time optimal control [Esposito, 2009] or system biology [Brunton
et al., 2016]. One powerful continuous-time approach to non-linear system identification are deep
Neural ODEs (NODE), as presented by Chen et al. [2018]. Since neural networks are very expressive,
they can be deployed in a variety of applications [Rackauckas et al., 2020]. However, because of that
expressiveness, little is known about their system theoretical properties after training. Thus, there has
been growing interest in regularizing such dynamics models to ensure favorable properties. In the
context of ensuring stability of the learned dynamics, Kolter and Manek [2019] propose to jointly
learn a dynamics model and a neural network Lyapunov function, that guarantees global stability
via a projection method. Neural network Lyapunov functions have previously been employed by
Richards et al. [2018] to estimate the safe region of a fixed feedback policy and by Chang et al. [2019]
∗

Correspondence to andreas.schlaginhaufen@epfl.ch, wenkph@ethz.ch.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

