Towards Tight Communication Lower Bounds
for Distributed Optimisation
Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic, Inc.
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Janne H. Korhonen
IST Austria
janne.korhonen@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We consider a standard distributed optimisation setting where N machines, each
holding a d-dimensional function fi , aim to jointly minimise the sum of the
PN
functions i=1 fi (x). This problem arises naturally in large-scale distributed
optimisation, where a standard solution is to apply variants of (stochastic) gradient descent. We focus on the communication complexity of this problem: our
main result provides the first fully unconditional bounds on total number of bits
which need to be sent and received by the N machines to solve this problem
under point-to-point communication, within a given error-tolerance. Specifically,
we show that ⌦(N d log d/N ") total bits need to be communicated between the
PN
machines to find an additive ✏-approximation to the minimum of i=1 fi (x). The
result holds for both deterministic and randomised algorithms, and, importantly,
requires no assumptions on the algorithm structure. The lower bound is tight under
certain restrictions on parameter values, and is matched within constant factors
for quadratic objectives by a new variant of quantised gradient descent, which we
describe and analyse. Our results bring over tools from communication complexity
to distributed optimisation, which has potential for further applications.

1

Introduction

The ability to efficiently distribute large-scale optimisation over several computing nodes has been
one of the key enablers of recent progress in machine learning, and the last decade has seen significant
attention dedicated to efficient distributed optimisation. One specific area of focus has been on
reducing the communication cost of distributed machine learning, i.e. the total number of bits sent and
received by machines in order to jointly optimise an objective function. To this end, communicationefficient variants are known for most classical optimisation algorithms, and in fact entire families of
communication-compression methods have been introduced in the last decade.
We consider a standard setting in which N machines communicate by sending point-to-point binary
messages to each other. Given dimension d, and a domain D ✓ Rd , each machine i is given an input
function fi : D ! R, corresponding to a subset of the data, and the machines need to jointly minimise
PN
the empirical risk i=1 fi (x) with either deterministic or probabilistic guarantees on the output,
within " additive error tolerance. That is, at least one node needs to output z 2 [0, 1]d such that
N
X
i=1

fi (z) 

inf

x2[0,1]d

N
X

fi (x) + " .

(1)

i=1

This setting models data-parallel optimisation, and covers virtually all practical settings, from largescale regression, to the training of deep neural networks.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

