Rethinking Space-Time Networks
with Improved Memory Coverage for
Efficient Video Object Segmentation

Ho Kei Cheng†
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign
hokeikc2@illinois.edu

Yu-Wing Tai
Kuaishou
Technology
yuwing@gmail.com

Chi-Keung Tang
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
This paper presents a simple yet effective approach to modeling space-time correspondences in the context of video object segmentation. Unlike most existing
approaches, we establish correspondences directly between frames without reencoding the mask features for every object, leading to a highly efficient and robust
framework. With the correspondences, every node in the current query frame is
inferred by aggregating features from the past in an associative fashion. We cast
the aggregation process as a voting problem and find that the existing inner-product
affinity leads to poor use of memory with a small (fixed) subset of memory nodes
dominating the votes, regardless of the query. In light of this phenomenon, we
propose using the negative squared Euclidean distance instead to compute the
affinities. We validate that every memory node now has a chance to contribute,
and experimentally show that such diversified voting is beneficial to both memory
efficiency and inference accuracy. The synergy of correspondence networks and
diversified voting works exceedingly well, achieves new state-of-the-art results on
both DAVIS and YouTubeVOS datasets while running significantly faster at 20+
FPS for multiple objects without bells and whistles.

1

Introduction

Video object segmentation (VOS) aims to identify and segment target instances in a video sequence.
This work focuses on the semi-supervised setting where the first-frame segmentation is given and
the algorithm needs to infer the segmentation for the remaining frames. This task is an extension
of video object tracking [1, 2], requiring detailed object masks instead of simple bounding boxes.
A high-performing algorithm should be able to delineate an object from the background or other
distractors (e.g., similar instances) under partial or complete occlusion, appearance changes, and
object deformation [3].
Most current methods either fit a model using the initial segmentation [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] or leverage
temporal propagation [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], particularly with spatio-temporal matching [17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. Space-Time Memory networks [18] are especially popular
recently due to its high performance and simplicity – many variants [22, 16, 23, 21, 24, 28, 29, 30],
including competitions’ winners [31, 32], have been developed to improve the speed, reduce memory
usage, or to regularize the memory readout process of STM.
In this work, we aim to subtract from STM to arrive at a minimalistic form of matching networks,
dubbed Space-Time Correspondence Network (STCN) 1 . Specifically, we start from the basic premise
†
1

This work was done in The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Training/inference code and pretrained models: https://github.com/hkchengrex/STCN

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

