A Gang of Adversarial Bandits

Mark Herbster*, Stephen Pasteris*
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London WC1E 6BT
{m.herbster,s.pasteris}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Fabio Vitale
University of Lille
59653 Villeneuve d’Ascq CEDEX
France
fabio.vitale2@univ-lille.fr

Massimiliano Pontil
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia and
Department of Computer Science
University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
We consider running multiple instances of multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems in
parallel. A main motivation for this study are online recommendation systems, in
which each of N users is associated with a MAB problem and the goal is to exploit
users’ similarity in order to learn users’ preferences to K items more efficiently. We
consider the adversarial MAB setting, whereby an adversary is free to choose which
user and which loss to present to the learner during the learning process. Users are
in a social network and the learner is aided by a-priori knowledge of the strengths
of the social links between all pairs of users. It is assumed that if the social link
between two users is strong then they tend to share the same action. The regret is
measured relative to an arbitrary function which maps users to actions. The smoothness of the function is captured by a resistance-based dispersion measure Ψ. We
present two learning algorithms, G ABA -I and G ABA -II which exploit the network
structure to bias towards functions
p of low Ψ values. We show that G ABA -I has
an expected regret bound of O( ln(N K/Ψ)ΨKTp
) and per-trial time complexity
of O(K ln(N )), whilst G ABA -II has a weaker O( ln(N/Ψ) ln(N K/Ψ)ΨKT )
regret, but a better O(ln(K) ln(N )) per-trial time complexity. We highlight improvements of both algorithms over running independent standard MABs across
users.

1

Introduction

During the last decade multi-armed bandits (MAB) have received a great deal of attention in machine
learning and related fields, due to their wide practical and theoretical importance. The central problem
is to design a decision strategy whereby a learner explores sequentially the environment in order to
find the best item (arm) within a prescribed set. At each step in the exploration the learner chooses an
arm, after which feedback (typically a loss or reward corresponding to the selected arm) is observed
from the environment. Then the next decision is made by the learner based on past interactions,
and the process repeats. The goal is to design efficient exploration strategies which incur a small
cumulative loss in comparison to the cumulative loss that would have been obtained by always
* Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

