Class-Incremental Learning via Dual Augmentation

1

Fei Zhu1,2 , Zhen Cheng1,2 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2∗, Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{zhufei2018, chengzhen2019}@ia.ac.cn, {xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep learning systems typically suffer from catastrophic forgetting of past knowledge when acquiring new skills continually. In this paper, we emphasize two
dilemmas, representation bias and classifier bias in class-incremental learning, and
present a simple and novel approach that employs explicit class augmentation
(classAug) and implicit semantic augmentation (semanAug) to address the two
biases, respectively. On the one hand, we propose to address the representation bias
by learning transferable and diverse representations. Specifically, we investigate
the feature representations in incremental learning based on spectral analysis and
present a simple technique called classAug, to let the model see more classes
during training for learning representations transferable across classes. On the
other hand, to overcome the classifier bias, semanAug implicitly involves the simultaneous generating of an infinite number of instances of old classes in the deep
feature space, which poses tighter constraints to maintain the decision boundary
of previously learned classes. Without storing any old samples, our method can
perform comparably with representative data replay based approaches.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled great success in many machine learning tasks, based on
stationary, large-scale, computationally expensive, and memory-intensive training data [1, 2, 3]. Yet
the need of the ability to acquire sequential experience in dynamic and open environments [4, 5, 6]
poses a serious challenge to modern deep learning systems, which only perform well on homogenized,
balanced, and shuffled data [7]. Typically, DNNs suffer from drastic performance degradation of
previously learned tasks after learning new knowledge, which is a well-documented phenomenon,
known as catastrophic forgetting [8, 9, 10]. Recently, incremental learning (IL), also referred to as
lifelong learning or continual learning, has received extensive attention [11, 12, 13, 14] to enable
DNNs to preserve and extend knowledge continually.
Many earlier studies focus on task-incremental learning, which uses separate output layers for
different tasks, and needs the task identity for inference [11, 15, 16]. In this work, we consider a more
realistic and challenging setting of class-incremental learning (Class-IL), where the model only has
access to data of new classes at each stage and needs to learn a unified classifier that can classify all
seen classes [13, 17, 18]. Unfortunately, the learning paradigm of Class-IL will lead to two problems:
representation bias and classifier bias, as shown in Figure 1. First, for representation learning, if the
feature extractor is fixed after learning old classes, the learned representations could be preserved,
but suffer from the lack of transferability for new classes; on the contrary, if we update the feature
extractor on new classes, the updated representations would be no longer suitable for old classes.
Consequently, the old and new classes would be easily overlapped in the deep feature space. We
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

