Representing Long-Range Context for Graph
Neural Networks with Global Attention
Zhanghao Wu*1 , Paras Jain*1 , Matthew A. Wright1
Azalia Mirhoseini2 , Joseph E. Gonzalez1 , Ion Stoica1
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Google Brain
Correspondence to: {zhwu, paras_jain}@berkeley.edu
* equal contribution, determined via a random coin flip.

Abstract
Graph neural networks are powerful architectures for structured datasets. However, current methods struggle to represent long-range dependencies. Scaling
the depth or width of GNNs is insufficient to broaden receptive fields as larger
GNNs encounter optimization instabilities such as vanishing gradients and representation oversmoothing, while pooling-based approaches have yet to become
as universally useful as in computer vision. In this work, we propose the use of
Transformer-based self-attention to learn long-range pairwise relationships, with
a novel “readout” mechanism to obtain a global graph embedding. Inspired by
recent computer vision results that find position-invariant attention performant in
learning long-range relationships, our method, which we call GraphTrans, applies
a permutation-invariant Transformer module after a standard GNN module. This
simple architecture leads to state-of-the-art results on several graph classification
tasks, outperforming methods that explicitly encode graph structure. Our results
suggest that purely-learning-based approaches without graph structure may be
suitable for learning high-level, long-range relationships on graphs. Code for
GraphTrans is available at https://github.com/ucbrise/graphtrans.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) enable deep networks to process structured inputs such as molecules or
social networks. GNNs learn mappings that compute representations at graph nodes and/or edges from
the structure of and features in their neighborhoods. This neighborhood-local aggregation leverages
the relational inductive bias encoded by the graph’s connectivity [3]. Similar to convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), GNNs can aggregate information from beyond local neighborhoods by stacking
layers, effectively broadening the GNN receptive field.
However, GNN performance drops dramatically when its depth increases [21]. This limitation has
hurt the performance of GNNs on whole-graph classification and regression tasks, where we want to
predict a target value describing the whole graph that may rely on long-range dependencies that may
not be captured by a GNN with a limited receptive field [35]. Consider for example a large graph
where node A must attend to a distant node B which is K-hops away. If our GNN layer aggregates
only over a node’s one-hop neighborhood, then a K-layer GNN is required. However, the width of
the receptive field of this GNN will grow exponentially, diluting the signal from node B. That is,
simply expanding the receptive field to a K-hop neighborhood may not capture these long-range
dependencies either [40]. Often, “too deep” GNNs lead to node representations that collapse to be
equivalent over the entire graph, a phenomenon sometimes called oversmoothing or oversquashing
[21, 5, 2]. Therefore, the maximum context size for common GNN architectures is effectively limited.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

