From Optimality to Robustness:
Dirichlet Sampling Strategies in Stochastic Bandits

Dorian Baudry
dorian.baudry@inria.fr

Patrick Saux
patrick.saux@inria.fr

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
The stochastic multi-arm bandit problem has been extensively studied under standard assumptions on the arm’s distribution (e.g bounded with known support,
exponential family, etc). These assumptions are suitable for many real-world problems but sometimes they require knowledge (on tails for instance) that may not
be precisely accessible to the practitioner, raising the question of the robustness
of bandit algorithms to model misspecification. In this paper we study a generic
Dirichlet Sampling (DS) algorithm, based on pairwise comparisons of empirical
indices computed with re-sampling of the arms’ observations and a data-dependent
exploration bonus. We show that different variants of this strategy achieve provably
optimal regret guarantees when the distributions are bounded and logarithmic regret
for semi-bounded distributions with a mild quantile condition. We also show that a
simple tuning achieve robustness with respect to a large class of unbounded distributions, at the cost of slightly worse than logarithmic asymptotic regret. We finally
provide numerical experiments showing the merits of DS in a decision-making
problem on synthetic agriculture data.

1

Introduction

The K-armed stochastic bandit model is a decision-making problem in which a learner sequentially
picks an action among K alternatives, called arms, and collects a random reward. In this setting, all
rewards drawn from an arm are independent and identically distributed. Hence, we can formally
associate each arm k ∈ {1, . . . , K} with its reward distribution νk , with mean µk . The objective
of the learner is to adapt her strategy (At )t∈[T ] in order to maximize the expected sum of rewards
obtained after T selections (where T is the horizon, unknown to the learner). This is equivalent
to minimizing the regret, defined as the difference between the expected total reward of an oracle
strategy always selecting an arm with largest mean and that of the algorithm, which is equal to
RT = E

" T
X
t=1

#
?

µ − µAt =

K
X

∆k E [Nk (T )] .

(1)

k=1

PT
Here, Nk (T ) = t=1 1(At = k) denotes the number of selections of arm k after T time steps,
µ? = maxj∈{1,...,K} µj and ∆k = µ? − µk is called the gap between arm k and the largest mean. To
assess the performance of a bandit algorithm, one naturally studies the best guarantees achievable by
a uniformly efficient algorithm, i.e with sub-linear regret on any instance of a given class of problems.
This guarantee was first provided by Lai and Robbins (1985) for 1-dimensional parametric families
of distributions, and then extended by Burnetas and Katehakis (1996) for more general families. It
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

