Computer-Aided Design as Language

Yaroslav Ganin1∗ Sergey Bartunov1
1

Yujia Li1

DeepMind

2

Ethan Keller2

Stefano Saliceti1

Onshape

Abstract
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) applications are used in manufacturing to model
everything from coffee mugs to sports cars. These programs are complex and
require years of training and experience to master. A component of all CAD
models particularly difficult to make are the highly structured 2D sketches that lie
at the heart of every 3D construction. In this work, we propose a machine learning
model capable of automatically generating such sketches. Through this, we pave
the way for developing intelligent tools that would help engineers create better
designs with less effort. The core of our method is a combination of a generalpurpose language modeling technique alongside an off-the-shelf data serialization
protocol. Additionally, we explore several extensions allowing us to gain finer
control over the generation process. We show that our approach has enough
flexibility to accommodate the complexity of the domain and performs well for
both unconditional synthesis and image-to-sketch translation.

1

Introduction

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) is used in the production of most manufactured objects: from cars to robots
to stents to power plants. CAD has replaced pencil
drawings with precise computer sketches, enabling unparalleled precision, flexibility, and speed. Despite
these improvements the CAD engineer must still develop, relate and annotate all the minutiae of their designs with the same attention to detail as their draftingtable forebears. CAD productivity might be improved
by the careful application of machine learning to automate predictable design tasks and free the engineer to
focus on the bigger picture. The flexibility and power
of deep learning is uniquely suited to the complexity of
design.
Sketches are at the heart of mechanical CAD. They are
the skeleton from which three dimensional forms are
made. A sketch consists of various geometric entities
(e.g., lines, arcs, splines and circles) related by specific
constraints such as tangency, perpendicularity and symmetry. Figure 1 illustrates how entities and constraints
work in tandem to create well-defined shapes. Geometric entities lie on a single plane and together form
enclosed regions used by subsequent construction operations such as lofts and extrusions to generate complex
∗

coincident

mirror

orthogonal

tangent

Figure 1: The anatomy of a CAD sketch.
Sketches are the main building block of every 3D construction. A sketch consists of
entities (e.g., lines and arcs) and constraints
(e.g., tangent and mirror). The dotted curve
shows what happens if we drop some of the
constraints — the design idea is lost.

Correspondence to: ganin@deepmind.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

