Activation Sharing with Asymmetric Paths Solves
Weight Transport Problem without Bidirectional
Connection
Sunghyeon Woo

Jeongwoo Park
Jiwoo Hong
Dongsuk Jeon
Seoul National University
{wsh0917, jeffjw, micro995, djeon1}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
One of the reasons why it is difficult for the brain to perform backpropagation (BP)
is the weight transport problem, which argues forward and feedback neurons cannot
share the same synaptic weights during learning in biological neural networks.
Recently proposed algorithms address the weight transport problem while providing
good performance similar to BP in large-scale networks. However, they require
bidirectional connections between the forward and feedback neurons to train their
weights, which is observed to be rare in the biological brain. In this work, we
propose an Activation Sharing algorithm that removes the need for bidirectional
connections between the two types of neurons. In this algorithm, hidden layer
outputs (activations) are shared across multiple layers during weight updates. By
applying this learning rule to both forward and feedback networks, we solve
the weight transport problem without the constraint of bidirectional connections,
also achieving good performance even on deep convolutional neural networks for
various datasets. In addition, our algorithm could significantly reduce memory
access overhead when implemented in hardware.

1

Introdution

Backpropagation (BP) [1] is the representative approach to training various deep neural networks.
While BP exhibits excellent training performance, similar to or even better than that of humans, it has
been long argued that the structure of biological neural networks does not support the backpropagation
of errors [2, 3, 4, 5]. To resolve this issue, a wide range of studies have been conducted to develop an
algorithm that is feasible in biological neural networks. One important reason behind the biological
implausibility of BP is the weight transport problem [6]. BP requires identical forward and feedback
paths for reliable training; i.e., the two paths must have the same synaptic weights. While biological
neural networks may also implement two separate processing paths (forward and feedback paths), it is
impossible to explicitly pass the weights between the two paths, as it requires a very fast transmission
of information along the axon from each synapse output [7].
The Feedback Alignment (FA) algorithm [8] solves the weight transport problem by propagating
errors through the feedback path with random fixed weights. It was shown that the feedback weights
could be aligned with the forward weights in the course of training, and consequently, the network is
trained in a similar way to BP. Similarly, Direct Feedback Alignment (DFA) [9] directly propagates
errors from the top layer to lower layers using random fixed weights, and Direct Random Target
Projection [10] locally creates errors using targets rather than using backpropagated errors. Although
these algorithms demonstrate good training performance on simple networks, they exhibit large
performance degradation when applied to complex networks, especially deep convolutional neural
networks [11, 12].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

