Large-Scale Learning with Fourier Features and
Tensor Decompositions

Frederiek Wesel
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
f.wesel@tudelft.nl

Kim Batselier
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
k.batselier@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Random Fourier features provide a way to tackle large-scale machine learning
problems with kernel methods. Their slow Monte Carlo convergence rate has
motivated the research of deterministic Fourier features whose approximation error
can decrease exponentially in the number of basis functions. However, due to
their tensor product extension to multiple dimensions, these methods suffer heavily
from the curse of dimensionality, limiting their applicability to one, two or threedimensional scenarios. In our approach we overcome said curse of dimensionality
by exploiting the tensor product structure of deterministic Fourier features, which
enables us to represent the model parameters as a low-rank tensor decomposition.
We derive a monotonically converging block coordinate descent algorithm with
linear complexity in both the sample size and the dimensionality of the inputs for
a regularized squared loss function, allowing to learn a parsimonious model in
decomposed form using deterministic Fourier features. We demonstrate by means
of numerical experiments how our low-rank tensor approach obtains the same performance of the corresponding nonparametric model, consistently outperforming
random Fourier features.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods such as Support Vector Machines and Gaussian Processes are commonly used to
tackle problems such as classification, regression and dimensionality reduction. Since they can
be universal function approximators [13], kernel methods have received renewed attention in the
last few years and have shown equivalent or superior performance to Neural Networks [22, 26, 11].
The main idea behind kernel methods is to lift the data into a higher-dimensional (or even infinitedimensional) Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space H by means of a feature map φ (·) : X → H.
Considering then the pairwise similarities between the mapped data allows to tackle problems which
are highly nonlinear in the original sample space X , but linear in H. This can be done equivalently
by considering a kernel function k (·, ·) : X × X → R such that hφ (x) , φ (x0 )i = k (x, x0 ) and
performing thus said mapping implicitly. Although effective at learning nonlinear patterns in the data,
kernel methods are known to scale poorly as the number of data points N increases. For example,
when considering Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR), Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) [33] or
Least-Squares Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM) [41, 42] training usually consist in inverting
the Gram matrix kij = k (xi , xj ), which encodes the pairwise
relation between all data. As a

2
consequence,
the
associated
storage
complexity
is
O
N
and
the
computational complexity is

3
O N , rendering these methods unfeasible for large data. In order to lower the computational
cost, data dependent methods approximate the kernel function by means of M data dependent
basis functions.
 Due to their reduced-rank formulation, the computational complexity is reduced
to O N M 2 for N  M . However, e.g. for the Nyström method [46], the convergence rate is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

