Addressing Algorithmic Disparity and Performance
Inconsistency in Federated Learning

Sen Cui1 Weishen Pan1 Jian Liang2 Changshui Zhang1 Fei Wang3
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Automation,Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China
2
Alibaba Group, China
3
Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
{cuis19, pws15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
xuelang.lj@alibaba-inc.com
zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
few2001@med.cornell.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has gain growing interests for its capability of learning
from distributed data sources collectively without the need of accessing the raw
data samples across different sources. So far FL research has mostly focused on
improving the performance, how the algorithmic disparity will be impacted for
the model learned from FL and the impact of algorithmic disparity on the utility
inconsistency are largely unexplored. In this paper, we propose an FL framework to
jointly consider performance consistency and algorithmic fairness across different
local clients (data sources). We derive our framework from a constrained multiobjective optimization perspective, in which we learn a model satisfying fairness
constraints on all clients with consistent performance. Specifically, we treat the
algorithm prediction loss at each local client as an objective and maximize the
worst-performing client with fairness constraints through optimizing a surrogate
maximum function with all objectives involved. A gradient-based procedure is
employed to achieve the Pareto optimality of this optimization problem. Theoretical
analysis is provided to prove that our method can converge to a Pareto solution
that achieves the min-max performance with fairness constraints on all clients.
Comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the
superiority that our approach over baselines and its effectiveness in achieving both
fairness and consistency across all local clients.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1] refers to the paradigm of learning from fragmented data without sacrificing
privacy. FL has aroused broad interests from diverse disciplines including high-stakes scenarios such
as loan approvals, criminal justice, healthcare, etc [2]. An increasing concern is whether these FL
systems induce disparity in local clients in these cases. For example, ProPublica reported that an
algorithm used across the US for predicting a defendant’s risk of future crime produced higher scores
to African-Americans than Caucasians on average [3]. This has caused severe concerns from the
public on the real deployment of data mining models and made algorithmic fairness an important
research theme in recent years.
Existing works on algorithmic fairness in machine learning have mostly focused on individual
learning scenarios. There has not been much research on how FL will impact the model fairness at
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

