Reconstruction for Powerful Graph Representations

Leonardo Cotta
Purdue University
cotta@purdue.edu

Christopher Morris
Mila – Quebec AI Institute, McGill University
chris@christophermorris.info
Bruno Ribeiro
Purdue University
ribeiro@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have limited expressive power, failing to represent
many graph classes correctly. While more expressive graph representation learning
(GRL) alternatives can distinguish some of these classes, they are significantly harder
to implement, may not scale well, and have not been shown to outperform well-tuned
GNNs in real-world tasks. Thus, devising simple, scalable, and expressive GRL
architectures that also achieve real-world improvements remains an open challenge.
In this work, we show the extent to which graph reconstruction—reconstructing
a graph from its subgraphs—can mitigate the theoretical and practical problems
currently faced by GRL architectures. First, we leverage graph reconstruction to build
two new classes of expressive graph representations. Secondly, we show how graph
reconstruction boosts the expressive power of any GNN architecture while being a
(provably) powerful inductive bias for invariances to vertex removals. Empirically, we
show how reconstruction can boost GNN’s expressive power—while maintaining its
invariance to permutations of the vertices—by solving seven graph property tasks not
solvable by the original GNN. Further, we demonstrate how it boosts state-of-the-art
GNN’s performance across nine real-world benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Supervised machine learning for graph-structured data, i.e., graph classification and regression, is
ubiquitous across application domains ranging from chemistry and bioinformatics [8, 94] to image [89],
and social network analysis [33]. Consequently, machine learning on graphs is an active research area
with numerous proposed approaches—notably GNNs [21, 42, 45] being the most representative case of
GRL methods.
Arguably, GRL’s most interesting results arise from a cross-over between graph theory and representation
learning. For instance, the representational limits of GNNs are upper-bounded by a simple heuristic
for the graph isomorphism problem [78, 105], the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (1WL) [44, 73, 75, 101, 102], which might miss crucial structural information in the data [5]. Further
works show how GNNs cannot approximate graph properties such as diameter, radius, girth, and subgraph
counts [25, 38], inspiring architectures [6, 66, 77, 78] based on the more powerful κ-dimensional
Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (κ-WL) [44].1 On the other hand, despite the limited expressiveness of
GNNs, they still can overfit the training data, offering limited generalization performance [105]. Hence,
devising GRL architectures that are simultaneously sufficiently expressive and avoid overfitting remains
an open problem.
1
We opt for using κ instead of k, i.e., κ-WL instead of k-WL, to not confuse the reader with the hyperparameter
k of our models.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

