Sparse Training via Boosting Pruning Plasticity
with Neuroregeneration

Shiwei Liu1∗, Tianlong Chen2 , Xiaohan Chen2 , Zahra Atashgahi3 , Lu Yin1 , Huanyu Kou4 ,
Li Shen5 , Mykola Pechenizkiy1,6 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Decebal Constantin Mocanu1,3
1
Eindhoven University of Technology, 2 University of Texas at Austin
3
University of Twente,4 University of Leeds,5 JD Explore Academy, 6 University of Jyväskylä
{s.liu3,l.yin,m.pechenizkiy}@tue.nl, {tianlong.chen,xiaohan.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu
{z.atashgahi,d.c.mocanu}@utwente.nl, {khydouble1,mathshenli}@gmail.com

Abstract
Works on lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) and single-shot network pruning (SNIP)
have raised a lot of attention currently on post-training pruning (iterative magnitude pruning), and before-training pruning (pruning at initialization). The former
method suffers from an extremely large computation cost and the latter usually
struggles with insufficient performance. In comparison, during-training pruning,
a class of pruning methods that simultaneously enjoys the training/inference efficiency and the comparable performance, temporarily, has been less explored.
To better understand during-training pruning, we quantitatively study the effect
of pruning throughout training from the perspective of pruning plasticity (the
ability of the pruned networks to recover the original performance). Pruning plasticity can help explain several other empirical observations about neural network
pruning in literature. We further find that pruning plasticity can be substantially
improved by injecting a brain-inspired mechanism called neuroregeneration, i.e.,
to regenerate the same number of connections as pruned. We design a novel
gradual magnitude pruning (GMP) method, named gradual pruning with zerocost neuroregeneration (GraNet), that advances state of the art. Perhaps most
impressively, its sparse-to-sparse version for the first time boosts the sparse-tosparse training performance over various dense-to-sparse methods with ResNet50 on ImageNet without extending the training time. We release all codes in
https://github.com/Shiweiliuiiiiiii/GraNet.

1

Introduction

Neural network pruning is the most common technique to reduce the parameter count, storage
requirements, and computational costs of modern neural network architectures. Recently, posttraining pruning [49, 29, 18, 47, 10, 54, 74, 5, 57, 75] and before-training pruning [31, 30, 67, 63,
6, 11] have been two fast-rising fields, boosted by lottery tickets hypothesis (LTH) [10] and singleshot network pruning (SNIP) [31]. The process of post-training pruning typically involves fully
pre-training a dense network as well as many cycles of retraining (either fine-tuning [18, 17, 39]
or rewinding [12, 54]). As the training costs of the state-of-the-art models, e.g., GPT-3 [4] and
FixEfficientNet-L2 [64] have exploded, this process can lead to a large amount of overhead cost.
Recently emerged methods for pruning at initialization significantly reduce the training cost by
identifying a trainable sub-network before the main training process. While promising, the existing
methods fail to match the performance achieved by the magnitude pruning after training [11].
∗

Partial of this work have been done when Shiwei Liu worked as an intern at JD Explore Academy.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

