Dynamical Wasserstein Barycenters for
Time-series Modeling

Kevin C. Cheng
Tufts University
kevin.cheng@tufts.edu

Shuchin Aeron
Tufts University
shuchin.aeron@tufts.edu

Michael C. Hughes
Tufts University
michael.hughes@tufts.edu

Eric L. Miller
Tufts University
eric.miller@tufts.edu

Abstract
Many time series can be modeled as a sequence of segments representing highlevel discrete states, such as running and walking in a human activity application.
Flexible models should describe the system state and observations in stationary
“pure-state” periods as well as transition periods between adjacent segments, such
as a gradual slowdown between running and walking. However, most prior work
assumes instantaneous transitions between pure discrete states. We propose a
dynamical Wasserstein barycentric (DWB) model that estimates the system state
over time as well as the data-generating distributions of pure states in an unsupervised manner. Our model assumes each pure state generates data from a
multivariate normal distribution, and characterizes transitions between states via
displacement-interpolation specified by the Wasserstein barycenter. The system
state is represented by a barycentric weight vector which evolves over time via a
random walk on the simplex. Parameter learning leverages the natural Riemannian
geometry of Gaussian distributions under the Wasserstein distance, which leads
to improved convergence speeds. Experiments on several human activity datasets
show that our proposed DWB model accurately learns the generating distribution
of pure states while improving state estimation for transition periods compared to
the commonly used linear interpolation mixture models.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of estimating the dynamically evolving state of a system from time-series
data.1 The notion of “state” in such contexts typically is modeled in one of two ways. For many
problems, the system state is a vector of continuous quantities (Kalman, 1960; Krishnan et al., 2016),
perhaps constrained in some manner. Alternatively, discrete-state models take on one of a countable
number of options at each point in time, as exemplified by hidden Markov models (HMMs) (Rabiner,
1989) or “switching-state” extensions (Ghahramani and Hinton, 2000; Linderman et al., 2017).
Many time-series characterization problems of current interest warrant a hybrid of continuous and
discrete state representation approaches, where the system gradually transitions in a continuous
manner among a finite collection of “pure” discrete states. For example, in human activity recognition
using accelerometer sensor data (Bi et al., 2021), some segments of data do correspond to distinct
activities (run, sit, walk, etc.), suggesting a discrete state representation. However, when using sensors
with high-enough sampling rates, transition periods when the system is evolving from one state to
another (e.g. the individual accelerates from standing to running over a few seconds) can be well
1

Code available at https://github.com/kevin-c-cheng/DynamicalWassBarycenters_Gaussian

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

