Unsupervised Representation Transfer for Small
Networks: I Believe I Can Distill On-the-Fly

Hee Min Choi, Hyoa Kang, and Dokwan Oh
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
Suwon, South Korea
{chm.choi, hyoa.kang, dokwan.oh}@samsung.com

Abstract
A current remarkable improvement of unsupervised visual representation learning
is based on heavy networks with large-batch training. While recent methods have
greatly reduced the gap between supervised and unsupervised performance of deep
models such as ResNet-50, this development has been relatively limited for small
models. In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised learning framework for
small networks that combines deep self-supervised representation learning and
knowledge distillation within one-phase training. In particular, a teacher model is
trained to produce consistent cluster assignments between different views of the
same image. Simultaneously, a student model is encouraged to mimic the prediction
of on-the-fly self-supervised teacher. For effective knowledge transfer, we adopt
the idea of domain classifier so that student training is guided by discriminative
features invariant to the representational space shift between teacher and student.
We also introduce a network driven multi-view generation paradigm to capture rich
feature information contained in the network itself. Extensive experiments show
that our student models surpass state-of-the-art offline distilled networks even from
stronger self-supervised teachers as well as top-performing self-supervised models.
Notably, our ResNet-18, trained with ResNet-50 teacher, achieves 68.3% ImageNet
Top-1 accuracy on frozen feature linear evaluation, which is only 1.5% below the
supervised baseline.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a growing attention in unsupervised and self-supervised learning where
the goal is to effectively learn useful features from a large amount of unlabeled data. Current selfsupervised visual representation learning methods appear to approach and possibly even outperform
the fully-supervised counterpart [8, 25, 29]. All top-performing self-supervised learning (SSL)
algorithms for visual representation involve training deep models on powerful computers. In particular,
their smallest architecture is ResNet-50 [26], and the networks are trained with large batches (e.g.,
4096 images) on multiple specialized hardware devices such as 128 TPU cores [6, 8, 25]. Yet, this
heavy implementation is not a viable option in a resource-limited environment, and there is evidence
that the SSL methods even do not work well on light models (Figure 1 and [22]). Also, we need
strong small networks that can operate on a system on a chip (SoC) for real-world applications.
Existing methods on SSL have demonstrated that deeper models learn general visual representation
more effectively with unlabeled data [8, 40]. Moreover, it has been empirically shown that predictive
performance of bigger networks is better transferred into smaller ones [9]. Inspired by these, we are
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

