Proportional Participatory Budgeting
with Additive Utilities
Dominik Peters
Grzegorz Pierczyński
Piotr Skowron
University of Toronto
University of Warsaw
University of Warsaw
Toronto, ON, Canada
Warsaw, Poland
Warsaw, Poland
dominik@cs.toronto.edu g.pierczynski@mimuw.edu.pl p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

Abstract
We study voting rules for participatory budgeting, where a group of voters collectively decides which projects should be funded using a common budget. We
allow the projects to have arbitrary costs, and the voters to have arbitrary additive
valuations over the projects. We formulate two axioms that guarantee proportional
representation to groups of voters with common interests. To the best of our knowledge, all known rules for participatory budgeting do not satisfy either of the two
axioms; in addition we show that the most prominent proportional rule for committee elections, Proportional Approval Voting, cannot be adapted to arbitrary costs
nor to additive valuations so that it would satisfy our axioms of proportionality. We
construct a simple and attractive voting rule called the Method of Equal Shares that
satisfies one of our axioms (for arbitrary costs and arbitrary additive valuations),
and that can be evaluated in polynomial time. We prove that our other stronger
axiom is also satisfiable, though by a computationally more expensive and less
natural voting rule.

1

Introduction

Consider an abstract model where there is a group of agents who have preferences over a set of
options. Each option has a cost, and the goal is to select a subset of options whose total cost does
not exceed a predefined budget. This model provides a formal framework for a number of real-life
scenarios. Perhaps the most natural example is Participatory Budgeting (PB). Through a voting
system, PB allows residents of a city (the agents) to decide which projects (the options) will be funded
by the government. In recent years, PB has been started in many cities around the world [Cabannes,
2004, Aziz and Shah, 2020], and in some cases is used to decide a significant fraction of the city
budget. For example, in Paris, PB has been run every year since 2014, and since 2016 the total
amount of funding for PB in Paris has been more than 100 million euros annually. Besides PB, the
formal model captures the problem of electing a representative committee for a group of voters, say a
faculty board or a parliament [Faliszewski et al., 2017, Lackner and Skowron, 2020], but also appears
useful in situations that do not involve humans. For example, our framework describes the problem
of selecting validators in consensus protocols, such as the blockchain [Cevallos and Stewart, 2020],
the problem of selecting web pages that should be displayed in response to user queries, where the
selected set of web pages should be useful for different types of user profiles [Skowron et al., 2017]
or the problem of locating public facilities [Skowron et al., 2016, Byrka et al., 2018]. Algorithms
for PB can even be used for improving the quality of genetic algorithms [Faliszewski et al., 2016].
While there are numerous applications of the model that we consider, for concreteness we will use
terminology referring to participatory budgeting.
In this paper, we focus on designing algorithms (which we call aggregation rules) for selecting projects.
We are interested in rules that are fair in the sense that each agent has roughly equal influence on the
outcome.This implies that the selected subset of projects must proportionally represent the views of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

