Learning to Draw: Emergent Communication
through Sketching

Daniela Mihai
Electronics and Computer Science
The University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
adm1g15@soton.ac.uk

Jonathon Hare
Electronics and Computer Science
The University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
jsh2@soton.ac.uk

Abstract
Evidence that visual communication preceded written language and provided a
basis for it goes back to prehistory, in forms such as cave and rock paintings depicting traces of our distant ancestors. Emergent communication research has sought
to explore how agents can learn to communicate in order to collaboratively solve
tasks. Existing research has focused on language, with a learned communication
channel transmitting sequences of discrete tokens between the agents. In this work,
we explore a visual communication channel between agents that are allowed to
draw with simple strokes. Our agents are parameterised by deep neural networks,
and the drawing procedure is differentiable, allowing for end-to-end training. In
the framework of a referential communication game, we demonstrate that agents
can not only successfully learn to communicate by drawing, but with appropriate
inductive biases, can do so in a fashion that humans can interpret. We hope to
encourage future research to consider visual communication as a more flexible and
directly interpretable alternative of training collaborative agents.

1

Introduction

Imagine you and a friend are playing a game where you have to get your friend to guess an object
in the room by you sketching the object. No other communication is allowed beyond the sketched
image. This is an example of a referential communication game. To play this game you need to have
learned how to draw in a way that your friend can understand. This paper explores how artificial
agents parameterised by neural networks can learn to play similar drawing games. More specifically,
we reformulate the traditional referential game such that one agent draws a sketch of a given photo
and the second agent guesses, based on the drawing, the corresponding photo from a set of images.
Spurred by innovations in artificial neural networks, deep and reinforcement learning techniques,
recent work in multi-agent emergent communication [4, 17, 19, 29, 37] pursues interactions in the
form of gameplay between agents to induce human-like communication. Artificial communicating
agents can collaborate to solve various tasks: image referential games with realistic visual input
[19, 28, 29], negotiation [2], navigation of virtual environments [7, 22], reconstruction of missing
input [4, 17] and, more recently, drawing games [11]. The key to achieving the shared goal in many
of these games is collaboration, and implicitly, communication. To date, studies on communication
emergence in multi-agent games have focused on exploring a language-based communication channel,
with messages represented by discrete tokens or token sequences [6, 17, 19, 25, 28, 29, 35]. However,
these communication protocols can be difficult for a human to interpret [3, 26, 33]. In this work we
propose a direct and potentially self-explainable means of transmitting knowledge: sketching.
Evidence suggests pre- and early-humans were able to communicate by drawing long before developing the various stages of written language [20, 38]. Drawings such as petrograms and petroglyphs
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

