Continuous vs. Discrete Optimization
of Deep Neural Networks

Omer Elkabetz
Tel Aviv University
omer.elkabetz@cs.tau.ac.il

Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
cohennadav@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Existing analyses of optimization in deep learning are either continuous, focusing on
(variants of) gradient flow, or discrete, directly treating (variants of) gradient descent.
Gradient flow is amenable to theoretical analysis, but is stylized and disregards
computational efficiency. The extent to which it represents gradient descent is an
open question in the theory of deep learning. The current paper studies this question.
Viewing gradient descent as an approximate numerical solution to the initial value
problem of gradient flow, we find that the degree of approximation depends on the
curvature around the gradient flow trajectory. We then show that over deep neural
networks with homogeneous activations, gradient flow trajectories enjoy favorable
curvature, suggesting they are well approximated by gradient descent. This finding
allows us to translate an analysis of gradient flow over deep linear neural networks
into a guarantee that gradient descent efficiently converges to global minimum
almost surely under random initialization. Experiments suggest that over simple
deep neural networks, gradient descent with conventional step size is indeed close
to gradient flow. We hypothesize that the theory of gradient flows will unravel
mysteries behind deep learning.1

1

Introduction

The success of deep neural networks is fueled by the mysterious properties of gradient-based
optimization, namely, the ability of (variants of) gradient descent to minimize non-convex training
objectives while exhibiting tendency towards solutions that generalize well. Vast efforts are being
directed at mathematically analyzing this phenomenon, with existing results typically falling into
one of two categories: continuous or discrete. Continuous analyses usually focus on gradient flow
(or variants thereof), which corresponds to gradient descent (or variants thereof) with infinitesimally
small step size. Compared to their discrete (positive step size) counterparts, continuous settings are
oftentimes far more amenable to theoretical analysis (e.g. they admit use of the theory of differential
equations), but on the other hand are stylized, and disregard the critical aspect of computational
efficiency (number of steps required for convergence). Works analyzing gradient flow over deep neural
networks either accept the latter shortcomings (see for example [49, 4, 46]), or attempt to reproduce
part of the results via completely separate analysis of gradient descent (cf. [30, 18, 5]). The extent
to which gradient flow represents gradient descent is an open question in the theory of deep learning.
The current paper formally studies the foregoing question. Viewing gradient descent as a numerical
method for approximately solving the initial value problem corresponding to gradient flow, we turn to
the literature on numerical analysis, and invoke a fundamental theorem concerning the approximation
error. The theorem implies that in general, the match between gradient descent and gradient flow is determined by the curvature around gradient flow’s trajectory. In particular, the “more convex” the trajectory,
i.e. the larger the (possibly negative) minimal eigenvalue of the Hessian is around the trajectory, the bet1

Due to lack of space, essential portions of this paper were deferred to supplementary material. We refer the
reader to [21] for a self-contained version of the text.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

