Personalized Federated Learning with
Gaussian Processes
Idan Achituve
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
idan.achituve@biu.ac.il

Aviv Shamsian
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
aviv.shamsian@biu.ac.il

Gal Chechik
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
NVIDIA, Isreal
gal.chechik@biu.ac.il

Aviv Navon
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
aviv.navon@biu.ac.il

Ethan Fetaya
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
ethan.fetaya@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Federated learning aims to learn a global model that performs well on client devices
with limited cross-client communication. Personalized federated learning (PFL)
further extends this setup to handle data heterogeneity between clients by learning
personalized models. A key challenge in this setting is to learn effectively across
clients even though each client has unique data that is often limited in size. Here
we present pFedGP, a solution to PFL that is based on Gaussian processes (GPs)
with deep kernel learning. GPs are highly expressive models that work well in
the low data regime due to their Bayesian nature. However, applying GPs to
PFL raises multiple challenges. Mainly, GPs performance depends heavily on
access to a good kernel function, and learning a kernel requires a large training
set. Therefore, we propose learning a shared kernel function across all clients,
parameterized by a neural network, with a personal GP classifier for each client. We
further extend pFedGP to include inducing points using two novel methods, the first
helps to improve generalization in the low data regime and the second reduces the
computational cost. We derive a PAC-Bayes generalization bound on novel clients
and empirically show that it gives non-vacuous guarantees. Extensive experiments
on standard PFL benchmarks with CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and CINIC-10, and on a
new setup of learning under input noise show that pFedGP achieves well-calibrated
predictions while significantly outperforming baseline methods, reaching up to
21% in accuracy gain.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there is a growing interest in applying learning in decentralized systems under the
setup of federated learning (FL) [37, 51, 66]. In FL, a server node stores a global model and connects
to multiple end-devices (“clients"), which have private data that cannot be shared. The goal is to
learn the global model in a communication-efficient manner. However, learning a single shared
model across all clients may perform poorly when the data distribution varies significantly across
clients. Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) [67] addresses this challenge by jointly learning a
personalized model for each client. While significant progress had been made in recent years, leading
approaches still struggle in realistic scenarios. First, when the amount of data per client is limited,
even though this is one of the original motivations behind federated learning [4, 51, 72]. Second,
when the input distribution shifts between clients, which is often the case, as clients use different
devices and sensors. Last, when we require well-calibrated predictions, which is an important demand
from medical and other safety-critical applications.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

