Sample Complexity Bounds for Active Ranking from
Multi-wise Comparisons

Wenbo Ren
Dept. Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
ren.453@osu.edu

Jia Liu
Dept. Electrical & Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
liu.1736@osu.edu

Ness B. Shroff
Dept. Electrical & Computer Engineering and Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
shroff.11@osu.edu

Abstract
We study the sample complexity (i.e., the number of comparisons needed) bounds
for actively ranking a set of n items from multi-wise comparisons. Here, a multiwise comparison takes m items as input and returns a (noisy) result about the best
item (the winner feedback) or the order of these items (the full-ranking feedback).
We consider two basic ranking problems: top-k items selection and full ranking.
Unlike previous works that study ranking from multi-wise comparisons, in this
paper, we do not require any parametric model or assumption and work on the fundamental setting where each comparison returns the correct result with probability
1 or a certain probability larger than 12 . This paper helps understand whether and to
what degree utilizing multi-wise comparisons can reduce the sample complexity for
the ranking problems compared to ranking from pairwise comparisons. Specifically,
under the winner feedback setting, one can reduce the sample complexity for top-k
selection up to an m factor and that for full ranking up to a log m factor. Under
the full-ranking feedback setting, one can reduce the sample complexity for top-k
selection up to an m factor and that for full ranking up to an m log m factor. We
also conduct numerical simulations to confirm our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and motivation

Ranking from comparisons is a class of fundamental problems that underpin many areas in machine
learning, and has found various applications in problems involving crowd-sourcing, social choices,
recommendation, and searching. In such ranking problems, there is a hidden ranking among multiple
items to be recovered, where items may refer to candidates, products, movies, advertisements, etc. In
this paper, we study ranking from multi-wise comparisons. A multi-wise comparison refers to a query
on m items about the most preferred one (the winner feedback) or the full ranking (the full-ranking
feedback) of these items. These comparisons may be deterministic or non-deterministic (i.e., noisy or
they may return incorrect results). The noise comes from the uncertain nature of humans, the lack of
information, or the underlying physics. In this paper, we focus on two goals. One is to find the top-k
items (ranking or ordering these items are not necessary), and the other is to find the full ranking.
Our focus is on active ranking (e.g., [4–7, 10, 17–19]), where “active” means that after each comparison, the learner can adaptively choose the next items to be compared according to past observations
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

