On Pathologies in KL-Regularized Reinforcement
Learning from Expert Demonstrations

Tim G. J. Rudner∗ †
University of Oxford
Michael A. Osborne
University of Oxford

Cong Lu∗
University of Oxford

Yarin Gal
University of Oxford

Yee Whye Teh
University of Oxford

Abstract
KL-regularized reinforcement learning from expert demonstrations has proved
successful in improving the sample efficiency of deep reinforcement learning algorithms, allowing them to be applied to challenging physical real-world tasks.
However, we show that KL-regularized reinforcement learning with behavioral
reference policies derived from expert demonstrations can suffer from pathological training dynamics that can lead to slow, unstable, and suboptimal online
learning. We show empirically that the pathology occurs for commonly chosen
behavioral policy classes and demonstrate its impact on sample efficiency and
online policy performance. Finally, we show that the pathology can be remedied by
non-parametric behavioral reference policies and that this allows KL-regularized
reinforcement learning to significantly outperform state-of-the-art approaches on a
variety of challenging locomotion and dexterous hand manipulation tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [15, 24, 46, 47] is a powerful paradigm for learning complex behaviors.
Unfortunately, many modern reinforcement learning algorithms require agents to carry out millions
of interactions with their environment to learn desirable behaviors, making them of limited use
for a wide range of practical applications that cannot be simulated [8, 28]. This limitation has
motivated the study of algorithms that can incorporate pre-collected offline data into the training
process either fully offline or with online exploration to improve sample efficiency, performance, and
reliability [2, 6, 16, 23, 52, 53]. An important and well-motivated subset of these methods consists of
approaches for efficiently incorporating expert demonstrations into the learning process [5, 11, 18, 42].
Reinforcement learning with Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization is a particularly successful approach for doing so [3, 27, 29, 31, 44, 51]. In KL-regularized reinforcement learning, the standard
reinforcement learning objective is augmented by a Kullback-Leibler divergence term that penalizes dissimilarity between the online policy and a behavioral reference policy derived from expert
demonstrations. The resulting regularized objective pulls the agent’s online policy towards the
behavioral reference policy while also allowing it to improve upon the behavioral reference policy by
exploring and interacting with the environment. Recent advances that leverage explicit or implicit
KL-regularized objectives, such as BRAC [51], ABM [44], and AWAC [27], have shown that KLregularized reinforcement learning from expert demonstrations is able to significantly improve the
sample efficiency of online training and reliably solve challenging environments previously unsolved
by standard deep reinforcement learning algorithms.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

