A Law of Iterated Logarithm for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Gugan Thoppe
Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, Karnataka 560012, India
gthoppe@iisc.ac.in

Bhumesh Kumar
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin at Madison
Madison, WI 53706, USA
bkumar@wisc.edu

Abstract
In Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), multiple agents interact with
a common environment, as also with each other, for solving a shared problem in
sequential decision-making. It has wide-ranging applications in gaming, robotics,
finance, etc. In this work, we derive a novel law of iterated logarithm for a family
of distributed nonlinear stochastic approximation schemes that is useful in MARL.
In particular, our result describes the convergence rate on almost every sample path
where the algorithm converges. This result is the first of its kind in the distributed
setup and provides deeper insights than the existing ones, which only discuss convergence rates in the expected or the CLT sense. Importantly, our result holds
under significantly weaker assumptions: neither the gossip matrix needs to be
doubly stochastic nor the stepsizes square summable. As an application, we show
that, for the stepsize n−γ with γ ∈ (0, 1), the distributed TD(0)
√ algorithm with
linear function approximation has a convergence
rate
of
O(
n−γ ln n) a.s.; for
√
the 1/n type stepsize, the same is O( n−1 ln ln n) a.s. These decay rates do not
depend on the graph depicting the interactions among the different agents.

1

Introduction

Can a machine train itself in the same way an infant learns to sit up, crawl, and walk? That is, can a
device interact with the environment and figure out the action sequence required to complete a given
task? The study of algorithms that enable such decision-making is what the field of Reinforcement
Learning (RL) is all about [40]. In contrast, the mathematics needed to analyze such schemes is
what forms the focus in Stochastic Approximation (SA) theory [2, 4]. More generally, SA refers
to an iterative scheme that helps find zeroes or optimal points of a function, for which only noisy
evaluations are possible. In this work, we analyze a family of Distributed Stochastic Approximation
(DSA) algorithms [24] that is useful in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [22, 51].
In the MARL framework, we have multiple agents or learners that continually engage with a shared
environment: the agents pick local actions, and the environment responds by transitioning to a new
state and giving each agent a different local reward. Additionally, the agents also gossip about
local computations with each other. The goal of the agents is to cooperatively find action policies
that maximize the collective rewards obtained over time. Algorithms useful in this endeavor have
found empirical success in domains as diverse as gaming [28], robotics [29], autonomous driving
[35], communication networks [21], power grids [34], and economics [19]. However, theoretical
analyses of such schemes are still very minimal, and this is what this paper aims to address.
For the purpose of analysis, MARL methods are often viewed as special cases of DSA algorithms.
The archetypical form of a DSA scheme with m distributed nodes can be described as follows. Let G
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

