Parameterized Knowledge Transfer for Personalized
Federated Learning

Jie Zhang1 , Song Guo1,∗ , Xiaosong Ma1 , Haozhao Wang2 , Wencao Xu1 , and Feijie Wu1
1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, HUST
{jieaa.zhang,harli.wu}@connect.polyu.hk, hz_wang@hust.edu.cn,
{song.guo,xiaosma,wenchao.xu}@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In recent years, personalized federated learning (pFL) has attracted increasing
attention for its potential in dealing with statistical heterogeneity among clients.
However, the state-of-the-art pFL methods rely on model parameters aggregation
at the server side, which require all models to have the same structure and size, and
thus limits the application for more heterogeneous scenarios. To deal with such
model constraints, we exploit the potentials of heterogeneous model settings and
propose a novel training framework to employ personalized models for different
clients. Specifically, we formulate the aggregation procedure in original pFL into a
personalized group knowledge transfer training algorithm, namely, KT-pFL, which
enables each client to maintain a personalized soft prediction at the server side to
guide the others’ local training. KT-pFL updates the personalized soft prediction of
each client by a linear combination of all local soft predictions using a knowledge
coefficient matrix, which can adaptively reinforce the collaboration among clients
who own similar data distribution. Furthermore, to quantify the contributions
of each client to others’ personalized training, the knowledge coefficient matrix
is parameterized so that it can be trained simultaneously with the models. The
knowledge coefficient matrix and the model parameters are alternatively updated
in each round following the gradient descent way. Extensive experiments on
various datasets (EMNIST, Fashion_MNIST, CIFAR-10) are conducted under
different settings (heterogeneous models and data distributions). It is demonstrated
that the proposed framework is the first federated learning paradigm that realizes
personalized model training via parameterized group knowledge transfer while
achieving significant performance gain comparing with state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [1] has emerged as an efficient paradigm to collaboratively train a shared
machine learning model among multiple clients without directly accessing their private data. By
periodically aggregating parameters from the clients for global model updating, it can converge
to high accuracy and strong generalization. FL has shown its capability to protect user privacy
while there remains a crucial challenge that significantly degrades the learning performance, i.e.,
statistic heterogeneity in users’ local datasets. Given the Non-Independent and Identically Distributed
(Non-IID) user data, the trained global model often cannot be generalized well over each client [2–5].
To deal with the above issues, employing personalized models appears to be an effective solution in
FL, i.e., personalized federated learning (pFL). Recent works regarding pFL include regularizationbased methods [6–8] (i.e., pFedMe [6], L2SGD [7], FedAMP [8]), meta-learning-based Per-FedAvg
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

