Information-theoretic generalization bounds for
black-box learning algorithms

Hrayr Harutyunyan1 , Maxim Raginsky2 , Greg Ver Steeg1 , Aram Galstyan1
1
USC Information Sciences Institute, 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
We derive information-theoretic generalization bounds for supervised learning algorithms based on the information contained in predictions rather than in the output
of the training algorithm. These bounds improve over the existing informationtheoretic bounds, are applicable to a wider range of algorithms, and solve two
key challenges: (a) they give meaningful results for deterministic algorithms and
(b) they are significantly easier to estimate. We show experimentally that the
proposed bounds closely follow the generalization gap in practical scenarios for
deep learning.

1

Introduction

Large neural networks trained with variants of stochastic gradient descent have excellent generalization capabilities, even in regimes where the number of parameters is much larger than the
number of training examples. Zhang et al. [41] showed that classical generalization bounds based on
various notions of complexity of hypothesis set fail to explain this phenomenon, as the same neural
network can generalize well for one choice of training data and memorize completely for another
one. This observation has spurred a tenacious search for algorithm-dependent and data-dependent
generalization bounds that give meaningful results in practical settings for deep learning [17].
One line of attack bounds generalization error based on the information about training dataset
stored in the weights [39, 4, 22, 6, 33, 14, 23, 27]. The main idea is that when the training and
testing performance of a neural network are different, the network weights necessarily capture some
information about the training dataset. However, the opposite might not be true: A neural network
can store significant portions of training set in its weights and still generalize well [32, 40, 21].
Furthermore, because of their information-theoretic nature, these generalization bounds become
infinite or produce trivial bounds for deterministic algorithms. When such bounds are not infinite,
they are notoriously hard to estimate, due to the challenges arising in estimation of Shannon mutual
information between two high-dimensional variables (e.g., weights of a ResNet and a training dataset).
This work addresses the aforementioned challenges. We first improve some of the existing
information-theoretic generalization bounds, providing a unified view and derivation of them (Sec. 2).
We then derive novel generalization bounds that measure information with predictions, rather than
with the output of the training algorithm (Sec. 3). These bounds are applicable to a wide range of methods, including neural networks, Bayesian algorithms, ensembling algorithms, and non-parametric
approaches. In the case of neural networks, the proposed bounds improve over the existing weightbased bounds, partly because they avoid a counter-productive property of weight-based bounds that
information stored in unused weights affects generalization bounds, even though it has no effect on
generalization. The proposed bounds produce meaningful results for deterministic algorithms and are
significantly easier to estimate. For example, in case of classification, computing our most efficient
bound involves estimating mutual information between a pair of predictions and a binary variable.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

