Risk-Monotonicity in Statistical Learning

Zakaria Mhammedi∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mhammedi@mit.edu

Abstract
Acquisition of data is a difficult task in many applications of machine learning, and
it is only natural that one hopes and expects the population risk to decrease (better
performance) monotonically with increasing data points. It turns out, somewhat
surprisingly, that this is not the case even for the most standard algorithms that
minimize the empirical risk. Non-monotonic behavior of the risk and instability in
training have manifested and appeared in the popular deep learning paradigm under
the description of double descent. These problems highlight the current lack of
understanding of learning algorithms and generalization. It is, therefore, crucial to
pursue this concern and provide a characterization of such behavior. In this paper,
we derive the first consistent and risk-monotonic (in high probability) algorithms
for a general statistical learning setting under weak assumptions, consequently
answering some questions posed by [53] on how to avoid non-monotonic behavior
of risk curves. We further show that risk monotonicity need not necessarily come
at the price of worse excess risk rates. To achieve this, we derive new empirical
Bernstein-like concentration inequalities of independent interest that hold for
certain non-i.i.d. processes such as Martingale Difference Sequences.

1

Introduction

Guarantees on the performance of machine learning algorithms are desirable, especially given the
widespread deployment. A traditional performance guarantee often takes the form of a generalization
bound, where the expected risk associated with hypotheses returned by an algorithm is bounded in
terms of the corresponding empirical risk plus an additive error which typically converges to zero as
the sample size increases. However, interpreting such bounds is not always straight forward and can
be somewhat ambiguous. In particular, given that the error term in these bounds goes to zero, it is
tempting to conclude that more data would monotonically decrease the expected risk of an algorithm
such as the Empirical Risk Minimizer (ERM). However, this is not always the case; for example,
[33] showed that increasing the sample size by one, can sometimes make the test performance worse
in expectation for commonly used algorithms such as ERM in popular settings including linear
regression. This type of non-monotonic behavior is still poorly understood and indeed not a desirable
feature of an algorithm since it is expensive to acquire more data in many applications.
Non-monotonic behavior of risk curves [47]—the curve of the expected risk as a function of the
sample size—has been observed in many previous works [18, 43, 48, 20] (see also [33, 52] for
nice accounts of the literature). At least two phenomena have been identified as being the cause
behind such behavior. The first one, coined peaking [30, 19], or double descent according to more
recent literature [6, 49, 7, 17, 15, 37, 40, 41, 16, 12, 11, 14, 42], is the phenomenon where the risk
curve peaks at a certain sample size n. This sample size typically represents the cross-over point
from an over-parameterized to under-parameterized model. For example, when the number of data
points is less than the number of parameters of a model (over-parameterized model), such as Neural
∗

Work done while at the Australian National University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

