Rényi Differential Privacy of the Subsampled Shuffle
Model in Distributed Learning
Antonious M. Girgis
UCLA
amgirgis@g.ucla.edu

Deepesh Data
UCLA
deepesh.data@gmail.com

Suhas Diggavi
UCLA
suhasdiggavi@ucla.edu

Abstract
We study privacy in a distributed learning framework, where clients collaboratively
build a learning model iteratively through interactions with a server from whom
we need privacy. Motivated by stochastic optimization and the federated learning
(FL) paradigm, we focus on the case where a small fraction of data samples
are randomly sub-sampled in each round to participate in the learning process,
which also enables privacy amplification. To obtain even stronger local privacy
guarantees, we study this in the shuffle privacy model, where each client randomizes
its response using a local differentially private (LDP) mechanism and the server
only receives a random permutation (shuffle) of the clients’ responses without
their association to each client. The principal result of this paper is a privacyoptimization performance trade-off for discrete randomization mechanisms in this
sub-sampled shuffle privacy model. This is enabled through a new theoretical
technique to analyze the Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP) of the sub-sampled
shuffle model. We numerically demonstrate that, for important regimes, with
composition our bound yields significant improvement in privacy guarantee over
the state-of-the-art approximate Differential Privacy (DP) guarantee (with strong
composition) for sub-sampled shuffled models. We also demonstrate numerically
significant improvement in privacy-learning performance operating point using real
data sets. Despite these advances an open question is to bridge the gap between
lower and upper privacy bounds in our RDP analysis.

1

Introduction

As learning moves towards the edge, there is a need to collaborate to build learning models1 , such
as in federated learning [36, 44, 33]. In this framework, the collaboration is typically mediated by
a server. In particular, we want to collaboratively build a learning model by solving an empirical
risk minimization (ERM) problem (see (2) in Section 2). To obtain a model parametrized by ✓ using
ERM, the commonly used mechanism is Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [12]. However, one
needs to solve this while enabling strong privacy guarantees on local data from the server, while also
obtaining good learning performance, i.e., a suitable privacy-learning performance operating point.
Differential privacy (DP) [18] is the gold standard notion of data privacy that gives a rigorous
framework through quantifying the information leakage about individual training data points from
the observed interactions. Though DP was originally proposed in a framework where data resides
centrally [18], for distributed learning the more appropriate notion is of local differential privacy
(LDP) [35, 17]. Here, each client randomizes its interactions with the server from whom the data is to
be kept private (e.g., see industrial implementations [23, 31, 16]). However, LDP mechanisms suffer
1
This is because no client has access to enough data to build rich learning models locally and we do not want
to directly share local data.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

