Tree in Tree: from Decision Trees to Decision Graphs

Mahsa Shoaran
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
mahsa.shoaran@epfl.ch

Bingzhao Zhu
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
bz323@cornell.edu

Abstract
Decision trees have been widely used as classifiers in many machine learning
applications thanks to their lightweight and interpretable decision process. This
paper introduces Tree in Tree decision graph (TnT), a framework that extends the
conventional decision tree to a more generic and powerful directed acyclic graph.
TnT constructs decision graphs by recursively growing decision trees inside the
internal or leaf nodes instead of greedy training. The time complexity of TnT is
linear to the number of nodes in the graph, and it can construct decision graphs
on large datasets. Compared to decision trees, we show that TnT achieves better
classification performance with reduced model size, both as a stand-alone classifier
and as a base estimator in bagging/AdaBoost ensembles. Our proposed model is a
novel, more efficient, and accurate alternative to the widely-used decision trees.

1

Introduction

Decision trees (DTs) and tree ensembles are widely used in practice, particularly for applications
that require few parameters [1–5], fast inference [6–8], and good interpretability [9, 10]. In a DT, the
internal and leaf nodes are organized in a binary structure, with internal nodes defining the routing
function and leaf nodes predicting the class label. Although DTs are easy to train by recursively
splitting leaf nodes, the tree structure can be suboptimal for the following reasons: (1) DTs can grow
exponentially large as the depth of the tree increases. Yet, the root-leaf path can be short even for
large DTs, limiting the predictive power. (2) In a DT, the nodes are not shared across different paths,
reducing the efficiency of the model.
Decision trees are similar to neural networks (NNs) in that both models are composed of basic units.
A possible way to enhance the performance of DTs or NNs is to replace the basic units with more
powerful models. For instance, “Network in Network” builds micro NNs with complex structures
within local receptive fields to achieve state-of-the-art performances on image recognition tasks [11].
As for DTs, previous work replaced the axis-aligned splits with logistic regression or linear support
vector machines to construct oblique trees [1, 3, 6, 12–14]. The work in [5] further incorporates
convolution operations into DTs for improved performance on image recognition tasks, while [1]
replaces the leaf predictors with linear regression to improve the regression performance. Unlike the
greedy training algorithms used for axis-aligned trees (e.g., Classification and Regression Trees or
CART [15]), oblique trees are generally trained by gradient-based [3, 13, 14] or alternating [1, 6]
optimization algorithms.
Inspired by the concepts of Network in Network [11] and oblique trees [6, 12], we propose a novel
model, Tree in Tree (TnT), to recursively replace the internal and leaf nodes with micro decision
trees. In contrast to a conventional tree structure, the nodes in a TnT form a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) to address the aforementioned limitations and construct a more efficient model. Unlike
previous oblique trees that were optimized on a predefined tree structure [1, 5], TnT can learn graph
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

