Unsupervised Motion Representation Learning with
Capsule Autoencoders

Ziwei Xu† , Xudong Shen‡ , Yongkang Wong† , Mohan S Kankanhalli†
† School of Computing, National University of Singapore
‡ NUS Graduate School, National University of Singapore
{ziwei-xu, mohan}@comp.nus.edu.sg
xudong.shen@u.nus.edu, yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose the Motion Capsule Autoencoder (MCAE), which addresses a key
challenge in the unsupervised learning of motion representations: transformation invariance. MCAE models motion in a two-level hierarchy. In the lower
level, a spatio-temporal motion signal is divided into short, local, and semanticagnostic snippets. In the higher level, the snippets are aggregated to form fulllength semantic-aware segments. For both levels, we represent motion with a
set of learned transformation invariant templates and the corresponding geometric
transformations by using capsule autoencoders of a novel design. This leads to
a robust and efficient encoding of viewpoint changes. MCAE is evaluated on a
novel Trajectory20 motion dataset and various real-world skeleton-based human
action datasets. Notably, it achieves better results than baselines on Trajectory20
with considerably fewer parameters and state-of-the-art performance on the unsupervised skeleton-based action recognition task.

1

Introduction

Real-world movements contain a plethora of information beyond the literal sense of moving. For
example, honeybees “dance” to communicate the location of a foraging site and human gait alone
can reveal activities and identities [10]. Understanding these movements is vital for an artificial intelligent agent to comprehend and interact with the ever-changing world. Studies on social behavior
analysis [8, 9], action recognition [59, 64], and video summarizing [60] have also acknowledged the
importance of movement.
A key step towards understanding movements is to analyze their patterns. However, learning motion
pattern representations is non-trivial due to (1) the curse of dimensionality from input data, (2) difficulties in modeling long-term dependencies in motion sequences, (3) high intra-class variation as a
result of subject or viewpoint change, and (4) insufficient data annotation. The first two challenges
have been ameliorated by the advances in keypoint detection [57], spatial-temporal feature extractors [38, 43, 50], and hierarchical temporal models [13, 49, 56]. The third and the fourth nonetheless
remain hurdles and call for unsupervised transformation-invariant motion models.
Inspired by the viewpoint-invariant capsule-based representation for images [11, 17], we exploit
capsule networks and introduce the Motion Capsule Autoencoder (MCAE), an unsupervised capsule
framework that learns the transformation-invariant motion representation for keypoints. MCAE
models motion signals in a two-level snippet-segment hierarchy. A snippet is a movement of a
narrow time span, while a segment consists of multiple temporally-ordered snippets, representing a
longer-time motion. In both the lower and the higher levels, the snippet capsules (SniCap) and the
segment capsules (SegCap) maintain a set of templates as their identities—snippet templates and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

