Adaptive Risk Minimization:
Learning to Adapt to Domain Shift
Marvin Zhang⇤1 , Henrik Marklund⇤2 , Nikita Dhawan⇤ 1 ,
Abhishek Gupta1 , Sergey Levine1 , Chelsea Finn2
1

UC Berkeley, 2 Stanford University

Abstract
A fundamental assumption of most machine learning algorithms is that the training
and test data are drawn from the same underlying distribution. However, this assumption is violated in almost all practical applications: machine learning systems
are regularly tested under distribution shift, due to changing temporal correlations,
atypical end users, or other factors. In this work, we consider the problem setting
of domain generalization, where the training data are structured into domains and
there may be multiple test time shifts, corresponding to new domains or domain
distributions. Most prior methods aim to learn a single robust model or invariant
feature space that performs well on all domains. In contrast, we aim to learn models
that adapt at test time to domain shift using unlabeled test points. Our primary
contribution is to introduce the framework of adaptive risk minimization (ARM),
in which models are directly optimized for effective adaptation to shift by learning
to adapt on the training domains. Compared to prior methods for robustness, invariance, and adaptation, ARM methods provide performance gains of 1-4% test
accuracy on a number of image classification problems exhibiting domain shift.

1

Introduction

The standard assumption in empirical risk minimization (ERM) is that the data distribution at test
time will match the training distribution. When this assumption does not hold, i.e., when there is
distribution shift, the performance of standard ERM methods can deteriorate significantly [54, 38].
As an example which we study quantitatively in Section 5,
consider a handwriting classification model that, after
training on data from past users, is deployed to new end
users. Each new user represents a new test distribution that
differs from the training distribution. Thus, each test setting involves dealing with shift. In Figure 1, we visualize
a batch of 50 examples from a test user, and we highlight
an ambiguous example which may be either a “2” (written
with a loop) or an “a” (in the double-storey style) depending on the user’s handwriting. Due to the biases in the
training data, an ERM trained model incorrectly classifies
this example as “2”. However, we can see that the batch of
images from this test user contains other examples of “2”
(written without loops) and “a” (also double-storey) from Figure 1: An example of ambiguous data
this user. Can we somehow leverage this unlabeled data points in handwriting classification, evalto better handle test shifts caused by new users?
uated quantitatively in Section 5.
⇤

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

