Framing RNN as a kernel method:
A neural ODE approach

Adeline Fermanian1∗

Pierre Marion1∗

Jean-Philippe Vert2

Gérard Biau1

1
Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation, LPSM,
F-75005 Paris, France
{adeline.fermanian, pierre.marion, gerard.biau}@sorbonne-universite.fr
2
Google Research, Brain team,
Paris, France
jpvert@google.com

Abstract
Building on the interpretation of a recurrent neural network (RNN) as a continuoustime neural differential equation, we show, under appropriate conditions, that the
solution of a RNN can be viewed as a linear function of a specific feature set of
the input sequence, known as the signature. This connection allows us to frame
a RNN as a kernel method in a suitable reproducing kernel Hilbert space. As a
consequence, we obtain theoretical guarantees on generalization and stability for a
large class of recurrent networks. Our results are illustrated on simulated datasets.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are among the most successful methods for modeling sequential
data. They have achieved state-of-the-art results in difficult problems such as natural language
processing (e.g., Mikolov et al., 2010; Collobert et al., 2011) or speech recognition (e.g., Hinton
et al., 2012; Graves et al., 2013). This class of neural networks has a natural interpretation in terms
of (discretization of) ordinary differential equations (ODE), which casts them in the field of neural
ODE (Chen et al., 2018). This observation has led to the development of continuous-depth models
for handling irregularly-sampled time-series data, including the ODE-RNN model (Rubanova et al.,
2019), GRU-ODE-Bayes (De Brouwer et al., 2019), or neural CDE models (Kidger et al., 2020;
Morrill et al., 2020a). In addition, the time-continuous interpretation of RNN allows to leverage
the rich theory of differential equations to develop new recurrent architectures (Chang et al., 2019;
Herrera et al., 2020; Erichson et al., 2021), which are better at learning long-term dependencies.
On the other hand, the development of kernel methods for deep learning offers theoretical insights on
the functions learned by the networks (Cho and Saul, 2009; Belkin et al., 2018; Jacot et al., 2018).
Here, the general principle consists in defining a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)—that is, a
function class H —, which is rich enough to describe the architectures of networks. A good example
is the construction of Bietti and Mairal (2017, 2019), who exhibit an RKHS for convolutional neural
networks. This kernel perspective has several advantages. First, by separating the representation of
the data from the learning process, it allows to study invariances of the representations learned by
the network. Next, by reducing the learning problem to a linear one in H , generalization bounds
can be more easily obtained. Finally, the Hilbert structure of H provides a natural metric on neural
networks, which can be used for example for regularization (Bietti et al., 2019).
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

