Efficient and Accurate Gradients for Neural SDEs
Patrick Kidger 1
1

James Foster 1

Xuechen Li 2

Terry Lyons 1

2
University of Oxford; The Alan Turing Insitute
Stanford
{kidger, foster, tlyons}@maths.ox.ac.uk
lxuechen@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Neural SDEs combine many of the best qualities of both RNNs and SDEs: memory
efficient training, high-capacity function approximation, and strong priors on model
space. This makes them a natural choice for modelling many types of temporal
dynamics. Training a Neural SDE (either as a VAE or as a GAN) requires backpropagating through an SDE solve. This may be done by solving a backwards-in-time
SDE whose solution is the desired parameter gradients. However, this has previously suffered from severe speed and accuracy issues, due to high computational
cost and numerical truncation errors. Here, we overcome these issues through
several technical innovations. First, we introduce the reversible Heun method. This
is a new SDE solver that is algebraically reversible: eliminating numerical gradient
errors, and the first such solver of which we are aware. Moreover it requires half as
many function evaluations as comparable solvers, giving up to a 1.98× speedup.
Second, we introduce the Brownian Interval: a new, fast, memory efficient, and
exact way of sampling and reconstructing Brownian motion. With this we obtain
up to a 10.6× speed improvement over previous techniques, which in contrast are
both approximate and relatively slow. Third, when specifically training Neural
SDEs as GANs (Kidger et al. 2021), we demonstrate how SDE-GANs may be
trained through careful weight clipping and choice of activation function. This
reduces computational cost (giving up to a 1.87× speedup) and removes the numerical truncation errors associated with gradient penalty. Altogether, we outperform
the state-of-the-art by substantial margins, with respect to training speed, and with
respect to classification, prediction, and MMD test metrics. We have contributed
implementations of all of our techniques to the torchsde library to help facilitate
their adoption.

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations Stochastic differential equations have seen widespread use in
the mathematical modelling of random phenomena, such as particle systems [1], financial markets [2],
population dynamics [3], and genetics [4]. Featuring inherent randomness, then in modern machine
learning parlance SDEs are generative models.
Such models have typically been constructed theoretically, and are usually relatively simple. For
example the Black–Scholes equation, widely used to model asset prices in financial markets, has only
two scalar parameters: a fixed drift and a fixed diffusion [5].
Neural stochastic differential equations Neural stochastic differential equations offer a shift in
this paradigm. By parameterising the drift and diffusion of an SDE as neural networks, then modelling
capacity is greatly increased, and theoretically arbitrary SDEs may be approximated. (By the universal
approximation theorem for neural networks [6, 7].) Several authors have now studied or introduced
Neural SDEs; [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] amongst others.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

