Practical Near Neighbor Search via Group Testing

Joshua Engels∗
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, Texas, USA
jae4@rice.edu

Benjamin Coleman*
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, Texas, USA
ben.coleman@rice.edu

Anshumali Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science
Rice University & ThirdAI Corp.
Houston, Texas, USA
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for the approximate near neighbor problem that combines classical ideas from group testing with locality-sensitive hashing (LSH). We
reduce the near neighbor search problem to a group testing problem by designating neighbors as “positives,” non-neighbors as “negatives,” and approximate
membership queries as group tests. We instantiate this framework using distancesensitive Bloom Filters to Identify Near-Neighbor Groups (FLINNG). We prove
that FLINNG has sub-linear query time and show that our algorithm comes with
a variety of practical advantages. For example, FLINNG can be constructed in a
single pass through the data, consists entirely of efficient integer operations, and
does not require any distance computations. We conduct large-scale experiments
on high-dimensional search tasks such as genome search, URL similarity search,
and embedding search over the massive YFCC100M dataset. In our comparison
with leading algorithms such as HNSW and FAISS, we find that FLINNG can
provide up to a 10x query speedup with substantially smaller indexing time and
memory.

1

Introduction

Nearest neighbor search is a fundamental problem with many applications in machine learning
systems. Informally, the task is as follows. Given a dataset D = {x1 , x2 , ...xN }, we wish to build a
data structure that can be queried with any point q to obtain a small set of points xi ∈ D that have
high similarity (low distance) to the query. This structure is called an index. Near neighbor indices
form the backbone of production models in recommendation systems, social networks, genomics,
computer vision and many other application domains.
Applications: In this paper, we focus on algorithms for approximate near neighbor search over highdimensional large scale datasets. Such tasks frequently arise in genomics, web-scale data mining,
machine learning, and other large-scale applications. Consider the Yahoo Flickr Creative Commons
dataset (YFCC100M) which consists of 100 million media embeddings that are derived from the
neuron activations for a convolutional neural network [21]. Each embedding is a 4096-dimensional
vector. The dataset is about 1TB in size and presents a substantial challenge for even the most popular
algorithms, which struggle with memory, index construction, and query time. Similar issues occur
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

