Sample Selection for Fair and Robust Training

Yuji Roh
KAIST
yuji.roh@kaist.ac.kr

Kangwook Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison
kangwook.lee@wisc.edu

Steven Euijong Whang∗
KAIST
swhang@kaist.ac.kr

Changho Suh
KAIST
chsuh@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Fairness and robustness are critical elements of Trustworthy AI that need to be
addressed together. Fairness is about learning an unbiased model while robustness
is about learning from corrupted data, and it is known that addressing only one of
them may have an adverse affect on the other. In this work, we propose a sample
selection-based algorithm for fair and robust training. To this end, we formulate a
combinatorial optimization problem for the unbiased selection of samples in the
presence of data corruption. Observing that solving this optimization problem is
strongly NP-hard, we propose a greedy algorithm that is efficient and effective in
practice. Experiments show that our algorithm obtains fairness and robustness that
are better than or comparable to the state-of-the-art technique, both on synthetic and
benchmark real datasets. Moreover, unlike other fair and robust training baselines,
our algorithm can be used by only modifying the sampling step in batch selection
without changing the training algorithm or leveraging additional clean data.

1

Introduction

Trustworthy AI is becoming essential for modern machine learning. While a traditional focus of
machine learning is to train the most accurate model possible, companies that actually deploy AI
including Microsoft [2021], Google [2020], and IBM [2020] are now pledging to make their AI
systems fair, robust, interpretable, and transparent as well. Among the key objectives, we focus on
fairness and robustness because they are closely related and need to be addressed together. Fairness
is about learning an unbiased model while robustness is about learning a resilient model even on
noisy data, and both issues root from the same training data. A recent work [Roh et al., 2020] shows
that improving fairness while ignoring noisy data may lead to a worse accuracy-fairness tradeoff.
Likewise, focusing on robustness only may have an adverse affect on fairness as we explain below.
There are several possible approaches for supporting fairness and robustness together. One is an
in-processing approach where the model architecture itself is modified to optimize the two objectives.
In particular, the state-of-the-art approach called FR-Train [Roh et al., 2020] uses adversarial learning
to train a classifier and two discriminators for fairness and robustness. However, such an approach
requires the application developer to use a specific model architecture and is thus restrictive. Another
approach is to preprocess the data [Kamiran and Calders, 2011] and remove any bias and noise before
model training, but this requires modifying the data itself. In addition, we are not aware of a general
data cleaning method that is designed to explicitly improve model fairness and robustness together.
Instead, we propose an adaptive sample selection approach for the purpose of improving fairness and
robustness. This approach can easily be deployed as a batch selection method, which does not require
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

