Sparse Uncertainty Representation in Deep Learning
with Inducing Weights

1

Hippolyt Ritter1∗, Martin Kukla2 , Cheng Zhang2 & Yingzhen Li3∗
University College London 2 Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK 3 Imperial College London
j.ritter@cs.ucl.ac.uk, {Martin.Kukla,Cheng.Zhang}@microsoft.com,
yingzhen.li@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian Neural Networks and deep ensembles represent two modern paradigms of
uncertainty quantification in deep learning. Yet these approaches struggle to scale
mainly due to memory inefficiency, requiring parameter storage several times that
of their deterministic counterparts. To address this, we augment each weight matrix
with a small inducing weight matrix, projecting the uncertainty quantification into
a lower dimensional space. We further extend Matheron’s conditional Gaussian
sampling rule to enable fast weight sampling, which enables our inference method
to maintain reasonable run-time as compared with ensembles. Importantly, our
approach achieves competitive performance to the state-of-the-art in prediction and
uncertainty estimation tasks with fully connected neural networks and ResNets,
while reducing the parameter size to ≤ 24.3% of that of a single neural network.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are becoming deeper and wider than ever before. From image recognition
models such as ResNet-101 (He et al., 2016a) and DenseNet (Huang et al., 2017) to BERT (Xu et al.,
2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) for language modelling, deep neural networks have found
consistent success in fitting large-scale data. As these models are increasingly deployed in real-world
applications, calibrated uncertainty estimates for their predictions become crucial, especially in
safety-critical areas such as healthcare. In this regard, Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) (MacKay,
1995; Blundell et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Zhang et al., 2020) and deep ensembles
(Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) represent two popular paradigms for estimating uncertainty, which
have shown promising results in applications such as (medical) image processing (Kendall & Gal,
2017; Tanno et al., 2017) and out-of-distribution detection (Ovadia et al., 2019).
Though progress has been made, one major obstacle to scaling up BNNs and deep ensembles is
their high storage cost. Both approaches require the parameter counts to be several times higher
than their deterministic counterparts. Although recent efforts have improved memory efficiency
(Louizos & Welling, 2017; Świ ˛
atkowski et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2020; Dusenberry et al., 2020), these
still use more parameters than a deterministic neural network. This is particularly problematic in
hardware-constrained edge devices, when on-device storage is required due to privacy regulations.
Meanwhile, an infinitely wide BNN becomes a Gaussian process (GP) that is known for good
uncertainty estimates (Neal, 1995; Matthews et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018). But perhaps surprisingly,
this infinitely wide BNN is “parameter efficient”, as its “parameters” are effectively the datapoints,
which have a considerably smaller memory footprint than explicitly storing the network weights. In
addition, sparse posterior approximations store a smaller number of inducing points instead (Snelson
& Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias, 2009), making sparse GPs even more memory efficient.
∗

Work done at Microsoft Research Cambridge.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

