Accelerating Robotic Reinforcement Learning via
Parameterized Action Primitives
Deepak Pathak†
Ruslan Salakhutdinov†
Carnegie Mellon University
{mdalal,dpathak,rsalakhu} @ cs.cmu.edu

Murtaza Dalal

Abstract
Despite the potential of reinforcement learning (RL) for building general-purpose
robotic systems, training RL agents to solve robotics tasks still remains challenging
due to the difficulty of exploration in purely continuous action spaces. Addressing
this problem is an active area of research with the majority of focus on improving
RL methods via better optimization or more efficient exploration. An alternate but
important component to consider improving is the interface of the RL algorithm
with the robot. In this work, we manually specify a library of robot action primitives
(RAPS), parameterized with arguments that are learned by an RL policy. These
parameterized primitives are expressive, simple to implement, enable efficient
exploration and can be transferred across robots, tasks and environments. We
perform a thorough empirical study across challenging tasks in three distinct
domains with image input and a sparse terminal reward. We find that our simple
change to the action interface substantially improves both the learning efficiency
and task performance irrespective of the underlying RL algorithm, significantly
outperforming prior methods which learn skills from offline expert data. Code and
videos at https://mihdalal.github.io/raps/

1

Introduction

Meaningful exploration remains a challenge for robotic reinforcement learning systems. For example,
in the manipulation tasks shown in Figure 1, useful exploration might correspond to picking up and
placing objects in different configurations. However, random motions in the robot’s joint space will
rarely, if ever, result in the robot touching the objects, let alone pick them up. Recent work, on the
other hand, has demonstrated remarkable success in training RL agents to solve manipulation tasks
[4, 24, 26] by sidestepping the exploration problem with careful engineering. Levine et al. [26] use
densely shaped rewards, while Kalashnikov et al. [24] leverage a large scale robot infrastructure and
Andrychowicz et al. [4] require training in simulation with engineered reward functions in order to
transfer to the real world. In general, RL methods can be prohibitively data inefficient, require careful
reward development to learn, and struggle to scale to more complex tasks without the aid of human
demonstrations or carefully designed simulation setups.
An alternative view on why RL is difficult for robotics is that it requires the agent to learn both
what to do in order to achieve the task and how to control the robot to execute the desired motions.
For example, in the kitchen environment featured at the bottom of Figure 1, the agent would have
to learn how to accurately manipulate the arm to reach different locations as well as how to grasp
different objects, while also ascertaining what object it has to grasp and where to move it. Considered
independently, the problems of controlling a robot arm to execute particular motions and figuring out
the desired task from scalar reward feedback, then achieving it, are non-trivial. Jointly learning to
solve both problems makes the task significantly more difficult.
†

Equal advising

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

