Learning Equivariant Energy Based Models
with Equivariant Stein Variational Gradient Descent

Priyank Jaini∗
Bosch-Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Lars Holdijk∗
Bosch-Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Max Welling
Bosch-Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We focus on the problem of efficient sampling and learning of probability densities
by incorporating symmetries in probabilistic models. We first introduce Equivariant Stein Variational Gradient Descent algorithm – an equivariant sampling method
based on Stein’s identity for sampling from densities with symmetries. Equivariant
SVGD explicitly incorporates symmetry information in a density through equivariant kernels which makes the resultant sampler efficient both in terms of sample
complexity and the quality of generated samples. Subsequently, we define equivariant energy based models to model invariant densities that are learned using
contrastive divergence. By utilizing our equivariant SVGD for training equivariant
EBMs, we propose new ways of improving and scaling up training of energy based
models. We apply these equivariant energy models for modelling joint densities in
regression and classification tasks for image datasets, many-body particle systems
and molecular structure generation.

1

Introduction

Many real-world observations comprise symmetries and admit probabilistic models that are invariant
to such symmetry transformations. Naturally, overlooking these inductive biases while encoding
such domains will lead to models with inferior performance capabilities. In this paper, we focus on
the problem of efficient sampling and learning of equivariant probability densities by incorporating
symmetries in probabilistic models.
We accomplish this by first proposing equivariant Stein variational descent algorithm in §3 for
sampling from invariant densities. Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) is a kernel-based
inference method that constructs a set of particles iteratively along an optimal gradient path in an
RKHS to approximate and sample from a target distribution. We extend SVGD for invariant densities
by considering equivariant kernel functions that evolve the set of particles such that the density at
each time-step is invariant to the same symmetry transformations as encoded in the kernel. We
demonstrate that equivariant SVGD is more sample efficient, produces a more diverse set of samples,
and is more robust compared to regular SVGD when sampling from invariant densities.
Subsequently, in §4, we build equivariant Energy Based Models EBMs for learning invariant densities
given access to i.i.d. data by leveraging the tremendous recent advances in geometric deep learning
where the energy function is equivariant neural network. We train these equivariant EBMs through
contrastive divergence by generating samples using equivariant SVGD. We show that incorporating
the symmetries present in the data into the energy model as well as the sampler provides an efficient
learning paradigm to train equivariant EBMs that generalize well beyond training data.
We empirically demonstrate the performance of equivariant EBMs using equivariant SVGD in §5. We
consider real-world applications comprising of problems from many-body particle systems, molecular
structure generation and, classification and generation for image datasets.
*Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

