MCMC Variational Inference via Uncorrected
Hamiltonian Annealing

Tomas Geffner
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA
tgeffner@cs.umass.edu

Justin Domke
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Given an unnormalized target distribution we want to obtain approximate samples
from it and a tight lower bound on its (log) normalization constant log Z. Annealed
Importance Sampling (AIS) with Hamiltonian MCMC is a powerful method that
can be used to do this. Its main drawback is that it uses non-differentiable transition
kernels, which makes tuning its many parameters hard. We propose a framework
to use an AIS-like procedure with Uncorrected Hamiltonian MCMC, called Uncorrected Hamiltonian Annealing. Our method leads to tight and differentiable lower
bounds on log Z. We show empirically that our method yields better performances
than other competing approaches, and that the ability to tune its parameters using
reparameterization gradients may lead to large performance improvements.

1

Introduction

Variational Inference (VI) [4, 41, 45] is a method to do approximate inference on a target distribution
p(z) = p̄(z)/Z that is only known up to the normalization constant Z. The basic insights are, first,
that the evidence lower bound (ELBO) Eq(z) [log p̄(z) − log q(z)] lower-bounds log Z and, second,
that maximizing the ELBO is equivalent to minimizing the KL-divergence from q to p. The simplest
VI method chooses a parameterized family for q and optimizes its parameters to maximize the ELBO.
A recent direction involves combining VI with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [34, 43]. These
methods can be seen as an instance of the auxiliary VI framework [2] – they create an augmented
variational distribution that represents all intermediate random variables generated during the MCMC
procedure. An augmented target distribution that attempts to capture the inverse MCMC dynamics
is optimized jointly with this variational distribution. However, it has been observed that capturing
inverse dynamics is challenging [43, §5.4] (further discussion in Section 4).
Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) [22, 27] is a powerful technique used to build augmented distributions without the need of learning inverse dynamics. While it was originally proposed to estimate
expectations using importance sampling, it can be easily used to build lower bounds on normalization
constants of intractable densities [18, 44]. AIS creates a sequence of densities that bridge from a
tractable initial approximation q to the target p̄. Then, the augmented variational distribution is given
by a sequence of MCMC kernels targeting each bridging density, while the augmented target uses the
reversals of those kernels. It turns out that the ratio of these augmented distributions can be computed
using only evaluations of the bridging densities. Combining Hamiltonian MCMC kernels with AIS
has been observed to produce strong lower bounds [35, 44].
However, these bounds are sensitive to numerous parameters, such as the initial distribution, bridging
schedule, and parameters of the MCMC kernels. It would be desirable to optimize these parameters
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

