Emergent Communication under
Varying Group Sizes and Connectivities
Jooyeon Kim
thingsflow
Seoul, Korea
jyscardioid@gmail.com

Alice Oh
KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
alice.oh@kaist.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in deep neural networks allowed artificial agents to derive their
own emergent languages that promote interaction, coordination, and collaboration
within a group. Just as we humans have succeeded in creating a shared language that
allows us to interact within a large group, can the emergent communication within
an artificial group converge to a shared, agreed language? This research provides an
analytical study of the shared emergent language within the group communication
settings of different sizes and connectivities. As the group size increases up to
hundreds, agents start to speak dissimilar languages, but the rate at which they
successfully communicate is maintained. We observe the emergence of different
dialects when we restrict group communication to have local connectivities only.
Finally, we provide optimization results of group communication graphs when the
number of agents one can communicate with is restricted or when we penalize
communication between distant agent pairs. The optimized communication graphs
show superior communication success rates compared to graphs with the same
number of links, as well as the emergence of hub nodes and scale-free networks.

1

Introduction

Communication plays a vital role for us humans to interact with one another [Austin, 1975, Allwood,
1976, Linell, 2009]. We acquire new information about the environment and other people around
us through communication, which further facilitates collaboration or competition and allows us to
coordinate our future decisions and actions better.
Over the past decades, numerous research outcomes have succeeded in mimicking human behavior and making artificial agents equipped with interactive communication abilities [Batali, 1998,
Cangelosi and Parisi, 2002, Christiansen and Kirby, 2003, Steels, 2003, Wagner et al., 2003]. The
communication in the artificial system is emergent in a way that there are no pre-specified usage rules,
semantics, or syntax, all of which are formed by the artificial agents upon their necessities [Lazaridou
et al., 2017]. Not only does empowering agents with their own communicative abilities set an important milestone in interactive AI systems, it also brings us steps closer to the world where machines
cooperate with humans [Mikolov et al., 2016, Crandall et al., 2018, Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020].
In human societies, hundreds of millions of people use the shared, agreed communication protocols to
interact. As the group becomes more complex with increased size and connectivity, communication
becomes more and more vital for us to coordinate with one another. Fortunately, we humans excel at
using languages for large-group coordination and problem-solving [Tomasello, 2010, Lupyan and
Bergen, 2016]. However, in the AI system counterpart, the question of how emergent communication
will function under different group settings is understudied. As the group becomes more complex,
will emergent communication become more effective for the system in promoting group coordination,
as in human society, or will it lose its functionality? Will the emergent communication still converge
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

