Constrained Optimization to Train Neural Networks
on Critical and Under-Represented Classes

Sara Sangalli1 , Ertunc Erdil1 , Andreas Hoetker2 , Olivio Donati2 , Ender Konukoglu1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
2
Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Universitätsspital Zürich
sara.sangalli@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are notorious for making more mistakes for the
classes that have substantially fewer samples than the others during training. Such
class imbalance is ubiquitous in clinical applications and very crucial to handle
because the classes with fewer samples most often correspond to critical cases (e.g.,
cancer) where misclassifications can have severe consequences. Not to miss such
cases, binary classifiers need to be operated at high True Positive Rates (TPRs) by
setting a higher threshold, but this comes at the cost of very high False Positive
Rates (FPRs) for problems with class imbalance. Existing methods for learning
under class imbalance most often do not take this into account. We argue that
prediction accuracy should be improved by emphasizing the reduction of FPRs
at high TPRs for problems where misclassification of the positive, i.e. critical,
class samples are associated with higher cost. To this end, we pose the training
of a DNN for binary classification as a constrained optimization problem and
introduce a novel constraint that can be used with existing loss functions to enforce
maximal area under the ROC curve (AUC) through prioritizing FPR reduction
at high TPR. We solve the resulting constrained optimization problem using an
Augmented Lagrangian method (ALM). Going beyond binary, we also propose
two possible extensions of the proposed constraint for multi-class classification
problems. We present experimental results for image-based binary and multi-class
classification applications using an in-house medical imaging dataset, CIFAR10,
and CIFAR100. Our results demonstrate that the proposed method improves the
baselines in majority of the cases by attaining higher accuracy on critical classes
while reducing the misclassification rate for the non-critical class samples.1

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) perform extremely well in many classification tasks when sufficiently
large and representative datasets are available for training. However, in many real world applications,
it is not uncommon to encounter highly-skewed class distributions, i.e., majority of the data belong to
only a few classes while some classes are represented with scarce instances. Training DNNs on such
imbalanced datasets leads to models that are biased toward majority classes with poor prediction
accuracy for samples of minority class. While this is problematic for all such applications, it poses an
even greater issue for “critical” applications where misclassifying samples belonging to the minority
class can have severe consequences. One domain where such applications are common and machine
learning is having an important impact is medical imaging.
In medical imaging, applications with data imbalance are ubiquitous [14] and costs of making some
types of mistakes are more severe than others. For instance, in a diagnosis application, discarding a
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/salusanga/alm-dnn.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

