Optimal Algorithms for Stochastic Contextual
Preference Bandits
Aadirupa Saha∗

Abstract
We consider the problem of preference bandits in the contextual setting. At each
round, the learner is presented with a context set of K items, chosen randomly from
a potentially infinite set of arms D ⊆ Rd . However, unlike classical contextual
bandits, our framework only allows the learner to receive feedback in terms of item
preferences: At each round, the learner is allowed to play a subset of size q (any
q ∈ {2, . . . , K}) upon which only a (noisy) winner of the subset is revealed. Yet,
same as the classical setup, the goal is still to compete against the best context
arm at each round. The problem is relevant in various online decision-making
scenarios, including recommender systems, information retrieval, tournament
ranking–typically any application where it’s easier to elicit the items’ relative
strength instead of their absolute scores. To the best of our knowledge, this work is
the first to consider preference-based stochastic contextual bandits for potentially
infinite decision spaces. We start with presenting two algorithms for the special
case of pairwise preferences
(q = 2): The first algorithm is simple and easy to
√
implement with an Õ(d T√
) regret guarantee, while the second algorithm
is shown
√
to achieve the optimal Õ( dT ) regret, as follows from our Ω( dT ) matching
lower bound analysis. We then proceed to analyze the problem for any general
q-subsetwise preferences (q ≥ 2), where surprisingly,
our lower bound proves
√
the fundamental performance limit to be Ω( dT ) yet again, independent of the
subsetsize q. Following this, we propose a matching upper bound algorithm
justifying the tightness of our results. This implies having access to subsetwise
preferences does not help in faster information aggregation for our feedback model.
All the results are corroborated empirically against existing baselines.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making problems with side information (in the form of features or attributes),
have been popular in machine learning as contextual bandits [16, 13, 26]. A contextual bandit learner,
at each round, observes a context before taking action based on it. The resulting payoff is typically
assumed to depend on the context and the action taken according to an unknown map. The learner
aims to play the best possible action for the current context at each time and thus minimize its regret
with respect to an oracle that knows the payoff function.
In many learning settings, however, it is more common to be able to only relatively compare actions,
in a decision step, instead of being able to gauge their absolute utilities. E.g., information retrieval,
search engine optimization, recommender systems, crowdsourcing, drug testing, tournament ranking,
social surveys etc. [18, 21]. A specific application example is: Consider the problem of recommending
items from a catalog to users on a shopping website. Each time, the context is determined by the
visiting user’s features together with all items’ features. When a subset of items is presented, the user
clicks on one of them according to a relative preference model; only the items presented matter – this
plausibly models comparative cognitive choices being made by humans. The aim is to converge to
identify the overall best item in the catalog. Additionally, since our model is designed to leverage
∗

Microsoft Research, New York, US; aasa@microsoft.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

