Limiting fluctuation and trajectorial stability of
multilayer neural networks with mean field training
Huy Tuan Pham
Department of Mathematics, Stanford University

Phan-Minh Nguyen ⇤
The Voleon Group

Abstract
The mean field theory of multilayer neural networks centers around a particular infinite-width scaling, in which the learning dynamics is shown to be closely
tracked by the mean field limit. A random fluctuation around this infinite-width
limit is expected from a large-width expansion to the next order. This fluctuation
has been studied only in the case of shallow networks, where previous works employ heavily technical notions or additional formulation ideas amenable only to
that case. Treatment of the multilayer case has been missing, with the chief difficulty in finding a formulation that must capture the stochastic dependency across
not only time but also depth.
In this work, we initiate the study of the fluctuation in the case of multilayer networks, at any network depth. Leveraging on the neuronal embedding framework
recently introduced by Nguyen and Pham [17], we systematically derive a system
of dynamical equations, called the second-order mean field limit, that captures the
limiting fluctuation distribution. We demonstrate through the framework the complex interaction among neurons in this second-order mean field limit, the stochasticity with cross-layer dependency and the nonlinear time evolution inherent in the
limiting fluctuation. A limit theorem is proven to relate quantitatively this limit to
the fluctuation realized by large-width networks.
We apply the result to show a stability property of gradient descent mean field
training: in the large-width regime, along the training trajectory, it progressively
biases towards a solution with “minimal fluctuation” (in fact, vanishing fluctuation) in the learned output function, even after the network has been initialized at
or has converged (sufficiently fast) to a global optimum. This extends a similar
phenomenon previously shown only for shallow networks with a squared loss in
the empirical risk minimization setting, to multilayer networks with a loss function that is not necessarily convex in a more general setting.

1

Introduction

Recent literature has witnessed much interest and progresses in the mean field theory of neural
networks. In particular, it is shown that under a suitable scaling, as the widths tend to infinity, the
neural network’s learning dynamics converges to a nonlinear deterministic limit, known as the mean
field (MF) limit [14, 17]. This line of works starts with analyses of the shallow case under various
settings and has led to a number of nontrivial exciting results [18, 14, 5, 23, 25, 9, 22, 19, 29, 24,
30, 12, 1, 16]. The generalization to multilayer neural networks, already much more conceptually
and technically challenging, has also been met with serious efforts from different groups of authors,
with various novel ideas and insights [15, 17, 20, 2, 26, 6].
Since the MF limit is basically a first-order infinite-width approximation of the neural network, it is
natural to consider the next order term in the expansion for a more faithful finite-width description.
⇤

The author ordering is randomized.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

