Neural Circuit Synthesis from Specification Patterns

Frederik Schmitt
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
frederik.schmitt@cispa.de
Christopher Hahn
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
christopher.hahn@cispa.de

Markus N. Rabe
Google Research
Mountain View, California, USA
mrabe@google.com

Bernd Finkbeiner
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
finkbeiner@cispa.de

Abstract
We train hierarchical Transformers on the task of synthesizing hardware circuits
directly out of high-level logical specifications in linear-time temporal logic (LTL).
The LTL synthesis problem is a well-known algorithmic challenge with a long
history and an annual competition is organized to track the improvement of algorithms and tooling over time. New approaches using machine learning might open
a lot of possibilities in this area, but suffer from the lack of sufficient amounts of
training data. In this paper, we consider a method to generate large amounts of
additional training data, i.e., pairs of specifications and circuits implementing them.
We ensure that this synthetic data is sufficiently close to human-written specifications by mining common patterns from the specifications used in the synthesis
competitions. We show that hierarchical Transformers trained on this synthetic
data solve a significant portion of problems from the synthesis competitions, and
even out-of-distribution examples from a recent case study.

1

Introduction

In reactive synthesis, a circuit is automatically constructed from a logical specification given as a
formula in linear-time temporal logic (LTL). LTL is widely used by the verification community and
is the basis for industrial specification languages like the IEEE standard PSL [24]. Efficient synthesis
tools for LTL would simplify the hardware design process: a hardware designer could focus on
specifying what the circuit is supposed to compute, instead of implementing how the computation
is done. LTL synthesis procedures, however, have to invoke involved reasoning engines, which
turn often out to be infeasible when facing real-world problem instances. Much research has been
conducted to push this form of hardware construction process closer to practice (see, for example, the
synthesis of the AMBA protocol [5]). The high computational complexity of the general problem
(2-EXPTIME-complete), however, is so far a barrier that seems insurmountable with classical, e.g.,
automaton-based, approaches. Recent successful applications of machine learning for logical tasks,
such as SAT solving [45, 46], higher-order theorem proving [36, 3], and the LTL trace generation
problem [22] encourage new approaches to the LTL synthesis problem using machine learning.
Similar to the success of machine learning for program synthesis, e.g., [37, 20, 42], machine learning
approaches might open a lot of possibilities in hardware synthesis. For example, secondary design
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

