Improved Transformer for High-Resolution GANs

Long Zhao1,∗ Zizhao Zhang2 Ting Chen3 Dimitris N. Metaxas1 Han Zhang3
1
Rutgers University 2 Google Cloud AI 3 Google Research

Abstract
Attention-based models, exemplified by the Transformer, can effectively model
long range dependency, but suffer from the quadratic complexity of self-attention
operation, making them difficult to be adopted for high-resolution image generation
based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). In this paper, we introduce two
key ingredients to Transformer to address this challenge. First, in low-resolution
stages of the generative process, standard global self-attention is replaced with the
proposed multi-axis blocked self-attention which allows efficient mixing of local
and global attention. Second, in high-resolution stages, we drop self-attention while
only keeping multi-layer perceptrons reminiscent of the implicit neural function.
To further improve the performance, we introduce an additional self-modulation
component based on cross-attention. The resulting model, denoted as HiT, has a
nearly linear computational complexity with respect to the image size and thus
directly scales to synthesizing high definition images. We show in the experiments
that the proposed HiT achieves state-of-the-art FID scores of 30.83 and 2.95 on
unconditional ImageNet 128 × 128 and FFHQ 256 × 256, respectively, with a
reasonable throughput. We believe the proposed HiT is an important milestone for
generators in GANs which are completely free of convolutions. Our code is made
publicly available at https://github.com/google-research/hit-gan.

1

Introduction

Attention-based models demonstrate notable learning capabilities for both encoder-based and decoderbased architectures [66, 69] due to their self-attention operations which can capture long-range dependencies in data. Recently, Vision Transformer [12], one of the most powerful attention-based models,
has achieved a great success on encoder-based vision tasks, specifically image classification [12, 60],
segmentation [37, 64], and vision-language modeling [46]. However, applying the Transformer to
image generation based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is still an open problem.
The main challenge of adopting the Transformer as a decoder/generator lies in two aspects. On one
hand, the quadratic scaling problem brought by the self-attention operation becomes even worse when
generating pixel-level details for high-resolution images. For example, synthesizing a high definition
image with the resolution of 1024 × 1024 leads to a sequence containing around one million pixels
in the final stage, which is unaffordable for the standard self-attention mechanism. On the other
hand, generating images from noise inputs poses a higher demand for spatial coherency in structure,
color, and texture than discriminative tasks, and hence a more powerful yet efficient self-attention
mechanism is desired for decoding feature representations from inputs.
In view of these two key challenges, we propose a novel Transformer-based decoder/generator in
GANs for high-resolution image generation, denoted as HiT. HiT employs a hierarchical structure
of Transformers and divides the generative process into low-resolution and high-resolution stages,
focusing on feature decoding and pixel-level generating, respectively. Specifically, its low-resolution
∗
This work was done while Long Zhao was a student researcher at the Google Brain team. Correspondence
to: Long Zhao (lz311@rutgers.edu) and Han Zhang (zhanghan@google.com).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

