Mixed Supervised Object Detection by Transferring
Mask Prior and Semantic Similarity

Yan Liu∗, Zhijie Zhang∗, Li Niu†, Junjie Chen, Liqing Zhang†
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{loseover, zzj506506, ustcnewly, chen.bys}@sjtu.edu.cn
zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection has achieved promising success, but requires large-scale fullyannotated data, which is time-consuming and labor-extensive. Therefore, we
consider object detection with mixed supervision, which learns novel object categories using weak annotations with the help of full annotations of existing base
object categories. Previous works using mixed supervision mainly learn the classagnostic objectness from fully-annotated categories, which can be transferred to
upgrade the weak annotations to pseudo full annotations for novel categories. In
this paper, we further transfer mask prior and semantic similarity to bridge the gap
between novel categories and base categories. Specifically, the ability of using
mask prior to help detect objects is learned from base categories and transferred
to novel categories. Moreover, the semantic similarity between objects learned
from base categories is transferred to denoise the pseudo full annotations for
novel categories. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method over existing methods. Codes are available at
https://github.com/bcmi/TraMaS-Weak-Shot-Object-Detection.

1

Introduction

With the ubiquitous application of convolutional neural networks and the release of large-scale
fully-annotated detection benchmark datasets (e.g., MS COCO [27], ILSVRC Detection [32], and
PASCAL VOC [10]), object detection has achieved significant advances in recent years [14, 29, 41].
However, Fully Supervised Object Detection (FSOD) requires massive training images with precise
bounding boxes and box-level category labels. Acquiring such full annotations is time-consuming
and labor-intensive, which limits the application of FSOD in real-world scenarios. In contrast, weak
annotations like image-level category labels are much easier to acquire (e.g., crawl from public
websites). Thus, plenty of Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD) methods [22, 30, 15]
have been proposed to bridge the gap between full annotation and weak annotation. Due to the
lack of box-level annotation, WSOD methods rely on unsupervised proposal generation strategy
(e.g., Selective Search [43], Edge Boxes [48]) to extract region proposals. Based on the proposals,
[3, 38, 39] formulated WSOD task as Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) problem, which treats each
image as a bag or multiple bags of proposals. With known image-level labels and unknown box-level
labels, we can infer the box-level label of each proposal with an MIL classifier. However, WSOD
methods usually only localize the most discriminative region and confuse objects with co-occurring
distractors, so the performance gap between FSOD and WSOD is still very large.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

