Adaptive Online Packing-guided Search for POMDPs

Chenyang Wu1 , Guoyu Yang1 , Zongzhang Zhang1∗, Yang Yu1, 2 ,
Dong Li3 , Wulong Liu3 , Jianye Hao3
1

National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Company
{wucy, yanggy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn,
{lidong106, liuwulong, haojianye}@huawei.com

Abstract
The partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) provides a general
framework for modeling an agent’s decision process with state uncertainty, and
online planning plays a pivotal role in solving it. A belief is a distribution of
states representing state uncertainty. Methods for large-scale POMDP problems
rely on the same idea of sampling both states and observations. That is, instead
of exact belief updating, a collection of sampled states is used to approximate
the belief; instead of considering all possible observations, only a set of sampled
observations are considered. Inspired by this, we take one step further and propose
an online planning algorithm, Adaptive Online Packing-guided Search (AdaOPS),
to better approximate beliefs with adaptive particle filter technique and balance
estimation bias and variance by fusing similar observation branches. Theoretically,
our algorithm is guaranteed to find an -optimal policy with a high probability given
enough planning time under some mild assumptions. We evaluate our algorithm
on several tricky POMDP domains, and it outperforms the state-of-the-art in all of
them. Codes are available at https://github.com/LAMDA-POMDP/AdaOPS.jl.

1

Introduction

POMDPs generalize the MDPs by considering the state uncertainty [1]. In MDPs, the agent knows
its state exactly. In POMDPs, though an MDP determines the underlying dynamics, the agent cannot
access its actual state at each timestep and, instead, receives an observation serving as a clue. In order
to make decisions in POMDPs, the state uncertainty must be handled. A popular method for tackling
the uncertainty is to maintain a belief, a distribution on the state space, where the probability of a state
indicates how possible the agent believes it is. However, an exact belief updating requires O(|S|2 )
computations, which is unaffordable in immense state space. A practical way is to approximate the
belief with a collection of weighted particles (or samples) and update it with particle filtering [2].
Finding an optimal solution for finite-horizon POMDPs or a near-optimal solution for discounted
infinite-horizon POMDPs is proved to be PSPACE-complete [3, 4]. Therefore, online planning,
which computes a real-time solution, plays a crucial role in solving POMDPs, following for two
reasons. The first is that online planning searches for a solution for not all possible beliefs but the
current belief alone, relieving the computational load significantly. Second, online planning can take
advantage of the approximate offline solution and other heuristics to expedite the tree search process.
Online planning algorithms have made substantial progress in solving large-scale POMDP problems
[5–9]. These methods approximate the belief with a collection of sampled states instead of updating
∗

Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

