Distributed Estimation with Multiple Samples per User:
Sharp Rates and Phase Transition
Jayadev Acharya
Cornell University
acharya@cornell.edu

Clément L. Canonne
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Ziteng Sun
Cornell University
zs335@cornell.edu

Yuhan Liu
Cornell University
yl2976@cornell.edu

Himanshu Tyagi
Indian Institute of Science
htyagi@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We obtain tight minimax rates for the problem of distributed estimation of discrete
distributions under communication constraints, where n users observing m samples
each can broadcast only ¸ bits. Our main result is a tight characterization (up to
logarithmic factors) of the error rate as a function of m, ¸, the domain size, and the
number of users under most regimes of interest. While previous work focused on
the setting where each user only holds one
Ô sample, we show that as m grows the
¸1 error rate gets reduced by a factor of m for small m. However, for large m
we observe an interesting phase transition: theÔdependence
Ô of the error rate on the
communication constraint ¸ changes from 1/ 2¸ to 1/ ¸.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and motivation

We consider the problem of density estimation in a distributed setting where each of n users locally
holds a dataset of m independent observations from an unknown discrete probability distribution,
and a central server seeks to leverage their data in order to estimate this underlying distribution.
This abstract formulation encompasses an array of crucial building blocks in areas such as federated
learning, IoT, or measurement from deployed sensors, and has (along with some of its variants)
received significant attention in recent years.
Our focus in this work is to understand how a bandwidth constraint at each user affects this learning
task. Namely, to characterize the fundamental tradeoffs between communication, local sample size,
and estimation error rate. Previous work on distributed estimation has focused primarily on the
single-sample case where each user has exactly one draw from an unknown underlying distribution
p. We consider the more general, more practical, and technically more involved setting where each
of the n users holds m Ø 1 samples from a k-ary distribution, and can transmit ¸ bits to a central
server. Our goal is to understand the minimax rates of estimating p in ¸1 distance. Before detailing
our results and discussing their relation with prior work, we provide the necessary background and
notation.
1.2

Problem setting and notation

Let k be a positive integer. Let k = {p = (p1 , . . . , pk ) œ Rk : p Ø 0, ÎpÎ1 = 1} denote the
set of all probability distributions over a discrete domain of size k, which we assume without loss
of generality is [k] := {1, 2, . . . , k}. For p, q œ k , the total variation (TV) distance between
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

