LADA: Look-Ahead Data Acquisition via
Augmentation for Deep Active Learning

Yoon-Yeong Kim1 Kyungwoo Song2 Joonho Jang1 Il-Chul Moon1,3
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

2

University of Seoul 3 Summary.AI

yoonyeong.kim@kaist.ac.kr kyungwoo.song@uos.ac.kr
adkto8093@kaist.ac.kr icmoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Active learning effectively collects data instances for training deep learning models
when the labeled dataset is limited and the annotation cost is high. Data augmentation is another effective technique to enlarge the limited amount of labeled
instances. The scarcity of labeled dataset leads us to consider the integration
of data augmentation and active learning. One possible approach is a pipelined
combination, which selects informative instances via the acquisition function and
generates virtual instances from the selected instances via augmentation. However,
this pipelined approach would not guarantee the informativeness of the virtual
instances. This paper proposes Look-Ahead Data Acquisition via augmentation,
or LADA framework, that looks ahead the effect of data augmentation in the process of acquisition. LADA jointly considers both 1) unlabeled data instance to
be selected and 2) virtual data instance to be generated by data augmentation, to
construct the acquisition function. Moreover, to generate maximally informative
virtual instances, LADA optimizes the data augmentation policy to maximize the
predictive acquisition score, resulting in the proposal of InfoSTN and InfoMixup.
The experimental results of LADA show a significant improvement over the recent
augmentation and acquisition baselines that were independently applied.

1

Introduction

Large-scale datasets in the big data era have opened the blooming of data science, but the data labeling
requires significant efforts from human annotators, or oracle. Therefore, an adaptive sampling by
an acquisition function, i.e. active learning, has been developed to select the most informative data
instances in learning the decision boundary [1–3]. This selection is difficult because it is influenced
by the learner and the dataset at the same time. Hence, the understanding of the relation between the
two has become the components of active learning, which queries the next training example by the
informativeness, assessed by acquisition function.
Besides active learning, data augmentation is another data source for learning models that provides
virtual data instances generated from the training dataset [4]. Conventional data augmentation has
been a simple transformation of labeled data instances, e.g., flipping, rotating, etc [5]. Recently,
the data augmentation has expanded to become a deep neural model generating virtual instances,
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [6] or Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [7]. Spatial
Transform Networks (STN) [8] also generate spatially transformed instances for learning the classifier.
Since the conventional and the deep neural model-based augmentations perform the Vicinal Risk
Minimization (VRM) [9], they preserve labels of virtual instances and limit the feasible vicinity.
To overcome the limited vicinity of VRM, Mixup [10] and its variants have been proposed by
interpolating multiple data instances. The pair of interpolated features and labels, or the Mixup
instances, become virtual instances to enlarge the support of the data distribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

