Predicting What You Already Know Helps:
Provable Self-Supervised Learning
Jason D. Lee1 ,

Qi Lei1 ,

Nikunj Saunshi1 ,

Jiacheng Zhuo2

1
Princeton University 2 University of Texas at Austin
{jasonlee@,qilei@,nsaunshi@cs}.princeton.edu, jzhuo@utexas.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning solves auxiliary prediction tasks (known
as pretext tasks) without requiring labeled data to learn useful semantic representations. These pretext tasks are created solely using the input features, such as
predicting a missing image patch, recovering the color channels of an image from
context, or predicting missing words in text; yet predicting this known information
helps in learning representations effective for downstream prediction tasks.
We posit a mechanism exploiting the statistical connections between certain
reconstruction-based pretext tasks that guarantee to learn a good representation.
Formally, we quantify how the approximate independence between the components
of the pretext task (conditional on the label and latent variables) allows us to learn
representations that can solve the downstream task by just training a linear layer on
top of the learned representation. We prove the linear layer yields small approximation error even for complex ground truth function class and will drastically reduce
labeled sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning revitalizes machine learning models in computer vision, NLP, and control
problems (see reference therein [36, 38, 15, 63, 35]). Training a model with auxiliary tasks based
only on input features reduces the extensive costs of data collection and semantic annotations for
downstream tasks. It is also known to improve the adversarial robustness of models [29, 11, 12].
Self-supervised learning creates pseudo labels solely based on input features, and solves auxiliary
prediction tasks (or pretext tasks) in a supervised manner. However, the underlying principles of
self-supervised learning are mysterious since it is a-priori unclear why predicting what we already
know should help. We thus raise the following question:
What conceptual connection between pretext and downstream tasks ensures good representations?
What is a good way to quantify this?
As a thought experiment, consider a simple downstream task of classifying desert, forest, and sea
images. A meaningful pretext task is to predict the background color of images (known as image
colorization [66]). Denote X1 , X2 , Y to be the input image, color channel, and the downstream label
respectively. Given knowledge of the label Y , one can possibly predict the background X2 without
knowing much about X1 . In other words, X2 is approximately independent of X1 conditional on
the label Y . Consider another task of inpainting [48] the front of a building (X2 ) from the rest (X1 ).
While knowing the label “building” (Y ) is not sufficient for successful inpainting, adding additional
latent variables Z such as architectural style, location, window positions, etc. will ensure that
variation in X2 given Y, Z is small. We can mathematically interpret this as X1 being approximate
conditionally independent of X2 given Y, Z.
The main insight that we exploit in this work is that with approximate conditional independence (as
in the above examples), a method that predicts X2 from X1 will inadvertently implicitly encode and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

