Variational Continual Bayesian Meta-Learning

Qiang Zhang1,2,3∗†, Jinyuan Fang4†, Zaiqiao Meng5,6 , Shangsong Liang4,6‡ , Emine Yilmaz7‡
1
Hangzhou Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
3
AZFT Knowledge Engine Lab, China; 4 Sun Yat-sen University, China
5
University of Glasgow, United Kingdom
6
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
7
University College London, United Kingdom
{qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn; fangjy6@gmail.com; zaiqiao.meng@gmail.com}
{liangshangsong@gmail.com; emine.yilmaz@ucl.ac.uk}

Abstract
Conventional meta-learning considers a set of tasks from a stationary distribution.
In contrast, this paper focuses on a more complex online setting, where tasks arrive
sequentially and follow a non-stationary distribution. Accordingly, we propose a
Variational Continual Bayesian Meta-Learning (VC-BML) algorithm. VC-BML
maintains a Dynamic Gaussian Mixture Model for meta-parameters, with the
number of component distributions determined by a Chinese Restaurant Process.
Dynamic mixtures at the meta-parameter level increase the capability to adapt
to diverse and dissimilar tasks due to a larger parameter space, alleviating the
negative knowledge transfer problem. To infer the posteriors of model parameters,
compared to the previously used point estimation method, we develop a more
robust posterior approximation method – structured variational inference for the
sake of avoiding forgetting knowledge. Experiments on tasks from non-stationary
distributions show that VC-BML is superior in transferring knowledge among
diverse tasks and alleviating catastrophic forgetting in an online setting.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning inductively transfers knowledge among analogous low-resource tasks, i.e., tasks with
scarce labeled data such as few-shot image classification, to enhance model generalization and data
efficiency [1, 2]. Conventional meta-learning assumes that these tasks follow a stationary distribution.
However, this assumption may be unrealistic in an online setting, where the task distribution is
normally non-stationary, i.e., subsequent tasks are disparate and heterogeneous [3, 4]. In reality, the
newly arriving tasks may differ from previous ones or even contradict to each other [5], e.g., the task
of online landmark prediction can encounter images from unnamed classes. This leads to two issues:
(1) a single set of model parameters exhibit decreased performance on disparate tasks, called as the
negative knowledge transfer issue [6]; and (2) for fast adaptation to those disparate tasks, a model
often has to dramatically change its parameters and thus often forgets previously learnt knowledge,
known as the catastrophic forgetting issue [7]. Due to these issues, it is inefficient to use conventional
meta-learning in an online setting. This motivates us to extend the conventional meta-learning to
deal with the streaming low-resource tasks that follow a non-stationary distribution, such that we can
dynamically update the model to effectively transfer knowledge while avoid forgetting.
∗

The work was done while at University College London
Equal Contributions
‡
Corresponding Author
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

