Tuning Mixed Input Hyperparameters on the Fly for
Efficient Population Based AutoRL
Jack Parker-Holderú
University of Oxford

Vu Nguyen
Amazon, Australia

Shaan Desai
University of Oxford

Stephen Roberts
University of Oxford

Abstract
Despite a series of recent successes in reinforcement learning (RL), many RL
algorithms remain sensitive to hyperparameters. As such, there has recently been
interest in the field of AutoRL, which seeks to automate design decisions to create
more general algorithms. Recent work suggests that population based approaches
may be effective AutoRL algorithms, by learning hyperparameter schedules on
the fly. In particular, the PB2 algorithm is able to achieve strong performance in
RL tasks by formulating online hyperparameter optimization as time varying GPbandit problem, while also providing theoretical guarantees. However, PB2 is only
designed to work for continuous hyperparameters, which severely limits its utility in
practice. In this paper we introduce a new (provably) efficient hierarchical approach
for optimizing both continuous and categorical variables, using a new time-varying
bandit algorithm specifically designed for the population based training regime.
We evaluate our approach on the challenging Procgen benchmark, where we
show that explicitly modelling dependence between data augmentation and other
hyperparameters improves generalization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL [75]) is a paradigm whereby agents learn to make sequential decisions
through trial and error. In the past few years there have been a series of breakthroughs using RL in
games [70, 44, 6] and robotics [50, 33], which have led to a surge of interest in the machine learning
community. Beyond these examples, RL offers the potential to impact vast swathes of society, from
autonomous vehicles to robotic applications in healthcare and industry.
Despite the promising results, RL is notoriously difficult to use in practice. In particular, RL
algorithms are incredibly sensitive to hyperparameters [23, 2, 18, 27, 9, 47], with careful tuning often
the difference between success and failure. Furthermore, as new and more complex algorithms are
introduced, the search space continues to grow [2]. As a result, it is often challenging to reproduce RL
results given the significant number of moving parts in modern algorithms [2]. This makes it almost
impossible to apply these methods in novel settings, where optimal hyperparameters are unknown.
On the other hand, the capability of current methods may be understated, as better configurations
could boost performance [10, 84].
In this work we focus on the recent impressive results for Population Based Training (PBT, [29, 39]),
which has demonstrated strong performance in a variety of prominent RL settings [65, 84, 43, 19, 28].
PBT works by training agents in parallel, with an evolutionary outer loop optimizing hyperparameters,
periodically replacing weaker agents with perturbations of stronger ones. However, since PBT relies
on random search to explore the hyperparameter space, it requires a large population size which can
be prohibitively expensive for small and even medium-sized labs.
ú

Correspondence to jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

