Fast rates for prediction with limited expert advice

1

El Mehdi Saad1 , Gilles Blanchard1,2
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay; 2 Inria

Abstract
We investigate the problem of minimizing the excess generalization error with
respect to the best expert prediction in a finite family in the stochastic setting,
under limited access to information. We assume that the learner only has access
to a limited number of expert advices per training round, as well as for prediction.
Assuming that the loss function is Lipschitz and strongly convex, we show that
if we are allowed to see the advice of only one expert per round for T rounds in
the training phase, or to use the advice of √
only one expert for prediction in the test
phase, the worst-case excess risk is Ω(1/ T ) with probability lower bounded by
a constant. However, if we are allowed to see at least two actively chosen expert
advices per training round and use at least two experts for prediction, the fast rate
O(1/T ) can be achieved. We design novel algorithms achieving this rate in this
setting, and in the setting where the learner has a budget constraint on the total
number of observed expert advices, and give precise instance-dependent bounds on
the number of training rounds and queries needed to achieve a given generalization
error precision.
Keywords: Online Learning, Budgeted Learning, Prediction with expert advice.

1

Introduction and setting

We consider a generic prediction problem in a stochastic setting: a target random variable Y taking
values in Y is to be predicted by a user-determined forecast F , also modeled as a random variable,
taking values in a closed convex subset X of Rd . The mismatch between the two is measured via a
loss function l(F, Y ). The quality of the agent’s output is measured by its generalization risk


R(F ) := E l(F, Y ) .
To assist us in this task, the forecast or “advice” of a number of “experts” (F1 , . . . , FK ) (also
modeled as random variables) can be requested. The agent’s objective is to achieve a risk as close as
possible to the risk of the best expert R∗ = mini∈JKK R(Fi ) (for a nonnegative integer n, we denote
JnK = {1, . . . , n} ). We measure the performance of the user’s forecast via its excess risk (or average
regret) with respect to that best expert.
The literature on expert advice generally considers the cumulative regret over a sequence of forecasts
Ft followed by observation of the target variable Yt and incurring the loss l(Ft , Yt ), t = 1, . . . , T .
In the present work we will separate observation (or training) phase and forecast phase: the user
is allowed to observe (some of) the expert’s predictions and the target variable for a number of
independent, identically distributed rounds (Yt , F1,t , . . . , FK,t )1≤t≤T following certain rules to be
specified. After the observation phase, the user must decide of a prediction strategy, namely a
Pk
convex combination of the experts Fb = i=1 w
bi Fi , where the weights w
bi can be chosen based
on the information gathered in the training phase. The risk of this strategy is R(Fb), where the risk
is evaluated on new, independent data. In other words, if the training phase takes place over T
independent rounds, the forecast risk is the expected loss over the (T + 1)th, independent, round.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

