Bias Out-of-the-Box: An Empirical Analysis of
Intersectional Occupational Biases in Popular
Generative Language Models

Hannah Rose Kirk†‡ , Yennie Jun† , Haider Iqbal† , Elias Benussi† ,
Filippo Volpin† , Frederic A. Dreyer† , Aleksandar Shtedritski† , Yuki M. Asano†
†
Oxford Artificial Intelligence Society, University of Oxford
‡
hannah.kirk@oii.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The capabilities of natural language models trained on large-scale data have increased immensely over the past few years. Open source libraries such as HuggingFace have made these models easily available and accessible. While prior research
has identified biases in large language models, this paper considers biases contained
in the most popular versions of these models when applied ‘out-of-the-box’ for
downstream tasks. We focus on generative language models as they are well-suited
for extracting biases inherited from training data. Specifically, we conduct an indepth analysis of GPT-2, which is the most downloaded text generation model on
HuggingFace, with over half a million downloads per month. We assess biases related to occupational associations for different protected categories by intersecting
gender with religion, sexuality, ethnicity, political affiliation, and continental name
origin. Using a template-based data collection pipeline, we collect 396K sentence
completions made by GPT-2 and find: (i) The machine-predicted jobs are less
diverse and more stereotypical for women than for men, especially for intersections;
(ii) Intersectional interactions are highly relevant for occupational associations,
which we quantify by fitting 262 logistic models; (iii) For most occupations, GPT-2
reflects the skewed gender and ethnicity distribution found in US Labor Bureau
data, and even pulls the societally-skewed distribution towards gender parity in
cases where its predictions deviate from real labor market observations. This raises
the normative question of what language models should learn - whether they should
reflect or correct for existing inequalities.

1

Introduction

The advent of deep learning and massive growth in training data have led to natural language models
surpassing humans on numerous benchmarks [1, 22, 39, 40]. However, as Bender et al. [7] states,
these models can exacerbate existing biases in data and perpetuate stereotypical associations to
the harm of marginalized communities. Simultaneously, pre-trained models have become readily
accessible via open source libraries such as HuggingFace, allowing non-experts to apply these tools
in their own applications. These developments in generative language models substantiate a need to
understand the potential for biases towards protected classes, such as gender and ethnicity.
This paper considers potential biases present in the most popular and most downloaded versions of
large-scale, open sourced text generation models applied ‘out-of-the-box’. Despite the release of
newer and larger models often redirecting researchers’ attention, there exist important research gaps
in existing models. Bearing in mind that the potential negative total impact from biased models is
correlated with number of downloads of that model, this paper tests the biases in the small GPT-2
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

