Adversarial Neuron Pruning Purifies
Backdoored Deep Models

Dongxian Wu1∗
Yisen Wang2,3†
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking Univesity, China
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking Univesity, China
1

Abstract
As deep neural networks (DNNs) are growing larger, their requirements for computational resources become huge, which makes outsourcing training more popular.
Training in a third-party platform, however, may introduce potential risks that a
malicious trainer will return backdoored DNNs, which behave normally on clean
samples but output targeted misclassifications whenever a trigger appears at the
test time. Without any knowledge of the trigger, it is difficult to distinguish or
recover benign DNNs from backdoored ones. In this paper, we first identify an
unexpected sensitivity of backdoored DNNs, that is, they are much easier to collapse and tend to predict the target label on clean samples when their neurons are
adversarially perturbed. Based on these observations, we propose a novel model
repairing method, termed Adversarial Neuron Pruning (ANP), which prunes some
sensitive neurons to purify the injected backdoor. Experiments show, even with
only an extremely small amount of clean data (e.g., 1%), ANP effectively removes
the injected backdoor without causing obvious performance degradation. Our code
is available at https://github.com/csdongxian/ANP_backdoor.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve satisfactory performance in many tasks,
including computer vision [15], speech recognition [45], and gaming agents [36]. However, their
success heavily relies on a large amount of computation and data, forcing researchers to outsource the
training in “Machine Learning as a Service” (MLaaS) platforms or download pretrained models from
the Internet, which brings potential risks of training-time attacks [17, 35, 2]. Among them, backdoor
attack [14, 6, 42] is remarkably dangerous because it stealthily builds a strong relationship between a
trigger pattern and a target label inside DNNs by poisoning a small proportion of the training data.
As a result, the returned model always behaves normally on the clean data but is controlled to make
target misclassification by presenting the trigger pattern such as a specific single-pixel [41] or a
black-white checkerboard [14] at the test time.
Since DNNs are deployed in many real-world and safety-critical applications, it is urgent to defend
against backdoor attacks. While there are many defense methods during training [38, 41, 8, 29, 20],
this work focuses on a more realistic scenario in outsourcing training that repairs models after
training. In particular, the defenders try to remove the injected backdoor without access to the model
training process. Without knowledge of the trigger pattern, previous methods only achieve limited
robustness [7, 24, 22]. Some works try to reconstruct the trigger [43, 5, 33, 50, 44], however, the
∗
Work was done as an internship at Peking University when he was a student at Tsinghua University. Now,
he is a Post-doc at the University of Tokyo.
†
Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

