Finding Discriminative Filters for Specific
Degradations in Blind Super-Resolution

Liangbin Xie∗ 1,2,3

Xintao Wang∗3

Chao Dong1,4

Zhongang Qi3

Ying Shan3

1

Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{lb.xie, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn
{xintaowang, zhongangqi, yingsshan}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recent blind super-resolution (SR) methods typically consist of two branches, one
for degradation prediction and the other for conditional restoration. However, our
experiments show that a one-branch network can achieve comparable performance
to the two-branch scheme. Then we wonder: how can one-branch networks
automatically learn to distinguish degradations? To find the answer, we propose a
new diagnostic tool – Filter Attribution method based on Integral Gradient (FAIG).
Unlike previous integral gradient methods, our FAIG aims at finding the most
discriminative filters instead of input pixels/features for degradation removal in
blind SR networks. With the discovered filters, we further develop a simple yet
effective method to predict the degradation of an input image. Based on FAIG,
we show that, in one-branch blind SR networks, 1) we are able to find a very
small number of (1%) discriminative filters for each specific degradation; 2) The
weights, locations and connections of the discovered filters are all important to
determine the specific network function. 3) The task of degradation prediction can
be implicitly realized by these discriminative filters without explicit supervised
learning. Our findings can not only help us better understand network behaviors
inside one-branch blind SR networks, but also provide guidance on designing
more efficient architectures and diagnosing networks for blind SR. The codes are
available at https://github.com/TencentARC/FAIG.

1

Introduction

As a special category of image Super-Resolution (SR) [11, 6, 22], blind super-resolution [28, 3, 48]
is an active research topic towards real-world restoration applications, and has attracted increasing
attention. Blind SR aims at reconstructing a high-resolution image from its low-resolution counterpart
which contains unknown and complex degradations (e.g., blur, noise). Recent deep-learning-based
blind SR methods typically consist of two branches: one for degradation prediction and the other
for conditional restorations [14, 25, 39], as illustrated in Fig. 1. This design incorporates human
knowledge about the degradation process [8, 23] and is consistent in classical blind SR methods [28,
11], thus implying a certain degree of interpretability.
With the powerful representation ability of deep learning, it is natural to wonder whether a unified
one-branch network can effectively address the blind SR problem without the delicate two-branch
∗

Equal contributions. Liangbin Xie is an intern in ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

