BCD Nets: Scalable Variational Approaches for
Bayesian Causal Discovery

Chris Cundy1 Aditya Grover2,3 Stefano Ermon1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Facebook AI Research
3
University of California, Los Angeles
{cundy, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu
adityag@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
A structural equation model (SEM) is an effective framework to reason over causal
relationships represented via a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Recent advances
have enabled effective maximum-likelihood point estimation of DAGs from observational data. However, a point estimate may not accurately capture the uncertainty in inferring the underlying graph in practical scenarios, wherein the
true DAG is non-identifiable and/or the observed dataset is limited. We propose
Bayesian Causal Discovery Nets (BCD Nets), a variational inference framework
for estimating a distribution over DAGs characterizing a linear-Gaussian SEM.
Developing a full Bayesian posterior over DAGs is challenging due to the the
discrete and combinatorial nature of graphs. We analyse key design choices for
scalable VI over DAGs, such as 1) the parametrization of DAGs via an expressive
variational family, 2) a continuous relaxation that enables low-variance stochastic optimization, and 3) suitable priors over the latent variables. We provide a
series of experiments on real and synthetic data showing that BCD Nets outperform maximum-likelihood methods on standard causal discovery metrics such as
structural Hamming distance in low data regimes.

1

Introduction

One of the key uses of statistical methods is learning causal relationships from observed data a.k.a.
causal discovery [39]. Causal models allow us to forecast the effects of interventions and counterfactuals in several real-world domains, such as economic policy [57] and medicine [47]. Although
early approaches to statistical inference emphasised that ‘correlation is not causation’ [15], it has
since been shown that for certain families of data-generating processes, it is indeed possible to infer
causal relationships from purely observational data [37, 29].
One such widely studied data-generating process is the linear-Gaussian structural equation model
(SEM) [37], where the causal relationships between the random variables in the model can be represented via a weighted directed acyclic graph (DAG). The value of any variable in the DAG of
a linear-Gaussian SEM is given by a linear combination of the values of its parent nodes and additive noise. For causal discovery, naive Monte-Carlo sampling or enumeration of the possible
DAGs quickly becomes intractable, since the number of possible DAGs over a model grows superexponentially with the number of variables [18]. A variety of methods have been developed over
the years to efficiently sample or optimize over DAGs [11, 53, 51, 45]. For example, a recent line
of work scales to high dimensions by maximizing the likelihood of the model (MLE) over a set of
continuous relaxations of adjacency matrices using gradient-based methods and specialized DAG
regularization terms. [62, 61, 35, 59].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

