Unlabeled Principal Component Analysis

Yunzhen Yao, Liangzu Peng, Manolis C. Tsakiris
School of Information Science and Technology
ShanghaiTech University
yaoyzh,penglz,mtsakiris@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce robust principal component analysis from a data matrix in which
the entries of its columns have been corrupted by permutations, termed Unlabeled
Principal Component Analysis (UPCA). Using algebraic geometry, we establish
that UPCA is a well-defined algebraic problem in the sense that the only matrices of minimal rank that agree with the given data are row-permutations of the
ground-truth matrix, arising as the unique solutions of a polynomial system of
equations. Further, we propose an efficient two-stage algorithmic pipeline for
UPCA suitable for the practically relevant case where only a fraction of the data
have been permuted. Stage-I employs outlier-robust PCA methods to estimate the
ground-truth column-space. Equipped with the column-space, Stage-II applies
recent methods for unlabeled sensing to restore the permuted data. Experiments on
synthetic data, face images, educational and medical records reveal the potential of
UPCA for applications such as data privatization and record linkage.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

In principal component analysis, a cornerstone of machine learning and data science, one is given a
data matrix X̃, assumed to be a corrupted version of a ground-truth data matrix X∗ = [x∗1 · · · x∗n ] ∈
Rm×n , typically but not necessarily assumed to have low rank, and the objective is to estimate X∗
or the column-space S∗ ⊂ Rm of X∗ . The most common types of corruptions that have attracted
interest in modern studies are additive sparse perturbations [6, 47], outlier data points that lie away
from S∗ [43, 40], and missing entries, the latter also known as low-rank matrix completion [7, 4].
Recently, permutations have been emerging as another type of data corruption, typically set in the
context of linear regression, where the correspondences between the input and the output data have
been partially distorted or even are entirely unavailable [38, 39, 22, 17, 30, 31, 46, 19, 41, 36]. There,
one is given a point x∗ of a linear subspace S∗ , but only up to a permutation of its coordinates, say
x̃ = Π∗ x∗ with Π∗ an unknown permutation, and the goal is to find x∗ from the data x̃, S∗ . This
Unlabeled Sensing [38, 39] problem has many potential machine learning applications, e.g., record
linkage [30, 31], visual [26, 27] or textual [5, 28, 29] permutation learning, and matching problems
in neuroscience [21] and biology [1, 42].
While methods for unlabeled sensing rely on knowledge of the source subspace S∗ , this is not always
known in practice. On the other hand, data of the form X̃ = [x̃1 , . . . , x̃n ] ∈ Rm×n with x̃j = Π∗j x∗j
an unknown permutation of an unknown point x∗j ∈ S∗ , are often available, thus raising the question
of whether S∗ can be estimated from X̃. An important example of this situation is record linkage
[13, 20, 3], where the objective is to integrate data from independent sources, x̃1 , . . . , x̃n ∈ Rm ,
for subsequent data analysis. Since the entries of different records x̃i ’s are collected separately, the
data matrix X̃ is unlabeled in the sense that, the entries of its i-th row do not necessarily correspond
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

