Unified Pretraining Framework for Document
Understanding

Jiuxiang Gu1 , Jason Kuen1 , Vlad I. Morariu1 , Handong Zhao1 ,
Nikolaos Barmpalios2 , Rajiv Jain1 , Ani Nenkova1 , Tong Sun1
1
Adobe Research, 2 Adobe Document Cloud
{jigu,kuen,morariu,hazhao,barmpali,rajijain,nenkova,tsun}@adobe.com

Abstract
Document intelligence automates the extraction of information from documents
and supports many business applications. Recent self-supervised learning methods
on large-scale unlabeled document datasets have opened up promising directions
towards reducing annotation efforts by training models with self-supervised objectives. However, most of the existing document pretraining methods are still
language-dominated. We present UDoc, a new unified pretraining framework for
document understanding. UDoc is designed to support most document understanding tasks, extending the Transformer to take multimodal embeddings as input. Each
input element is composed of words and visual features from a semantic region of
the input document image. An important feature of UDoc is that it learns a generic
representation by making use of three self-supervised losses, encouraging the representation to model sentences, learn similarities, and align modalities. Extensive
empirical analysis demonstrates that the pretraining procedure learns better joint
representations and leads to improvements in downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Document intelligence is a broad research area that includes techniques for information extraction and
understanding. Unlike plain-text documents in natural language processing (NLP) [1, 2], a physical
document can be composed of multiple elements: tables, figures, charts, etc. In addition, a document
usually includes rich visual information, and can be one of various types of documents (scientific
paper, form, resume, etc.), with various combinations of multiple elements and layouts. Complex
content and layout, noisy data, font and style variations make automatic document understanding very
challenging. For example, to understand text-rich documents such as letters, a system needs to focus
almost exclusively on text content, paying attention to a long sequential context, while processing
semi-structured documents such as forms requires the system to analyze spatially distributed short
words, paying particular attention to the spatial arrangement of the words. Following the success
of BERT [3] on NLP tasks, there has been growing interest in developing pretraining methods
for document understanding [4, 5, 6]. Pretrained models have achieved state-of-the-art (SoTA)
performance across diverse document understanding tasks [7, 8].
Huge training datasets help pretraining models to learn a good representation for downstream tasks.
However, we observe three major problems with the current pretraining setup: (1) documents are
composed of semantic regions. Most of the recent document pretraining works follow BERT and split
documents into words. However, unlike the sequence-to-sequence learning in NLP, documents have a
hierarchical structure (words form sentences, sentences form a semantic region, and semantic regions
form a document). Also, the importance of words and sentences are highly context-dependent, i.e.,
the same word or sentence may have different importance in a different context. Moreover, current
transformer-based document pretraining models suffer from input length constraints. Also, input
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

