A Constant Approximation Algorithm for Sequential
Random-Order No-Substitution k-Median Clustering

Tom Hess
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
tomhe@post.bgu.ac.il

Michal Moshkovitz
Department of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University∗
Tel Aviv, Israel
mmoshkovitz@eng.ucsd.edu

Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
We study k-median clustering under the sequential no-substitution setting. In this
setting, a data stream is sequentially observed, and some of the points are selected
by the algorithm as cluster centers. However, a point can be selected as a center
only immediately after it is observed, before observing the next point. In addition, a
selected center cannot be substituted later. We give the first algorithm for this setting
that obtains a constant approximation factor on the optimal cost under a random
arrival order, an exponential improvement over previous work. This is also the first
constant approximation guarantee that holds without any structural assumptions
on the input data. Moreover, the number of selected centers is only quasi-linear
in k. Our algorithm and analysis are based on a careful cost estimation that avoids
outliers, a new concept of a linear bin division, and a multiscale approach to center
selection.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning task used for various applications, such as anomaly
detection [Leung and Leckie, 2005], recommender systems [Shepitsen et al., 2008] and cancer
diagnosis [Zheng et al., 2014]. In recent years, the problem of sequential clustering has been actively
studied, motivated by applications in which data arrives sequentially, such as online recommender
systems [Nasraoui et al., 2007] and online community detection [Aggarwal, 2003].
In this work, we study k-median clustering in the sequential no-substitution setting, a term first
introduced in Hess and Sabato [2020]. In this setting, a stream of data points is sequentially observed,
and some of these points are selected by the algorithm as cluster centers. However, a point can
be selected as a center only immediately after it is observed, before observing the next point. In
addition, a selected center cannot be substituted later. This setting is motivated by applications in
which center selection is mapped to a real-world irreversible action. For instance, consider a stream
of website users, where the goal is to instantaneously identify users that serve as social cluster centers
and provide them with a promotional gift while they are still on the website. As another example,
consider recruiting representative participants for a clinical trial out of a stream of incoming patients.
∗

This work was done while the author was at the University of California San Diego.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

