To Beam Or Not To Beam:
That is a Question of Cooperation
for Language GANs

Thomas Scialom?‡ , Paul-Alexis Dray? , Sylvain Lamprier‡ ,
Benjamin Piwowarski‡ , Jacopo Staiano?

CNRS, France
‡
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
?
reciTAL, Paris, France
thomas@recital.ai

Abstract
Due to the discrete nature of words, language GANs require to be optimized from
rewards provided by discriminator networks, via reinforcement learning methods.
This is a much harder setting than for continuous tasks, which enjoy gradient
flows from discriminators to generators, usually leading to dramatic learning
instabilities. However, we claim that this can be solved by making discriminator
and generator networks cooperate to produce output sequences during training.
These cooperative outputs, inherently built to obtain higher discrimination scores,
not only provide denser rewards for training, but also form a more compact artificial
set for discriminator training, hence improving its accuracy and stability. In this
paper, we show that our SelfGAN framework, built on this cooperative principle,
outperforms Teacher Forcing and obtains state-of-the-art results on two challenging
tasks, Summarization and Question Generation.

1

Introduction

Natural Language Generation encompasses tasks such as Machine Translation, Summarization or
Data To Text generation. The real life applications are numerous, but require highly reliable and
fluent models. Despite significant advances, state-of-the-art models are still known to be de-generated,
with outputs containing repetitions and even nonfactual information i.e. hallucination [13].
Among the culprits is a limitation of Teacher Forcing [37]: the loss is computed at a token level
while the aim is to produce complete sequences. Moreover, while a single ground-truth reference is
considered correct, several realizations of the same content may exist. Finally, the model is subject to
Exposure Bias [27], i.e. a mismatch between training and inference distributions – in the latter, the
model has no access to ground truth for the previously generated tokens. The literature has considered
this mismatch responsible for the lower quality observed when generating longer sequences [2, 16].
To overcome such Teacher Forcing limitations, a consensus has emerged: a sequence level objective
should be introduced [27, 41]. A body of work has proposed to use Reinforcement Learning (RL)
with standard NLG metrics like BLEU [39] or ROUGE [23]. However, NLG metrics are known to not
reflect well human judgement [21], which explains why the resulting models tend to be qualitatively
worse than their MLE baselines [3]. To move toward less biased metrics, a natural alternative is to
evaluate the output with a learned discriminator. An ideal discriminator would not be biased w.r.t. to
its training set, and could therefore be considered as a perfect metric that matches human consensus.
Note that discriminators are already reported to be highly accurate to distinguish human written texts
from machine generated ones [31, 43].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

