Learning with Holographic Reduced Representations
Ashwinkumar Ganesan1⇤, Hang Gao1 , Sunil Gandhi1⇤, Edward Raff1,2,3 , Tim Oates1
James Holt2 , Mark McLean2
1
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
2
Laboratory for Physical Sciences
3
Booz Allen Hamilton

Abstract
Holographic Reduced Representations (HRR) are a method for performing
symbolic AI on top of real-valued vectors [1] by associating each vector with an
abstract concept, and providing mathematical operations to manipulate vectors as
if they were classic symbolic objects. This method has seen little use outside of
older symbolic AI work and cognitive science. Our goal is to revisit this approach
to understand if it is viable for enabling a hybrid neural-symbolic approach to
learning as a differentiable component of a deep learning architecture. HRRs today
are not effective in a differentiable solution due to numerical instability, a problem
we solve by introducing a projection step that forces the vectors to exist in a well
behaved point in space. In doing so we improve the concept retrieval efficacy
of HRRs by over 100⇥. Using multi-label classification we demonstrate how to
leverage the symbolic HRR properties to develop an output layer and loss function
that is able to learn effectively, and allows us to investigate some of the pros
and cons of an HRR neuro-symbolic learning approach. Our code can be found
at
https://github.com/NeuromorphicComputationResearchProgram/
Learning-with-Holographic-Reduced-Representations

1

Introduction

Symbolic and connectionist (or “neural”) based approaches to Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML) have often been treated as two separate, independent methods of approaching AI/ML.
This does not need to be the case, and our paper proposes to study the viability of a hybrid approach
to propagation based learning. In particular, we make use of the Holographic Reduced Representation
(HRR) approach originally proposed by Plate [1]. Plate proposed using circular convolution as a
“binding” operator. Given two vectors in a d dimensional feature space, x, y 2 Rd , they can be
“bound” together using circular convolution, which we denote as s = x ⌦ y. This gives us a new
result s 2 Rd . The HRR approach also includes an inversion operation † that maps Rd ! Rd .
With this binding and inverse operation, Plate showed that we can assign vectors to have a conceptual
symbolic meaning and construct statements (or “sentences”) from these representations. For example,
we can construct S = red ⌦ cat + blue ⌦ dog to represent “a red cat and a blue dog”. HRRs can also
query the statement representation S. To ask which animal was red, we compose S ⌦ red † ⇡ cat
which gives us a numeric output approximately equal to the vector representing “cat”.

The HRR framework requires a constant amount of memory, relies on well-optimized and scalable
operations like the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), provides symbolic manipulation, and uses only
differentiable operations, that would make it seem ideal as a tool for exploring neuro-symbolic
modeling. Unfortunately back-propagating through HRR operations does not learn in practice,
⇤

Research work completed prior to joining Amazon.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

