Gradient-Free Adversarial Training Against
Image Corruption for Learning-based Steering

Yu Shen
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
yushen@umd.edu

Laura Zheng
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
lyzheng@umd.edu

Manli Shu
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
manlis@umd.edu

Weizi Li
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152
wli@memphis.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Ming C. Lin
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
lin@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We introduce a simple yet effective framework for improving the robustness of
learning algorithms against image corruptions for autonomous driving. These corruptions can occur due to both internal (e.g., sensor noises and hardware abnormalities) and external factors (e.g., lighting, weather, visibility, and other environmental
effects). Using sensitivity analysis with FID-based parameterization, we propose a
novel algorithm exploiting basis perturbations to improve the overall performance
of autonomous steering and other image processing tasks, such as classification
and detection, for self-driving cars. Our model not only improves the performance
on the original dataset, but also achieves significant performance improvement on
datasets with multiple and unseen perturbations, up to 87% and 77%, respectively.
A comparison between our approach and other SOTA techniques confirms the effectiveness of our technique in improving the robustness of neural network training
for learning-based steering and other image processing tasks.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving is a complex task that requires many software and hardware components to
operate reliably under highly disparate and often unpredictable conditions. In this work, we study
“learning-based steering” as it contains both perception and control, both critical components for
autonomous driving. While on the road, vehicles are going to experience day and night, clear
and foggy conditions, sunny and rainy days, as well as bright cityscapes and dark tunnels. All
these external factors in conjunction with internal factors of the camera (e.g., those associated with
hardware) can lead to quality variations in input data for image-based learning algorithms. One
can harden machine learning systems to these degradations by simulating them at training time [6].
However, an algorithmic tool for analyzing the sensitivity of real-world neural network performance
on the properties of (and corruptions to) training images is lacking. More importantly, a mechanism
to leverage such a sensitivity analysis for improving learning outcomes needs to be developed. In
this work, we quantify the influence of image quality on the task of “learning to steer,” study how
training on degraded and low-quality images can boost robustness to image corruptions, and provide
a systematic approach to improve the performance of learning algorithms using quantitative analysis.
Image degradations can be simulated by varying attributes such as blur, noise, distortion, color
representations (such as RGB or CMY) hues, saturation, and intensity values (HSV). However,
identifying the correct combination of the simulated corruptions to obtain optimal performance on
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

