Volume Rendering of Neural Implicit Surfaces

Lior Yariv1
1

Jiatao Gu2

Yoni Kasten1

Weizmann Institute of Science

2

Yaron Lipman1,2

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Neural volume rendering became increasingly popular recently due to its success
in synthesizing novel views of a scene from a sparse set of input images. So far,
the geometry learned by neural volume rendering techniques was modeled using
a generic density function. Furthermore, the geometry itself was extracted using
an arbitrary level set of the density function leading to a noisy, often low fidelity
reconstruction. The goal of this paper is to improve geometry representation and
reconstruction in neural volume rendering. We achieve that by modeling the volume density as a function of the geometry. This is in contrast to previous work
modeling the geometry as a function of the volume density. In more detail, we
define the volume density function as Laplace’s cumulative distribution function
(CDF) applied to a signed distance function (SDF) representation. This simple
density representation has three benefits: (i) it provides a useful inductive bias
to the geometry learned in the neural volume rendering process; (ii) it facilitates
a bound on the opacity approximation error, leading to an accurate sampling of
the viewing ray. Accurate sampling is important to provide a precise coupling of
geometry and radiance; and (iii) it allows efficient unsupervised disentanglement
of shape and appearance in volume rendering. Applying this new density representation to challenging scene multiview datasets produced high quality geometry
reconstructions, outperforming relevant baselines. Furthermore, switching shape
and appearance between scenes is possible due to the disentanglement of the two.

1

Introduction

Volume rendering [18] is a set of techniques that renders volume density in radiance fields by the
so called volume rendering integral. It has recently been shown that representing both the density
and radiance fields as neural networks can lead to excellent prediction of novel views by learning
only from a sparse set of input images. This neural volume rendering approach, presented in [21] and
developed by its follow-ups [34, 2] approximates the integral as alpha-composition in a differentiable
way, allowing to learn simultaneously both from input images. Although this coupling indeed leads
to good generalization of novel viewing directions, the density part is not as successful in faithfully
predicting the scene’s actual geometry, often producing noisy, low fidelity geometry approximation.
We propose VolSDF to devise a different model for the density in neural volume rendering, leading
to better approximation of the scene’s geometry while maintaining the quality of view synthesis.
The key idea is to represent the density as a function of the signed distance to the scene’s surface,
see Figure 1. Such density function enjoys several benefits. First, it guarantees the existence of a
well-defined surface that generates the density. This provides a useful inductive bias for disentangling
density and radiance fields, which in turn provides a more accurate geometry approximation. Second,
we show this density formulation allows bounding the approximation error of the opacity along rays.
This bound is used to sample the viewing ray so to provide a faithful coupling of density and radiance
field in the volume rendering integral. E.g., without such a bound the computed radiance along a ray
(pixel color) can potentially miss or extend surface parts leading to incorrect radiance approximation.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

