Self-Attention Between Datapoints: Going Beyond
Individual Input-Output Pairs in Deep Learning

Jannik Kossen1∗

Neil Band1∗

Clare Lyle1 Aidan N. Gomez1,3 Tom Rainforth2 Yarin Gal1
1

OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
3
Cohere

Abstract
We challenge a common assumption underlying most supervised deep learning:
that a model makes a prediction depending only on its parameters and the features
of a single input. To this end, we introduce a general-purpose deep learning
architecture that takes as input the entire dataset instead of processing one datapoint
at a time. Our approach uses self-attention to reason about relationships between
datapoints explicitly, which can be seen as realizing non-parametric models using
parametric attention mechanisms. However, unlike conventional non-parametric
models, we let the model learn end-to-end from the data how to make use of other
datapoints for prediction. Empirically, our models solve cross-datapoint lookup
and complex reasoning tasks unsolvable by traditional deep learning models. We
show highly competitive results on tabular data, early results on CIFAR-10, and
give insight into how the model makes use of the interactions between points.

1

Introduction

From CNNs [57] to Transformers [90], most of supervised deep learning relies on parametric
modeling: models learn parameters θ from a set of training data Dtrain = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}
to maximize training likelihoods p(y | x; θ) mapping from features x ∈ X to target values y ∈ Y.
At test time, they then make a prediction p(y ∗ | x∗ ; θ) that depends only on those parameters θ and
the test input x∗ . That is, parametric models do not consider direct dependencies between datapoints.
This paper challenges parametric modeling as the dominant paradigm in deep learning. Based on the
same end-to-end learning motivations that underpin deep learning itself, we consider giving models
the additional flexibility of using training data directly when making predictions p(y ∗ | x∗ , Dtrain ; θ).

Concretely, we introduce Non-Parametric Transformers (NPTs): a general deep learning architecture that takes the entire dataset as input and predicts by explicitly learning interactions between
datapoints (Fig. 1). NPTs leverage both parametric and non-parametric predictive mechanisms, with
the use of end-to-end training allowing the model to naturally learn from the data how to balance
the two. Namely, instead of just learning predictive functions from the features to the targets of
independent datapoints, NPTs can also learn to reason about general relationships between inputs.
We use multi-head self-attention [4, 59, 90] to model relationships between datapoints and construct
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to {jannik.kossen, neil.band}@cs.ox.ac.uk.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

