Linear Convergence in Federated Learning:
Tackling Client Heterogeneity and Sparse Gradients

Aritra Mitra

Rayana Jaafar
George J. Pappas
Hamed Hassani
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
{amitra20,rayanaj,pappasg,hassani}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider a standard federated learning (FL) setup where a group of clients
periodically coordinate with a central server to train a statistical model. We
develop a general algorithmic framework called FedLin to tackle some of the key
challenges intrinsic to FL, namely objective heterogeneity, systems heterogeneity,
and infrequent and imprecise communication. Our framework is motivated by the
observation that under these challenges, various existing FL algorithms suffer from
a fundamental speed-accuracy conflict: they either guarantee linear convergence
but to an incorrect point, or convergence to the global minimum but at a sub-linear
rate, i.e., fast convergence comes at the expense of accuracy. In contrast, when the
clients’ local loss functions are smooth and strongly convex, we show that FedLin
guarantees linear convergence to the global minimum, despite arbitrary objective
and systems heterogeneity. We then establish matching upper and lower bounds
on the convergence rate of FedLin that highlight the effects of infrequent, periodic
communication. Finally, we show that FedLin preserves linear convergence rates
under aggressive gradient sparsification, and quantify the effect of the compression
level on the convergence rate. Notably, our work is the first to provide tight linear
convergence rate guarantees, and constitutes the first comprehensive analysis of
gradient sparsification in FL.

1

Introduction

In a canonical federated learning (FL) architecture, a set S of clients periodically communicate with
a central server to find a global statistical model that solves the following problem [1–5]:
m

min f (x), where f (x) =

x∈Rd

1 X
fi (x).
m i=1

(1)

Here, m is the number of clients, fi : Rd → R is the local objective (loss) function of client i, and
f (x) is the global objective function. Some of the core distinguishing tenets of the FL paradigm are
as follows [1–5]. First, due to privacy considerations, clients cannot directly share their local training
data with the server. Second, differences in the clients’ data-sets may cause the clients to have nonidentical loss functions with different minima - this is known as statistical or objective heterogeneity.
Third, due to variability in hardware (CPU, memory) and power (battery level), i.e., due to systems or
device heterogeneity, the client devices may have different computation speeds; in particular, this
may lead to slow and straggling devices that affect convergence guarantees. Finally, communicationefficiency is a major concern, dictating the need to reduce the number of communication rounds,
and also the size of the messages transmitted in each round. The above considerations pose unique
technical challenges that we aim to address in this paper.
In a typical FL setting, to reduce the number of communication rounds, clients perform multiple local
training steps in isolation before communicating with the server. Due to such local steps, the popular
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

