Sample Complexity of Tree Search Configuration:
Cutting Planes and Beyond

Maria-Florina Balcan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Siddharth Prasad
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sprasad2@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Ellen Vitercik
EECS Department
UC Berkeley
vitercik@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Cutting-plane methods have enabled remarkable successes in integer programming over the last few decades. State-of-the-art solvers integrate a myriad of
cutting-plane techniques to speed up the underlying tree-search algorithm used to
find optimal solutions. In this paper we provide sample complexity bounds for
cut-selection in branch-and-cut (B&C). Given a training set of integer programs
sampled from an application-specific input distribution and a family of cut selection
policies, these guarantees bound the number of samples sufficient to ensure that
using any policy in the family, the size of the tree B&C builds on average over the
training set is close to the expected size of the tree B&C builds. We first bound
the sample complexity of learning cutting planes from the canonical family of
Chvátal-Gomory cuts. Our bounds handle any number of waves of any number
of cuts and are fine tuned to the magnitudes of the constraint coefficients. Next,
we prove sample complexity bounds for more sophisticated cut selection policies
that use a combination of scoring rules to choose from a family of cuts. Finally,
beyond the realm of cutting planes for integer programming, we develop a general
abstraction of tree search that captures key components such as node selection
and variable selection. For this abstraction, we bound the sample complexity of
learning a good policy for building the search tree.

1

Introduction

Integer programming is one of the most broadly-applicable tools in computer science, used to
formulate problems from operations research (such as routing, scheduling, and pricing), machine
learning (such as adversarially-robust learning, MAP estimation, and clustering), and beyond. Branchand-cut (B&C) is the most widely-used algorithm for solving integer programs (IPs). B&C is highly
configurable, and with a deft configuration, it can be used to solve computationally challenging
problems. Finding a good configuration, however, is a notoriously difficult problem.
We study machine learning approaches to configuring policies for selecting cutting planes, which have
an enormous impact on B&C’s performance. At a high level, B&C works by recursively partitioning
the IP’s feasible region, searching for the locally optimal solution within each set of the partition,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

