Noise2Score: Tweedie’s Approach to Self-Supervised
Image Denoising without Clean Images

Kwanyoung Kim1
Jong Chul Ye1,2,3
Department of Bio and Brain Engineering
2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
3
Deptartment of Mathematical Sciences
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{cubeyoung, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Recently, there has been extensive research interest in training deep networks to
denoise images without clean reference. However, the representative approaches
such as Noise2Noise, Noise2Void, Stein’s unbiased risk estimator (SURE), etc.
seem to differ from one another and it is difficult to find the coherent mathematical
structure. To address this, here we present a novel approach, called Noise2Score,
which reveals a missing link in order to unite these seemingly different approaches.
Specifically, we show that image denoising problems without clean images can be
addressed by finding the mode of the posterior distribution and that the Tweedie’s
formula offers an explicit solution through the score function (i.e. the gradient of
loglikelihood). Our method then uses the recent finding that the score function can
be stably estimated from the noisy images using the amortized residual denoising
autoencoder, the method of which is closely related to Noise2Noise or Nose2Void.
Our Noise2Score approach is so universal that the same network training can be
used to remove noises from images that are corrupted by any exponential family
distributions and noise parameters. Using extensive experiments with Gaussian,
Poisson, and Gamma noises, we show that Noise2Score significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art self-supervised denoising methods in the benchmark data set
such as (C)BSD68, Set12, and Kodak, etc.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference, which derives the posterior probability using a prior probability and a likelihood
function for the observed data, has been an important tool in statistics. This approach has been used
extensively for image denoising from early ages to the modern era of deep learning. For example,
in the recent unsupervised deep learning approach for image denoising using Stein’s risk estimate
(SURE) [1], the unknown Bayesian risk is replaced by the SURE that can be calculated from the noisy
measurement so that deep neural network training is performed by minimizing it. Unfortunately, this
method is sensitive to hyper-parameters, and the neural network must be retrained if the underlying
noise model varies [2]. On the other hand, there has been increased research interest in image
denoisers that can be trained by minimizing variants of empirical risks that are not associated with
clean data. Noise2Noise [3] was the first representative approach that does not require clean data.
Unfortunately, multiple noisy versions of the same images are necessary for training. To address
this, self-supervised learning approaches such as Noise2Void [4], Noise2Self [5], etc. have been
developed in order to use only a single noisy image. This class of approaches, which we will call
Noise2X throughout the paper, are especially important for practical applications, where noiseless
clean images or multiple noisy realization of the same image are difficult or impossible to collect.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

