Spot the Difference: Detection of Topological Changes
via Geometric Alignment

Steffen Czolbe
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
per.sc@di.ku.dk

Aasa Feragen
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
afhar@dtu.dk

Oswin Krause
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
oswin.krause@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Geometric alignment appears in a variety of applications, ranging from domain
adaptation, optimal transport, and normalizing flows in machine learning; optical
flow and learned augmentation in computer vision and deformable registration
within biomedical imaging. A recurring challenge is the alignment of domains
whose topology is not the same; a problem that is routinely ignored, potentially
introducing bias in downstream analysis. As a first step towards solving such
alignment problems, we propose an unsupervised algorithm for the detection of
changes in image topology. The model is based on a conditional variational autoencoder and detects topological changes between two images during the registration
step. We account for both topological changes in the image under spatial variation
and unexpected transformations. Our approach is validated on two tasks and
datasets: detection of topological changes in microscopy images of cells, and
unsupervised anomaly detection brain imaging.

1

Introduction

Geometric alignment is a fundamental component of widely different algorithms, ranging from
domain adaptation [7], optimal transport [40] and normalizing flows [35, 42] in machine learning;
optical flow [21, 51] and learned augmentation [20] in computer vision, and deformable registration
within biomedical imaging [5, 15, 19, 39, 53]. A recurring challenge is the alignment of domains
whose topology is not the same. When the objects to be aligned are probability distributions [35], this
appears when distributions have different numbers of modes whose support is separated into separate
connected components. When the objects to be aligned are scenes or natural images, the problem
occurs with occlusion or temporal changes [51]. In biomedical image registration, the problem is
very common and happens when the studied anatomy differs from "standard" anatomy [36]. Despite
being extremely common, this problem is routinely ignored or accepted as inevitable, potentially
introducing bias in downstream analysis.
We study two cases from biomedical image registration. One is the alignment of image slices to
reconstruct a 3d volume, where changes in topology between slices introduce challenges in postprocessing (Figure 1). The other is the registration of brain MRI scans, where tumors give common
examples of anatomies that are topologically different from healthy brains. In deformable image
registration, a "moving image" is mapped via a nonlinear transformation to make it as similar as
possible to a "target" image, enabling matching local features or transferring information from one
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

