Better Safe Than Sorry: Preventing Delusive
Adversaries with Adversarial Training

Lue Tao1,2
1

Lei Feng3

Jinfeng Yi4

Sheng-Jun Huang1,2

Songcan Chen1,2†

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University
4
JD AI Research

Abstract
Delusive attacks aim to substantially deteriorate the test accuracy of the learning
model by slightly perturbing the features of correctly labeled training examples.
By formalizing this malicious attack as finding the worst-case training data within
a specific ∞-Wasserstein ball, we show that minimizing adversarial risk on the
perturbed data is equivalent to optimizing an upper bound of natural risk on the
original data. This implies that adversarial training can serve as a principled
defense against delusive attacks. Thus, the test accuracy decreased by delusive
attacks can be largely recovered by adversarial training. To further understand
the internal mechanism of the defense, we disclose that adversarial training can
resist the delusive perturbations by preventing the learner from overly relying on
non-robust features in a natural setting. Finally, we complement our theoretical
findings with a set of experiments on popular benchmark datasets, which show that
the defense withstands six different practical attacks. Both theoretical and empirical
results vote for adversarial training when confronted with delusive adversaries.

1

Introduction

Although machine learning (ML) models have achieved superior performance on many challenging
tasks, their performance can be largely deteriorated when the training and test distributions are
different. For instance, standard models are prone to make mistakes on the adversarial examples that
are considered as worst-case data at test time [10, 113]. Compared with that, a more threatening and
easily overlooked threat is the malicious perturbations at training time, i.e., the delusive attacks [82]
that aim to maximize test error by slightly perturbing the correctly labeled training examples [6, 7].
In the era of big data, many practitioners collect training data from untrusted sources where delusive
adversaries may exist. In particular, many companies are scraping large datasets from unknown users
or public websites for commercial use. For example, Kaspersky Lab, a leading antivirus company,
has been accused of poisoning competing products [7]. Although they denied any wrongdoings and
clarified the false rumors, one can still imagine the disastrous consequences if that really happens in
the security-critical applications. Furthermore, a recent survey of 28 organizations found that these
industry practitioners are obviously more afraid of data poisoning than other threats from adversarial
ML [64]. In a nutshell, delusive attacks has become a realistic and horrible threat to practitioners.
Recently, Feng et al. [32] showed for the first time that delusive attacks are feasible for deep networks,
by proposing “training-time adversarial data” that can significantly deteriorate model performance
on clean test data. However, how to design learning algorithms that are robust to delusive attacks
still remains an open question due to several crucial challenges [82, 32]. First of all, delusive attacks
†

Corresponding author: Songcan Chen <s.chen@nuaa.edu.cn>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

