Ultrahyperbolic Neural Networks

Marc T. Law
NVIDIA

Abstract
Riemannian space forms, such as the Euclidean space, sphere and hyperbolic space,
are popular and powerful representation spaces in machine learning. For instance,
hyperbolic geometry is appropriate to represent graphs without cycles and has been
used to extend Graph Neural Networks. Recently, some pseudo-Riemannian space
forms that generalize both hyperbolic and spherical geometries have been exploited
to learn a specific type of nonparametric embedding called ultrahyperbolic. The
lack of geodesic between every pair of ultrahyperbolic points makes the task of
learning parametric models (e.g., neural networks) difficult. This paper introduces
a method to learn parametric models in ultrahyperbolic space. We experimentally
show the relevance of our approach in the tasks of graph and node classification.

1

Introduction

Riemannian manifolds of constant curvature are the most common representation spaces in machine
learning. They include the Euclidean space (of constant zero curvature), the d-sphere (of constant
positive curvature) and the hyperbolic space (of constant negative curvature). The choice of a
geometry to represent data mainly depends on the kind of relationship that needs to be described. For
instance, Gromov [10] showed the relevance of hyperbolic geometry to represent trees (i.e., graphs
without cycles). Since many hierarchies can be described as trees, hyperbolic representations have
been used to represent hierarchical relationships (e.g., hypernymy between words [19]). Nonetheless,
in many domains (e.g., social networks or protein structures), hierarchical graphs contain cycles.
In hyperbolic geometry, the considered manifold is not a vector space and is not equipped with the
standard dot product. Therefore, most hyperbolic neural networks [5, 8, 18, 27] represent the weights
of their last layer in the tangent space of some reference point. That tangent space is equipped with a
positive definite metric tensor and the learned model can then be optimized with Riemannian gradient
descent [1, 4]. In particular, since there exists a geodesic between any pair of points, the parameters
are often optimized by using parallel transport (also called parallel translation) or the logarithm map.
The Riemannian gradients are then parallel translated to the reference tangent space in which the
model parameters lie. We refer the reader to [23] for a recent survey on hyperbolic neural networks.
Recently, Law & Stam [15] proposed ultrahyperbolic embeddings. They are a type of embedding that
lies on a pseudo-Riemannian manifold of constant nonzero curvature [2, 21, 30]. Pseudo-Riemannian
manifolds (also called semi-Riemannian manifolds) are generalizations of Riemannian manifolds
where the nondegenerate metric tensor is not constrained to be positive definite [16]. In particular,
when the metric tensor is not positive definite (e.g., when it is indefinite), the negative of the (pseudoRiemannian) gradient is not a descent direction [9]. Law & Stam [15] proposed an efficient method
to calculate a descent direction and learn ultrahyperbolic (nonparametric) embeddings. The main
motivation of representing data on an ultrahyperbolic manifold is that it contains hyperbolic and
spherical parts (see Fig. 1 and supp. material for details). It can then describe relationships specific
to hyperbolic and spherical geometries (e.g., to represent parts of a graph that are trees or cycles) and
is more flexible. Ultrahyperbolic embeddings were experimentally shown to be more appropriate
than hyperbolic embeddings to represent hierarchical graphs with cycles on several datasets [15].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

