On sensitivity of meta-learning to support data
Mayank Agarwal 1
mayank.agarwal@ibm.com

Mikhail Yurochkin 1,2
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Yuekai Sun 3
yuekai@umich.edu

IBM Research,1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,2 University of Michigan3 .

Abstract
Meta-learning algorithms are widely used for few-shot learning. For example,
image recognition systems that readily adapt to unseen classes after seeing only a
few labeled examples. Despite their success, we show that modern meta-learning
algorithms are extremely sensitive to the data used for adaptation, i.e. support data.
In particular, we demonstrate the existence of (unaltered, in-distribution, natural)
images that, when used for adaptation, yield accuracy as low as 4% or as high
as 95% on standard few-shot image classification benchmarks. We explain our
empirical findings in terms of class margins, which in turn suggests that robust and
safe meta-learning requires larger margins than supervised learning.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning, or learning to learn [29], is the problem of training models that can adapt to new
tasks quickly, using only a handful of examples. The problem is inspired by humans’ ability to learn
new skills or concepts at a rapid pace (e.g. recognizing previously unknown objects after seeing
only a single example [20]). Meta-learning has found applications in many domains, including
safety-critical medical image analysis [23], autonomous driving [35], visual navigation [43] and
legged robots control [40]. In this paper, we investigate the vulnerabilities of modern meta-learning
algorithms in the context of few-shot image classification problem [25], where a meta-learner needs
to solve a classification task on classes unseen during training using a small number (typically 1
or 5) of labeled samples from each of these classes to adapt. Specifically, we demonstrate that the
performance of modern meta-learning algorithms on few-shot image recognition benchmarks varies
drastically depending on the examples provided for adaptation, typically called support data, raising
concerns about its safety in deployment.
Despite the many empirical successes of artificial intelligence, its vulnerabilities are important to
explore and mitigate in our pursuit of safe AI that is suitable for critical applications. Sensitivity to
small (possibly adversarial) perturbations to the inputs [13], backdoor attacks allowing malicious
model manipulations [6], algorithmic biases [2] and poor generalization outside of the training
domain [18] are some of the prominent examples of AI safety failures. Some of these issues have
also been studied in the context of meta-learning, e.g. adversarial robustness [45, 11, 44] and fairness
[37]. Most of the aforementioned AI-safety dangers are associated with adversarial manipulations
of the train or test data, or significant distribution shifts at test time. In meta-learning, prior works
demonstrated that an adversary can create visually imperceptible changes of the test inputs [11] or the
support data [44, 30] causing meta-learning algorithms to fail on various few-shot image recognition
benchmarks. In this work we demonstrate adversary-free and in-distribution failures specific to
meta-learning. Sohn et al. [39] studied a similar problem in the context of semi-supervised learning.
A distinct feature of meta-learning is the adaptation stage where the model is updated using a scarce
amount of labeled examples from a new task. In practice, these examples need to be selected and
presented to a human for labeling. Then a meta-learner adapts and can be used to classify the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

