On Large-Cohort Training for Federated Learning

Zachary Charles
Google
zachcharles@google.com

Zachary Garrett
Google
zachgarrett@google.com

Sergei Shmulyian
Google
sshmulyian@google.com

Zhouyuan Huo
Google
zhhuo@google.com

Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
smithv@cmu.edu

Abstract
Federated learning methods typically learn a model by iteratively sampling updates
from a population of clients. In this work, we explore how the number of clients
sampled at each round (the cohort size) impacts the quality of the learned model
and the training dynamics of federated learning algorithms. Our work poses three
fundamental questions. First, what challenges arise when trying to scale federated
learning to larger cohorts? Second, what parallels exist between cohort sizes in
federated learning, and batch sizes in centralized learning? Last, how can we design
federated learning methods that effectively utilize larger cohort sizes? We give
partial answers to these questions based on extensive empirical evaluation. Our
work highlights a number of challenges stemming from the use of larger cohorts.
While some of these (such as generalization issues and diminishing returns) are
analogs of large-batch training challenges, others (including catastrophic training
failures and fairness concerns) are unique to federated learning.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [52] considers learning a model from multiple clients without directly
sharing training data, often under the orchestration of a central server. In this work we focus on
cross-device FL, in which the aim is to learn across a large population of edge devices [27, Table 1].
A distinguishing characteristic of cross-device FL is partial participation of the client population:
Due to systems constraints such as network size, the server typically only communicates with a subset
of the clients at a time1 . For example, in the popular FedAvg algorithm [52], at each communication
round the server broadcasts its current model to a subset of available clients (referred to as a cohort),
who use the model to initialize local optimization and send their model updates back to the server.
Intuitively, larger cohort sizes have the potential to improve the convergence of FL algorithms. By
sampling more clients per round, we can observe a more representative sample of the underlying
population—possibly reducing the number of communication rounds needed to achieve a given
accuracy. This intuition is reflected in many convergence analyses of FL methods [29, 31, 32, 62, 69],
which generally show that asymptotic convergence rates improve as the cohort size increases.
Larger cohorts can also provide privacy benefits. For example, when using the distributed differential
privacy model [6, 11, 16, 65] in federated learning, noise is typically added to the updates sent from
the clients to the server [54]. This helps preserve privacy but can also mar the utility of the learned
model. By dividing the noise among more clients, larger cohorts may mitigate detrimental effects
of noise. Moreover, since privacy tends to decrease as a function of the number of communication
1

In contrast, cross-silo settings often have a small set of clients, most of which participate in each round [27].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

