NeRV: Neural Representations for Videos

Hao Chen1 , Bo He1 , Hanyu Wang1 , Yixuan Ren1 , Ser-Nam Lim2 , Abhinav Shrivastava1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, 2 Facebook AI

{chenh, bohe, hywang66, yxren, abhinav}@umd.edu, sernamlim@fb.com

Abstract
We propose a novel neural representation for videos (NeRV) which encodes videos
in neural networks. Unlike conventional representations that treat videos as frame
sequences, we represent videos as neural networks taking frame index as input.
Given a frame index, NeRV outputs the corresponding RGB image. Video encoding
in NeRV is simply fitting a neural network to video frames and decoding process
is a simple feedforward operation. As an image-wise implicit representation,
NeRV output the whole image and shows great efficiency compared to pixelwise implicit representation, improving the encoding speed by 25× to 70×, the
decoding speed by 38× to 132×, while achieving better video quality. With such a
representation, we can treat videos as neural networks, simplifying several videorelated tasks. For example, conventional video compression methods are restricted
by a long and complex pipeline, specifically designed for the task. In contrast, with
NeRV, we can use any neural network compression method as a proxy for video
compression, and achieve comparable performance to traditional frame-based
video compression approaches (H.264, HEVC etc.). Besides compression, we
demonstrate the generalization of NeRV for video denoising. The source code and
pre-trained model can be found at https://github.com/haochen-rye/NeRV.git.

1

Introduction

What is a video? Typically, a video captures a dynamic visual scene using a sequence of frames. A
schematic interpretation of this is a curve in 2D space, where each point can be characterized with a
(x, y) pair representing the spatial state. If we have a model for all (x, y) pairs, then, given any x, we
can easily find the corresponding y state. Similarly, we can interpret a video as a recording of the
visual world, where we can find a corresponding RGB state for every single timestamp. This leads to
our main claim: can we represent a video as a function of time?
More formally, can we represent a video V as V = {vt }Tt=1 , where vt = fθ (t), i.e., a frame at timestamp t, is represented as a function f parameterized by θ. Given their remarkable representational
capacity [1], we choose deep neural networks as the function in our work. Given these intuitions,
we propose NeRV, a novel representation that represents videos as implicit functions and encodes
them into neural networks. Specifically, with a fairly simple deep neural network design, NeRV
can reconstruct the corresponding video frames with high quality, given the frame index. Once the
video is encoded into a neural network, this network can be used as a proxy for video, where we can
directly extract all video information from the representation. Therefore, unlike traditional video
representations which treat videos as sequences of frames, shown in Figure 1 (a), our proposed NeRV
considers a video as a unified neural network with all information embedded within its architecture
and parameters, shown in Figure 1 (b).
As an image-wise implicit representation, NeRV shares lots of similarities with pixel-wise implicit
visual representations [5, 6] which takes spatial-temporal coordinates as inputs. The main differences
between our work and image-wise implicit representation are the output space and architecture
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

