PlayVirtual: Augmenting Cycle-Consistent Virtual
Trajectories for Reinforcement Learning

Tao Yu1∗ Cuiling Lan2† Wenjun Zeng2 Mingxiao Feng1 Zhizheng Zhang2 Zhibo Chen1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
yutao666@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com
fmxustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhizzhang@microsoft.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning good feature representations is important for deep reinforcement learning
(RL). However, with limited experience, RL often suffers from data inefficiency
for training. For un-experienced or less-experienced trajectories (i.e., state-action
sequences), the lack of data limits the use of them for better feature learning.
In this work, we propose a novel method, dubbed PlayVirtual, which augments
cycle-consistent virtual trajectories to enhance the data efficiency for RL feature
representation learning. Specifically, PlayVirtual predicts future states in a latent space based on the current state and action by a dynamics model and then
predicts the previous states by a backward dynamics model, which forms a trajectory cycle. Based on this, we augment the actions to generate a large amount
of virtual state-action trajectories. Being free of groudtruth state supervision, we
enforce a trajectory to meet the cycle consistency constraint, which can significantly enhance the data efficiency. We validate the effectiveness of our designs
on the Atari and DeepMind Control Suite benchmarks. Our method achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on both benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/Playvirtual.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) combines the powerful representation capacity of deep neural
networks and the notable advantages of RL for solving sequential decision-making problems. It has
made great progress in many complex control tasks such as video games [35, 46, 3], and robotic
control [22, 54, 36]. Despite the success of deep RL, it faces the challenge of data/sample inefficiency
when learning from high-dimensional observations such as image pixels from limited experience
[27, 61, 29]. Fitting a high-capability feature encoder using only scarce reward signals is data
inefficient and prone to suboptimal convergence [49]. Humans can learn to play Atari games in
several minutes, while RL agents need millions of interactions [44]. However, collecting experience
in the real world is often expensive and time-consuming. One may need several months to collect
interaction data for robotic arms training [22] or be troubled by collecting sufficient patient data to
train a healthcare agent [52]. Therefore, from another perspective, making efficient use of limited
experience for improving data efficiency becomes vital for RL.
Many methods improve data efficiency by introducing auxiliary tasks with useful self-supervision to
learn compact and informative feature representations, which better serves policy learning. Previous
works have demonstrated that good auxiliary supervision can significantly improve agent learning,
like leveraging image reconstruction [49], the prediction of future states [41, 13, 30, 40], maximizing
Predictive Information [38, 1, 34, 42, 31], or promoting discrimination through contrastive learning
∗
†

This work was done when Tao Yu was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

