TestRank: Bringing Order into Unlabeled Test
Instances for Deep Learning Tasks

Yu Li† , Min Li† , Qiuxia Lai† , Yannan Liu∗ , and Qiang Xu†
†
CURE Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
∗
Wuheng Lab, ByteDance
{yuli,mli,qxlai,qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) systems are notoriously difficult to test and debug due to
the lack of correctness proof and the huge test input space to cover. Given the
ubiquitous unlabeled test data and high labeling cost, in this paper, we propose a
novel test input prioritization technique, namely TestRank, which aims at revealing
more model failures with less labeling effort. TestRank brings order into the
unlabeled test data according to their likelihood of being a failure, i.e., their failurerevealing capabilities. Different from existing solutions, TestRank leverages both
intrinsic and contextual attributes of the unlabeled test data when prioritizing
them. To be specific, we first build a similarity graph on both unlabeled test
samples and labeled samples (e.g., training or previously labeled test samples).
Then, we conduct graph-based semi-supervised learning to extract contextual
features from the correctness of similar labeled samples. For a particular test
instance, the contextual features extracted with the graph neural network and the
intrinsic features obtained with the DL model itself are combined to predict its
failure-revealing capability. Finally, TestRank prioritizes unlabeled test inputs in
descending order of the above probability value. We evaluate TestRank on three
popular image classification datasets, and results show that TestRank significantly
outperforms existing test input prioritization techniques. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/cure-lab/TestRank.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) systems are prone to errors due to many factors, such as the biased training/validation dataset, the limitations of the model architecture, and the constraints on training cost.
It is essential to conduct high-quality testing before DL models are deployed in the field; otherwise,
the behaviors of DL models can be unpredictable and result in severe accidents after deployment.
However, the cost of building test oracles (i.e., the ground-truth output) by manually labeling a
massive set of test instances is prohibitive, especially for tasks requiring experts for accurate labeling,
such as medical images and malware executables.
To tackle the above problem, various test input prioritization techniques [Feng et al., 2020, Byun
et al., 2019, Shen et al., 2020] are proposed to identify ‘high-quality’ test instances from a large
amount of unlabeled data, which facilitates revealing more failures (e.g., misclassification) of the DL
model with reasonable labeling effort. These methods try to derive the failure-revealing capability of
a test instance with its intrinsic attributes extracted from the responses of the model under test (e.g.,
the softmax-based probabilities given by the target DL model to this specific input). DeepGini [Feng
et al., 2020] feeds the unlabeled data to the target DL model and calculates confidence-related scores
based on the model’s output probabilities to rank the unlabeled test cases. Test cases with nearly
equal probabilities on all output classes are regarded as less confident ones and are likely to reveal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

