How Does it Sound? Generation of Rhythmic
Soundtracks for Human Movement Videos
Kun Su ∗†

Xiulong Liu ∗†

Eli Shlizerman ‡†§

Figure 1: RhythmicNet: Given an input of a silent human movement video, RhythmicNet generates a
soundtrack for it.

Abstract
One of the primary purposes of video is to capture people and their unique activities.
It is often the case that the experience of watching the video can be enhanced by
adding a musical soundtrack that is in-sync with the rhythmic features of these
activities. How would this soundtrack sound? Such a problem is challenging since
little is known about capturing the rhythmic nature of free body movements. In this
work, we explore this problem and propose a novel system, called ‘RhythmicNet’,
which takes as an input a video with human movements and generates a soundtrack
for it. RhythmicNet works directly with human movements, by extracting skeleton
keypoints and implementing a sequence of models translating them to rhythmic
sounds. RhythmicNet follows the natural process of music improvisation which
includes the prescription of streams of the beat, the rhythm and the melody. In
particular, RhythmicNet first infers the music beat and the style pattern from body
keypoints per each frame to produce the rhythm. Next, it implements a transformerbased model to generate the hits of drum instruments and implements a U-net based
model to generate the velocity and the offsets of the instruments. Additional types
of instruments are added to the soundtrack by further conditioning on generated
drum sounds. We evaluate RhythmicNet on large scale video datasets that include
body movements with inherit sound association, such as dance, as well as ’in the
wild’ internet videos of various movements and actions. We show that the method
can generate plausible music that aligns with different types of human movements.

1

Introduction

Rhythmic sounds are everywhere, from raindrops falling on surfaces, to birds chirping, to machines
generating unique sound patterns. When sounds accompany visual scenes, they enhance the perception of the scene by complementing it with additional cues such as semantic association of events,
means of communication, drawing attention to parts of the scene, and many more. For visual scenes
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
‡
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
§
Corresponding author: shlizee@uw.edu
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

