Soft Calibration Objectives for Neural Networks

Archit Karandikar∗
Google Research
archk@google.com
Dustin Tran
Google Research
trandustin@google.com

Nicholas Cain∗
Google Research
nicholascain@google.com
Balaji Lakshminarayanan
Google Research
balajiln@google.com

Michael C. Mozer
Google Research
mcmozer@google.com

Jonathon Shlens
Google Research
shlens@google.com

Becca Roelofs
Google Research
rolfs@google.com

Abstract
Optimal decision making requires that classifiers produce uncertainty estimates
consistent with their empirical accuracy. However, deep neural networks are
often under- or over-confident in their predictions. Consequently, methods have
been developed to improve the calibration of their predictive uncertainty, both
during training and post-hoc. In this work, we propose differentiable losses to
improve calibration based on a soft (continuous) version of the binning operation
underlying popular calibration-error estimators. When incorporated into training,
these soft calibration losses achieve state-of-the-art single-model ECE across
multiple datasets with less than 1% decrease in accuracy. For instance, we observe
an 82% reduction in ECE (70% relative to the post-hoc rescaled ECE) in exchange
for a 0.7% relative decrease in accuracy relative to the cross-entropy baseline on
CIFAR-100. When incorporated post-training, the soft-binning-based calibration
error objective improves upon temperature scaling, a popular recalibration method.
Overall, experiments across losses and datasets demonstrate that using calibrationsensitive procedures yield better uncertainty estimates under dataset shift than the
standard practice of using a cross-entropy loss and post-hoc recalibration methods.2

1

Introduction

Despite the success of deep neural networks across a variety of domains, they are still susceptible
to miscalibrated predictions. Both over- and under-confidence contribute to miscalibration, and
empirically, deep neural networks empirically exhibit significant miscalibration [Guo et al., 2017].
Calibration error (CE) quantifies a model’s miscalibration by measuring how much its confidence,
i.e. the predicted probability of correctness, diverges from its accuracy, i.e. the empirical probability
of correctness. Models with low CE are critical in domains where satisfactory outcomes depend on
well-modeled uncertainty, such as autonomous vehicle navigation [Bojarski et al., 2016] and medical
diagnostics [Jiang et al., 2012, Caruana et al., 2015, Kocbek et al., 2020]. Calibration has also been
shown to be useful for improving model fairness [Pleiss et al., 2017] and detecting out-of-distribution
data [Kuleshov and Ermon, 2017, Devries and Taylor, 2018, Shao et al., 2020]. More generally, low
∗
2

co-first author
Code available on GitHub: https://github.com/google/uncertainty-baselines/tree/main/experimental/caltrain

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

