Efficient Learning of Discrete-Continuous
Computation Graphs

David Friede1,2
david@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
2

Mathias Niepert1
mathias.niepert@neclab.eu
1

University of Mannheim
Mannheim, Germany

NEC Laboratories Europe
Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
Numerous models for supervised and reinforcement learning benefit from combinations of discrete and continuous model components. End-to-end learnable
discrete-continuous models are compositional, tend to generalize better, and are
more interpretable. A popular approach to building discrete-continuous computation graphs is that of integrating discrete probability distributions into neural
networks using stochastic softmax tricks. Prior work has mainly focused on computation graphs with a single discrete component on each of the graph’s execution
paths. We analyze the behavior of more complex stochastic computations graphs
with multiple sequential discrete components. We show that it is challenging to
optimize the parameters of these models, mainly due to small gradients and local
minima. We then propose two new strategies to overcome these challenges. First,
we show that increasing the scale parameter of the Gumbel noise perturbations during training improves the learning behavior. Second, we propose dropout residual
connections specifically tailored to stochastic, discrete-continuous computation
graphs. With an extensive set of experiments, we show that we can train complex
discrete-continuous models which one cannot train with standard stochastic softmax tricks. We also show that complex discrete-stochastic models generalize better
than their continuous counterparts on several benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Neuro-symbolic learning systems aim to combine discrete and continuous operations. The majority of recent research has focused on integrating neural network components into probabilistic
logics [28, 20], that is, making logic-based reasoning approaches more amenable to noisy and highdimensional input data. On the other end of the spectrum are the data-driven approaches, which aim
to learn a modular and discrete program structure in an end-to-end neural network based system. The
broader vision followed by proponents of these approaches are systems capable of assembling the
required modular operations to solve a variety of tasks with heterogeneous input data. Reinforcement
learning [33], neuro-symbolic program synthesis [25], and neural module networks [1] are instances
of such data-integrated discrete-continuous learning systems.
We focus on learning systems comprised of both symbolic and continuous operations where the
symbolic operations are modeled as discrete probability distributions. The resulting systems can be
described by their stochastic computation graphs, a formalism recently introduced to unify several
related approaches [30]. Figure 1 illustrates two instances of such stochastic computation graphs.
For a given high-dimensional input such as a set of images or a list of symbols, a computation graph,
consisting of stochastic (discrete) and continuous (neural) nodes, is created to solve a particular task.
Both, the mechanism to assemble the graphs (if not already provided) and the various operations are
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

