Multi-armed Bandit Requiring Monotone Arm
Sequences

Ningyuan Chen
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto
105 St George St, Toronto, ON, Canada
ningyuan.chen@utoronto.ca

Abstract
In many online learning or multi-armed bandit problems, the taken actions or
pulled arms are ordinal and required to be monotone over time. Examples include
dynamic pricing, in which the firms use markup pricing policies to please early
adopters and deter strategic waiting, and clinical trials, in which the dose allocation
usually follows the dose escalation principle to prevent dose limiting toxicities. We
consider the continuum-armed bandit problem when the arm sequence is required
to be monotone. We show that when the unknown objective function is Lipschitz
continuous, the regret is O(T ). When in addition the objective function is unimodal
or quasiconcave, the regret is Õ(T 3/4 ) under the proposed algorithm, which is
also shown to be the optimal rate. This deviates from the optimal rate Õ(T 2/3 ) in
the continuous-armed bandit literature and demonstrates the cost to the learning
efficiency brought by the monotonicity requirement.

1

Introduction

In online learning problems such as the multi-armed bandits (MAB), the decision maker chooses
from a set of actions/arms with unknown reward. The goal is to learn the expected rewards of the
arms and choose the optimal one as much as possible within a finite horizon. The framework and its
many variants have been successfully applied to a wide range of practical problems, including news
recommendation [31], dynamic pricing [9] and medical decision-making [8].
Popular algorithms such as UCB [4, 5] and Thompson sampling [3, 34] typically explore the arms
sufficiently and as more evidence is gathered, converge to the optimal arm. These algorithms are
designed to handle the classic MAB problems, in which the arms are discrete and do not have any
order. However, in some practical problems, the arms are ordinal and even continuous. This is the
focus of the study on the so-called continuum-armed bandit [2, 26, 6, 11, 38]. By discretizing the
arm space properly, algorithms such as UCB and Thompson sampling can still be applied. Therefore,
the continuous decision space has readily been incorporated into the framework.
Another practical issue, which is not studied thoroughly but emerges naturally from some applications,
is the requirement that the action/arm sequence is has to be monotone. Such a requirement is usually
imposed due to external reasons that cannot be internalized to be part of the regret. We give two
concrete examples below.
Dynamic pricing. When launching a new product, how does the market demand reacts to the price
is typically unknown. Online learning is a popular tool for the firm to learn the demand and make
profits simultaneously. See [21] for a comprehensive review. In this case, the arms are the prices
charged by the firm. However, changing prices arbitrarily over time may have severe adverse effects.
First, early adopters of the product are usually loyal customers. Price drops at a later stage may cause
a backlash in this group of customers, whom the firm is the least willing to offend. Second, customers
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

