A Shading-Guided Generative Implicit Model for
Shape-Accurate 3D-Aware Image Synthesis

Xingang Pan1
1

Xudong Xu2

Chen Change Loy3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

2

Bo Dai3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{xpan,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
3

Christian Theobalt1

xx018@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{ccloy, bo.dai}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The advancement of generative radiance fields has pushed the boundary of 3Daware image synthesis. Motivated by the observation that a 3D object should look
realistic from multiple viewpoints, these methods introduce a multi-view constraint
as regularization to learn valid 3D radiance fields from 2D images. Despite the
progress, they often fall short of capturing accurate 3D shapes due to the shapecolor ambiguity, limiting their applicability in downstream tasks. In this work, we
address this ambiguity by proposing a novel shading-guided generative implicit
model that is able to learn a starkly improved shape representation. Our key insight
is that an accurate 3D shape should also yield a realistic rendering under different
lighting conditions. This multi-lighting constraint is realized by modeling illumination explicitly and performing shading with various lighting conditions. Gradients
are derived by feeding the synthesized images to a discriminator. To compensate
for the additional computational burden of calculating surface normals, we further
devise an efficient volume rendering strategy via surface tracking, reducing the
training and inference time by 24% and 48%, respectively. Our experiments on multiple datasets show that the proposed approach achieves photorealistic 3D-aware
image synthesis while capturing accurate underlying 3D shapes. We demonstrate
improved performance of our approach on 3D shape reconstruction against existing
methods, and show its applicability on image relighting. Our code will be released
at https://github.com/XingangPan/ShadeGAN.

1

Introduction

Advanced deep generative models, e.g., StyleGAN [1, 2] and BigGAN [3], have achieved great
successes in natural image synthesis. While producing impressive results, these 2D representationbased models cannot synthesize novel views of an instance in a 3D-consistent manner. They also fall
short of representing an explicit 3D object shape. To overcome such limitations, researchers have
proposed new deep generative models that represent 3D scenes as neural radiance fields [4, 5]. Such
3D-aware generative models allow explicit control of viewpoint while preserving 3D consistency
during image synthesis. Perhaps a more fascinating merit is that they have shown the great potential
of learning 3D shapes in an unsupervised manner from just a collection of unconstrained 2D images.
If we could train a 3D-aware generative model that learns accurate 3D object shapes, it would broaden
various downstream applications such as 3D shape reconstruction and image relighting.
Existing attempts for 3D-aware image synthesis [4, 5] tend to learn coarse 3D shapes that are
inaccurate and noisy, as shown in Fig.1 (a). We found that such inaccuracy arises from an inevitable
ambiguity inherent in the training strategy adopted by these methods. In particular, a form of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

