Differentially Private Model Personalization

Prateek Jain
Google Research
prajain@google.com

Keith Rush
Google Research
krush@google.com

Shuang Song
Google Research
shuangsong@google.com

Adam Smith
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Abhradeep Thakurta
Google Research
athakurta@google.com

Abstract
We study personalization of supervised learning with user-level differential privacy.
Consider a setting with many users, each of whom has a training data set drawn from
their own distribution Pi . Assuming some shared structure among the problems Pi ,
can users collectively learn the shared structure—and solve their tasks better than
they could individually—while preserving the privacy of their data? We formulate
this question using joint, user-level differential privacy—that is, we control what is
leaked about each user’s entire data set.
We provide algorithms that exploit popular non-private approaches in this domain
like the Almost-No-Inner-Loop (ANIL) method, and give strong user-level privacy
guarantees for our general approach. When the problems Pi are linear regression
problems with each user’s regression vector lying in a common, unknown lowdimensional subspace, we show that our efficient algorithms satisfy nearly optimal
estimation error guarantees. We also establish a general, information-theoretic
upper bound via an exponential mechanism-based algorithm.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning techniques are amazingly successful but come with a range of risks to the
privacy of the personal data on which they are trained. Complex models often encode exact personal
information in surprising ways—allowing, in extreme cases, the exact recovery of training data from
black box use of the model [7, 8]. The emerging architecture of modern learning systems, in which
models are trained collaboratively by networks of mobile devices using extremely rich, personal
information exacerbates these risks.
The paradigm of model personalization, a special case of multitask learning, has emerged as one
way to address both privacy and scalability issues. The idea is to let users train models on their own
data—for example, to recognize friends’ and family members’ faces in photos, or to suggest text
completions that match the user’s style—based on information that is common to the many other
similar learning problems being solved by other users in the system. Even a fairly limited amount of
shared information—a useful feature representation or starting set of parameters for optimization, for
example—can dramatically reduce the amount of data each user requires. But that shared information
can nevertheless be highly disclosive.
In this paper, we formulate a model for reasoning rigorously about the loss to privacy incurred by
sharing information for model personalization. In our model, there are n users, each holding a dataset
of m labeled examples. We assume user j’s data set Dj is drawn i.i.d. from a distribution Pj ; the
user’s goal is to learn a prediction rule that generalizes well to unseen examples from Pj . Ideally, the
user should succeed much better than they could have on their own. We give new algorithms for this
setting, analyze their accuracy on specific data distributions, and test our results empirically.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

