Iterative Methods for Private Synthetic Data:
Unifying Framework and New Methods

Terrance Liu∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
terrancl@andrew.cmu.edu

Giuseppe Vietri∗
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
vietr002@umn.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study private synthetic data generation for query release, where the goal is to
construct a sanitized version of a sensitive dataset, subject to differential privacy,
that approximately preserves the answers to a large collection of statistical queries.
We first present an algorithmic framework that unifies a long line of iterative algorithms in the literature. Under this framework, we propose two new methods.
Our first method, generative networks with the exponential mechanism (GEM), circumvents computational bottlenecks in algorithms such as MWEM by optimizing
over generative models parameterized by neural networks, which capture a rich
family of distributions while enabling fast gradient-based optimization. The second
method, private entropy projection (PEP), can be viewed as an advanced variant
of MWEM that adaptively reuses past query measurements to boost accuracy. We
demonstrate that GEM and PEP empirically outperform existing algorithms. Furthermore, we show that GEM nicely incorporates prior information from public
data while overcoming limitations of PMWPub , the existing state-of-the-art method
that also leverages public data.

1

Introduction

As the collection and analyses of sensitive data become more prevalent, there is an increasing need
to protect individuals’ private information. Differential privacy [15] is a rigorous and meaningful
criterion for privacy preservation that enables quantifiable trade-offs between privacy and accuracy. In recent years, there has been a wave of practical deployments of differential privacy across
organizations such as Google, Apple, and most notably, the U.S. Census Bureau [3].
In this paper, we study the problem of differentially private query release: given a large collection of
statistical queries, the goal is to release approximate answers subject to the constraint of differential
privacy. Query release has been one of the most fundamental and practically relevant problems
in differential privacy. For example, the release of summary data from the 2020 U.S. Decennial
Census can be framed as a query release problem. We focus on the approach of synthetic data
generation—that is, generate a privacy-preserving "fake" dataset, or more generally a representation
of a probability distribution, that approximates all statistical queries of interest. Compared to simple
Gaussian or Laplace mechanisms that perturb the answers directly, synthetic data methods can
provably answer an exponentially larger collection of queries with non-trivial accuracy. However,
their statistical advantage also comes with a computational cost. Prior work has shown that achieving
better accuracy than simple Gaussian perturbation is intractable in the worst case even for the simple
query class of 2-way marginals that release the marginal distributions for all pairs of attributes [38].
∗

First two authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

