TacticZero: Learning to Prove Theorems from Scratch
with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Minchao Wu
Australian National University
Data61, CSIRO
Minchao.Wu@anu.edu.au

Michael Norrish
Australian National University
michael.norrish@anu.edu.au

Christian Walder
Australian National University
Data61, CSIRO
christian.walder@data61.csiro.au

Amir Dezfouli
Data61, CSIRO
amir.dezfouli@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to interactive theorem proving (ITP) using deep
reinforcement learning. The proposed framework is able to learn proof search
strategies as well as tactic and arguments prediction in an end-to-end manner.
We formulate the process of ITP as a Markov decision process (MDP) in which
each state represents a set of potential derivation paths. This structure allows us
to introduce a search mechanism which enables the agent to efficiently discard
(predicted) dead-end derivations and restart from promising alternatives. We
implement the framework in the H OL 4 theorem prover. Experimental results show
that the framework using learned search strategies outperforms existing automated
theorem provers (i.e. hammers) available in H OL 4 when evaluated on unseen
problems. We further elaborate the role of key components of the framework using
ablation studies.

1

Introduction

Interactive theorem proving (ITP) is the process of humans interacting with a computer system to
develop formal proofs of mathematical theorems. In ITP, a human user can define mathematical
objects, and then guide the computer to prove theorems about them using commands called tactics.
Tactics are programs that embody high-level proof strategies such as simplification and induction.
Successful tactic application converts the current target goal (a theorem to be proved) into zero or
more subgoals that remain to be proved.
Proofs written in an ITP system are ultimately checked by a machine, and therefore, they are much
more trustworthy than pencil-and-paper proofs. For this reason, ITP has gained success in both
formalizing mathematics, and in verifying computer programs [Leroy, 2009, Hales et al., 2017].
Nevertheless, because a great amount of formal detail needs to be spelled out when using an ITP
system, substantial human inputs are required to fill the gaps between steps in a proof. In particular,
in terms of tactic-based theorem proving, human guidance in the selection of both tactics, and the
arguments to tactics is crucial to a successful proof. This requires expert knowledge both of the
relevant mathematics, and the particular ITP system being used. This requirement for expertise has in
turn limited the application of ITP systems.
One promising line of work to address this limitation has been to use machine learning methods to
replace the role of human experts in ITP. Existing learning-based approaches have two noticeable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

