Neural Bootstrapper
Minsuk Shin1⇤, Hyungjoo Cho2⇤, Hyun-seok Min3 , Sungbin Lim4†
Department of Statistics, University of South Carolina1
Department of Transdisciplinary Studies, Seoul National University2
Tomocube Inc.3
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST4
sungbin@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Bootstrapping has been a primary tool for ensemble and uncertainty quantification in machine learning and statistics. However, due to its nature of multiple
training and resampling, bootstrapping deep neural networks is computationally
burdensome; hence it has difficulties in practical application to the uncertainty
estimation and related tasks. To overcome this computational bottleneck, we propose a novel approach called Neural Bootstrapper (NeuBoots), which learns to
generate bootstrapped neural networks through single model training. NeuBoots
injects the bootstrap weights into the high-level feature layers of the backbone
network and outputs the bootstrapped predictions of the target, without additional
parameters and the repetitive computations from scratch. We apply NeuBoots
to various machine learning tasks related to uncertainty quantification, including
prediction calibrations in image classification and semantic segmentation, active
learning, and detection of out-of-distribution samples. Our empirical results show
that NeuBoots outperforms other bagging based methods under a much lower
computational cost without losing the validity of bootstrapping.

1

Introduction

Bootstrapping [7] or bagging [3] procedures have been commonly used as a primary tool in quantifying uncertainty lying on statistical inference, e.g. evaluations of standard errors, confidence intervals,
and hypothetical null distribution. Despite its success in statistics and machine learning field, the
naive use of bootstrap procedures in deep neural network applications has been less practical due to
its computational intensity. Bootstrap procedures require evaluating a number of models; however,
training multiple deep neural networks are infeasible in practice in terms of computational cost.
To utilize bootstrap for deep neural networks, we propose a novel bootstrapping procedure called
Neural Bootstrapper (NeuBoots). The proposed method is mainly motivated by Generative Bootstrap
Sampler (GBS) [38], which trains a bootstrap generator by model parameterization based on Random
Weight Bootstrapping (RWB, [37]) framework. For many statistical models, the idea of GBS is more
theoretically valid than amortized bootstrap [31], which trains an implicit model to approximate
the bootstrap distribution over model parameters. However, GBS is hardly scalable to modern deep
neural networks containing millions of parameters.
Contrary to the previous method, the proposed method is effortlessly scalable and universally
applicable to the various architectures. The key idea of NeuBoots is simple; multiplying bootstrap
weights to the final layer of the backbone network and instead of model parameterization. Hence it
outputs the bootstrapped predictions of the target without additional parameters and the repetitive
⇤
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

