Exponential Separation between Two Learning
Models and Adversarial Robustness
Grzegorz Głuch
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
grzegorz.gluch@epfl.ch

Ruediger Urbanke
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
ruediger.urbanke@epfl.ch

Abstract
We prove an exponential separation for the sample/query complexity between the
standard PAC-learning model and a version of the Equivalence-Query-learning
model. In the PAC model all samples are provided at the beginning of the learning
process. In the Equivalence-Query model the samples are acquired through an interaction between a teacher and a learner, where the teacher provides counterexamples
to hypotheses given by the learner. It is intuitive that in an interactive setting fewer
samples are needed. We make this formal and prove that in order to achieve an
error ✏ exponentially (in ✏) fewer samples suffice than what the PAC bound requires.
It was shown experimentally by Stutz, Hein, and Schiele that adversarial training
with on-manifold adversarial examples aids generalization (compared to standard
training). If we think of the adversarial examples as counterexamples to the current
hypothesis then our result can be thought of as a theoretical confirmation of those
findings. We also discuss how our result relates to adversarial robustness. In the
standard adversarial model one restricts the adversary by introducing a norm constraint. An alternative was pioneered by Goldwasser et. al. Rather than restricting
the adversary the learner is enhanced. We pursue a third path. We require the
adversary to return samples according to the Equivalance-Query model and show
that this leads to robustness. Even though our model has its limitations it provides
a fresh point of view on adversarial robustness.

1

Introduction

We analyze the connections between adversarial training, generalization and robustness. Our key
technical contribution is a novel result in the field of learning theory, showing an exponential
separation for the sample/query complexity of two learning models. This result provides a theoretical
confirmation for the experimental observations in Stutz et al. [2019] and points to a fresh research
direction in the field of adversarial robustness.
Let us start with a discussion of our main technical contribution. The first model we consider is the
PAC-learning introduced in Valiant [1984]. In this model the learner is given i.i.d. samples from an
unknown distribution and is tasked with finding a hypothesis with low generalization error. The second
model is a version of Equivalence-Query-learning (EQ-learning) introduced in [Angluin, 1988]. In
this setting samples are acquired through an interaction between a teacher and a learner. In each
round of interaction the learner presents a hypothesis and the teacher replies with a counterexample
for this hypothesis. Very close models to the model we study were considered previously in Angluin
and Dohrn [2017] and Bshouty and Gavinsky [2002]. In this setting the counterexamples produced
by the teacher come from the data distribution constrained to being in the error set of the presented
hypothesis. We use ideas similar to those used in boosting techniques [Schapire, 1990] to prove
that in the EQ-learning model O(d · polylog(1/✏)) queries suffices to achieve a standard error of
✏, where d is the VC-dimension of the hypothesis class. This improves on the previously known
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.

