Nonsmooth Implicit Differentiation for Machine
Learning and Optimization

Jérôme Bolte
Toulouse School
of Economics
Univ. Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Tam Le
Toulouse School
of Economics
Univ. Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Edouard Pauwels
IRIT, CNRS
Univ. Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Antonio Silveti-Falls
Toulouse School
of Economics
Univ. Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Abstract
In view of training increasingly complex learning architectures, we establish a nonsmooth implicit function theorem with an operational calculus. Our result applies
to most practical problems (i.e., definable problems) provided that a nonsmooth
form of the classical invertibility condition is fulfilled. This approach allows for
formal subdifferentiation: for instance, replacing derivatives by Clarke Jacobians
in the usual differentiation formulas is fully justified for a wide class of nonsmooth problems. Moreover this calculus is entirely compatible with algorithmic
differentiation (e.g., backpropagation). We provide several applications such as
training deep equilibrium networks, training neural nets with conic optimization
layers, or hyperparameter-tuning for nonsmooth Lasso-type models. To show
the sharpness of our assumptions, we present numerical experiments showcasing
the extremely pathological gradient dynamics one can encounter when applying
implicit algorithmic differentiation without any hypothesis.

1

Introduction

Differentiable programming. The recent introduction of deep equilibrium networks [7], the increasing importance of bilevel programming (e.g., hyperparameter optimization) [48] and the ubiquity
of differentiable programming (e.g., TensorFlow [1], PyTorch [47], JAX [16]) in modern optimization
call for the development of a versatile theory of nonsmooth differentiation. Our focus is on nonsmooth
implicit differentiation. There are currently two practices lying at the crossroads of mathematics
and computer science: on the one hand the use of the standard smooth implicit function theorem
“almost everywhere” [31, 30] and on the other hand the development of algorithmic differentiation
tools [2, 3, 59]. The empirical use of the latter in the nonsmooth world has shown surprisingly
efficient results [59], but the current theories cannot explain this success. We bridge this gap by
providing nonsmooth implicit differentiation results and illustrating their impact on the training of
neural networks and hyperparameter optimization.
Backpropagation: a formal differentiation approach. Let us consider z implicitly defined
through F (z(x)) = h(x) where F and h have full domain and adequate dimensions. How does
autograd apply to evaluating the “derivative” of the implicitly defined function z? Regardless of
differentiability or nonsmoothness, and provided that inversion is possible, one commonly uses (or
dynamically approximates) this derivative by
−1

(backpropF (z(x)))

backproph x,

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

