On Locality of Local Explanation Models

Sahra Ghalebikesabi∗
University of Oxford
sahra.ghalebikesabi@stats.ox.ac.uk

Lucile Ter-Minassian∗
University of Oxford
lucile.ter-minassian@stats.ox.ac.uk

Karla Diaz-Ordaz
The London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine & The Alan Turing Institute
Chris Holmes
University of Oxford & The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Shapley values provide model agnostic feature attributions for model outcome at a
particular instance by simulating feature absence under a global population distribution. The use of a global population can lead to potentially misleading results
when local model behaviour is of interest. Hence we consider the formulation
of neighbourhood reference distributions that improve the local interpretability
of Shapley values. By doing so, we find that the Nadaraya-Watson estimator, a
well-studied kernel regressor, can be expressed as a self-normalised importance
sampling estimator. Empirically, we observe that Neighbourhood Shapley values
identify meaningful sparse feature relevance attributions that provide insight into
local model behaviour, complimenting conventional Shapley analysis. They also increase on-manifold explainability and robustness to the construction of adversarial
classifiers.

1

Introduction

The ability to correctly interpret a prediction model is increasingly important as we move to
widespread adoption of machine learning methods, in particular within safety critical domains
such as health care [22, 17]. In this paper, we consider the task of attributing the features {1, . . . , m}
of a complex machine learning model f : Rm → Rl , abstracted as a function that predicts a response
given a test instance x ∈ Rm , given only black-box access to the model. We especially focus on
two popular model-agnostic feature removal based local explanation models, namely LIME [32] and
SHAP [26]. However our findings are applicable to other local explanation models that we do not
consider in this paper. As these methods are often described as fitting a local surrogate model to the
black box [34], a natural question is: how ‘local’ are local explanation methods?
As a simple motivating example as to why this question matters, consider a black box model given by
f (x) = I(x1 > 0)2x22 − I(x1 ≤ 0)x22 where I(·) denotes the indicator function. When attributing the
local feature importance at a test instance x = (x1 , 2), with x2 fixed at 2, we would expect Feature-1
to receive a higher absolute attribution when x is closer to the decision boundary at x1 = 0. In
Figure 1 we report the results on this example from LIME and SHAP as well as for our proposed
‘Neighbourhood SHAP’ approach. We observe that Neighbourhood SHAP assigns Feature-1 a smaller
attribution, the higher the absolute value of x1 is. SHAP and LIME, however, assign Feature-1 an
attribution which is constant either side of x1 = 0 which illustrates that these methods capture global
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

