Towards Deeper Deep Reinforcement Learning
with Spectral Normalization

Johan Bjorck∗,

Carla P. Gomes, Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University

Abstract
In computer vision and natural language processing, innovations in model architecture that increase model capacity have reliably translated into gains in performance.
In stark contrast with this trend, state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms often use small MLPs, and gains in performance typically originate from
algorithmic innovations. It is natural to hypothesize that small datasets in RL
necessitate simple models to avoid overfitting; however, this hypothesis is untested.
In this paper we investigate how RL agents are affected by exchanging the small
MLPs with larger modern networks with skip connections and normalization, focusing specifically on actor-critic algorithms. We empirically verify that naïvely
adopting such architectures leads to instabilities and poor performance, likely
contributing to the popularity of simple models in practice. However, we show
that dataset size is not the limiting factor, and instead argue that instability from
taking gradients through the critic is the culprit. We demonstrate that spectral
normalization (SN) can mitigate this issue and enable stable training with large
modern architectures. After smoothing with SN, larger models yield significant
performance improvements — suggesting that more “easy” gains may be had by
focusing on model architectures in addition to algorithmic innovations.

1

Introduction

In computer vision and natural language processing (NLP), competitive models are growing increasingly large, and researchers now train billion-parameter models [13, 36]. The earliest neural networks
were often shallow [40] with performance dropping for excessively deep models [29]. However,
ever since the introduction of batch normalization [31] and residual connections [29], performance
has improved more or less monotonically with model scale [64]. As a result, competitive models in
computer vision and NLP are growing ever larger [10, 56], and further architectural innovations are
continuously researched [14].
In stark contrast with this trend, state-of-the-art (SOTA) reinforcement learning (RL) agents often
rely on small feedforward networks [35, 37, 39] and performance gains typically originate from
algorithmic innovations such as novel loss functions [58, 62, 68] rather than increasing model capacity.
Indeed, a recent large-scale study has shown that large networks can harm performance in RL [2].
It is natural to suspect that high-capacity models might overfit in the low-sample regime common
in RL evaluation. Imagenet contains over a million unique images whereas RL is often evaluated
in contexts with fewer environment samples [37, 39]. However, to date, this overfitting hypothesis
remains largely untested.
To address this, we study the effects of using larger modern architectures in RL. By modern architectures we mean networks with high capacity, facilitated by normalization layers [6, 31] and skip
connections [29]. We thus depart from the trend in RL of treating networks as black-box function
∗

Correspondence to: Johan Bjorck <njb225@cornell.edu>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

