Towards Biologically Plausible
Convolutional Networks
Roman Pogodin
Gatsby Unit, UCL
roman.pogodin.17@ucl.ac.uk

Yash Mehta
Gatsby Unit, UCL
y.mehta@ucl.ac.uk

Timothy P. Lillicrap
DeepMind; CoMPLEX, UCL
countzero@google.com

Peter E. Latham
Gatsby Unit, UCL
pel@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Convolutional networks are ubiquitous in deep learning. They are particularly
useful for images, as they reduce the number of parameters, reduce training time,
and increase accuracy. However, as a model of the brain they are seriously problematic, since they require weight sharing – something real neurons simply cannot
do. Consequently, while neurons in the brain can be locally connected (one of
the features of convolutional networks), they cannot be convolutional. Locally
connected but non-convolutional networks, however, significantly underperform
convolutional ones. This is troublesome for studies that use convolutional networks
to explain activity in the visual system. Here we study plausible alternatives to
weight sharing that aim at the same regularization principle, which is to make each
neuron within a pool react similarly to identical inputs. The most natural way to
do that is by showing the network multiple translations of the same image, akin to
saccades in animal vision. However, this approach requires many translations, and
doesn’t remove the performance gap. We propose instead to add lateral connectivity
to a locally connected network, and allow learning via Hebbian plasticity. This requires the network to pause occasionally for a sleep-like phase of “weight sharing”.
This method enables locally connected networks to achieve nearly convolutional
performance on ImageNet and improves their fit to the ventral stream data, thus
supporting convolutional networks as a model of the visual stream.

1

Introduction

Convolutional networks are a cornerstone of modern deep learning: they’re widely used in the visual
domain [1, 2, 3], speech recognition [4], text classification [5], and time series classification [6].
They have also played an important role in enhancing our understanding of the visual stream [7].
Indeed, simple and complex cells in the visual cortex [8] inspired convolutional and pooling layers in
deep networks [9] (with simple cells implemented with convolution and complex ones with pooling).
Moreover, the representations found in convolutional networks are similar to those in the visual
stream [10, 11, 12, 13] (see [7] for an in-depth review).
Despite the success of convolutional networks at reproducing activity in the visual system, as a
model of the visual system they are somewhat problematic. That’s because convolutional networks
share weights, something biological networks, for which weight updates must be local, can’t do [14].
Locally connected networks avoid this problem by using the same receptive fields as convolutional
networks (thus locally connected), but without weight sharing [15]. However, they pay a price
for biological plausibility: locally connected networks are known to perform worse than their
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

