Stylized Dialogue Generation with
Multi-Pass Dual Learning

Jinpeng Li1 , Yingce Xia2 , Rui Yan3,5∗, Hongda Sun3 , Dongyan Zhao1,4∗ , Tie-Yan Liu2
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
lijinpeng@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yingce.xia, tyliu}@microsoft.com,
{ruiyan, sunhongda98}@ruc.edu.cn, zhaody@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Stylized dialogue generation, which aims to generate a given-style response for
an input context, plays a vital role in intelligent dialogue systems. Considering
there is no parallel data between the contexts and the responses of target style S1 ,
existing works mainly use back translation to generate stylized synthetic data for
training, where the data about context, target style S1 and an intermediate style S0
is used. However, the interaction among these texts is not fully exploited, and the
pseudo contexts are not adequately modeled. To overcome the above difficulties,
we propose multi-pass dual learning (MPDL), which leverages the duality among
the context, response of style S1 and response of style S0 . MPDL builds mappings
among the above three domains, where the context should be reconstructed by
the MPDL framework, and the reconstruction error is used as the training signal.
To evaluate the quality of synthetic data, we also introduce discriminators that
effectively measure how a pseudo sequence matches the specific domain, and the
evaluation result is used as the weight for that data. Evaluation results indicate that
our method obtains significant improvement over previous baselines.

1

Introduction

In recent years, dialogue systems have attracted a surge of research interest and achieved great
success [1, 2, 3, 4]. The dialogue generation task can be formulated as a sequence-to-sequence
learning problem [5, 6], where the source sequence is the given context, and the target sequence is
the response. Stylized dialogue generation, which automatically generates response following the
desired style, obtains significant progress in open-domain dialogue systems. The styles could be
formal/informal, modern/Shakespearean, serious/humor, etc.
A core challenge of this task is the lack of parallel training data between the contexts and responses
of desired styles (denoted as style S1 ), which limits the performance of models. A natural solution
is to establish the pseudo pairs between contexts and responses of style S1 using unsupervised or
semi-supervised learning. The parallel data between contexts and responses of style S0 (denoted as
style S0 ) is leveraged. Note the conversations corpus (context, style S0 ) are relatively easy to obtain.
After that, the stylized dialogue model can be trained on the synthetic data. Specifically, Su et al. [7]
propose a diversifying dialogue generation model based on iterative back translation [8]. Zheng et
al. [9] propose a style routing approach with a joint training process, where an inverse model with
style embeddings is used to generate pseudo pairs and train the stylized dialogue generation model.
∗

corresponding authors: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn) and Dongyan Zhao (zhaody@pku.edu.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

