NN-Baker: A Neural-network Infused Algorithmic
Framework for Optimization Problems on Geometric
Intersection Graphs

Evan McCarty ∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Chicago
emccarty@uic.edu
Anastasios Sidiropoulos
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Chicago
sidiropo@uic.edu

Qi Zhao ∗
Computer Science and Engineering Department
University of California, San Diego
qiz032@ucsd.edu
Yusu Wang
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
yusuwang@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a surge of approaches to use neural networks to
help tackle combinatorial optimization problems, including graph optimization
problems. However, theoretical understanding of such approaches remains limited.
In this paper, we consider the geometric setting, where graphs are induced by points
in a fixed dimensional Euclidean space. It turns out that several graph optimization
problems can be approximated (in a bicriteria manner) by an algorithm that runs in
time linear in graph size n via a framework that we call the Baker-paradigm. A key
advantage of the Baker-paradigm is that it decomposes the input problem into (at
most linear number of) small sub-problems of bounded sizes (independent of the
size of the input). For the family of such bounded-size sub-problems, we can now
design neural networks with universal approximation guarantees to solve them.
This leads to a mixed algorithmic-ML framework, which we call NN-Baker that
has the capacity to approximately solve a family of graph optimization problems
(e.g, maximum independent set and minimum vertex cover) in time linear in the
input graph size. We instantiate our NN-Baker by a CNN version and GNN version,
and demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach via a range of
experiments.

1

Introduction

Many tasks in science and engineering can be naturally modeled by combinatorial optimization
problems over graphs, such as maximum independent set, minimum vertex cover, minimum multiway cut, maximum clique, and so on. These problems are often NP-hard. Hence there has been
great effort devoted to developing efficient approximation algorithms. However, many such problems
are hard to approximate in the general setting as well: for example, it is known that the maximum
independent set problem is NP-hard, and it is even NP-hard to approximate within n1−ε on n-vertex
graphs, for any fixed ε > 0 [1].
On the other hand, many of these hard problems admit PTAS in the geometric setting when the
graphs are assumed to be induced by points in fixed-dimensional Euclidean space. Here, a PTAS
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

