Progressive Coordinate Transforms for Monocular
3D Object Detection

Li Wang1∗ Li Zhang1† Yi Zhu2
1

Zhi Zhang2

Fudan University

Tong He2
2

Mu Li2

Xiangyang Xue1

Amazon Inc.

Abstract
Recognizing and localizing objects in the 3D space is a crucial ability for an AI
agent to perceive its surrounding environment. While significant progress has
been achieved with expensive LiDAR point clouds, it poses a great challenge for
3D object detection given only a monocular image. While there exist different
alternatives for tackling this problem, it is found that they are either equipped with
heavy networks to fuse RGB and depth information or empirically ineffective to
process millions of pseudo-LiDAR points. With in-depth examination, we realize
that these limitations are rooted in inaccurate object localization. In this paper,
we propose a novel and lightweight approach, dubbed Progressive Coordinate
Transforms (PCT) to facilitate learning coordinate representations. Specifically,
a localization boosting mechanism with confidence-aware loss is introduced to
progressively refine the localization prediction. In addition, semantic image representation is also exploited to compensate for the usage of patch proposals. Despite
being lightweight and simple, our strategy leads to superior improvements on
the KITTI and Waymo Open Dataset monocular 3D detection benchmarks. At
the same time, our proposed PCT shows great generalization to most coordinatebased 3D detection frameworks. The code is available at: https://github.com/
amazon-research/progressive-coordinate-transforms.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental and challenging task in scene understanding applications. Recently,
3D object detection has received increasing attention and found applications in a wide range of
scenarios such as autonomous driving, robotics, visual navigation and mixed reality. Despite the
great progress from the area of 2D object detection [34, 49, 40, 18, 4], 3D object detection remains a
largely unsolved problem as it aims to predict the object location in the 3D space alongside 3D object
dimension and orientation.
Existing prevalent approaches [50, 44, 35, 10, 11] for 3D object detection largely rely on LiDAR
sensors, which provide accurate 3D point clouds of the scene. Although these approaches achieve
superior performance, the dependence on expensive equipment severely limits their applicability to
generic 3D perception. There also exists a cheaper alternative that takes a single-view RGB image as
input, termed as monocular 3D object detection. However, its performance is far from satisfactory
as itself is an ill-posed problem due to the loss of depth information in 2D image planes. Hence,
several recent attempts introduce depth information to help monocular 3D detection. Such attempts
can be roughly categorized into two directions, pixel-based and coordinate-based. Pixel-based
∗

Work done during an internship at Amazon.
Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) and Xiangyang Xue (xyxue@fudan.edu.cn) are the corresponding
authors. Li Zhang is with School of Data Science, Fudan University. Li Wang and Xiangyang Xue are with
School of Computer Science, Fudan University.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

