Learning Theory Can (Sometimes) Explain
Generalisation in Graph Neural Networks

Pascal Mattia Esser
Technical University of Munich
esser@in.tum.de

Leena C. Vankadara
University of Tübingen
leena.chennuru-vankadara@uni-tuebingen.de

Debarghya Ghoshdastidar
Technical University of Munich
Munich Data Science Institute
ghoshdas@in.tum.de

Abstract
In recent years, several results in the supervised learning setting suggested that
classical statistical learning-theoretic measures, such as VC dimension, do not
adequately explain the performance of deep learning models which prompted a
slew of work in the infinite-width and iteration regimes. However, there is little
theoretical explanation for the success of neural networks beyond the supervised
setting. In this paper we argue that, under some distributional assumptions, classical
learning-theoretic measures can sufficiently explain generalization for graph neural
networks in the transductive setting. In particular, we provide a rigorous analysis
of the performance of neural networks in the context of transductive inference,
specifically by analysing the generalisation properties of graph convolutional networks for the problem of node classification. While VC Dimension does result in
trivial generalisation error bounds in this setting as well, we show that transductive
Rademacher complexity can explain the generalisation properties of graph convolutional networks for stochastic block models. We further use the generalisation error
bounds based on transductive Rademacher complexity to demonstrate the role of
graph convolutions and network architectures in achieving smaller generalisation
error and provide insights into when the graph structure can help in learning. The
findings of this paper could re-new the interest in studying generalisation in neural
networks in terms of learning-theoretic measures, albeit in specific problems.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have found tremendous success in a wide range of practical applications and, in
the broader society, it is often considered synonymous to machine learning. The rapid gain in
popularity has, however, come at the cost of interpretability and reliability of complex neural network
architectures. Hence, there has been an increasing interest in understanding generalization and other
theoretical properties of neural networks in the theoretical machine learning community (Feldman
2020; Arora et al. 2019a; Ma et al. 2017; Nagarajan et al. 2019; Theisen et al. 2020; Ghorbani et al.
2020). Most of the existing theory literature focuses on the supervised learning problem, or more
precisely, the setting of inductive inference. In contrast, there is a general lack of understanding
of transductive problems, in particular the role of unlabeled data in training. Consequently there
has also been little progress in rigorously understanding one of widely used tools for transductive
inference—Graph neural networks (GNN).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

