Federated Linear Contextual Bandits
Ruiquan Huang
The Pennsylvania State University
rzh5514@psu.edu
Jing Yang
The Pennsylvania State University
yangjing@psu.edu

Weiqiang Wu
Facebook
weiqiang.wwu@gmail.com
Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a novel federated linear contextual bandits model, where individual clients face different K-armed stochastic bandits coupled through common
global parameters. By leveraging the geometric structure of the linear rewards, a
collaborative algorithm called Fed-PE is proposed to cope with the heterogeneity
across clients without exchanging local feature vectors or raw data. Fed-PE relies
on a novel multi-client G-optimal design, and achieves near-optimal regrets for
both disjoint and shared parameter cases with logarithmic communication costs. In
addition, a new concept called collinearly-dependent policies is introduced, based
on which a tight minimax regret lower bound for the disjoint parameter case is
derived. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms on
both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is an emerging distributed machine learning (ML)
paradigm where massive number of clients collaboratively learn a shared prediction model while
keeping all the training data on local devices. Compared with standard centralized machine learning,
FL has the following characteristics (Kairouz et al., 2021):
• Heterogeneous local datasets. The local datasets, which are often generated at edge devices, are
likely drawn from non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) distributions.
• Communication efficiency. The communication cost scales with the number of clients, which
is one of the primary bottlenecks of FL. It is critical to minimize the communication cost while
maintaining the learning accuracy.
• Privacy. FL protects local data privacy by only sharing model updates instead of the raw data.
While the main focus of the state-of-the-art FL is on the supervised learning setting, recently, a few
researchers begin to extend FL to the multi-armed bandits (MAB) framework (Lai and Robbins,
1985; Auer et al., 2002; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi, 2012; Agrawal and Goyal, 2012, 2013a). In the
canonical setting of MAB, a player chooses to play one arm from a set of arms at each time slot.
An arm, if played, will offer a reward that is drawn from its distribution which is unknown to the
player. With all previous observations, the player needs to decide which arm to pull each time in order
to maximize the cumulative reward. MAB thus represents an online learning model that naturally
captures the intrinsic exploration-exploitation tradeoff in many sequential decision-making problems.
Extending FL to the MAB framework is naturally motivated by a corpus of applications, such as
recommender systems, clinical trials, and cognitive radio. In those applications, the sequential
decision making involves multiple clients and is distributed by nature. While classical MAB models
assume immediate access to the sequentially generated data at the learning agent, under the new
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

