Collaborative Uncertainty
in Multi-Agent Trajectory Forecasting

1

Bohan Tang1 Yiqi Zhong2 Ulrich Neumann2 Gang Wang3 Ya Zhang1 Siheng Chen1∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Southern California 3 Beijing Institute of Technology
1
tangbohan@alumni.sjtu.edu.cn 1 {sihengc, ya_zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
{yiqizhon, uneumann}@usc.edu 3 gangwang@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Uncertainty modeling is critical in trajectory forecasting systems for both interpretation and safety reasons. To better predict the future trajectories of multiple
agents, recent works have introduced interaction modules to capture interactions
among agents. This approach leads to correlations among the predicted trajectories. However, the uncertainty brought by such correlations is neglected. To
fill this gap, we propose a novel concept, collaborative uncertainty (CU), which
models the uncertainty resulting from the interaction module. We build a general CU-based framework to make a prediction model learn the future trajectory
and the corresponding uncertainty. The CU-based framework is integrated as a
plugin module to current state-of-the-art (SOTA) systems and deployed in two
special cases based on multivariate Gaussian and Laplace distributions. In each
case, we conduct extensive experiments on two synthetic datasets and two public,
large-scale benchmarks of trajectory forecasting. The results are promising: 1) The
results of synthetic datasets show that CU-based framework allows the model to
appropriately approximate the ground-truth distribution. 2) The results of trajectory
forecasting benchmarks demonstrate that the CU-based framework steadily helps
SOTA systems improve their performances. Specially, the proposed CU-based
framework helps VectorNet improve by 57 cm regarding Final Displacement Error
on nuScenes dataset. 3) The visualization results of CU illustrate that the value of
CU is highly related to the amount of the interactive information among agents.

1

Introduction

A multi-agent trajectory forecasting system aims to predict future trajectories of multiple agents based
on their observed trajectories and surroundings [1, 2]. Precise trajectory prediction provides essential
information for decision making and safety in numerous intelligent systems, including autonomous
vehicles [3, 4, 5, 6], drones [7], and industrial robotics [8, 9].
The rapid development of deep learning has enabled a number of deep-learning-based algorithms to
handle multi-agent trajectory forecasting [3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. These methods exhibit
state-of-the-art performances, with some having been integrated into real-world systems. However,
deep-learning-based forecasting is not always reliable or interpretable [16, 17, 18]. In circumstances
when noises from the environment are overwhelmingly distracting, or when the situation has never
been encountered before, a deep-learning-based algorithm could provide baffling predictions, which
might cause terrible tragedies. A fundamental challenge is to know when we could rely on those
deep-learning-based forecasting algorithms. To tackle this problem, one solution is to report the
uncertainty of each prediction. Finding ways to best conceptualize and measure the prediction
uncertainty of deep-learning-based algorithms becomes an imperative, which motivates this work.
∗

The corresponding author is Siheng Chen.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

