Edge Representation Learning with Hypergraphs

Jaehyeong Jo1∗ , Jinheon Baek1∗ , Seul Lee1∗,
Dongki Kim1 , Minki Kang1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2 , South Korea
harryjo97@kaist.ac.kr, jinheon.baek@kaist.ac.kr,
ellenlee7890@gmail.com, cleverki@kaist.ac.kr,
zzxc1133@kaist.ac.kr, sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Graph neural networks have recently achieved remarkable success in representing
graph-structured data, with rapid progress in both the node embedding and graph
pooling methods. Yet, they mostly focus on capturing information from the nodes
considering their connectivity, and not much work has been done in representing
the edges, which are essential components of a graph. However, for tasks such
as graph reconstruction and generation, as well as graph classification tasks for
which the edges are important for discrimination, accurately representing edges
of a given graph is crucial to the success of the graph representation learning.
To this end, we propose a novel edge representation learning framework based
on Dual Hypergraph Transformation (DHT), which transforms the edges of a
graph into the nodes of a hypergraph. This dual hypergraph construction allows
us to apply message-passing techniques for node representations to edges. After
obtaining edge representations from the hypergraphs, we then cluster or drop
edges to obtain holistic graph-level edge representations. We validate our edge
representation learning method with hypergraphs on diverse graph datasets for
graph representation and generation performance, on which our method largely
outperforms existing graph representation learning methods. Moreover, our edge
representation learning and pooling method also largely outperforms state-of-theart graph pooling methods on graph classification, not only because of its accurate
edge representation learning, but also due to its lossless compression of the nodes
and removal of irrelevant edges for effective message-passing.1

1

Introduction

The recent demand in representing graph-structured data, such as molecular, social, and knowledge
graphs, has brought remarkable progress in the Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [44, 37]. Early
works on GNNs [23, 15, 39] aim to accurately represent each node to reflect the graph topology, by
transforming, propagating, and aggregating information from their neighborhoods based on messagepassing schemes [12]. More recent works focus on learning holistic graph-level representations,
by proposing graph pooling techniques that condense the node-level representations into a smaller
graph or a single vector. While such state-of-the-art node embedding or graph pooling methods
have achieved impressive performances on graph-related tasks (e.g., node classification and graph
classification), they have largely overlooked the edges, which are essential components of a graph.
Most existing GNNs, including ones that consider categorical edge features [32, 12], only implicitly
capture the edge information in the learned node/graph representations when updating them. While a
∗
1

Equal contribution
Code is available at https://github.com/harryjo97/EHGNN

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

