Inverse Optimal Control Adapted to the Noise
Characteristics of the Human Sensorimotor System

Matthias Schultheis∗
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technical University of Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
matthias.schultheis@tu-darmstadt.de

Dominik Straub∗
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technical University of Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
dominik.straub@tu-darmstadt.de

Constantin A. Rothkopf
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technical University of Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
constantin.rothkopf@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Computational level explanations based on optimal feedback control with signaldependent noise have been able to account for a vast array of phenomena in human
sensorimotor behavior. However, commonly a cost function needs to be assumed
for a task and the optimality of human behavior is evaluated by comparing observed
and predicted trajectories. Here, we introduce inverse optimal control with signaldependent noise, which allows inferring the cost function from observed behavior.
To do so, we formalize the problem as a partially observable Markov decision process and distinguish between the agent’s and the experimenter’s inference problems.
Specifically, we derive a probabilistic formulation of the evolution of states and belief states and an approximation to the propagation equation in the linear-quadratic
Gaussian problem with signal-dependent noise. We extend the model to the case of
partial observability of state variables from the point of view of the experimenter.
We show the feasibility of the approach through validation on synthetic data and
application to experimental data. Our approach enables recovering the costs and
benefits implicit in human sequential sensorimotor behavior, thereby reconciling
normative and descriptive approaches in a computational framework.

1

Introduction

Computational level theories of behavior strive to answer the questions, why a system behaves the
way it does and what the goal of the system’s computations is. Such goals can be formalized based
on the reward hypothesis. In the words of Richard Sutton, the reward hypothesis assumes, that “goals
and purposes can be well thought of as maximization of the expected value of the cumulative sum
of a received scalar signal” [1]. Thus, to understand human sensorimotor behavior, it is essential to
characterize its goals and purposes quantitatively in terms of costs and benefits. But particularly in
every-day tasks, the cost and benefits underlying behavior are unknown.
Stochastic optimal control allows formulating behavioral goals in terms of a cost function for tasks
involving sequential actions under action variability, uncertainty in the internal model, and delayed
rewards. The solution to the optimization problem entailed in the cost function is a sequence of
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this paper.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

