ReSSL: Relational Self-Supervised Learning with
Weak Augmentation

Mingkai Zheng1,2 Shan You2,4∗ Fei Wang3
Chen Qian
Changshui Zhang4 Xiaogang Wang2,5 Chang Xu1
2

1

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
SenseTime Research 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Self-supervised Learning (SSL) including the mainstream contrastive learning has
achieved great success in learning visual representations without data annotations.
However, most of methods mainly focus on the instance level information (i.e.,
the different augmented images of the same instance should have the same feature
or cluster into the same class), but there is a lack of attention on the relationships
between different instances. In this paper, we introduced a novel SSL paradigm,
which we term as relational self-supervised learning (ReSSL) framework that
learns representations by modeling the relationship between different instances.
Specifically, our proposed method employs sharpened distribution of pairwise
similarities among different instances as relation metric, which is thus utilized to
match the feature embeddings of different augmentations. Moreover, to boost the
performance, we argue that weak augmentations matter to represent a more reliable
relation, and leverage momentum strategy for practical efficiency. Experimental
results show that our proposed ReSSL significantly outperforms the previous stateof-the-art algorithms in terms of both performance and training efficiency. Code is
available at https://github.com/KyleZheng1997/ReSSL

1

Introduction

Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has shown its superiority and achieved promising results for
unsupervised visual representation learning in computer vision tasks [40, 27, 32, 6, 9, 47, 23, 24].
The purpose of a typical self-supervised learning algorithm is to learn general visual representations
from a large amount of data without human annotations, which can be transferred or leveraged in
downstream tasks (e.g., classification, detection, and segmentation). Some previous works [5, 23]
even have proven that a good unsupervised pretraining can lead to a better downstream performance
than supervised pretraining.
Among various SSL algorithms, contrastive learning [47, 45, 6] serves as a state-of-the-art framework,
which mainly focuses on learning an invariant feature from different views. For example, instance
discrimination is a widely adopted pre-text task as in [6, 24, 47], which utilizes the noisy contrastive
estimation (NCE) to encourage two augmented views of the same image to be pulled closer on
the embedding space but pushes apart all the other images away. Deep Clustering [4, 48, 5] is an
alternative pre-text task that forces different augmented views of the same instance to be clustered
into the same class. However, instance discrimination based methods will inevitably induce a class
∗

Corresponding author youshan@sensetime.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

