Rot-Pro: Modeling Transitivity by Projection in
Knowledge Graph Embedding

Tengwei Song, Jie Luo∗, Lei Huang
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment
Beihang University, Beijing, 100191
{songtengwei,luojie,huangleiai}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge graph embedding models learn the representations of entities and relations in the knowledge graphs for predicting missing links (relations) between
entities. Their effectiveness are deeply affected by the ability of modeling and
inferring different relation patterns such as symmetry, asymmetry, inversion, composition and transitivity. Although existing models are already able to model many
of these relations patterns, transitivity, a very common relation pattern, is still not
been fully supported. In this paper, we first theoretically show that the transitive
relations can be modeled with projections. We then propose the Rot-Pro model
which combines the projection and relational rotation together. We prove that
Rot-Pro can infer all the above relation patterns. Experimental results show that
the proposed Rot-Pro model effectively learns the transitivity pattern and achieves
the state-of-the-art results on the link prediction task in the datasets containing
transitive relations.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) aims to learn low-dimensional dense vectors to express the
entities and relations in the knowledge graphs (KG). It is widely used in recommendation system,
question answering, dialogue systems [5, 17, 7]. The general intuition of KGE is to model and
infer relations between entities in knowledge graphs, which has complex patterns such as symmetry,
asymmetry, inversion, composition, and transitivity as shown in Table 1.
Many studies dedicate to find a method, which is able to model various relation patterns [3, 2, 21, 20].
TransE models relations as translations, aims to model the inversion and composition patterns;
DisMult can model symmetric relations by capturing interactions between head and tail entities and
relations. One representative model proposed recently is RotatE [20], which is proved to be able to
model symmetry, asymmetry, inversion and composition patterns by modeling relation as a rotation
in the complex plane. However, none of them can model all the five relation patterns, especially the
transitivity pattern.
This paper focus on modeling the transitivity pattern. We theoretically show that the transitive
relations can be modeled with idempotent transformations, i.e. projections [25]. Any projection
matrix is similar to a diagonal matrix with elements in the diagonal being 0 or 1. We design the
projection by constraining the similarity matrix to be a rotation matrix, which has less parameters to
learn.
In order to model not only transitivity but also other relation patterns shown in Table 1, we propose
the Rot-Pro model which combines the projection and relational rotation together. We theoretically
prove that Rot-Pro can infer the symmetry, asymmetry, inversion, composition, and transitivity
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

