Single Layer Predictive Normalized Maximum
Likelihood for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Meir Feder
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
meir@eng.tau.ac.il

Koby Bibas
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
kobybibas@gmail.com

Tal Hassner
Facebook AI
talhassner@gmail.com

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is vital for developing machine learning based models for critical safety systems. Common approaches for OOD
detection assume access to some OOD samples during training which may not be
available in a real-life scenario. Instead, we utilize the predictive normalized maximum likelihood (pNML) learner, in which no assumptions are made on the tested
input. We derive an explicit expression of the pNML and its generalization error,
denoted as the regret, for a single layer neural network (NN). We show that this
learner generalizes well when (i) the test vector resides in a subspace spanned by
the eigenvectors associated with the large eigenvalues of the empirical correlation
matrix of the training data, or (ii) the test sample is far from the decision boundary.
Furthermore, we describe how to efficiently apply the derived pNML regret to any
pretrained deep NN, by employing the explicit pNML for the last layer, followed by
the softmax function. Applying the derived regret to deep NN requires neither additional tunable parameters nor extra data. We extensively evaluate our approach on
74 OOD detection benchmarks using DenseNet-100, ResNet-34, and WideResNet40 models trained with CIFAR-100, CIFAR-10, SVHN, and ImageNet-30 showing
a significant improvement of up to 15.6% over recent leading methods.

1

Introduction

An important concern that limits the adoption of deep neural networks (DNN) in critical safety
systems is how to assess our confidence in their predictions, i.e, quantifying their generalization
capability (Kaufman et al., 2019; Willers et al., 2020). Take, for instance, a machine learning model
for medical diagnosis (Bibas et al., 2021). It may produce (wrong) diagnoses in the presence of test
inputs that are different from the training set rather than flagging them for human intervention (Singh
et al., 2021). Detecting such unexpected inputs had been formulated as the out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection task (Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2017), as flagging test inputs that lie outside the training
classes, i.e., are not in-distribution (IND).
Previous learning methods that designed to offer such generalization measures, include VCdimension (Zhong et al., 2017; Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 2015) and norm based bounds (Neyshabur
et al., 2018; Bartlett et al., 2017). As a whole, these methods characterized the generalization ability
based on the properties of the parameters. However, they do not consider the test sample that is
presented to the model (Jiang et al., 2020), which makes them useless for OOD detection. Other
approaches build heuristics over the empirical risk minimization (ERM) learner, by post-processing
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

