Modeling Heterogeneous Hierarchies with
Relation-specific Hyperbolic Cones

Yushi Bai∗
bys18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Hongyu Ren
hyren@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University

Rex Ying∗
rexying@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Jure Leskovec
jure@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University

Abstract
Hierarchical relations are prevalent and indispensable for organizing human knowledge captured by a knowledge graph (KG). The key property of hierarchical
relations is that they induce a partial ordering over the entities, which needs to
be modeled in order to allow for hierarchical reasoning. However, current KG
embeddings can model only a single global hierarchy (single global partial ordering) and fail to model multiple heterogeneous hierarchies that exist in a single
KG. Here we present ConE (Cone Embedding), a KG embedding model that is
able to simultaneously model multiple hierarchical as well as non-hierarchical
relations in a knowledge graph. ConE embeds entities into hyperbolic cones and
models relations as transformations between the cones. In particular, ConE uses
cone containment constraints in different subspaces of the hyperbolic embedding
space to capture multiple heterogeneous hierarchies. Experiments on standard
knowledge graph benchmarks show that ConE obtains state-of-the-art performance
on hierarchical reasoning tasks as well as knowledge graph completion task on
hierarchical graphs. In particular, our approach yields new state-of-the-art Hits@1
of 45.3% on WN18RR and 16.1% on DDB14 (0.231 MRR). As for hierarchical
reasoning task, our approach outperforms previous best results by an average of
20% across three hierarchical datasets.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph (KG) is a prevalent data structure that stores factual knowledge in the form of
triplets, which connect two entities (nodes) with a relation (edge) [1]. Knowledge graphs play an
important role in many scientific and machine learning applications, including question answering
[2], information retrieval [3] and discovery in biomedicine [4]. Knowledge graph completion is the
problem of predicting missing relations in the graph, and is crucial in many real-world applications.
Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) models [5, 6, 7] approach the task by embedding entities and
relations into low-dimensional vector space and then use the embeddings to learn a function that
given a head entity h and a relation r predicts the tail entity t.
Hierarchical information is ubiquitous in real-world KGs, such as WordNet [8] or Gene Ontology
[9], since much human knowledge is organized hierarchically. The relations in these KGs can be
separated into non-hierarchical relations (e.g., likes, friendOf ) and hierarchical relations (e.g., isA,
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

