EvoGrad: Efficient Gradient-Based Meta-Learning
and Hyperparameter Optimization

Ondrej Bohdal1 , Yongxin Yang1 , Timothy Hospedales1,2
1
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh
2
Samsung AI Research Centre, Cambridge
{ondrej.bohdal, yongxin.yang, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Gradient-based meta-learning and hyperparameter optimization have seen significant progress recently, enabling practical end-to-end training of neural networks
together with many hyperparameters. Nevertheless, existing approaches are relatively expensive as they need to compute second-order derivatives and store a
longer computational graph. This cost prevents scaling them to larger network
architectures. We present EvoGrad, a new approach to meta-learning that draws
upon evolutionary techniques to more efficiently compute hypergradients. EvoGrad estimates hypergradient with respect to hyperparameters without calculating
second-order gradients, or storing a longer computational graph, leading to significant improvements in efficiency. We evaluate EvoGrad on three substantial recent
meta-learning applications, namely cross-domain few-shot learning with featurewise transformations, noisy label learning with Meta-Weight-Net and low-resource
cross-lingual learning with meta representation transformation. The results show
that EvoGrad significantly improves efficiency and enables scaling meta-learning
to bigger architectures such as from ResNet10 to ResNet34.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based meta-learning and hyperparameter optimization have been of long-standing interest in
neural networks and machine learning [11, 21, 4]. Hyperparameters (aka meta-parameters) can take
diverse forms, especially under the guise of meta-learning, where there has recently been an explosion
of successful applications addressing diverse learning challenges [9]. For example to name just a few:
training optimizer initial condition in support of few-shot learning [7, 1, 15]; training instance-wise
weights for cleaning noisy datasets [31, 26]; training loss functions in support of generalisation [14]
and learning speed; and training stochastic regularizers in support of cross-domain robustness [33].
Most of these applications share the property that meta-parameters impact validation loss only
indirectly through their effect on model parameters, and so computing validation loss gradients with
respect to meta-parameters usually leads to the need to compute second-order derivatives, and store
longer computational graphs for backpropagation. This eventually becomes a bottleneck to execution
time, and – more severely – to scaling the size of the underlying models, given the practical limitation
of GPU memory. There has been steady progress in the development of diverse practical algorithms
for computing validation loss with respect to meta-parameters [20, 19, 21]. Nevertheless they mostly
share some form of the aforementioned limitations. In particular, the majority of recent successful
practical applications [31, 33, 14, 2, 5, 17, 30] essentially use some variant of the T1 − T2 algorithm
V
[20] to estimate the gradient ∂ℓ
∂λ of validation loss w.r.t. hyperparameters. This approach computes
∂ℓV ∂ 2 ℓT
V
the gradient online at each step of updating the base model θ, and estimates it as ∂ℓ
∂λ ≈ ∂θ ∂θ∂λ ,
for training loss ℓT . As with many alternative estimators, this requires second-order derivatives, and
extending the computational graph. Besides the additional computation cost, this limits the size of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

