Learning Causal Semantic Representation for
Out-of-Distribution Prediction
Chang Liu1∗, Xinwei Sun1 , Jindong Wang1 , Haoyue Tang2†, Tao Li3† ,
Tao Qin1 , Wei Chen1 , Tie-Yan Liu1
1
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, 100080.
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084. 3 Peking University, Beijing, 100871.

Abstract
Conventional supervised learning methods, especially deep ones, are found to
be sensitive to out-of-distribution (OOD) examples, largely because the learned
representation mixes the semantic factor with the variation factor due to their
domain-specific correlation, while only the semantic factor causes the output. To
address the problem, we propose a Causal Semantic Generative model (CSG) based
on a causal reasoning so that the two factors are modeled separately, and develop
methods for OOD prediction from a single training domain, which is common
and challenging. The methods are based on the causal invariance principle, with a
novel design in variational Bayes for both efficient learning and easy prediction.
Theoretically, we prove that under certain conditions, CSG can identify the semantic factor by fitting training data, and this semantic-identification guarantees the
boundedness of OOD generalization error and the success of adaptation. Empirical
study shows improved OOD performance over prevailing baselines.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has initiated a new era of artificial intelligence where the potential of machine learning
models is greatly unleashed. Despite the great success, these methods heavily rely on the assumption
that data from training and test domains follow the same distribution (i.e., the IID assumption),
while in practice the test domain is often out-of-distribution (OOD), meaning that the test data
distribute differently from the training data. Popular models for predicting the output (or label,
response, outcome) y from the input (or covariate) x have been found erroneous when confronted
with a distribution change, even from an essentially irrelevant perturbation like a position shift or
background change for images [91, 6, 102, 41, 2, 27]. These phenomena pose serious concerns on
the robustness and trustworthiness of machine learning methods and severely impede them from
risk-sensitive scenarios.
Looking into the problem, although deep learning models allow extracting abstract representation
for prediction with their powerful approximation capacity, the representation may unconsciously
mix up semantic factors s (e.g., shape of an object) and variation factors v (e.g., background, object
position) due to a correlation between them (e.g., desks often appear in a workspace background
and beds in bedrooms), so the model also relies on the variation factors v for prediction via this
correlation. However, this correlation tends to be superficial and spurious (e.g., a desk can also appear
in a bedroom, but this does not make it a bed), and may change drastically in a new domain, making
the effect from v misleading. So it is desired to learn a representation that identifies s against v.
Formally, the essence of this goal is to leverage causal relations for prediction, since the fundamental
distinction between s and v is that only s is the cause of y. Causal relations better reflect basic
∗
†

Correspondence to: Chang Liu <changliu@microsoft.com>.
Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

