Antipodes of Label Differential Privacy:
PATE and ALIBI
Mani Malek∗

Ilya Mironov∗

Karthik Prasad∗

Igor Shilov∗

Florian Tramèr†

Abstract
We consider the privacy-preserving machine learning (ML) setting where the
trained model must satisfy differential privacy (DP) with respect to the labels of the
training examples. We propose two novel approaches based on, respectively, the
Laplace mechanism and the PATE framework, and demonstrate their effectiveness
on standard benchmarks.
While recent work by Ghazi et al. proposed Label DP schemes based on a randomized response mechanism, we argue that additive Laplace noise coupled with
Bayesian inference (ALIBI) is a better fit for typical ML tasks. Moreover, we show
how to achieve very strong privacy levels in some regimes, with our adaptation of
the PATE framework that builds on recent advances in semi-supervised learning.
We complement theoretical analysis of our algorithms’ privacy guarantees with
empirical evaluation of their memorization properties. Our evaluation suggests that
comparing different algorithms according to their provable DP guarantees can be
misleading and favor a less private algorithm with a tighter analysis.
Code for implementation of algorithms and memorization attacks is available from
https://github.com/facebookresearch/label_dp_antipodes.

1

Introduction

Sophisticated machine learning models perform well on their target tasks despite of—or thanks
to—their predilection for data memorization [39, 2, 17]. When such models are trained on non-public
inputs, privacy concerns become paramount [31, 6, 7], which motivates the actively developing area
of privacy-preserving machine learning.
With some notable exceptions, which we discuss in the related works section, existing research has
focused on an “all or nothing” privacy definition, where all of the training data, i.e., both features and
labels, is considered private information. While this goal is appropriate for many applications, there
are several important scenarios where label-only privacy is the right solution concept.
A prominent example of label-only privacy is in online advertising, where the goal is to predict
conversion of an ad impression (the label) given a user’s profile and the spot’s context (the features).
The features are available to the advertising network, which trains the model, while the labels (data on
past conversion events) are visible only to the advertiser. More generally, any two-party setting where
data is vertically split between public inputs and (sensitive) outcomes is a candidate for training with
label-only privacy.
In this work we adopt the definition of differential privacy as our primary notion of privacy. The definition, introduced in the seminal work by Dwork et al. [13], satisfies several important properties that
make it well-suited for applications: composability, robustness to auxiliary information, preservation
under post-processing, and graceful degradation in the presence of correlated inputs (group privacy).
Following Ghazi et al. [18], we refer to the setting of label-only differential privacy as Label DP.
∗
†

{manimalek,imironov,krp,shilov}@fb.com, Facebook AI.
tramer@cs.stanford.edu, Stanford University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

