On Calibration and Out-of-domain Generalization
Yoav Wald⇤
Johns Hopkins University
yoav.wald@gmail.com

Amir Feder⇤
Technion
amirfeder@gmail.com

Daniel Greenfeld
Jether Energy Research
danielgreenfeld3@gmail.com

Uri Shalit
Technion
urishalit@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Out-of-domain (OOD) generalization is a significant challenge for machine learning models. Many techniques have been proposed to overcome this challenge,
often focused on learning models with certain invariance properties. In this work,
we draw a link between OOD performance and model calibration, arguing that
calibration across multiple domains can be viewed as a special case of an invariant
representation leading to better OOD generalization. Specifically, we show that under certain conditions, models which achieve multi-domain calibration are provably
free of spurious correlations. This leads us to propose multi-domain calibration
as a measurable and trainable surrogate for the OOD performance of a classifier.
We therefore introduce methods that are easy to apply and allow practitioners
to improve multi-domain calibration by training or modifying an existing model,
leading to better performance on unseen domains. Using four datasets from the
recently proposed WILDS OOD benchmark [23], as well as the Colored MNIST
dataset [21], we demonstrate that training or tuning models so they are calibrated
across multiple domains leads to significantly improved performance on unseen
test domains. We believe this intriguing connection between calibration and OOD
generalization is promising from both a practical and theoretical point of view.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models have recently displayed impressive success in a plethora of fields [19, 9, 41].
However, as models are typically only trained and tested on in-domain (ID) data, they often fail to
generalize to out-of-domain (OOD) data [23]. The problem is especially pressing when deploying
machine learning models in the wild, where they are required to perform well under conditions that
were not observed during training. For instance, a medical diagnosis system trained on patient data
from a few hospitals could fail when deployed in a new hospital.
Many methods have been proposed to improve the OOD generalization of machine learning models.
Specifically, there is rapidly growing interest in learning models that display certain invariance
properties under distribution shifts and do not rely on spurious correlations in the training data [34, 17,
1]. While highlighting the need for learning robust models, so far these attempts have limited success
scaling to realistic high-dimensional data, and in learning truly invariant representations [37, 11, 20].
In this paper, we argue that an alternative and relatively simple approach for learning invariant
representations could be achieved through model calibration across multiple domains. Calibration
asserts that the probabilities of outcomes predicted by a model match their true probabilities. Our
claim is that simultaneous calibration over several domains can be used as an observable indicator
⇤

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

