Differentially Private Sampling from Distributions
Sofya Raskhodnikova
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
sofya@bu.edu

Satchit Sivakumar
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
satchit@bu.edu

Adam Smith
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Marika Swanberg
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
marikas@bu.edu

Abstract
We initiate an investigation of private sampling from distributions. Given a dataset
with n independent observations from an unknown distribution P , a sampling
algorithm must output a single observation from a distribution that is close in total
variation distance to P while satisfying differential privacy. Sampling abstracts
the goal of generating small amounts of realistic-looking data. We provide tight
upper and lower bounds for the dataset size needed for this task for three natural
families of distributions: arbitrary distributions on {1, . . . , k}, arbitrary product
distributions on {0, 1}d , and product distributions on on {0, 1}d with bias in each
coordinate bounded away from 0 and 1. We demonstrate that, in some parameter
regimes, private sampling requires asymptotically fewer observations than learning
a description of P nonprivately; in other regimes, however, private sampling proves
to be as difficult as private learning. Notably, for some classes of distributions, the
overhead in the number of observations needed for private learning compared to
non-private learning is completely captured by the number of observations needed
for private sampling.

1

Introduction

Statistical machine learning models trained on sensitive data are now widely deployed in domains
such as education, finance, criminal justice, medicine, and public health. The personal data used to
train such models are more detailed than ever, and there is a growing awareness of the privacy risks
that come with their use. Differential privacy is a standard for confidentiality that is now well studied
and increasingly deployed.
Differentially private algorithms ensure that whatever is learned about an individual from the algorithm’s output would be roughly the same whether or not that individual’s record was actually part of
the input dataset. This requirement entails a strong guarantee, but limits the design of algorithms
significantly. As a result, there is a substantial line of work on developing good differentially private
methodology for learning and statistical estimation tasks, and on understanding how the sample size
required for specific tasks increases relative to unconstrained algorithms. A typical task investigated in
this area is distribution learning: informally, given records drawn i.i.d. from an unknown distribution
P , the algorithm aims to produce a description of a distribution Q that is close to P .
However, often the task at hand requires much less than full-fledged learning. We may simply need
to generate a small amount of data that has the same distributional properties as the population, or
perhaps simply “looks plausible” for the population. For example, one might need realistic data for
debugging a software program or for getting a quick idea of the range of values in a dataset.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

