Auditing Black-Box Prediction Models for
Data Minimization Compliance

Bashir Rastegarpanah
Boston University
bashir@bu.edu

Krishna P. Gummadi
MPI-SWS
gummadi@mpi-sws.org

Mark Crovella
Boston University
crovella@bu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on auditing black-box prediction models for compliance with
the GDPR’s data minimization principle. This principle restricts prediction models
to use the minimal information that is necessary for performing the task at hand.
Given the challenge of the black-box setting, our key idea is to check if each of the
prediction model’s input features is individually necessary by assigning it some
constant value (i.e., applying a simple imputation) across all prediction instances,
and measuring the extent to which the model outcomes would change. We introduce
a metric for data minimization that is based on model instability under simple
imputations. We extend the applicability of this metric from a finite sample model
to a distributional setting by introducing a probabilistic data minimization guarantee,
which we derive using a Bayesian approach. Furthermore, we address the auditing
problem under a constraint on the number of queries to the prediction system. We
formulate the problem of allocating a budget of system queries to feasible simple
imputations (for investigating model instability) as a multi-armed bandit framework
with probabilistic success metrics. We define two bandit problems for providing a
probabilistic data minimization guarantee at a given confidence level: a decision
problem given a data minimization level, and a measurement problem given a fixed
query budget. We design efficient algorithms for these auditing problems using
novel exploration strategies that expand classical bandit strategies. Our experiments
with real-world prediction systems show that our auditing algorithms significantly
outperform simpler benchmarks in both measurement and decision problems.

1

Introduction

Concerns about the widespread use of data-driven prediction models and their growing reliance on
personal data of individuals, have led to a number of data protection laws and regulations in recent
years [17, 19, 24]. Prominent amongst such regulations is the GDPR (article 5.1.c) [19] that proposes
the data minimization principle to control the extent to which personal data can be acquired and used
by prediction models. Specifically, the data minimization principle states that: “Personal data shall
be adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary for the purposes for which they are processed.”
Despite considerable public debate about the GDPR and the data minimization principle, to date,
only a few works [2, 18] have attempted to operationalize (i.e., formally interpret) the legal principle
for prediction models. These works have focused on finding operationalizations of data minimization
that tie the purpose of data processing to some performance metric such as prediction accuracy (e.g.,
in recommender systems [2], or in classification [18]). Specifically, they study whether a prediction
model can be redesigned to achieve similar prediction performance, while using fewer input features.
In the process, these works assume a transparent setting, where the full knowledge of the prediction
algorithm, training procedure, and desired performance metrics is available to the party investigating
the feasibility of reducing data inputs.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

