SNIPS: Solving Noisy Inverse Problems Stochastically

Bahjat Kawar, Gregory Vaksman, Michael Elad
Computer Science Department, Technion, Haifa, Israel
{bahjat.kawar, grishav, elad}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In this work we introduce a novel stochastic algorithm dubbed SNIPS, which draws
samples from the posterior distribution of any linear inverse problem, where the
observation is assumed to be contaminated by additive white Gaussian noise. Our
solution incorporates ideas from Langevin dynamics and Newton’s method, and exploits a pre-trained minimum mean squared error (MMSE) Gaussian denoiser. The
proposed approach relies on an intricate derivation of the posterior score function
that includes a singular value decomposition (SVD) of the degradation operator, in
order to obtain a tractable iterative algorithm for the desired sampling. Due to its
stochasticity, the algorithm can produce multiple high perceptual quality samples
for the same noisy observation. We demonstrate the abilities of the proposed
paradigm for image deblurring, super-resolution, and compressive sensing. We
show that the samples produced are sharp, detailed and consistent with the given
measurements, and their diversity exposes the inherent uncertainty in the inverse
problem being solved.

1

Introduction

Many problems in the field of image processing can be cast as noisy linear inverse problems. This
family of tasks includes denoising, inpainting, deblurring, super resolution, compressive sensing, and
many other image recovery problems. A general linear inverse problem is posed as
y = Hx + z,

(1)

where we aim to recover a signal x from its measurement y, given through a linear degradation

operator H and a contaminating noise, being additive, white and Gaussian, z ∼ N 0, σ02 I . In this
work we assume that both H and σ0 are known.
Over the years, many strategies, algorithms and underlying statistical models were developed for
handling image restoration problems. A key ingredient in many of the classic attempts is the prior
that aims to regularize the inversion process and lead to visually pleasing results. Among the various
options explored, we mention sparsity-inspired techniques [13, 55, 11], local Gaussian-mixture
modeling [57, 63], and methods relying on non-local self-similarity [6, 9, 36, 51]. More recently,
and with the emergence of deep learning techniques, a direct design of the recovery path from y to
an estimate of x took the lead, yielding state-of-the-art results in various linear inverse problems,
such as denoising [25, 59, 61, 52], deblurring [22, 48], super resolution [10, 17, 54] and other
tasks [29, 28, 19, 16, 37, 58].
Despite the evident success of the above techniques, many image restoration algorithms still have a
critical shortcoming: In cases of severe degradation, most recovery algorithms tend to produce washed
out reconstructions that lack details. Indeed, most image restoration techniques seek a reconstruction
that minimizes the mean squared error between the restored image, x̂, and the unknown original
one, x. When the degradation is acute and information is irreversibly lost, image reconstruction
becomes a highly ill-posed problem, implying that many possible clean images could explain the given
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

