How can classical multidimensional scaling go wrong?
Rishi Sonthalia
University of Michigan
rsonthal@umich.edu

Gregory Van Buskirk
University of Texas - Dallas
greg.vanbuskirk@utdallas.edu

Benjamin Raichel
University of Texas - Dallas
Benjamin.Raichel@utdallas.edu

Anna C. Gilbert
Yale University
anna.gilbert@yale.edu

Abstract
Given a matrix D describing the pairwise dissimilarities of a data set, a common
task is to embed the data points into Euclidean space. The classical multidimensional scaling (cMDS) algorithm is a widespread method to do this. However,
theoretical analysis of the robustness of the algorithm and an in-depth analysis of
its performance on non-Euclidean metrics is lacking.
In this paper, we derive a formula, based on the eigenvalues of a matrix obtained
from D, for the Frobenius norm of the difference between D and the metric
Dcmds returned by cMDS. This error analysis leads us to the conclusion that
when the derived matrix has a significant number of negative eigenvalues, then
kD Dcmds kF , after initially decreasing, will eventually increase as we increase
the dimension. Hence, counterintuitively, the quality of the embedding degrades
as we increase the dimension. We empirically verify that the Frobenius norm
increases as we increase the dimension for a variety of non-Euclidean metrics. We
also show on several benchmark datasets that this degradation in the embedding
results in the classification accuracy of both simple (e.g., 1-nearest neighbor) and
complex (e.g., multi-layer neural nets) classifiers decreasing as we increase the
embedding dimension.
Finally, our analysis leads us to a new efficiently computable algorithm that returns
a matrix Dl that is at least as close to the original distances as Dt (the Euclidean
metric closest in `2 distance). While Dl is not metric, when given as input to
cMDS instead of D, it empirically results in solutions whose distance to D does not
increase when we increase the dimension and the classification accuracy degrades
less than the cMDS solution.

1

Introduction

Multidimensional scaling (MDS) refers to a class of techniques for embedding data into Euclidean
space given pairwise dissimilarities [Carroll and Arabie, 1998, Borg and Groenen, 2005]. Apart
from the general usefulness of dimensionality reduction, MDS has been used in a wide variety of
applications including data visualization, data preprocessing, network analysis, bioinformatics, and
data exploration. Due to its long history and being well studied, MDS has many variations such as
non-metric MDS [Shepard, 1962a,b], multi-way MDS [Kroonenberg, 2008], multi-view MDS [Bai
et al., 2017], confirmatory or constrained MDS [Heiser and Meulman, 1983], etc. (See France and
Carroll [2010], Cox and Cox [2008] for surveys).
The basic MDS formulation involves minimizing an objective function over a space of embeddings.
There are two main objective functions associated with MDS: STRESS and STRAIN.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

