Preserved central model for faster bidirectional
compression in distributed settings

Constantin Philippenko Aymeric Dieuleveut
CMAP, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
[fistname].[lastname]@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
We develop a new approach to tackle communication constraints in a distributed
learning problem with a central server. We propose and analyze a new algorithm
that performs bidirectional compression and achieves the same convergence rate
as algorithms using only uplink (from the local workers to the central server)
compression. To obtain this improvement, we design MCM, an algorithm such that
the downlink compression only impacts local models, while the global model is
preserved. As a result, and contrary to previous works, the gradients on local
servers are computed on perturbed models. Consequently, convergence proofs are
more challenging and require a precise control of this perturbation. To ensure it,
MCM additionally combines model compression with a memory mechanism. This
analysis opens new doors, e.g. incorporating worker dependent randomized-models
and partial participation.

1

Introduction

Large scale distributed machine learning is widely used in many modern applications [1, 6, 28]. The
training is distributed over a potentially large number N of workers that communicate either with a
central server [see 17, 22, on federated learning], or using peer-to-peer communication [9, 34, 32].
In this work, we consider a setting using a central server that aggregates updates from remote
nodes. Formally, we have a number of features d ∈ N∗ , and a convex cost function F : Rd → R.
We want to solve the following distributed convex optimization problem using stochastic gradient
PN
algorithms [25, 5]: minw∈Rd F (w) with F (w) = N1 i=1 Fi (w), where (Fi )N
i=1 is a local risk
function (empirical risk or expected risk in a streaming framework). This applies to both instances of
distributed and federated learning.
An important issue of those frameworks is the high communication cost between the workers
and the central server [16, Sec. 3.5]. This cost is a concern from several points of view. First,
exchanging information can be the bottleneck in terms of speed. Second, the data consumption
and the bandwidth usage of training large distributed models can be problematic; and furthermore,
the energetic and environmental impact of those exchanges is a growing concern. Over the last
few years, new algorithms were introduced, compressing messages in the upload communications
(i.e., from remote devices to the central server) in order to reduce the size of those exchanges
[29, 3, 36, 2, 35, 31, 30, 23, 18]. More recently, a new trend has emerged to also compress the
downlink communication: this is bidirectional compression.
The necessity for bidirectional compression can depend on the situation. For example, a single
uplink compression could be sufficient in asymmetric regimes in which broadcasting a message to
N workers (“one to N ”) is faster than aggregating the information coming from each node (“N
to one”). However, in other regimes, e.g. with few machines, where the bottleneck is the transfer
time of a heavy model (up to several GB in modern Deep Learning architectures) the downlink
communication cannot be disregarded, as the upload and download speed are of the same order [24].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

