Local Explanation of Dialogue Response Generation
Yi-Lin Tuan1 , Connor Pryor2 , Wenhu Chen1 , Lise Getoor2 , William Yang Wang1
1
University of California, Santa Barbara
2
University of California, Santa Cruz
{ytuan, wenhuchen, william}@cs.ucsb.edu
{cfpryor, getoor}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
In comparison to the interpretation of classiﬁcation models, the explanation of
sequence generation models is also an important problem, however it has seen little
attention. In this work, we study model-agnostic explanations of a representative
text generation task – dialogue response generation. Dialog response generation
is challenging with its open-ended sentences and multiple acceptable responses.
To gain insights into the reasoning process of a generation model, we propose a
new method, local explanation of response generation (LERG), that regards the
explanations as the mutual interaction of segments in input and output sentences.
LERG views the sequence prediction as uncertainty estimation of a human response
and then creates explanations by perturbing the input and calculating the certainty
change over the human response. We show that LERG adheres to desired properties
of explanation for text generation, including unbiased approximation, consistency,
and cause identiﬁcation. Empirically, our results show that our method consistently
improves other widely used methods on proposed automatic- and human- evaluation
metrics for this new task by 4.4-12.8%. Our analysis demonstrates that LERG can
extract both explicit and implicit relations between input and output segments. 1

1

Introduction

As we use machine learning models in daily tasks, such as medical diagnostics [6, 19], speech
assistants [31] etc., being able to trust the predictions being made has become increasingly important.
To understand the underlying reasoning process of complex machine learning models a sub-ﬁeld
of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) [2, 17, 36] called local explanations, has seen promising
results [35]. Local explanation methods [27, 39] often approximate an underlying black box model
by ﬁtting an interpretable proxy, such as a linear model or tree, around the neighborhood of individual
predictions. These methods have the advantage of being model-agnostic and locally interpretable.
Traditionally, off-the-shelf local explanation frameworks, such as the Shapley value in game theory [38] and the learning-based Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanation (LIME) [35] have
been shown to work well on classiﬁcation tasks with a small number of classes. In particular, there has
been work on image classiﬁcation [35], sentiment analysis [8], and evidence selection for question answering [32]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there has been less work studying explanations
over models with sequential output and large class sizes at each time step. An attempt by [1] aims at
explaining machine translation by aligning the sentences in source and target languages. Nonetheless,
unlike translation, where it is possible to ﬁnd almost all word alignments of the input and output
sentences, many text generation tasks are not alignment-based. We further explore explanations over
sequences that contain implicit and indirect relations between the input and output utterances.
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/Pascalson/LERG.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

