Contextual Recommendations and Low-Regret
Cutting-Plane Algorithms

Sreenivas Gollapudi, Guru Guruganesh, Kostas Kollias, Pasin Manurangsi, Renato Paes Leme, and
Jon Schneider
Google Research

Abstract
We consider the following variant of contextual linear bandits motivated by routing
applications in navigational engines and recommendation systems. We wish to
learn a hidden d-dimensional value w∗ . Every round, we are presented with a
subset Xt ⊆ Rd of possible actions. If we choose (i.e. recommend to the user)
action xt , we obtain utility hxt , w∗ i but only learn the identity of the best action
arg maxx∈Xt hx, w∗ i.
We design algorithms for this problem which achieve regret O(d log T ) and
exp(O(d log d)). To accomplish this, we design novel cutting-plane algorithms
with low “regret” – the total distance between the true point w∗ and the hyperplanes
the separation oracle returns.
We also consider the variant where we are allowed to provide a list of several
recommendations. In this variant, we give an algorithm with O(d2 log d) regret
and list size poly(d). Finally, we construct nearly tight algorithms for a weaker
variant of this problem where the learner only learns the identity of an action that
is better than the recommendation. Our results rely on new algorithmic techniques
in convex geometry (including a variant of Steiner’s formula for the centroid of a
convex set) which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Consider the following problem faced by a geographical query service (e.g. Google Maps). When
a user searches for a path between two endpoints, the service must return one route out of a set of
possible routes. Each route has a multidimensional set of features associated with it, such as (i)
travel time, (ii) amount of traffic, (iii) how many turns it has, (iv) total distance, etc. The service
must recommend one route to the user, but doesn’t a priori know how the user values these features
relative to one another. However, when the service recommends a route, the service can observe some
feedback from the user: whether or not the user followed the recommended route (and if not, which
route the user ended up taking). How can the service use this feedback to learn the user’s preferences
over time?
Similar problems are faced by recommendation systems in general, where every round a user arrives
accompanied by some contextual information (e.g. their current search query, recent activity, etc.),
the system makes a recommendation to the user, and the system can observe the eventual action (e.g.
the purchase of a specific item) by the user. These problems can be viewed as specific cases of a
variant of linear contextual bandits that we term contextual recommendation.
In contextual recommendation, there is a hidden vector w∗ ∈ Rd (e.g. representing the values of the
user for different features) that is unknown to the learner. Every round t (for T rounds), the learner is
presented with an adversarially chosen (and potentially very large) set of possible actions Xt . Each
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

