Fine-Grained Zero-Shot Learning with DNA as Side
Information
Sarkhan Badirli
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, IN, USA
Zeynep Akata
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Christine J. Picard
Department of Biology
Indiana University - Purdue University
Indianapolis, IN, USA

George Mohler
Computer and Information Science Department
Indiana University - Purdue University
Indianapolis, IN, USA
Murat Dundar
Computer and Information Science Department
Indiana University - Purdue University
Indianapolis, IN, USA
mdundar@iupui.edu

Abstract
Fine-grained zero-shot learning task requires some form of side-information to
transfer discriminative information from seen to unseen classes. As manually
annotated visual attributes are extremely costly and often impractical to obtain for
a large number of classes, in this study we use DNA as side information for the
first time for fine-grained zero-shot classification of species. Mitochondrial DNA
plays an important role as a genetic marker in evolutionary biology and has been
used to achieve near perfect accuracy in species classification of living organisms.
We implement a simple hierarchical Bayesian model that uses DNA information
to establish the hierarchy in the image space and employs local priors to define
surrogate classes for unseen ones. On the benchmark CUB dataset we show that
DNA can be equally promising, yet in general a more accessible alternative than
word vectors as a side information. This is especially important as obtaining robust
word representations for fine-grained species names is not a practicable goal when
information about these species in free-form text is limited. On a newly compiled
fine-grained insect dataset that uses DNA information from over a thousand species
we show that the Bayesian approach outperforms state-of-the-art by a wide margin.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained species classification is essential in monitoring biodiversity. Diversity of life is the
central tenet to biology and preserving biodiversity is key to a more sustainable life. Monitoring
biodiversity requires identifying living organisms at the lowest taxonomic level possible. The
traditional approach to identification uses published morphological dichotomous keys to identify the
collected sample. This identification involves a tedious process of manually assessing the presence or
absence of a long list of morphological traits arranged at hierarchical levels. The analysis is often
performed in a laboratory setting by a well-trained human taxonomist and is difficult to do at scale.
Fortunately, advances in technology have addressed this challenge to some extent through the use of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

