Test-Time Personalization with a Transformer for
Human Pose Estimation
Yizhuo Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
liyizhuo@sjtu.edu.cn
Zonglin Di∗
UC San Diego
zodi@ucsd.edu

Miao Hao∗
UC San Diego
mhao@ucsd.edu

Nitesh B. Gundavarapu
UC San Diego
nbgundav@ucsd.edu

Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego
xiw012@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose to personalize a 2D human pose estimator given a set of test images
of a person without using any manual annotations. While there is a significant
advancement in human pose estimation, it is still very challenging for a model
to generalize to different unknown environments and unseen persons. Instead of
using a fixed model for every test case, we adapt our pose estimator during test
time to exploit person-specific information. We first train our model on diverse
data with both a supervised and a self-supervised pose estimation objectives jointly.
We use a Transformer model to build a transformation between the self-supervised
keypoints and the supervised keypoints. During test time, we personalize and
adapt our model by fine-tuning with the self-supervised objective. The pose is then
improved by transforming the updated self-supervised keypoints. We experiment
with multiple datasets and show significant improvements on pose estimations
with our self-supervised personalization. Project page with code is available at
https://liyz15.github.io/TTP/.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a large advancement in human pose estimation. A lot of efforts have
been spent on learning a generic deep network on large-scale human pose datasets to handle diverse
appearance changes [59, 64, 7, 15, 43]. Instead of learning a generic model, another line of research
is to personalize and customize human pose estimation for a single subject [10]. For a specific person,
we can usually have a long video (e.g., instructional videos, news videos) or multiple photos from
personal devices. With these data, we can adapt the model to capture the person-specific features for
improving pose estimation and handling occlusion and unusual poses. However, the cost of labeling
large-scale data for just one person is high and unrealistic.
In this paper, we propose to personalize human pose estimation with unlabeled video data during
test time, namely, Test-Time Personalization. Our setting falls in the general paradigm of Test-Time
Adaptation [58, 35, 61, 69], where a generic model is first trained with diverse data, and then it is
fine-tuned to adapt to a specific instance during test time without using human supervision. This
allows the model to generalize to out-of-distribution data and preserves privacy when training is
distributed. Specifically, Sun et al. [58] propose to generalize image classification by performing
joint training with a semantic classification task and a self-supervised image rotation prediction
task [18]. During inference, the shared network representation is fine-tuned on the test instance with
the self-supervisory signal for adaptation. While the empirical result is encouraging, it is unclear how
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

