Answering Complex Causal Queries With the
Maximum Causal Set Effect (MCSE)
Zachary Markovich∗
Massachussetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139
zmarko@mit.edu

Abstract
The standard tools of causal inference have been developed to answer simple
causal queries which can be easily formalized as a small number of statistical
estimands in the context of a particular structural causal model (SCM); however,
scientific theories often make diffuse predictions about a large number of causal
variables. This article proposes a framework for parameterizing such complex
causal queries as the maximum difference in causal effects associated with two
sets of causal variables that have a researcher specified probability of occurring.
We term this estimand the Maximum Causal Set Effect (MCSE) and develop
an estimator for it that is asymptotically consistent and conservative in finite
samples under assumptions that are standard in the causal inference literature.
This estimator is also asymptotically normal and amenable to the non-parametric
bootstrap, facilitating classical statistical inference about this novel estimand. We
compare this estimator to more common latent variable approaches and find that it
can uncover larger causal effects in both real world and simulated data.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning technology have made it possible to non-parametrically estimate
many parameters present in complex structural causal models (SCMs). Specifically, such estimating
technology has rapidly advanced for three major causal inference settings: the many causes setting,
the many moderators setting, and the many mediators setting. All three settings represent a situation
in which a particular causal query can be stated in terms of a large number of combinations of
different variables. Specifically, a researcher could estimate a different treatment effect associated
with each of the many different possible combinations of causes [Imbens, 2000, Wang and Blei,
2019, Li et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2018, Zheng et al., Forthcoming], a different conditional treatment
effect for each of the many different combinations of moderators [Green and Kern, 2012, Athey and
Imbens, 2016, Grimmer et al., 2017, Wager and Athey, 2018, Künzel et al., 2019], and a different
mediated effect for each of the many different combinations of mediators [Zhou and Yamamoto, 2020,
Daniel et al., 2015]. Such causal queries are complex in the sense that they require summarizing the
combined influence of a large number of causal variables.
The main challenge for applied researchers in such settings is that standard causal inference algorithms
are designed to provide a different estimate associated with each of the many causal variables rather
than a single number summarizing the combined influence of all the causal variables together.
Consider, for example, the setting of inferring the causal effect of actors on a film’s box office
performance. Wang and Blei [2019] provide a framework for estimating the average treatment effect
associated with every actor on a film’s performance. While certainly useful for making predictions
∗
PHD Candidate, Interdisciplinary
https://zmarkovich.github.io/

Doctoral

Program

in

Statistics

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

and

Political

Science,

