Localization, Convexity, and Star Aggregation

Suhas Vijaykumar∗
Statistics Center and Dept. of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
suhasv@mit.edu

Abstract
Offset Rademacher complexities have been shown to provide tight upper bounds for
the square loss in a broad class of problems including improper statistical learning
and online learning. We show that the offset complexity can be generalized to any
loss that satisfies a certain general convexity condition. Further, we show that this
condition is closely related to both exponential concavity and self-concordance,
unifying apparently disparate results. By a novel geometric argument, many of our
bounds translate to improper learning in a non-convex class with Audibert’s star
algorithm. Thus, the offset complexity provides a versatile analytic tool that covers
both convex empirical risk minimization and improper learning under entropy
conditions. Applying the method, we recover the optimal rates for proper and
improper learning with the p-loss for 1 < p < ∞, and show that improper variants
of empirical risk minimization can attain fast rates for logistic regression and other
generalized linear models.

1

Introduction

A central question in statistical learning theory asks which properties of the empirical risk minimizer
can be inferred without regard to the underlying data distribution. In particular, the convergence rate
of empirical risk minimization has been shown to depend both on distribution-specific properties, such
as Tsybakov’s margin condition (Tsybakov, 2004), as well as distribution-independent or “global”
properties, such as VC dimension of the class and curvature of the loss (Mendelson, 2002).
The local Rademacher complexities of Bartlett et al. (2005) address this issue by giving bounds that
are data dependent and also adapt to the global properties of the learning problem. More recently,
the offset Rademacher complexities of Rakhlin and Sridharan (2014) and Liang et al. (2015) have
been shown to provide similar bounds for the square loss in several contexts. The offset complexity
provides a simplified analysis that transparently relates the geometry of the square loss to statistical
properties of the estimator.
We extend offset Rademacher complexities to systematically study how curvature of the loss translates
to fast rates of convergence in proper and improper statistical learning. We show many results in
the literature can be studied in a common geometric framework: from classical results on uniform
convexity of the loss (Bartlett et al., 2006; Mendelson, 2002), to newer results on exponential concavity
(van Erven et al., 2015; Mehta, 2017) and self-concordance (Bilodeau et al., 2020; Marteau-Ferey
et al., 2019).
Remarkably, our analysis applies simultaneously to convex empirical risk minimization and to
improper learning with the star algorithm of Audibert (2008). In each case, excess risk is tightly
∗

Supported by the MIT Jerry A. Hausman Graduate Dissertation Fellowship

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

