Fast Policy Extragradient Methods for Competitive
Games with Entropy Regularization

Shicong Cen
Carnegie Mellon University
shicongc@andrew.cmu.edu

Yuting Wei
University of Pennsylvania
ytwei@wharton.upenn.edu

Yuejie Chi
Carnegie Mellon University
yuejiechi@cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of computing the equilibrium of competitive
games, which is often modeled as a constrained saddle-point optimization problem
with probability simplex constraints. Despite recent efforts in understanding the
last-iterate convergence of extragradient methods in the unconstrained setting,
the theoretical underpinnings of these methods in the constrained settings, especially those using multiplicative updates, remain highly inadequate, even when
the objective function is bilinear. Motivated by the algorithmic role of entropy
regularization in single-agent reinforcement learning and game theory, we develop
provably efficient extragradient methods to find the quantal response equilibrium
(QRE)—which are solutions to zero-sum two-player matrix games with entropy
regularization—at a linear rate. The proposed algorithms can be implemented in a
decentralized manner, where each player executes symmetric and multiplicative
updates iteratively using its own payoff without observing the opponent’s actions
directly. In addition, by controlling the knob of entropy regularization, the proposed algorithms can locate an approximate Nash equilibrium of the unregularized
matrix game at a sublinear rate without assuming the Nash equilibrium to be
unique. Our methods also lead to efficient policy extragradient algorithms for
solving entropy-regularized zero-sum Markov games at a linear rate. All of our
convergence rates are nearly dimension-free, which are independent of the size of
the state and action spaces up to logarithm factors, highlighting the positive role of
entropy regularization for accelerating convergence.

1

Introduction

Finding the equilibrium of competitive games, which can be viewed as constrained saddle-point
optimization problems with probability simplex constraints, lies at the heart of modern machine learning and decision making paradigms such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), competitive reinforcement learning (RL) (Littman, 1994), game theory (Shapley, 1953),
adversarial training (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018b), to name a few.
In this paper, we study one of the most basic forms of competitive games, namely two-player zero-sum
games, in both the matrix setting and the Markov setting. Our goal is to find the equilibrium policies
of both players in an independent and decentralized manner (Daskalakis et al., 2020; Wei et al.,
2021a) with guaranteed last-iterate convergence. Namely, each player will execute symmetric and
independent updates iteratively using its own payoff without observing the opponent’s actions directly,
and the final policies of the iterative process should be a close approximation to the equilibrium up
to any prescribed precision. This kind of algorithms is more advantageous and versatile especially
in federated environments, as it requires neither prior coordination between the players like twotimescale algorithms, nor a central controller to collect and disseminate the policies of all the players,
which are often unavailable due to privacy constraints.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

