Self-Consistent Models and Values
Gregory Farquhar
DeepMind
Matteo Hessel
DeepMind

Kate Baumli
DeepMind

Zita Marinho
DeepMind

Hado van Hasselt
DeepMind

Angelos Filos
University of Oxford
David Silver
DeepMind

Abstract
Learned models of the environment provide reinforcement learning (RL) agents
with flexible ways of making predictions about the environment. In particular,
models enable planning, i.e. using more computation to improve value functions
or policies, without requiring additional environment interactions. In this work,
we investigate a way of augmenting model-based RL, by additionally encouraging
a learned model and value function to be jointly self-consistent. Our approach
differs from classic planning methods such as Dyna, which only update values
to be consistent with the model. We propose multiple self-consistency updates,
evaluate these in both tabular and function approximation settings, and find that,
with appropriate choices, self-consistency helps both policy evaluation and control.

1

Introduction

Models of the environment provide reinforcement learning (RL) agents with flexible ways of making
predictions about the environment. They have been used to great effect in planning for action selection
[45, 29, 49], and for learning policies or value functions more efficiently [51]. Learning models can
also assist representation learning, serving as an auxiliary task, even if not used for planning [25, 48].
Traditionally, models are trained to be consistent with experience gathered in the environment. For
instance, an agent may learn maximum likelihood estimates of the reward function and state-transition
probabilities, based on the observed rewards and state transitions. Alternatively, an agent may learn a
model that only predicts behaviourally-relevant quantities like rewards, values, and policies [47].
In this work, we study a possible way to augment model-learning, by additionally encouraging a
learned model m̂ and value function v̂ to be jointly self-consistent, in the sense of jointly satisfying
the Bellman equation with respect to m̂ and v̂ for the agent’s policy π. Typical methods for using
models in learning, like Dyna [51], treat the model as a fixed best estimate of the environment, and
only update the value to be consistent with the model. Self-consistency, by contrast, jointly updates
the model and value to be consistent with each other. This may allow information to flow more
flexibly between the learned reward function, transition model, and approximate value. Since the true
model and value are self-consistent, this type of update may also serve as a useful regulariser.
We investigate self-consistency both in a tabular setting and at scale, in the context of deep RL. There
are many ways to formulate a model-value update based on the principle of self-consistency, but
we find that naive updates may be useless, or even detrimental. However, one variant based on a
semi-gradient temporal difference objective can accelerate value learning and policy optimisation.
We evaluate different search-control strategies (i.e. the choice of states and actions used in the selfconsistency update), and show that self-consistency can improve sample efficiency in environments
such as Atari, Sokoban and Go. We conclude with experiments designed to shed light on the
mechanisms by which our proposed self-consistency update aids learning.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

