Learning to Iteratively Solve Routing Problems with
Dual-Aspect Collaborative Transformer

Yining Ma1 , Jingwen Li1 , Zhiguang Cao2,∗, Wen Song3,∗ , Le Zhang4 ,
Zhenghua Chen5 , Jing Tang6
1

National University of Singapore
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, A*STAR
3
Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
6
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yiningma, lijingwen}@u.nus.edu, zhiguangcao@outlook.com,
wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn, zhangleuestc@gmail.com,
chen0832@e.ntu.edu.sg, jingtang@ust.hk
2

Abstract
Recently, Transformer has become a prevailing deep architecture for solving vehicle
routing problems (VRPs). However, it is less effective in learning improvement
models for VRP because its positional encoding (PE) method is not suitable in
representing VRP solutions. This paper presents a novel Dual-Aspect Collaborative
Transformer (DACT) to learn embeddings for the node and positional features
separately, instead of fusing them together as done in existing ones, so as to avoid
potential noises and incompatible correlations. Moreover, the positional features
are embedded through a novel cyclic positional encoding (CPE) method to allow
Transformer to effectively capture the circularity and symmetry of VRP solutions
(i.e., cyclic sequences). We train DACT using Proximal Policy Optimization and
design a curriculum learning strategy for better sample efﬁciency. We apply DACT
to solve the traveling salesman problem (TSP) and capacitated vehicle routing
problem (CVRP). Results show that our DACT outperforms existing Transformer
based improvement models, and exhibits much better generalization performance
across different problem sizes on synthetic and benchmark instances, respectively.

1 Introduction
Vehicle Routing problems (VRPs), such as the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and the Capacitated
Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) which consider ﬁnding the optimal route for a single or ﬂeet of
vehicles to serve a set of customers, have ubiquitous real-world applications [1, 2]. Despite being
intensively studied in the Operations Research (OR) community, VRPs still remain challenging due
to their NP-hard nature [3]. Recent studies on learning neural heuristics are gathering attention as
promising extensions to traditional hand-crafted ones (e.g., [4–14]), where reinforcement learning
(RL) [15] is usually exploited to train a deep neural network as an efﬁcient solver without hand-crafted
rules. A salient motivation is that deep neural networks may learn better heuristics by identifying
useful patterns in an end-to-end and data-driven fashion.
Solutions to VRPs, i.e., routes, are sequences of nodes (customer and depot locations). Naturally,
deep models for Natural Language Processing (NLP), which deal with sequence data as well, are ideal
∗

Zhiguang Cao and Wen Song are the corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

