Boosted CVaR Classification
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Arun Sai Suggala, Zico Kolter, Pradeep Ravikumar
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15213
{rzhai,cdan,asuggala,zkolter,pradeepr}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Many modern machine learning tasks require models with high tail performance,
i.e. high performance over the worst-off samples in the dataset. This problem
has been widely studied in fields such as algorithmic fairness, class imbalance,
and risk-sensitive decision making. A popular approach to maximize the model’s
tail performance is to minimize the CVaR (Conditional Value at Risk) loss, which
computes the average risk over the tails of the loss. However, for classification
tasks where models are evaluated by the 0/1 loss, we show that if the classifiers are
deterministic, then the minimizer of the average 0/1 loss also minimizes the CVaR
0/1 loss, suggesting that CVaR loss minimization is not helpful without additional
assumptions. We circumvent this negative result by minimizing the CVaR loss
over randomized classifiers, for which the minimizers of the average 0/1 loss
and the CVaR 0/1 loss are no longer the same, so minimizing the latter can lead
to better tail performance. To learn such randomized classifiers, we propose the
Boosted CVaR Classification framework which is motivated by a direct relationship
between CVaR and a classical boosting algorithm called LPBoost. Based on this
framework, we design an algorithm called α-AdaLPBoost. We empirically evaluate
our proposed algorithm on four benchmark datasets and show that it achieves higher
tail performance than deterministic model training methods.

1

Introduction

As machine learning continues to find broader usage, there is an increasing understanding of the
importance of tail performance of models, in addition to their average performance. For instance,
in datasets with highly imbalanced classes, the tail performance is the accuracy over the minority
classes which have much fewer samples than the others. In the field of algorithmic fairness, where
a dataset contains several demographic groups, the tail performance is the accuracy over certain
underrepresented groups that normal machine learning models often neglect. In all these examples, it
is crucial to design models with good tail performance that perform well across all parts/groups of
the data domain, instead of just performing well on average.
Owing to its importance, a number of recent works have designed techniques to learn models with
high tail performance [HSNL18, SKHL20, SRKL20]. Maximizing the tail performance is sometimes
referred to as learning under subpopulation shift, in the sense that the testing distribution could consist
of just a subpopulation of the training distribution. Most of the works on subpopulation shift fall
into two categories. In the first, also referred to as the domain-aware setting, the dataset is divided
into several predefined groups, and the goal is to maximize the worst-group performance, i.e. the
minimum performance over all the groups. A number of methods, such as importance weighting
[Shi00] and Group DRO [SKHL20, SRKL20], have been proposed for domain-aware subpopulation
shift. However, the domain-aware setting is not always applicable, either because the groups can
be hard to define, or because the group labels are not available. Thus, in the second category of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

