Sequence-to-Sequence Learning with
Latent Neural Grammars
Yoon Kim
MIT CSAIL
yoonkim@mit.edu

Abstract
Sequence-to-sequence learning with neural networks has become the de facto
standard for sequence prediction tasks. This approach typically models the local
distribution over the next word with a powerful neural network that can condition
on arbitrary context. While flexible and performant, these models often require
large datasets for training and can fail spectacularly on benchmarks designed to test
for compositional generalization. This work explores an alternative, hierarchical
approach to sequence-to-sequence learning with quasi-synchronous grammars,
where each node in the target tree is transduced by a node in the source tree. Both
the source and target trees are treated as latent and induced during training. We
develop a neural parameterization of the grammar which enables parameter sharing
over the combinatorial space of derivation rules without the need for manual feature
engineering. We apply this latent neural grammar to various domains—a diagnostic
language navigation task designed to test for compositional generalization (SCAN),
style transfer, and small-scale machine translation—and find that it performs
respectably compared to standard baselines.

1

Introduction

Sequence-to-sequence learning with neural networks [62, 22, 106] encompasses a powerful and
general class of methods for modeling the distribution over an output target sequence y given an input
source sequence x. Key to its success is a factorization of the output distribution via the chain rule
coupled with a richly-parameterized neural network that models the local conditional distribution over
the next word given the previous words and the input. While architectural innovations such as attention
[8], convolutional layers [39], and Transformers [110] have led to significant improvements, this
word-by-word modeling remains core to the approach, and with good reason—since any distribution
over the output can be factorized autoregressively via the chain rule, this approach should be able to
well-approximate the true target distribution given large-enough data and model.1
However, despite their excellent performance across key benchmarks these models are often sample
inefficient and can moreover fail spectacularly on diagnostic tasks designed to test for compositional
generalization [68, 63]. This is partially attributable to the fact that standard sequence-to-sequence
models have relatively weak inductive biases (e.g. for capturing hierarchical structure [79]), which
can result in learners that over-rely on surface-level (as opposed to structural) correlations.
In this work, we explore an alternative, hierarchical approach to sequence-to-sequence learning
with latent neural grammars. This work departs from previous approaches in three ways. First, we
model the distribution over the target sequence with a quasi-synchronous grammar [103] which
assumes a hierarchical generative process whereby each node in the target tree is transduced by
Much of the work was completed while the author was at MIT-IBM Watson AI. Code is available at
https://github.com/yoonkim/neural-qcfg.
1
There are, however, weighted languages whose next-word conditional distributions are hard to compute in a
formal sense, and these distributions cannot be captured by locally normalized autogressive models unless one
allows the number of parameters (or runtime) to grow superpolynomially in sequence length [72].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

