Deep Learning on a Data Diet:
Finding Important Examples Early in Training
Mansheej Paul
Stanford University
mansheej@stanford.edu

Surya Ganguli
Stanford University; Facebook AI Research
sganguli@stanford.edu

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
Mila ⇤
gkdz@google.com

Abstract
Recent success in deep learning has partially been driven by training increasingly
overparametrized networks on ever larger datasets. It is therefore natural to ask:
how much of the data is superfluous, which examples are important for generalization, and how do we find them? In this work, we make the striking observation
that, in standard vision datasets, simple scores averaged over several weight initializations can be used to identify important examples very early in training. We
propose two such scores—the Gradient Normed (GraNd) and the Error L2-Norm
(EL2N) scores—and demonstrate their efficacy on a range of architectures and
datasets by pruning significant fractions of training data without sacrificing test
accuracy. In fact, using EL2N scores calculated a few epochs into training, we
can prune half of the CIFAR10 training set while slightly improving test accuracy.
Furthermore, for a given dataset, EL2N scores from one architecture or hyperparameter configuration generalize to other configurations. Compared to recent
work that prunes data by discarding examples that are rarely forgotten over the
course of training, our scores use only local information early in training. We
also use our scores to detect noisy examples and study training dynamics through
the lens of important examples—we investigate how the data distribution shapes
the loss surface and identify subspaces of the model’s data representation that are
relatively stable over training.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning has made remarkable progress driven, in part, by training overparameterized models on ever larger datasets. This trend creates new challenges: the large computational resources required pose a roadblock to the democratization of AI. Memory and resource
constrained settings, such as on-device computing, require smaller models and datasets. Identifying
important training data plays a role in online and active learning. Finally, it is of theoretical interest
to understand how individual examples and sub-populations of training examples influence learning.
To address these challenges, we propose a scoring method that can be used to identify important
and difficult examples early in training, and prune the training dataset without large sacrifices in test
accuracy. We also investigate how different sub-populations of the training data identified by our
score affect the loss surface and training dynamics of the model.
⇤

This work was carried out while the author was at ServiceNow. It was finalized at Google Brain.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

