PLUGIn: A simple algorithm for inverting generative
models with recovery guarantees
Babhru Joshi

Xiaowei Li
Yaniv Plan
Özgür Yılmaz
Department of Mathematics
The University of British Columbia
{b.joshi, xli, yaniv, oyilmaz}@math.ubc.ca

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering an unknown latent code vector under a
known generative model. For a d-layer deep generative network G : Rn0 !
Rnd with ReLU activation functions, let the observation be G(x) + ✏ where ✏ is
noise. We introduce a simple novel algorithm, Partially Linearized Update for
Generative Inversion (PLUGIn), to estimate x (and thus G(x)). We prove that, when
weights are Gaussian and layer widths ni & 5i n0 (up to log factors), the algorithm
converges geometrically to a neighbourhood of x with high probability. Note the
inequality on layer widths allows ni > ni+1 when i 1. To our knowledge, this
is the first such result for networks with some contractive layers. After a sufficient
number of
p iterations, the estimation errors for both x and G(x) are at most in the
order of 4d n0 /nd k✏k. Thus, the algorithm can denoise when the expansion ratio
nd /n0 is large. Numerical experiments on synthetic data and real data are provided
to validate our theoretical results and to illustrate that the algorithm can effectively
remove artifacts in an image.

1

Introduction

We consider the inverse problem of recovering an unknown vector x⇤ 2 Rn0 from a noisy observation
y 2 Rnd of the form
y = G(x⇤ ) + ✏,
(1)
nd
n0
where ✏ 2 R is noise and G : R ! Rnd is a known d-layer feed-forward neural network with
ReLU activation functions (in fact, it is straightforward to generalize to positively homogeneous
activation functions, which we will elaborate later). Precisely, G has the form
G(x) = (Ad (Ad 1 . . . (A1 x) . . .)),

(2)

where (·) = max(·, 0) is the ReLU activation function and Ai 2 Rni ⇥ni 1 is the weight matrix in
the i-th layer.
The inverse problem (1) has applications in, for example, signal denoising and signal compression
[1, 2, 3]. In the case of denoising the typical goal is to recover a clean signal y ⇤ from its noisy
observation y ⇤ + ✏ and, in the case of compression, the goal is to find an efficient low dimensional
representation of y ⇤ . Traditional approaches for these problems often use priors on signals, for
example, a sparsity prior with respect to a fixed basis or dictionary [4, 5, 6]. An emerging viewpoint
is to use a generative prior that assumes the unknown signal y ⇤ is in the range of a deep generative
model G, i.e., y ⇤ = G(x⇤ ), and develop algorithms that can estimate the latent code vector x⇤ from
y ⇤ + ✏, thus recovering y ⇤ .
Recent advancements in training deep neural networks have shown that priors in the form of generative models can effectively map low dimensional vectors to the space of natural image classes
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

