Dual Progressive Prototype Network for Generalized
Zero-Shot Learning

Chaoqun Wang1 2 , Shaobo Min3 , Xuejin Chen1 2∗, Xiaoyan Sun2 , Houqiang Li1 2
1
School of Data Science
2
The National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology and Application
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
3
Tencent Data Platform, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
cq14@mail.ustc.edu.cn,bobmin@tencent.com,{xjchen99,sunxiaoyan,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) aims to recognize new categories with
auxiliary semantic information, e.g., category attributes. In this paper, we handle the critical issue of domain shift problem, i.e., confusion between seen and
unseen categories, by progressively improving cross-domain transferability and
category discriminability of visual representations. Our approach, named Dual
Progressive Prototype Network (DPPN), constructs two types of prototypes that
record prototypical visual patterns for attributes and categories, respectively. With
attribute prototypes, DPPN alternately searches attribute-related local regions
and updates corresponding attribute prototypes to progressively explore accurate
attribute-region correspondence. This enables DPPN to produce visual representations with accurate attribute localization ability, which benefts the semantic-visual
alignment and representation transferability. Besides, along with progressive attribute localization, DPPN further projects category prototypes into multiple spaces
to progressively repel visual representations from different categories, which boosts
category discriminability. Both attribute and category prototypes are collaboratively learned in a unifed framework, which makes visual representations of DPPN
transferable and distinctive. Experiments on four benchmarks prove that DPPN
effectively alleviates the domain shift problem in GZSL.

1 Introduction
Deep learning methods depend heavily on enormous manually-labelled data, which limits their
further applications [7, 8, 17, 52, 36, 19, 11]. Therefore, Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL)
recently attracts increasing attention, which aims to recognize images from novel categories with
only seen domain training data. Due to unavailable unseen domain data during training, GZSL
methods introduce category descriptions, such as category attributes [15, 14] or word embedding
[5, 37, 26, 41], to associate two domain categories.
A basic framework of embedding-based GZSL is to align global image representations with corresponding category descriptions in a joint embedding space [16, 3, 55, 38, 2, 6], as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Due to the domain shift problem across two domain categories, unseen domain images tend to be
misclassifed as seen categories. To address this issue, recent methods focus on discovering discriminative local regions to capture subtle differences between two domain categories. For example, AREN
[45] and VSE [55] leverage attention mechanism to discover important part regions, which improves
feature discrimination. DAZLE [20] and RGEN [46] introduce semantic guidance, e.g., category
∗

Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

