Explicable Reward Design
for Reinforcement Learning Agents

Rati Devidze1

Goran Radanovic1

Parameswaran Kamalaruban2

Adish Singla1

rdevidze@mpi-sws.org

gradanovic@mpi-sws.org

kparameswaran@turing.ac.uk

adishs@mpi-sws.org

1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Saarbrucken, Germany
2
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK

Abstract
We study the design of explicable reward functions for a reinforcement learning
agent while guaranteeing that an optimal policy induced by the function belongs
to a set of target policies. By being explicable, we seek to capture two properties:
(a) informativeness so that the rewards speed up the agent’s convergence, and (b)
sparseness as a proxy for ease of interpretability of the rewards. The key challenge
is that higher informativeness typically requires dense rewards for many learning
tasks, and existing techniques do not allow one to balance these two properties
appropriately. In this paper, we investigate the problem from the perspective
of discrete optimization and introduce a novel framework, E XP RD, to design
explicable reward functions. E XP RD builds upon an informativeness criterion that
captures the (sub-)optimality of target policies at different time horizons in terms of
actions taken from any given starting state. We provide a mathematical analysis of
E XP RD, and show its connections to existing reward design techniques, including
potential-based reward shaping. Experimental results on two navigation tasks
demonstrate the effectiveness of E XP RD in designing explicable reward functions.

1

Introduction

A reward function plays the central role during the learning/training process of a reinforcement
learning (RL) agent. Given a “task” the agent is expected to perform (i.e., the desired learning
outcome), there are typically many different reward specifications under which an optimal policy
has the same performance guarantees on the task. This freedom in choosing the reward function, in
turn, leads to the fundamental question of reward design: What are different criteria that one should
consider in designing a reward function for the agent, apart from the agent’s final output policy? [1–3].
One of the important criteria is informativeness, capturing that the rewards should speed up the
agent’s convergence [1–6]. For instance, a major challenge faced by an RL agent is because
of delayed rewards during training; in the worst-case, the agent’s convergence is slowed down
exponentially w.r.t. the time horizon of delay [7]. In this case, we seek to design a new reward
function that reduces this time horizon of delay while guaranteeing that any optimal policy induced by
the designed function is also optimal under the original reward function [3]. The classical technique
of potential-based reward shaping (when applied with appropriate state potentials) indeed allows us to
reduce this time horizon of delay to 1; see [3, 8] and Section 2. With 1, it means that globally optimal
actions for any state are also myopically optimal, thereby making the agent’s learning process trivial.
While informativeness is an important criterion, it is not the only criterion to consider when designing
rewards for many practical applications. Another natural criterion to consider is sparseness as a proxy
for ease of interpretability of the rewards. There are several practical settings where sparseness and
interpretability of rewards are important, as discussed next. The first motivating application is when
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

