Faster Neural Network Training with Approximate
Tensor Operations

Menachem Adelman
Intel & Technion
adelman.menachem@gmail.com
Ido Hakimi
Technion
idohakimi@gmail.com

Kfir Y. Levy ∗
Technion
kfirylevy@technion.ac.il
Mark Silberstein
Technion
mark@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We propose a novel technique for faster deep neural network training which systematically applies sample-based approximation to the constituent tensor operations,
i.e., matrix multiplications and convolutions. We introduce new sampling techniques, study their theoretical properties, and prove that they provide the same
convergence guarantees when applied to SGD training. We apply approximate
tensor operations to single and multi-node training of MLP and CNN networks on
MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. We demonstrate up to 66% reduction
in the amount of computations and communication, and up to 1.37x faster training
time while maintaining negligible or no impact on the final test accuracy.

1

Introduction

Approximation techniques for faster inference and training of deep neural networks (DNNs) have
received considerable attention. Examples include quantization [1–5], low-rank and structured-sparse
models [6–9], weight extrapolations [10], and partial/asynchronous gradient updates in the context
of distributed training [11, 12]. Sampling-based approximations were used to accelerate inference
[13, 14], but using them in training [15–17] has not been systematically studied nor demonstrated
end-to-end GPU performance benefits in practice.
We propose a novel approach to accelerating DNN training by systematically approximating tensor
operations via sampling. At a high level, the original matrix products and convolutions are replaced
with their faster approximate versions. The approximation is applied separately to each tensor
operation, keeping the network architecture and tensor dimensions intact, thereby facilitating the
adoption of this technique in existing DNN training frameworks, potentially in combination with other
approximation techniques. Furthermore, when combined with distributed training, our technique
allows for seamless reduction in the communication bandwidth and increased performance gains.
We begin by reviewing the plethora of existing methods for approximating matrix multiplication. We
compare several known algorithms [18–25], and find column-row sampling (CRS) [20] to be the most
suitable for approximating matrix multiplications in training. In order to compute the product of two
matrices A> B, the CRS algorithm samples the columns of A> and the corresponding rows of B thus
constructing smaller matrices which are then multiplied as usual. This method incurs low sampling
overheads and lends itself to an efficient implementation using existing dense matrix product routines.
CRS minimizes the approximation error for the Frobenius norm of the resulting matrix while keeping
the approximation unbiased.
∗

A Viterbi fellow

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

