Exponential Graph is Provably Efficient for
Decentralized Deep Training

Bicheng Ying1,3∗, Kun Yuan2∗ , Yiming Chen2∗ , Hanbin Hu4 , Pan Pan2 , Wotao Yin2
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Google Inc. 4 University of California, Santa Barbara
ybc@ucla.edu, {kun.yuan, charles.cym}@alibaba-inc.com,
hanbinhu@ucsb.edu, {panpan.pp, wotao.yin}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Decentralized SGD is an emerging training method for deep learning known for its
much less (thus faster) communication per iteration, which relaxes the averaging
step in parallel SGD to inexact averaging. The less exact the averaging is, however,
the more the total iterations the training needs to take. Therefore, the key to
making decentralized SGD efficient is to realize nearly-exact averaging using little
communication. This requires a skillful choice of communication topology, which
is an under-studied topic in decentralized optimization.
In this paper, we study so-called exponential graphs where every node is connected to O(log(n)) neighbors and n is the total number of nodes. This work
proves such graphs can lead to both fast communication and effective averaging
simultaneously. We also discover that a sequence of log(n) one-peer exponential
graphs, in which each node communicates to one single neighbor per iteration,
can together achieve exact averaging. This favorable property enables one-peer
exponential graph to average as effective as its static counterpart but communicates more efficiently. We apply these exponential graphs in decentralized
(momentum) SGD to obtain the state-of-the-art balance between per-iteration
communication and iteration complexity among all commonly-used topologies.
Experimental results on a variety of tasks and models demonstrate that decentralized (momentum) SGD over exponential graphs promises both fast and highquality training. Our code is implemented through BlueFog and available at
https://github.com/Bluefog-Lib/NeurIPS2021-Exponential-Graph.

1

Introduction

Efficient distributed training methods across multiple computing nodes are critical for large-scale
modern deep learning tasks. Parallel stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a widely-used approach,
which, at each iteration, computes a globally averaged gradient either using Parameter-Server [28]
or All-Reduce [47]. Such global coordination across all nodes in parallel SGD results in either
significant bandwidth cost or high latency, which can notably hamper the training scalability.
Decentralized SGD [45, 11, 30, 3] based on partial averaging has been one of the promising
alternatives to parallel SGD in distributed deep training. Partial averaging, as opposed to the global
averaging exploited in parallel SGD, only requires each node to compute the locally averaged model
within its neighborhood. Decentralized SGD does not involve any global operations, so it has much
lower communication overhead per iteration. The fewer neighbors each node needs to communicate,
the more efficient the per-iteration communication is in decentralized SGD.
∗

Equal Contribution. Corresponding Author: Wotao Yin

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

