A Theory-Driven Self-Labeling Refinement Method for
Contrastive Representation Learning

Pan Zhou∗

Caiming Xiong∗ Xiao-Tong Yuan† Steven Hoi∗
∗
Salesforce Research
†
Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology
panzhou3@gmail.com {cxiong, shoi}@salesforce.com xtyuan@nuist.edu.cn

Abstract
For an image query, unsupervised contrastive learning labels crops of the same
image as positives, and other image crops as negatives. Although intuitive, such a
native label assignment strategy cannot reveal the underlying semantic similarity
between a query and its positives and negatives, and impairs performance, since
some negatives are semantically similar to the query or even share the same
semantic class as the query. In this work, we first prove that for contrastive
learning, inaccurate label assignment heavily impairs its generalization for semantic
instance discrimination, while accurate labels benefit its generalization. Inspired by
this theory, we propose a novel self-labeling refinement approach for contrastive
learning. It improves the label quality via two complementary modules: (i) selflabeling refinery (SLR) to generate accurate labels and (ii) momentum mixup (MM)
to enhance similarity between query and its positive. SLR uses a positive of a query
to estimate semantic similarity between a query and its positive and negatives, and
combines estimated similarity with vanilla label assignment in contrastive learning
to iteratively generate more accurate and informative soft labels. We theoretically
show that our SLR can exactly recover the true semantic labels of label-corrupted
data, and supervises networks to achieve zero prediction error on classification
tasks. MM randomly combines queries and positives to increase semantic similarity
between the generated virtual queries and their positives so as to improves label
accuracy. Experimental results on CIFAR10, ImageNet, VOC and COCO show the
effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is an effective approach to learn features without manual annotations,
with great success witnessed to many downstream tasks, e.g. image classification and object detection [1–7]. The methodology of SSL is to construct a pretext task that can obtain data labels via
well designing the task itself, and then build a network to learn from these tasks. For instance, by
constructing jigsaw puzzle [8], spatial arrangement identification [9], orientation [10], or chromatic
channels [11] as a pretext task, SSL learns high-qualified features from the pretext task that can well
transfer to downstream tasks. As it gets rid of the manual annotation requirement in supervised deep
learning, SSL has been widely attracted increasing researching interests [1, 12].
As a leading approach in SSL, contrastive learning [1, 4, 13–17] constructs a novel instance discrimination pretext task to train a network so that the representations of different crops (augmentations)
of the same instance are close, while representations of different instances are far from each other.
Specifically, for an image crop query, it randomly augments the same image to obtain a positive, and
view other image crops as negatives. Then it constructs a one-hot label over the positive and negatives
to pull the query together with its positive and push the query away its negatives in the feature space.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

