Language models enable zero-shot prediction of the
effects of mutations on protein function

Joshua Meier 1 2 Roshan Rao 3 Robert Verkuil 1 Jason Liu 1
Tom Sercu 1 Alexander Rives 1 2

Abstract
Modeling the effect of sequence variation on function is a fundamental problem
for understanding and designing proteins. Since evolution encodes information
about function into patterns in protein sequences, unsupervised models of variant
effects can be learned from sequence data. The approach to date has been to fit
a model to a family of related sequences. The conventional setting is limited,
since a new model must be trained for each prediction task. We show that using
only zero-shot inference, without any supervision from experimental data or additional training, protein language models capture the functional effects of sequence
variation, performing at state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Proteins have a myriad of diverse functions that underlie the complexity of life. Protein sequences
encode function via structure through the spontaneous folding of the sequence into the three dimensional structure of the protein [1]. The effects of sequence mutations on function form a landscape
that reveals how function constrains sequence. Alterations at some sites in a protein sequence cannot
be tolerated because they are essential to the protein’s function. Other sites evolve together because
the structure and function is determined by them collectively. Mutations can enhance the activity of a
protein, attenuate it, or leave it unchanged.
The functional effect of sequence variations can be measured through deep mutational scanning
experiments [2]. Consisting of thousands to hundreds of thousands of measurements of protein
function, deep mutational scans give insight into the intrinsic constraints on a protein’s structure and
function. Due to the cost and difficulty of implementing such experiments, compilations of deep
mutational scanning data include experiments on a few dozens of proteins at most, relative to the tens
of thousands of proteins encoded in the human genome, and the millions more across the tree of life
that we would like to understand.
A model that learns the landscape linking sequence to function can provide insight into function
without having to do experiments. Unsupervised models of mutational effects can be learned from
sequences [3, 4]. Statistical patterns in a family of evolutionarily related protein sequences contain
information about structure and function [5–7]. This is because the properties of a protein act as
constraints on the selection of sequences through evolution [8].
In the natural language modeling community, there has been interest in zero-shot transfer of models
to new tasks. Massive language models can solve tasks they haven’t been directly trained on [9–11].
Recently protein language models have achieved state-of-the-art in various structure prediction tasks
[12–14]. Work to date has mainly focused on transfer in the classical representation learning setting,
using pre-trained features with supervision on the downstream task.
1
Facebook AI Research 2 New York University 3 UC Berkeley. ESM-1v is available at <https://github.
com/facebookresearch/esm>. Correspondence to: Alexander Rives <arives@fb.com>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

