Online Learning Of Neural Computations From
Sparse Temporal Feedback

Lukas Braun1,2
lukas.braun@psy.ox.ac.uk

Tim P. Vogels3
tim.vogels@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Neuronal computations depend on synaptic connectivity and intrinsic electrophysiological properties. Synaptic connectivity determines which inputs from presynaptic
neurons are integrated, while cellular properties determine how inputs are filtered
over time. Unlike their biological counterparts, most computational approaches to
learning in simulated neural networks are limited to changes in synaptic connectivity. However, if intrinsic parameters change, neural computations are altered
drastically. Here, we include the parameters that determine the intrinsic properties,
e.g., time constants and reset potential, into the learning paradigm. Using sparse
feedback signals that indicate target spike times, and gradient-based parameter
updates, we show that the intrinsic parameters can be learned along with the
synaptic weights to produce specific input-output functions. Specifically, we use a
teacher-student paradigm in which a randomly initialised leaky integrate-and-fire
or resonate-and-fire neuron must recover the parameters of a teacher neuron. We
show that complex temporal functions can be learned online and without backpropagation through time, relying on event-based updates only. Our results are a step
towards online learning of neural computations from ungraded and unsigned sparse
feedback signals with a biologically inspired learning mechanism.

1

Introduction

In biological and artificial spiking neurons, information processing depends on synaptic connectivity
as well as intrinsic variables. How a neuron integrates synaptic inputs over time changes its inputoutput function, leading to a large variety of neural computations [1]. In biology, the input-output
function of a neuron is modified not only by synaptic plasticity [2], but also by alterations of the
neuron’s electrophysiology, e.g., through changes in the composition of trans-membrane ion channels,
so-called intrinsic plasticity [3, 4]. Synaptic interactions influence the amount of neurotransmitter
released from the presynaptic neuron or the amount of receptors in the postsynaptic terminal and
therefore how strongly neurons are connected to each other. Intrinsic properties of the neuron, on
the other hand, affect the neuron’s threshold and resting potential and how strongly postsynaptic
potentials are amplified [4].
Correspondingly, the computational properties of an artificial neuron depend on the values of its
synaptic weights and intrinsic parameters. For instance, the neural computation performed by a leaky
integrate-and-fire neuron [5] or a leaky resonate-and-fire neuron [6] with identical synaptic inputs and
synaptic weights but different intrinsic parameters varies strongly within and across neuron models
(Figure 1A). Learning in artificial neurons is thus the process of modifying a set of synaptic weights
and intrinsic parameters to reach a target input-output function. However, unlike their biological
counterparts, most computational approaches to learning in spiking neurons are limited to effects of
1. Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
2. Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin, Berlin, Germany
4. Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

