Impression learning: Online
representation learning with synaptic plasticity

Colin Bredenberg
Center for Neural Science
New York University
cjb617@nyu.edu

Benjamin S. H. Lyo
Center for Neural Science
New York University
blyo@nyu.edu

Eero P. Simoncelli
Center for Neural Science,
New York University
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Cristina Savin
Center for Neural Science,
Center for Data Science
New York University
csavin@nyu.edu

Abstract
Understanding how the brain constructs statistical models of the sensory world
remains a longstanding challenge for computational neuroscience. Here, we derive
an unsupervised local synaptic plasticity rule that trains neural circuits to infer
latent structure from sensory stimuli via a novel loss function for approximate
online Bayesian inference. The learning algorithm is driven by a local error signal
computed between two factors that jointly contribute to neural activity: stimulus
drive and internal predictions — the network’s ‘impression’ of the stimulus. Physiologically, we associate these two components with the basal and apical dendrites of
pyramidal neurons, respectively. We show that learning can be implemented online,
is capable of capturing temporal dependencies in continuous input streams, and
generalizes to hierarchical architectures. Furthermore, we demonstrate both analytically and empirically that the algorithm is more data-efficient than a three-factor
plasticity alternative, enabling it to learn statistics of high-dimensional, naturalistic
inputs. Overall, the model provides a bridge from mechanistic accounts of synaptic
plasticity to algorithmic descriptions of unsupervised probabilistic learning and
inference.

1

Introduction

Sensory systems are faced with a task analogous to the scientific process itself: given a steady stream
of raw data, they must extract meaningful information about its underlying structure. Because the
true underlying structure of the data is rarely accessible, this “representation learning” must be
largely unsupervised. Framing perception in the language of Bayesian inference has proven fruitful in
perceptual and cognitive science [1–4], but has been difficult to connect to biology, because we still
lack a satisfactory account of how the machinery of Bayesian inference and learning is implemented
in neural circuits [5, 6].
Past work includes several examples of circuits that simultaneously learn a top-down generative
model of incoming stimuli and perform approximate inference with respect to these models. These
differ in the nature of the approximation, from maximum a posteriori estimation [7], to efficient
population codes that embed prior structure [8] to either parametric [9, 10] or sampling-based [11]
variational inference. Learning generally takes the form of optimizing a probabilistic objective, either
by backpropagation [9, 10] or through local parameter updates, which match biological learning more
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

