Manifold Topology Divergence: a Framework for
Comparing Data Manifolds

Serguei Barannikov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
CNRS, IMJ, Paris University, France

Ilya Trofimov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia

Grigorii Sotnikov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia

Ekaterina Trimbach
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Moscow, Russia

Alexander Korotin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology,
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (AIRI),
Moscow, Russia

Alexander Filippov
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Evgeny Burnaev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology,
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (AIRI),
Moscow, Russia

Abstract
We develop a framework for comparing data manifolds, aimed, in particular,
towards the evaluation of deep generative models. We describe a novel tool,
Cross-Barcode(P,Q), that, given a pair of distributions in a high-dimensional space,
tracks multiscale topology spacial discrepancies between manifolds on which the
distributions are concentrated. Based on the Cross-Barcode, we introduce the
Manifold Topology Divergence score (MTop-Divergence) and apply it to assess the
performance of deep generative models in various domains: images, 3D-shapes,
time-series, and on different datasets: MNIST, Fashion MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR10,
FFHQ, chest X-ray images, market stock data, ShapeNet. We demonstrate that
the MTop-Divergence accurately detects various degrees of mode-dropping, intramode collapse, mode invention, and image disturbance. Our algorithm scales
well (essentially linearly) with the increase of the dimension of the ambient highdimensional space. It is one of the first TDA-based practical methodologies that
can be applied universally to datasets of different sizes and dimensions, including
the ones on which the most recent GANs in the visual domain are trained. The
proposed method is domain agnostic and does not rely on pre-trained networks.

1

Introduction

Geometric perspective in working with data distributions has been pervasive in machine learning
[5, 8, 12, 10, 23, 20]. Reconstruction of the data from observing only a subset of its points has
made a significant step forward since the invention of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

