Compositional Modeling of Nonlinear Dynamical
Systems with ODE-based Random Features

Thomas M. McDonald
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
tmmcdonald1@sheffield.ac.uk

Mauricio A. Álvarez
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
mauricio.alvarez@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
Effectively modeling phenomena present in highly nonlinear dynamical systems
whilst also accurately quantifying uncertainty is a challenging task, which often requires problem-specific techniques. We present a novel, domain-agnostic approach
to tackling this problem, using compositions of physics-informed random features,
derived from ordinary differential equations. The architecture of our model leverages recent advances in approximate inference for deep Gaussian processes, such
as layer-wise weight-space approximations which allow us to incorporate random
Fourier features, and stochastic variational inference for approximate Bayesian
inference. We provide evidence that our model is capable of capturing highly
nonlinear behaviour in real-world multivariate time series data. In addition, we
find that our approach achieves comparable performance to a number of other
probabilistic models on benchmark regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems are ubiquitous across the natural sciences, with many physical and biological
processes being driven on a fundamental level by differential equations. Inferring ordinary differential
equation (ODE) parameters using observational data from such systems is an active area of research
[Meeds et al., 2019, Ghosh et al., 2021], however, in particularly complex systems it is often infeasible
to characterise all of the individual processes present and the interactions between them. Rather than
attempt to fully describe a complex system, latent force models (LFMs) [Alvarez et al., 2009] specify
a simplified mechanistic model of the system which captures salient features of the dynamics present.
This leads to a model which is able to readily extrapolate beyond the training input space, thereby
retaining one of the key advantages of mechanistic modeling over purely data-driven techniques.
Modeling nonlinear dynamical systems presents an additional challenge, and whilst nonlinear
differential equations have been incorporated into LFMs [Ward et al., 2020], shallow models such as
LFMs are generally less capable than deep models of modeling the non-stationarities often present
in nonlinear systems. Deep model architectures have greater representational power than shallow
models as a result of their hierarchical structure, which typically consists of compositions of functions
[LeCun et al., 2015]. Deep probabilistic models such as deep Gaussian processes (DGPs) [Damianou
and Lawrence, 2013] are able to leverage this representational power, with the additional advantage
of being able to accurately quantify uncertainty.
In this paper, we aim to model nonlinear dynamics by constructing a DGP from compositions of
physics-informed random Fourier features, with the motivation behind this approach being that many
real-world systems are compositional hierarchies [LeCun et al., 2015]. Whilst a number of recent
works have incorporated random Fourier features into deep models [Cutajar et al., 2017, Mehrkanoon
and Suykens, 2018], the only work we are aware of which does so in the context of a physics-informed
DGP is that of Lorenzi and Filippone [2018]. The authors impose physical structure on a DGP with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

