An Information-theoretic Approach to Distribution
Shifts
Ryota Tomioka
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
ryoto@microsoft.com

Marco Federici
AMLab
University of Amsterdam
m.federici@uva.nl

Patrick Forré
AI4Science Lab, AMLab
University of Amsterdam
p.d.forre@uva.nl

Abstract
Safely deploying machine learning models to the real world is often a challenging
process. Models trained with data obtained from a specific geographic location tend
to fail when queried with data obtained elsewhere, agents trained in a simulation
can struggle to adapt when deployed in the real world or novel environments,
and neural networks that are fit to a subset of the population might carry some
selection bias into their decision process. In this work, we describe the problem
of data shift from a novel information-theoretic perspective by (i) identifying and
describing the different sources of error, (ii) comparing some of the most promising
objectives explored in the recent domain generalization and fair classification
literature. From our theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation, we conclude
that the model selection procedure needs to be guided by careful considerations
regarding the observed data, the factors used for correction, and the structure of the
data-generating process.

1

Introduction

One of the most common assumptions for machine learning models is that the training and test
data are independently and identically sampled (IID) from the same distribution. In practice, this
assumption does not hold in many practical scenarios (Bengio et al., 2020). A machine learning
model trained to recognize land usage from satellite images using pictures from the early 2000s may
struggle to recognize the style of modern architectures (Christie et al., 2018), data collected on a
limited set of hospitals may not be representative of the variation introduced by the use of different
machines or procedures (Zech et al., 2018; Beede et al., 2020). Other kinds of distribution shifts are
more subtle and difficult to recognize despite having a noticeable impact on the model’s predictive
performance. Examples include under-represented or over-represented population groups (Popejoy &
Fullerton, 2016; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018) or biased annotations collected from crowd-sourcing
services (Zhang et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2020).
Different approaches in literature address these issues by using some external source of knowledge
such as domain or environment annotations (Wang & Deng, 2018), protected attributes (Mehrabi
et al., 2019) or sub-population groups (Santurkar et al., 2020) to reduce bias and minimize the model
error outside of the training distribution. Despite the progress in the field of domain generalization
literature, Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2020) has shown that the effectiveness of some of the most
common algorithms heavily relies on the hyper-parameter tuning strategy, revealing limitations of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

