Symbolic Regression via Neural-Guided Genetic
Programming Population Seeding

T. Nathan Mundhenk
mundhenk1@llnl.gov

Mikel Landajuela
landajuelala1@llnl.gov

Claudio P. Santiago
prata@llnl.gov

Daniel M. Faissol
faissol1@llnl.gov

Ruben Glatt
glatt1@llnl.gov
Brenden K. Petersen
bp@llnl.gov

Computational Engineering Division
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550

Abstract
Symbolic regression is the process of identifying mathematical expressions that fit
observed output from a black-box process. It is a discrete optimization problem
generally believed to be NP-hard. Prior approaches to solving the problem include
neural-guided search (e.g. using reinforcement learning) and genetic programming. In this work, we introduce a hybrid neural-guided/genetic programming
approach to symbolic regression and other combinatorial optimization problems.
We propose a neural-guided component used to seed the starting population of a
random restart genetic programming component, gradually learning better starting
populations. On a number of common benchmark tasks to recover underlying
expressions from a dataset, our method recovers 65% more expressions than
a recently published top-performing model using the same experimental setup.
We demonstrate that running many genetic programming generations without
interdependence on the neural-guided component performs better for symbolic
regression than alternative formulations where the two are more strongly coupled.
Finally, we introduce a new set of 22 symbolic regression benchmark problems
with increased difficulty over existing benchmarks. Source code is provided at
www.github.com/brendenpetersen/deep-symbolic-optimization.

1

Introduction

Symbolic regression involves searching the space of mathematical expressions to fit a dataset using
equations which are potentially easier to interpret than, for example, neural networks. A key difference
compared to polynomial or neural network-based regression is that we seek to illuminate the true
underlying process that generated the data. Thus, the process of symbolic regression is analogous
to how a physicist may derive a set of fundamental expressions to describe a natural process. For
example, Tycho Brahe meticulously mapped the motion of planets through the sky, but it was Johannes
Kepler who later created the expressions for the laws that described their motion. Given a dataset
(X, y), where each point has inputs Xi ∈ Rn and response yi ∈ R, symbolic regression aims to
identify a function f : Rn → R that best fits the dataset, where the functional form of f is a short
closed-form mathematical expression.
The space of mathematical expressions is structurally discrete (in functional form) but continuous
in parameter space (e.g. floating-point constants). The search space grows exponentially with the
length of the expression, rendering symbolic regression a challenging machine learning problem. It
is generally believed to be NP-hard [Lu et al., 2016]; however, no formal proof exists. Given the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

