Differentiable Spline Approximations
Minsu Cho1†
Biswajit Khara2

Aditya Balu2†

Ameya Joshi1

Soumik Sarkar2

Adarsh Krishnamurthy2

Anjana Deva Prasad2

Baskar Ganapathysubramanian2
Chinmay Hegde1

New York University1 , Iowa State University2
{mc8065, ameya.joshi, chinmay.h}@nyu.edu
{baditya, anjana, bkhara, soumiks, baskarg, adarsh}@iastate.edu ⇤

Abstract
The paradigm of differentiable programming has significantly enhanced the scope
of machine learning via the judicious use of gradient-based optimization. However,
standard differentiable programming methods (such as autodiff) typically require
the machine learning models to be differentiable, limiting their applicability. Our
goal in this paper is to use a new, principled approach to extend gradient-based
optimization to functions well modeled by splines, which encompass a large family
of piecewise polynomial models. We derive the form of the (weak) Jacobian of such
functions and show that it exhibits a block-sparse structure that can be computed
implicitly and efficiently. Overall, we show that leveraging this redesigned Jacobian
in the form of a differentiable “layer” in predictive models leads to improved
performance in diverse applications such as image segmentation, 3D point cloud
reconstruction, and finite element analysis. We also open-source the code at
https://github.com/idealab-isu/DSA.

1

Introduction

Motivation: Differentiable programming has been a paradigm shift in algorithm design. The main
idea is to leverage gradient-based optimization to optimize the parameters of the algorithm, allowing
for end-to-end trainable systems (such as deep neural networks) to exploit structure in data and
achieve better performance. This approach has found use in a large variety of applications such as
scientific computing [Innes, 2020; Innes et al., 2019; Schafer et al., 2020], image processing [Li
et al., 2018a], physics engines [Degrave et al., 2017], computational simulations [Alnæs et al., 2015],
and graphics [Li et al., 2018b; Chen et al., 2019]. One way to leverage differentiable programming
modules is to encode additional structural priors as “layers” in a larger machine learning model.
Inherent structural constraints such as monotonicity, or piecewise constancy, are particularly prevalent
in applications such as physics simulations, graphics rendering, and network engineering. In such
applications, it may be beneficial to build models that obey such priors by design.
Challenges: For differentiable programming to work, all layers within the model must admit simple
gradient calculations; however, this poses a major limitation in many settings. For example, consider
computer graphics applications for rendering 3D objects [Kindlmann et al., 2003; Gross et al., 1995;
Loop and Blinn, 2006]. A common primitive in such cases is a spline (or a piecewise polynomial)
function which either exactly or approximately interpolates between a discrete set of points to produce
a continuous shape or surface. Similar spline (or other piecewise polynomial) approximations arise in
⇤†

Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

