Early Convolutions Help Transformers See Better
Tete Xiao1,2 Mannat Singh1 Eric Mintun1 Trevor Darrell2 Piotr Dollár1∗ Ross Girshick1∗
1

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

2

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Vision transformer (ViT) models exhibit substandard optimizability. In particular,
they are sensitive to the choice of optimizer (AdamW vs. SGD), optimizer hyperparameters, and training schedule length. In comparison, modern convolutional neural
networks are easier to optimize. Why is this the case? In this work, we conjecture
that the issue lies with the patchify stem of ViT models, which is implemented by
a stride-p p×p convolution (p = 16 by default) applied to the input image. This
large-kernel plus large-stride convolution runs counter to typical design choices
of convolutional layers in neural networks. To test whether this atypical design
choice causes an issue, we analyze the optimization behavior of ViT models with
their original patchify stem versus a simple counterpart where we replace the ViT
stem by a small number of stacked stride-two 3×3 convolutions. While the vast
majority of computation in the two ViT designs is identical, we find that this small
change in early visual processing results in markedly different training behavior in
terms of the sensitivity to optimization settings as well as the final model accuracy.
Using a convolutional stem in ViT dramatically increases optimization stability
and also improves peak performance (by ∼1-2% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1k),
while maintaining flops and runtime. The improvement can be observed across the
wide spectrum of model complexities (from 1G to 36G flops) and dataset scales
(from ImageNet-1k to ImageNet-21k). These findings lead us to recommend using
a standard, lightweight convolutional stem for ViT models in this regime as a more
robust architectural choice compared to the original ViT model design.

1

Introduction

Vision transformer (ViT) models [13] offer an alternative design paradigm to convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [24]. ViTs replace the inductive bias towards local processing inherent in convolutions with global processing performed by multi-headed self-attention [43]. The hope is that
this design has the potential to improve performance on vision tasks, akin to the trends observed
in natural language processing [11]. While investigating this conjecture, researchers face another
unexpected difference between ViTs and CNNs: ViT models exhibit substandard optimizability.
ViTs are sensitive to the choice of optimizer [41] (AdamW [27] vs. SGD), to the selection of dataset
specific learning hyperparameters [13, 41], to training schedule length, to network depth [42], etc.
These issues render former training recipes and intuitions ineffective and impede research.
Convolutional neural networks, in contrast, are exceptionally easy and robust to optimize. Simple
training recipes based on SGD, basic data augmentation, and standard hyperparameter values have
been widely used for years [19]. Why does this difference exist between ViT and CNN models? In
this paper we hypothesize that the issues lies primarily in the early visual processing performed by
ViT. ViT “patchifies” the input image into p×p non-overlapping patches to form the transformer
encoder’s input set. This patchify stem is implemented as a stride-p p×p convolution, with p = 16
as a default value. This large-kernel plus large-stride convolution runs counter to the typical design
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

