Predify: Augmenting deep neural networks with
brain-inspired predictive coding dynamics

Bhavin Choksi∗
CerCo CNRS, UMR 5549 &
Université de Toulouse
bhavin.choksi@cnrs.fr
Benjamin Ador
CerCo CNRS
UMR 5549

Milad Mozafari*
CerCo CNRS, UMR 5549 &
IRIT CNRS, UMR 5505
milad.mozafari@cnrs.fr
Andrea Alamia
CerCo CNRS
UMR 5549

Callum Biggs O’May
CerCo CNRS
UMR 5549

Rufin VanRullen
CerCo CNRS, UMR 5549 &
ANITI, Université de Toulouse
rufin.vanrullen@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Deep neural networks excel at image classification, but their performance is far
less robust to input perturbations than human perception. In this work we explore
whether this shortcoming may be partly addressed by incorporating brain-inspired
recurrent dynamics in deep convolutional networks. We take inspiration from
a popular framework in neuroscience: “predictive coding”. At each layer of the
hierarchical model, generative feedback “predicts” (i.e., reconstructs) the pattern of
activity in the previous layer. The reconstruction errors are used to iteratively update
the network’s representations across timesteps, and to optimize the network’s
feedback weights over the natural image dataset–a form of unsupervised training.
We show that implementing this strategy into two popular networks, VGG16
and EfficientNetB0, improves their robustness against various corruptions and
adversarial attacks. We hypothesize that other feedforward networks could similarly
benefit from the proposed framework. To promote research in this direction, we
provide an open-sourced PyTorch-based package called Predify, which can be used
to implement and investigate the impacts of the predictive coding dynamics in any
convolutional neural network.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs), initially inspired by the primate visual cortex architecture, have taken big strides in solving computer vision tasks in the last decade. State-of-the-art
networks can learn to classify images with high accuracy from huge labeled datasets [1–6]. This rapid
progress and the resulting interest in these techniques have also highlighted their various shortcomings. Most widely studied is the sensitivity of neural networks, not only to perturbations specifically
designed to fool them (so-called “adversarial examples”) but also to regular noises typically observed
in natural scenes [7–9]. These shortcomings indicate that there is still room for improvement in
current techniques.
One possible way to improve the robustness of artificial neural networks could be to take further
inspiration from the brain. In particular, one major aspect of the cerebral cortex that is missing from
standard feedforward DCNNs is the presence of feedback connections. Recent studies have stressed
the importance of feedback connections in the brain [10, 11], and have shown how artificial neural
∗

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

