Batch Multi-Fidelity Bayesian Optimization with
Deep Auto-Regressive Networks

Shibo Li, Robert M. Kirby, and Shandian Zhe
School of Computing, University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
shibo@cs.utah.edu, kirby@cs.utah.edu, zhe@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful approach for optimizing black-box,
expensive-to-evaluate functions. To enable a flexible trade-off between the cost
and accuracy, many applications allow the function to be evaluated at different
fidelities. In order to reduce the optimization cost while maximizing the benefitcost ratio, in this paper we propose Batch Multi-fidelity Bayesian Optimization
with Deep Auto-Regressive Networks (BMBO-DARN). We use a set of Bayesian
neural networks to construct a fully auto-regressive model, which is expressive
enough to capture strong yet complex relationships across all the fidelities, so as
to improve the surrogate learning and optimization performance. Furthermore,
to enhance the quality and diversity of queries, we develop a simple yet efficient
batch querying method, without any combinatorial search over the fidelities. We
propose a batch acquisition function based on Max-value Entropy Search (MES)
principle, which penalizes highly correlated queries and encourages diversity. We
use posterior samples and moment matching to fulfill efficient computation of the
acquisition function, and conduct alternating optimization over every fidelity-input
pair, which guarantees an improvement at each step. We demonstrate the advantage
of our approach on four real-world hyperparameter optimization applications.

1

Introduction

Many applications demand we optimize a complex function of an unknown form that is expensive
to evaluate. Bayesian optimization (Mockus, 2012; Snoek et al., 2012) is a powerful approach to
optimize such functions. The key idea is to use a probabilistic surrogate model, typically Gaussian
processes (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006), to iteratively approximate the target function, integrate
the posterior information to compute and maximize an acquisition function so as to generate new
inputs at which to query, update the model with new examples, and meanwhile approach the optimum.
In practice, to enable a flexible trade-off between the computational cost and accuracy, many applications allow us to evaluate the target function at different fidelities. For example, to evaluate the
performance of the hyperparameters for a machine learning model, we can train the model thoroughly,
i.e., with sufficient iterations/epochs, to obtain the accurate evaluation (high-fidelity yet often costly)
or just run a few iterations/epochs to obtain a rough estimate (low-fidelity but much cheaper).
Many multi-fidelity BO algorithms (Lam et al., 2015; Kandasamy et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017;
Song et al., 2019; Takeno et al., 2019) have therefore been proposed to identify both the fidelities
and inputs at which to query, so as to reduce the cost and achieve a good benefit-cost balance.
Notwithstanding their success, these methods often overlook the strong yet complex relationships
between different fidelities or adopt an over-simplified assumption, (partly) for the sake of convenience
in calculating/maximizing the acquisition function considering fidelities. This, however, can restrict
the performance of the surrogate model, impair the optimization efficiency and increase the cost. For
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

