CSDI: Conditional Score-based Diffusion Models for
Probabilistic Time Series Imputation

1

Yusuke Tashiro123* , Jiaming Song1 , Yang Song1 , Stefano Ermon1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2
Mitsubishi UFJ Trust Investment Technology Institute, Tokyo, Japan
3
Japan Digital Design, Tokyo, Japan
{ytashiro,tsong,songyang,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The imputation of missing values in time series has many applications in healthcare
and finance. While autoregressive models are natural candidates for time series
imputation, score-based diffusion models have recently outperformed existing
counterparts including autoregressive models in many tasks such as image generation and audio synthesis, and would be promising for time series imputation. In
this paper, we propose Conditional Score-based Diffusion models for Imputation
(CSDI), a novel time series imputation method that utilizes score-based diffusion
models conditioned on observed data. Unlike existing score-based approaches,
the conditional diffusion model is explicitly trained for imputation and can exploit
correlations between observed values. On healthcare and environmental data, CSDI
improves by 40-65% over existing probabilistic imputation methods on popular
performance metrics. In addition, deterministic imputation by CSDI reduces the
error by 5-20% compared to the state-of-the-art deterministic imputation methods.
Furthermore, CSDI can also be applied to time series interpolation and probabilistic
forecasting, and is competitive with existing baselines. The code is available at
https://github.com/ermongroup/CSDI.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series are abundant in real world applications such as finance, meteorology and
healthcare. These time series data often contain missing values due to various reasons, including
device failures and human errors [1, 2, 3]. Since missing values can hamper the interpretation of a
time series, many studies have addressed the task of imputing missing values using machine learning
techniques [4, 5, 6]. In the past few years, imputation methods based on deep neural networks have
shown great success for both deterministic imputation [7, 8, 9] and probabilistic imputation [10].
These imputation methods typically utilize autoregressive models to deal with time series.
Score-based diffusion models – a class of deep generative models and generate samples by gradually
converting noise into a plausible data sample through denoising – have recently achieved state-ofthe-art sample quality in many tasks such as image generation [11, 12] and audio synthesis [13, 14],
outperforming counterparts including autoregressive models. Diffusion models can also be used to
impute missing values by approximating the scores of the posterior distribution obtained from the
prior by conditioning on the observed values [12, 15, 16]. While these approximations may work
well in practice, they do not correspond to the exact conditional distribution.
In this paper, we propose CSDI, a novel probabilistic imputation method that directly learns the
conditional distribution with conditional score-based diffusion models. Unlike existing score-based
approaches, the conditional diffusion model is designed for imputation and can exploit useful
information in observed values. We illustrate the procedure of time series imputation with CSDI in
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

