A Continuous Mapping For Augmentation Design

Chen Lin∗
University of Oxford
chen.lin@eng.ox.ac.uk

Keyu Tian∗
Software College
Beihang University
tiankeyu.00@gmail.com
Ser-Nam Lim
Facebook AI

Wanli Ouyang
University of Sydney

Puneet K. Dokania
University of Oxford & Five AI Ltd.

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Automated data augmentation (ADA) techniques have played an important role
in boosting the performance of deep models. Such techniques mostly aim to optimize a parameterized distribution over a discrete augmentation space. Thus, are
restricted by the discretization of the search space which normally is handcrafted.
To overcome the limitations, we take the first step to constructing a continuous
mapping from Rd to image transformations (an augmentation space). Using this
mapping, we take a novel approach where 1) we pose the ADA as a continuous
optimization problem over the parameters of the augmentation distribution; and 2)
use Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics to learn and sample augmentations.
This allows us to potentially explore the space of infinitely many possible augmentations, which otherwise was not possible due to the discretization of the space.
This view of ADA is radically different from the standard discretization based
view of ADA , and it opens avenues for utilizing the vast efficient gradient-based
algorithms available for continuous optimization problems. Results over multiple
benchmarks demonstrate the efficiency improvement of this work compared with
previous methods.

1

Introduction

Data augmentation [22] is one of the advanced techniques or recipes that proliferate the success of
deep learning. The crux behind data augmentation is to make a model invariant towards various input
transformations that we expect to observe during inference, thus, improves the generalization of the
model. Since it is not clear which transformations would benefit most, manual design is difficult. Thus,
there has been a growing interest in automatically learning such augmentations, a new thriving subarea
of data augmentation known as the Automated Data Augmentation (ADA) [5, 16, 21, 20, 19, 28].
ADA is generally formulated as a bilevel optimization problem over a discrete search space, and aims
to find an optimal augmentation policy. For example, the search space used in AutoAugment [5],
the very first promising work in this topic, contains several augmentation candidates, e.g., rotation/blurring/brightening with different discrete magnitudes, and the augmentation policy is defined
as a parameterized discrete distribution over this space. Such approach has been shown to provide
∗

Authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

