On the Frequency Bias of Generative Models

Katja Schwarz

Yiyi Liao

Andreas Geiger

Autonomous Vision Group
University of Tübingen and MPI for Intelligent Systems
{firstname.lastname}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
The key objective of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is to generate new
data with the same statistics as the provided training data. However, multiple recent
works show that state-of-the-art architectures yet struggle to achieve this goal.
In particular, they report an elevated amount of high frequencies in the spectral
statistics which makes it straightforward to distinguish real and generated images.
Explanations for this phenomenon are controversial: While most works attribute
the artifacts to the generator, other works point to the discriminator. We take a
sober look at those explanations and provide insights on what makes proposed
measures against high-frequency artifacts effective. To achieve this, we first
independently assess the architectures of both the generator and discriminator and
investigate if they exhibit a frequency bias that makes learning the distribution
of high-frequency content particularly problematic. Based on these experiments,
we make the following four observations: 1) Different upsampling operations
bias the generator towards different spectral properties. 2) Checkerboard artifacts
introduced by upsampling cannot explain the spectral discrepancies alone as the
generator is able to compensate for these artifacts. 3) The discriminator does not
struggle with detecting high frequencies per se but rather struggles with frequencies
of low magnitude. 4) The downsampling operations in the discriminator can impair
the quality of the training signal it provides. In light of these findings, we analyze
proposed measures against high-frequency artifacts in state-of-the-art GAN training
but find that none of the existing approaches can fully resolve spectral artifacts yet.
Our results suggest that there is great potential in improving the discriminator and
that this could be key to match the distribution of the training data more closely.

1

Introduction

In recent years, unconditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have achieved impressive
photo-realism for image synthesis tasks. While this has hampered the identification of generated
images based on visual cues, multiple recent works show that it is straightforward to distinguish
real and generated images based on their high-frequency content [7–9, 14, 22, 34, 38]. This has
aroused considerable interest because it reveals a fundamental problem in state-of-the-art GANs:
Existing approaches evidently struggle to learn the correct data distribution. While GAN training is
notoriously hard, learning the distribution of high-frequency content is particularly problematic [7–
9, 14, 22, 34, 38]. This indicates a systematic problem in existing approaches that could make
training suboptimal. For example, if generating high-frequencies is difficult for the generator but
detecting them is straightforward for the discriminator this imbalance could impair the stability of
the training. Conversely, if the discriminator struggles to detect high frequencies generating fine
details also becomes more difficult which could impede convergence. Therefore, we argue that it is
important to better understand the expressivity of both the generator and the discriminator. Indeed,
numerous works suggest that the architecture of the generator can hamper the generation of high
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

