Greedy Approximation Algorithms
for Active Sequential Hypothesis Testing
Kyra Gan⇤ , Su Jia⇤, Andrew A. Li
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{kyragan,sujia,aali1}@cmu.edu

Abstract
In the problem of active sequential hypothesis testing (ASHT), a learner seeks to
identify the true hypothesis from among a known set of hypotheses. The learner
is given a set of actions and knows the random distribution of the outcome of
any action under any true hypothesis. Given a target error > 0, the goal is to
sequentially select the fewest number of actions so as to identify the true hypothesis
with probability at least 1
. Motivated by applications in which the number
of hypotheses or actions is massive (e.g., genomics-based cancer detection), we
propose efficient (greedy, in fact) algorithms and provide the first approximation
guarantees for ASHT, under two types of adaptivity. Both of our guarantees are
independent of the number of actions and logarithmic in the number of hypotheses.
We numerically evaluate the performance of our algorithms using both synthetic
and real-world DNA mutation data, demonstrating that our algorithms outperform
previously proposed heuristic policies by large margins.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of learning the true hypothesis from among a (potentially large) set of candidate
hypotheses H. Assume that the learner is given a (potentially large) set of actions A, and knows the
distribution of the noisy outcome of each action, under each potential hypothesis. The learner incurs
a fixed cost each time an action is selected, and seeks to identify the true hypothesis with sufficient
confidence, at minimum total cost. Finally, and most importantly, the learner is allowed to select
actions adaptively.
This well-studied problem is referred to as active sequential hypothesis testing, and as we will describe
momentarily, there exists a broad set of results that tightly characterizes the optimal achievable cost
under various notions of adaptivity. Unfortunately, the corresponding optimal policies are typically
only characterized as the optimal policy to a Markov decision process (MDP)—thus, they remain
computationally hard to compute when one requires a policy in practice. This deficiency becomes
particularly apparent in modern applications where both the set of hypotheses and set of actions
are large. As a concrete example, we will describe later on an application to cancer blood testing
that has tens of hypotheses and billions of tests at full scale. Thus motivated, we provide the first
approximation algorithms for ASHT.
We study ASHT under two types of adaptivity: partial and full, where partial adaptivity requires
the sequence of actions to be decided upfront (with adaptively chosen stopping time), and full
adaptivity allows the choice of action to depend on previous outcomes. For both problems, we
propose greedy algorithms that run in O(|A||H|) time, and prove that their expected costs are upper
bounded by a non-trivial multiplicative factor of the corresponding optimal costs. Most notably, these
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

