Counterexample Guided RL Policy Refinement
Using Bayesian Optimization

Briti Gangopadhyay∗
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
briti_gangopadhyay@iitkgp.ac.in

Pallab Dasgupta
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
pallab@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

Abstract
Constructing Reinforcement Learning (RL) policies that adhere to safety requirements is an emerging field of study. RL agents learn via trial and error with an
objective to optimize a reward signal. Often policies that are designed to accumulate rewards do not satisfy safety specifications. We present a methodology for
counterexample guided refinement of a trained RL policy against a given safety
specification. Our approach has two main components. The first component is an
approach to discover failure trajectories using Bayesian Optimization over multiple
parameters of uncertainty from a policy learnt in a model-free setting. The second
component selectively modifies the failure points of the policy using gradient-based
updates. The approach has been tested on several RL environments, and we demonstrate that the policy can be made to respect the safety specifications through such
targeted changes.

1

Introduction

Classical Reinforcement Learning (RL) is designed to perceive the environment and act towards
maximizing a long term reward. These algorithms have shown superhuman performances in games
like GO [10], motivating their use in safety-critical domains like autonomous driving [23, 20, 16].
These policies are mostly learnt in simulation environments such as TORCS [22] or CARLA [14]
for accelerated learning. Therefore they are susceptible to perform poorly in the real world where
domain uncertainty arises due to noisy data. Also, the choice of a RL policy is determined by the
design of the reward signal, which if not constructed properly, may lead the agent towards unintended
or even harmful behaviour. Hence the need for constructing policies that account for risks arising due
to uncertainty and do not violate safety specifications.
Safe RL aims to learn policies that maximize the expectation of the return while respecting safety
specifications [17]. The existing literature on safe RL is broadly divided into three schools of
thought namely, 1) Transforming the optimization criteria by factoring in costs derived from safety
constraints [1], 2) Using external knowledge in the form of a teacher or a safety shield to replace
unsafe actions chosen by the policy during exploration / deployment [2], and 3) Establishing the
existence of an inductive safety invariant such as a Lyapunov function [11] or a control barrier
function [25]. Establishing such an invariant is often intractable for Neural Network controllers that
use many parameters and work on high-dimensional state spaces.
In this work, we propose a counterexample guided policy refinement method for verifying and
correcting a policy that has already been optimized and calibrated. Failure traces may occur in
such a policy due to the following reasons: a) Failure trajectories are extremely rare and do not
contribute significantly enough to reduce the expected reward, b) Uncertainty in the environment
∗

Code is available online at https://github.com/britig/policy-refinement-bo

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

