Confident-Anchor-Induced Multi-Source-Free
Domain Adaptation

Jiahua Dong1, 2∗ , Zhen Fang3∗ , Anjin Liu3 , Gan Sun1† , Tongliang Liu4
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
3
DeSI Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney. 4 TML Lab, University of Sydney.
{dongjiahua1995, fzjlyt, sungan1412}@gmail.com, anjin.liu@uts.edu.au,
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation has attracted appealing academic attentions by
transferring knowledge from labeled source domain to unlabeled target domain.
However, most existing methods assume the source data are drawn from a single
domain, which cannot be successfully applied to explore complementarily transferable knowledge from multiple source domains with large distribution discrepancies. Moreover, they require access to source data during training, which are
inefficient and unpractical due to privacy preservation and memory storage. To
address these challenges, we develop a novel Confident-Anchor-induced multisource-free Domain Adaptation (CAiDA) model, which is a pioneer exploration
of knowledge adaptation from multiple source domains to the unlabeled target
domain without any source data, but with only pre-trained source models. Specifically, a source-specific transferable perception module is proposed to automatically quantify the contributions of the complementary knowledge transferred from
multi-source domains to the target domain. To generate pseudo labels for the
target domain without access to the source data, we develop a confident-anchorinduced pseudo label generator by constructing a confident anchor group and assigning each unconfident target sample with a semantic-nearest confident anchor.
Furthermore, a class-relationship-aware consistency loss is proposed to preserve
consistent inter-class relationships by aligning soft confusion matrices across domains. Theoretical analysis answers why multi-source domains are better than a
single source domain, and establishes a novel learning bound to show the effectiveness of exploiting multi-source domains. Experiments on several representative datasets illustrate the superiority of our proposed CAiDA model. The code is
available at https://github.com/Learning-group123/CAiDA.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [22, 59, 63] captures transferable knowledge from labeled
data in a source domain to classify unlabeled data in a target domain. UDA has achieved remarkable
successes in many applications, e.g., object detection [23], medical diagnose [9, 12], sentiment analysis [34], etc. Generally, most of existing methods employ adversarial learning [17] to encourage the
learned source and target features to be indistinguishable from each other [10, 15], or minimize the
distribution discrepancy across domains by matching the statistical moments of distributions [41].
∗
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

