Biological learning in key-value memory networks
Danil Tyulmankov⇤
Columbia University
dt2586@columbia.edu

Ching Fang⇤
Columbia University
ching.fang@columbia.edu

Annapurna Vadaparty
Columbia University
Stanford University
apvadaparty@gmail.com

Guangyu Robert Yang
Columbia University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
yanggr@mit.edu

Abstract
In neuroscience, classical Hopfield networks are the standard biologically plausible
model of long-term memory, relying on Hebbian plasticity for storage and attractor
dynamics for recall. In contrast, memory-augmented neural networks in machine
learning commonly use a key-value mechanism to store and read out memories
in a single step. Such augmented networks achieve impressive feats of memory
compared to traditional variants, yet their biological relevance is unclear. We
propose an implementation of basic key-value memory that stores inputs using a
combination of biologically plausible three-factor plasticity rules. The same rules
are recovered when network parameters are meta-learned. Our network performs
on par with classical Hopfield networks on autoassociative memory tasks and can
be naturally extended to continual recall, heteroassociative memory, and sequence
learning. Our results suggest a compelling alternative to the classical Hopfield
network as a model of biological long-term memory.

1

Introduction

Long-term memory is an essential aspect of our everyday lives. It is the ability to rapidly memorize
an experience or item, and to retain that memory in a retrievable form over a prolonged duration
(days to years in humans). Neural networks capable of long-term memory have been studied in
both neuroscience and machine learning, yet a wide gap remains between the mechanisms and
interpretations of the two traditions.
In neuroscience, long-term associative memory is typically modeled by variants of Hopfield networks
[Hopfield, 1982, Amit, 1992, Willshaw et al., 1969]. Rooted in statistical physics, they are one of
the earliest and best known class of neural network models. A classical Hopfield network stores an
activation pattern ⇠ by strengthening the recurrent connections W between co-active neurons using a
biologically-plausible Hebbian plasticity rule,
W

W + ⇠⇠ |

(1)

and allows retrieval of a memory from a corrupted version through recurrent attractor dynamics,
xt+1 = sign(W xt )

(2)

thereby providing a content-addressable and pattern-completing autoassociative memory.
In a more recent parallel thread in machine learning, various memory networks have been devised to
augment traditional neural networks [Graves et al., 2014, Sukhbaatar et al., 2015, Munkhdalai et al.,
⇤

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

