Explanation-based Data Augmentation for Image
Classification
Sandareka Wickramanayake
Mong Li Lee
Wynne Hsu
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
{sandaw, leeml, whsu}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing works have generated explanations for deep neural network decisions
to provide insights into model behavior. We observe that these explanations can
also be used to identify concepts that caused misclassifications. This allows
us to understand the possible limitations of the dataset used to train the model,
particularly the under-represented regions in the dataset. This work proposes a
framework that utilizes concept-based explanations to automatically augment the
dataset with new images that can cover these under-represented regions to improve
the model performance. The framework is able to use the explanations generated by
both interpretable classifiers and post-hoc explanations from black-box classifiers.
Experiment results demonstrate that the proposed approach improves the accuracy
of classifiers compared to state-of-the-art augmentation strategies.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models learn decision boundaries based on the training dataset. Ideally, a training
dataset should provide sufficient variations in each class so that the model can learn the correct
decision boundaries. However, when there are under-represented regions in the training dataset, the
model will learn sub-optimal decision boundaries, leading to misclassification of data points [1, 2].
One way to address this problem is to augment the training dataset. A common data augmentation
approach is to apply different transformations to the training samples [3] or to mix existing samples
[4, 5]. However, such data augmentations only explore the neighborhood of these samples and
may not cover the under-represented regions. Another approach is to use annotations such as part
landmarks to obtain images from image resources such as Flickr or Google [6]. This approach may
introduce out-of-distribution images and degrade the classifier performance.
Identifying the appropriate samples to add to the training dataset is crucial. Here, we propose to use
model decision explanations to facilitate the search for samples from image repositories and augment
the training dataset with samples from the under-represented regions to enable the model to learn
the correct decision boundaries. Figure 1a shows the image of a juvenile Black Tern that has been
misclassified as White Breasted Nuthatch. A closer examination of the training dataset reveals that it
contains very few images of juvenile Black Terns (5 out of 30 images). These juvenile birds have
white heads with black skullcap and black earmark, unlike the adult Black Terns [7] (see Figure 1b).
In fact, the juvenile Black Tern in Figure 1a is more similar to White Breasted Nuthatch as shown in
Figure 1c, leading to the misclassification. Clearly, there is a need to augment the training data to
include more images of juvenile Black Tern in order to learn the correct decision boundary between
Black Terns and White Breasted Nuthatch.
Methods to explain model decisions include pixel-level attributions [8, 9, 10], and high-level semantic
concepts such as coarse-grained saliency maps [11, 12], interpretable basis decomposition [13],
linguistic explanations [14, 15] and prototypes [16]. The work in [17] designs a Comprehensive
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

