Deep Explicit Duration Switching Models
for Time Series
Abdul Fatir Ansari2∗ † Konstantinos Benidis1∗ Richard Kurle1
Harold Soh2
1

Alexander J. Smola1

Amazon Research

2

Yuyang Wang1

Ali Caner Türkmen1

Tim Januschowski1

National University of Singapore

Correspondence to: abdulfatir@u.nus.edu, {kbenidis, kurler}@amazon.com

Abstract
Many complex time series can be effectively subdivided into distinct regimes that
exhibit persistent dynamics. Discovering the switching behavior and the statistical
patterns in these regimes is important for understanding the underlying dynamical system. We propose the Recurrent Explicit Duration Switching Dynamical
System (RED-SDS), a flexible model that is capable of identifying both stateand time-dependent switching dynamics. State-dependent switching is enabled by
a recurrent state-to-switch connection and an explicit duration count variable is
used to improve the time-dependent switching behavior. We demonstrate how to
perform efficient inference using a hybrid algorithm that approximates the posterior
of the continuous states via an inference network and performs exact inference for
the discrete switches and counts. The model is trained by maximizing a Monte
Carlo lower bound of the marginal log-likelihood that can be computed efficiently
as a byproduct of the inference routine. Empirical results on multiple datasets
demonstrate that RED-SDS achieves considerable improvement in time series
segmentation and competitive forecasting performance against the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a key role in informing industrial and business decisions [17, 24, 8],
while segmentation is useful for understanding biological and physical systems [40, 45, 34]. State
Space Models (SSMs) [16] are a powerful tool for such tasks—especially when combined with
neural networks [42, 12, 13]—since they provide a principled framework for time series modeling.
One of the most popular SSMs is the Linear Dynamical System (LDS) [5, 43], which models the
dynamics of the data using a continuous latent variable, called state, that evolves with Markovian
linear transitions. The assumptions of LDS allow for exact inference of the states [27]; however,
they are too restrictive for real-world systems that often exhibit piecewise linear or non-linear hidden
dynamics with a finite number of operating modes or regimes. For example, the power consumption
of a city may follow different hidden dynamics during weekdays and weekends. Such data are better
explained by a Switching Dynamical System (SDS) [1, 21], an SSM with an additional set of latent
variables called switches that define the operating mode active at the current timestep.
Switching events can be classified into time-dependent or state-dependent [33]. Historically, emphasis
was placed on the former, which occurs after a certain amount of time has elapsed in a given regime.
While in a vanilla SDS switch durations follow a geometric distribution, more complex long-term
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at Amazon Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

