Grounding inductive biases in natural images:
invariance stems from variations in data
Diane Bouchacourt∗, Mark Ibrahim∗, Ari S. Morcos
Facebook AI Research
{dianeb,marksibrahim,arimorcos}@fb.com

Abstract
To perform well on unseen and potentially out-of-distribution samples, it is desirable for machine learning models to have a predictable response with respect to
transformations affecting the factors of variation of the input. Here, we study the
relative importance of several types of inductive biases towards such predictable behavior: the choice of data, their augmentations, and model architectures. Invariance
is commonly achieved through hand-engineered data augmentation, but do standard
data augmentations address transformations that explain variations in real data?
While prior work has focused on synthetic data, we attempt here to characterize
the factors of variation in a real dataset, ImageNet, and study the invariance of
both standard residual networks and the recently proposed vision transformer with
respect to changes in these factors. We show standard augmentation relies on a
precise combination of translation and scale, with translation recapturing most of
the performance improvement—despite the (approximate) translation invariance
built in to convolutional architectures, such as residual networks. In fact, we found
that scale and translation invariance was similar across residual networks and vision transformer models despite their markedly different architectural inductive
biases. We show the training data itself is the main source of invariance, and that
data augmentation only further increases the learned invariances. Notably, the
invariances learned during training align with the ImageNet factors of variation we
found. Finally, we find that the main factors of variation in ImageNet mostly relate
to appearance and are specific to each class.

1

Introduction

A dataset can be described in terms of natural factors of variation of the data: for example, images
of objects can present those objects with different poses, illuminations, colors, etc. Prediction
consistency of models with respect to changes in these factors is a desirable property for out-ofdomain generalization [5, 25]. However, state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
struggle when presented with “unusual" examples, e.g. a bus upside down [2]. Indeed, CNNs lack
robustness not only to changes in pose, but even to simple geometric transformations such as small
translations and rotations [4, 15].
Invariance to factors of variation can be learned directly from data, built-in via architectural inductive
biases, or encouraged via data augmentation (Fig. 1A). Our goal with this work is to explore the
relative impact of these three factors on the trained model’s learned invariances and performance.
As of today, data augmentation is the predominant method for encouraging invariance to a set of
transformations. Yet, even with data augmentation models fail to generalize to held out objects and to
learn invariance. For example, [15] found that augmenting with rotation and translation does not lead
to invariance to the very same transformations during testing. A complementary research direction
ensures a model responds predictably to transformations, using group equivariance theory (see Cohen
∗

equal contribution, a coin was flipped

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

