Finding Bipartite Components in Hypergraphs

Peter Macgregor
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
peter.macgregor@ed.ac.uk

He Sun
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
h.sun@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Hypergraphs are important objects to model ternary or higher-order relations of
objects, and have a number of applications in analysing many complex datasets
occurring in practice. In this work we study a new heat diffusion process in
hypergraphs, and employ this process to design a polynomial-time algorithm that
approximately finds bipartite components in a hypergraph. We theoretically prove
the performance of our proposed algorithm, and compare it against the previous
state-of-the-art through extensive experimental analysis on both synthetic and
real-world datasets. We find that our new algorithm consistently and significantly
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art across a wide range of hypergraphs.

1

Introduction

Spectral methods study the efficient matrix representation of graphs and datasets, and apply the
algebraic properties of these matrices to design efficient algorithms. Over the last three decades,
spectral methods have become one of the most powerful techniques in machine learning, and have
had comprehensive applications in a wide range of domains, including clustering [24, 31], image and
video segmentation [26], and network analysis [25], among many others. While the success of this
line of research is based on our rich understanding of Laplacian operators of graphs, there has been a
sequence of very recent work studying non-linear Laplacian operators for more complex objects (i.e.,
hypergraphs) and employing these non-linear operators to design hypergraph algorithms with better
performance.
1.1

Our contribution

In this work, we study the non-linear Laplacian-type operators for hypergraphs, and employ such an
operator to design a polynomial-time algorithm for finding bipartite components in hypergraphs. The
main contribution of our work is as follows:
First of all, we introduce and study a non-linear Laplacian-type operator JH for any hypergraph H.
While we’ll formally define the operator JH in Section 3, one can informally think about JH as a
variant of the standard non-linear hypergraph Laplacian LH studied in [5, 20, 27], and this variation
is needed to study the other end of the spectrum of LH . We present a polynomial-time algorithm
that finds some eigenvalue λ and its associated eigenvector of JH , and our algorithm is based on
the following heat diffusion process: starting from an arbitrary vector f0 ∈ Rn that describes the
initial heat distribution among the vertices, we use f0 to construct some 2-graph1 G0 , and use the
diffusion process in G0 to represent the one in the original hypergraph H and update ft ; this process
continues until the time at which G0 cannot be used to appropriately simulate the diffusion process
in H any more. At this point, we use the currently maintained ft to construct another 2-graph Gt
1
Throughout the paper, we refer to non-hyper graphs as 2-graphs. Similarly, we always use LH to refer to
the non-linear hypergraph Laplacian operator, and use LG as the standard 2-graph Laplacian.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

