Streaming Belief Propagation
for Community Detection

Yuchen Wu
Stanford University
wuyc14@stanford.edu

Jakab Tardos
EPFL
jakab.tardos@epfl.ch

André Linhares
Google Research
linhares@google.com

MohammadHossein Bateni
Google Research
bateni@google.com

Filipe Miguel Gonçalves de Almeida
Google Research
filipea@google.com

Andrea Montanari
Stanford University
montanari@stanford.edu

Ashkan Norouzi-Fard
Google Research
ashkannorouzi@google.com

Abstract
The community detection problem requires to cluster the nodes of a network into a
small number of well-connected ‘communities’. There has been substantial recent
progress in characterizing the fundamental statistical limits of community detection
under simple stochastic block models. However, in real-world applications, the
network structure is typically dynamic, with nodes that join over time. In this
setting, we would like a detection algorithm to perform only a limited number
of updates at each node arrival. While standard voting approaches satisfy this
constraint, it is unclear whether they exploit the network information optimally.
We introduce a simple model for networks growing over time which we refer to
as streaming stochastic block model (StSBM). Within this model, we prove that
voting algorithms have fundamental limitations. We also develop a streaming
belief-propagation (S TREAM BP) approach, for which we prove optimality in
certain regimes. We validate our theoretical findings on synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Given a single realization of a network G = (V, E), the community detection problem requires to
find a partition of its vertices into a small number of clusters or ‘communities’ [GN02, MO04, JTZ04,
For10, PKVS12, JYL+ 18].
Numerous methods have been developed for community detection on static networks [GN02, CNM04,
GA05, RCC+ 04, LF09, VLBB08, WZCX18]. However, the network structure evolves over time
in most applications. For instance, in social networks new users can join the network; in online
commerce new products can be listed; see [WGKM18, GLZ08, KvB+ 14] for other examples. In
such dynamic settings, it is desirable to have algorithms that perform only a limited number of
operations each time a node joins or leaves, possibly revising the labels of nodes in a neighborhood of
the new node. (These notions will be formalized below.) Several groups have developed algorithms
of this type in the recent past [HS12, CSG16, ZWCY19, MKV+ 20]. The present paper aims at
characterizing the fundamental statistical limits of community detection in the dynamic setting, and
proposing algorithms that achieve those limits.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

