Deep Contextual Video Compression

Jiahao Li, Bin Li, Yan Lu
Microsoft Research Asia
{li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Most of the existing neural video compression methods adopt the predictive coding
framework, which first generates the predicted frame and then encodes its residue
with the current frame. However, as for compression ratio, predictive coding is
only a sub-optimal solution as it uses simple subtraction operation to remove the
redundancy across frames. In this paper, we propose a deep contextual video
compression framework to enable a paradigm shift from predictive coding to
conditional coding. In particular, we try to answer the following questions: how to
define, use, and learn condition under a deep video compression framework. To
tap the potential of conditional coding, we propose using feature domain context
as condition. This enables us to leverage the high dimension context to carry
rich information to both the encoder and the decoder, which helps reconstruct the
high-frequency contents for higher video quality. Our framework is also extensible,
in which the condition can be flexibly designed. Experiments show that our
method can significantly outperform the previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep
video compression methods. When compared with x265 using veryslow preset, we
can achieve 26.0% bitrate saving for 1080P standard test videos. The codes are at
https://github.com/DeepMC-DCVC/DCVC.

1

Introduction

From H.261 [1] developed in 1988 to the just released H.266 [2] in 2020, all traditional video coding
standards are based on a predictive coding paradigm, where the predicted frame is first generated
by handcrafted modules and then the residue between the current frame and the predicted frame is
encoded and decoded. Recently, many deep learning (DL)-based video compression methods [3–11]
also adopt the predictive coding framework to encode the residue, where all handcrafted modules are
merely replaced by neural networks.
Encoding residue is a simple yet efficient manner for video compression, considering the strong
temporal correlations among frames. However, residue coding is not optimal to encode the current
frame xt given the predicted frame x̃t , because it only uses handcrafted subtraction operation to
remove the redundancy across frames. The entropy of residue coding is greater than or equal to
that of conditional coding [12]: H(xt − x̃t ) ≥ H(xt |x̃t ), where H represents the Shannon entropy.
Theoretically, one pixel in frame xt correlates to all the pixels in the previous decoded frames and the
pixels already been decoded in xt . For traditional video codec, it is impossible to use the handcrafted
rules to explicitly explore the correlation by taking all of them into consideration due to the huge space.
Thus, residue coding is widely adopted as a special extremely simplified case of conditional coding,
with the very strong assumption that the current pixel only has the correlation with the predicted pixel.
DL opens the door to automatically explore correlations in a huge space. Considering the success of
DL in image compression [13, 14], which just uses autoencoder to explore correlation in image, why
not use network to build the conditional coding-based autoencoder to explore correlation in video
rather than restricting our vision into residue coding?
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

