Meta-Adaptive Nonlinear Control:
Theory and Algorithms
Guanya Shi† , Kamyar Azizzadenesheli‡ , Michael O’Connell† , Soon-Jo Chung† , Yisong Yue†
†
Caltech ‡ Purdue University
{gshi,moc,sjchung,yyue}@caltech.edu, kamyar@purdue.edu

Abstract
We present an online multi-task learning approach for adaptive nonlinear control,
which we call Online Meta-Adaptive Control (OMAC). The goal is to control a
nonlinear system subject to adversarial disturbance and unknown environmentdependent nonlinear dynamics, under the assumption that the environmentdependent dynamics can be well captured with some shared representation. Our
approach is motivated by robot control, where a robotic system encounters a sequence of new environmental conditions that it must quickly adapt to. A key
emphasis is to integrate online representation learning with established methods
from control theory, in order to arrive at a unified framework that yields both
control-theoretic and learning-theoretic guarantees. We provide instantiations of
our approach under varying conditions, leading to the first non-asymptotic endto-end convergence guarantee for multi-task nonlinear control. OMAC can also
be integrated with deep representation learning. Experiments show that OMAC
significantly outperforms conventional adaptive control approaches which do not
learn the shared representation, in inverted pendulum and 6-DoF drone control
tasks under varying wind conditions1 .

1

Introduction

One important goal in autonomy and artificial intelligence is to enable autonomous robots to learn
from prior experience to quickly adapt to new tasks and environments. Examples abound in robotics,
such as a drone flying in different wind conditions [1], a manipulator throwing varying objects [2],
or a quadruped walking over changing terrains [3]. Though those examples provide encouraging
empirical evidence, when designing such adaptive systems, two important theoretical challenges
arise, as discussed below.
First, from a learning perspective, the system should be able to learn an “efficient” representation
from prior tasks, thereby permitting faster future adaptation, which falls into the categories of
representation learning or meta-learning. Recently, a line of work has shown theoretically that learning
representations (in the standard supervised setting) can significantly reduce sample complexity on
new tasks [4–6]. Empirically, deep representation learning or meta-learning has achieved success
in many applications [7], including control, in the context of meta-reinforcement learning [8–10].
However, theoretical benefits (in the end-to-end sense) of representation learning or meta-learning for
adaptive control remain unclear.
Second, from a control perspective, the agent should be able to handle parametric model uncertainties
with control-theoretic guarantees such as stability and tracking error convergence, which is a common
adaptive control problem [11, 12]. For classic adaptive control algorithms, theoretical analysis often
involves the use of Lyapunov stability and asymptotic convergence [11, 12]. Moreover, many recent
1

Code and video: https://github.com/GuanyaShi/Online-Meta-Adaptive-Control

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

