Handling Long-tailed Feature Distribution
in AdderNets
Minjing Dong1,2 , Yunhe Wang2∗, Xinghao Chen2 , Chang Xu1
1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
mdon0736@uni.sydney.edu.au, yunhe.wang@huawei.com,
xinghao.chen@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Adder neural networks (ANNs) are designed for low energy cost which replace
expensive multiplications in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with cheaper
additions to yield energy-efficient neural networks and hardware accelerations.
Although ANNs achieve satisfactory efficiency, there exist gaps between ANNs
and CNNs where the accuracy of ANNs can hardly be compared to CNNs without
the assistance of other training tricks, such as knowledge distillation. The inherent
discrepancy lies in the similarity measurement between filters and features, however
how to alleviate this difference remains unexplored. To locate the potential problem
of ANNs, we focus on the property difference due to similarity measurement. We
demonstrate that unordered heavy tails in ANNs could be the key component which
prevents ANNs from achieving superior classification performance since fatter
tails tend to overlap in feature space. Through pre-defining Multivariate Skew
Laplace distributions and embedding feature distributions into the loss function,
ANN features can be fully controlled and designed for various properties. We
further present a novel method for tackling existing heavy tails in ANNs with only
a modification of classifier where ANN features are clustered with their tails wellformulated through proposed angle-based constraint on the distribution parameters
to encourage high diversity of tails. Experiments conducted on several benchmarks
and comparison with other distributions demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed
approach for boosting the performance of ANNs.

1

Introduction

Deep Convolutional Neural Networks have been widely adopted in various computer vision tasks
due to their satisfactory performance, including image classification [12, 9, 10, 20], object detection
[13, 17, 6, 7], super-resolution [29, 5, 11, 18], etc.. However, the success of CNNs can hardly be
presented for practical usage without further modifications since the majority of computer vision tasks
are usually deployed on low-power platforms, such as portable and embedded devices, where the
computational resources are significantly constrained while prompt inference is required. As a result,
the acceleration of deep neural networks and reduction of energy cost become urgent requirements
and attract massive research efforts in recent years [8, 24, 15, 27, 4, 30, 21].
Recently, Chen et al.[3] introduced Adder Neural Network to replace the cross-correlation in CNNs
with ℓ1 -norm for the similarity measurement between input features and filters, which eliminates the
massive multiplications in CNNs. Through replacing existing multiplications with additions in deep
neural networks, ANNs achieve considerable energy reduction since addition is a cheaper operation
than multiplications [19, 23]. Furthermore, ANN can be more friendly for hardware designs of deep
learning acceleration [25, 28]. Although ANNs achieve comparable results with CNNs, there exist
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

