An Exponential Lower Bound for Linearly-Realizable
MDPs with Constant Suboptimality Gap

Yuanhao Wang
Princeton University
yuanhao@princeton.edu

Ruosong Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington and Microsoft Research
sham@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
A fundamental question in the theory of reinforcement learning is: suppose the
optimal Q-function lies in the linear span of a given d dimensional feature mapping, is sample-efficient reinforcement learning (RL) possible? The recent and
remarkable result of Weisz et al. (2020) resolves this question in the negative,
providing an exponential (in d) sample size lower bound, which holds even if the
agent has access to a generative model of the environment. One may hope that
such a lower can be circumvented with an even stronger assumption that there
is a constant gap between the optimal Q-value of the best action and that of the
second-best action (for all states); indeed, the construction in Weisz et al. (2020)
relies on having an exponentially small gap. This work resolves this subsequent
question, showing that an exponential sample complexity lower bound still holds
even if a constant gap is assumed. Perhaps surprisingly, this result implies an exponential separation between the online RL setting and the generative model setting,
where sample-efficient RL is in fact possible in the latter setting with a constant
gap. Complementing our negative hardness result, we give two positive results
showing that provably sample-efficient RL is possible either under an additional
low-variance assumption or under a novel hypercontractivity assumption.

1

Introduction

There has been substantial recent theoretical interest in understanding the means by which we
can avoid the curse of dimensionality and obtain sample-efficient reinforcement learning (RL)
methods [Wen and Van Roy, 2017, Du et al., 2019b,a, Wang et al., 2019, Yang and Wang, 2019,
Lattimore et al., 2020, Yang and Wang, 2020, Jin et al., 2020, Cai et al., 2020, Zanette et al.,
2020, Weisz et al., 2020, Du et al., 2020, Zhou et al., 2020b,a, Modi et al., 2020, Jia et al., 2020,
Ayoub et al., 2020]. Here, the extant body of literature largely focuses on sufficient conditions for
efficient reinforcement learning. Our understanding of what are the necessary conditions for efficient
reinforcement learning is far more limited. With regards to the latter, arguably, the most natural
assumption is linear realizability: we assume that the optimal Q-function lies in the linear span
of a given feature map. The goal is to the obtain polynomial sample complexity under this linear
realizability assumption alone.
This “linear Q∗ problem” was a major open problem (see Du et al. [2019a] for discussion), and a
recent hardness result by Weisz et al. [2020] provides a negative answer. In particular, the result
shows that even with access to a generative model, any algorithm requires an exponential number
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

