Spectral embedding for dynamic networks with
stability guarantees
Ian Gallagher
University of Bristol, UK
ian.gallagher@bristol.ac.uk

Andrew Jones
University of Bristol, UK
andrew.jones@bristol.ac.uk

Patrick Rubin-Delanchy
University of Bristol, UK
patrick.rubin-delanchy@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider the problem of embedding a dynamic network, to obtain time-evolving
vector representations of each node, which can then be used to describe changes
in behaviour of individual nodes, communities, or the entire graph. Given this
open-ended remit, we argue that two types of stability in the spatio-temporal
positioning of nodes are desirable: to assign the same position, up to noise, to
nodes behaving similarly at a given time (cross-sectional stability) and a constant
position, up to noise, to a single node behaving similarly across different times
(longitudinal stability). Similarity in behaviour is defined formally using notions of
exchangeability under a dynamic latent position network model. By showing how
this model can be recast as a multilayer random dot product graph, we demonstrate
that unfolded adjacency spectral embedding satisfies both stability conditions.
We also show how two alternative methods, omnibus and independent spectral
embedding, alternately lack one or the other form of stability.

1

Introduction

Consider a dynamic network in which nodes come and go, change abruptly or evolve, alone or
in communities, and form connections accordingly. Our goal is to find a vector representation,
(t)
Ŷi 2 Rd , for every node i and time t, which could be used for a diversity of downstream analyses,
such as clustering, time series analysis, classification, model selection and more. This problem is
known as dynamic (or evolutionary) network (or graph) embedding, and a great number of scalable
and empirically successful techniques have been put forward, with recent surveys by [47, 51]. We
consider, among these, a subset about which it is reasonable to try to establish a certain statistical
guarantee.
The novelty of this paper is not to propose a new procedure. Instead, it is to demonstrate that
an existing procedure, unfolded adjacency spectral embedding (UASE) [17], has two important
stability properties. Given a sequence of symmetric adjacency matrices A(1) , . . . , A(T ) 2 {0, 1}n⇥n ,
(t)
where Aij = 1 if nodes i and j form an edge at time t, UASE computes the rank d matrix
factorisation of A := (A(1) | · · · |A(T ) ) to obtain A ⇡ X̂Ŷ> using the singular value decomposition
(precise details later). The matrix Ŷ 2 RnT ⇥d contains, as rows, the desired representations
(1)
(1)
(T )
(T )
Ŷ1 , . . . , Ŷn , . . . , Ŷ1 , . . . , Ŷn .
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

