Beyond the Signs: Nonparametric Tensor
Completion via Sign Series

Chanwoo Lee
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
chanwoo.lee@wisc.edu

Miaoyan Wang
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
miaoyan.wang@wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of tensor estimation from noisy observations with possibly
missing entries. A nonparametric approach to tensor completion is developed
based on a new model which we coin as sign representable tensors. The model
represents the signal tensor of interest using a series of structured sign tensors.
Unlike earlier methods, the sign series representation effectively addresses both
low- and high-rank signals, while encompassing many existing tensor models—
including CP models, Tucker models, single index models, structured tensors with
repeating entries—as special cases. We provably reduce the tensor estimation
problem to a series of structured classification tasks, and we develop a learning
reduction machinery to empower existing low-rank tensor algorithms for more
challenging high-rank estimation. Excess risk bounds, estimation errors, and
sample complexities are established. We demonstrate the outperformance of our
approach over previous methods on two datasets, one on human brain connectivity
networks and the other on topic data mining.

1

Introduction

Higher-order tensors have recently received much attention in enormous fields including social
networks [3], neuroscience [38], and genomics [26]. Tensor methods provide effective representation
of the hidden structure in multiway data. In this paper we consider the signal plus noise model,
Y = Θ + E,

(1)

d1 ×···×dK

where Y ∈ R
is an order-K data tensor, Θ is an unknown signal tensor of interest, and E is
a noise tensor. Our goal is to accurately estimate Θ from the incomplete, noisy observation of Y. In
particular, we focus on the following two problems:
Q1 [Nonparametric tensor estimation]. How to flexibly estimate Θ under a wide range of structures,
including both low-rankness and high-rankness?
Q2 [Complexity of tensor completion]. How many observed tensor entries do we need to consistently
estimate the signal Θ?
Inadequacies of low-rank models. The signal plus noise model (2) is popular in tensor literature.
Existing methods estimate the signal tensor based on low-rankness of Θ [28, 34]. Common low-rank
models include Canonical Polyadic (CP) tensors [24], Tucker tensors [11], and block tensors [40].
While these methods have shown great success in theory, tensors in applications often violate the
low-rankness. Here we provide two examples to illustrate the limitation of classical models.
The first example reveals the sensitivity of tensor rank to order-preserving transformations. Let
Z ∈ R30×30×30 be an order-3 tensor with tensor rank(Z) = 3 (formal definition is deferred to the
end of this section). Suppose a monotonic transformation f (z) = (1 + exp(−cz))−1 is applied to Z
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

