Unleashing the Power of Contrastive Self-Supervised
Visual Models via Contrast-Regularized Fine-Tuning

1

Yifan Zhang1∗ Bryan Hooi1
National University of Singapore

Dapeng Hu1 Jian Liang2 Jiashi Feng3
2
Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 SEA AI Lab

Abstract
Contrastive self-supervised learning (CSL) has attracted increasing attention for
model pre-training via unlabeled data. The resulted CSL models provide instancediscriminative visual features that are uniformly scattered in the feature space.
During deployment, the common practice is to directly fine-tune CSL models
with cross-entropy, which however may not be the best strategy in practice. Although cross-entropy tends to separate inter-class features, the resulting models
still have limited capability for reducing intra-class feature scattering that exists in
CSL models. In this paper, we investigate whether applying contrastive learning
to fine-tuning would bring further benefits, and analytically find that optimizing the contrastive loss benefits both discriminative representation learning and
model optimization during fine-tuning. Inspired by these findings, we propose
Contrast-regularized tuning (Core-tuning), a new approach for fine-tuning CSL
models. Instead of simply adding the contrastive loss to the objective of fine-tuning,
Core-tuning further applies a novel hard pair mining strategy for more effective
contrastive fine-tuning, as well as smoothing the decision boundary to better exploit the learned discriminative feature space. Extensive experiments on image
classification and semantic segmentation verify the effectiveness of Core-tuning.

1

Introduction

Pre-training a deep neural network on a large database and then fine-tuning it on downstream tasks
has been a popular training scheme. Recently, contrastive self-supervised learning (CSL) has attracted
increasing attention on model pre-training, since it does not rely on any hand-crafted annotations but
even achieves more promising performance than supervised pre-training on downstream tasks [6, 7,
20, 22, 47]. Specifically, CSL leverages unlabeled data to train visual models via contrastive learning,
which maximizes the feature similarity for two augmentations of the same instance and minimizes the
feature similarity of two instances [58]. The learned models provide instance-discriminative visual
representations that are uniformly scattered in the feature space [53].
Although there have been substantial CSL studies on model pre-training [23, 47], few have explored
the fine-tuning process. The common practice is to directly fine-tune CSL models with the crossentropy loss [6, 13, 20]. However, we empirically (cf. Table 1) find that different fine-tuning methods
significantly influence the model performance on downstream tasks, and fine-tuning with only crossentropy is not the optimal strategy. Intuitively, although cross-entropy tends to learn separable features
among classes, the resulting model is still limited in its capability for reducing intra-class feature
scattering [37, 55] that exists in CSL models. Meanwhile, most existing fine-tuning methods [33, 35]
are devised for supervised pre-trained models and tend to enforce regularizers to prevent the finetuned models changing too much from the pre-trained ones. However, they suffer from the issue of
negative transfer [9], since downstream tasks are often different from the pre-training contrastive task.
In this sense, how to fine-tune CSL models remains an important yet under-explored question.
∗

Corresponding to: Yifan Zhang <yifan.zhang@u.nus.edu>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

