Calibration and Consistency of
Adversarial Surrogate Losses

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Natalie S. Frank
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
nf1066@nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & Courant Institute
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Adversarial robustness is an increasingly critical property of classifiers in applications. The design of robust algorithms relies on surrogate losses since the
optimization of the adversarial loss with most hypothesis sets is NP-hard. But,
which surrogate losses should be used and when do they benefit from theoretical
guarantees? We present an extensive study of this question, including a detailed
analysis of the H-calibration and H-consistency of adversarial surrogate losses.
We show that convex loss functions, or the supremum-based convex losses often
used in applications, are not H-calibrated for common hypothesis sets used in
machine learning. We then give a characterization of H-calibration and prove
that some surrogate losses are indeed H-calibrated for the adversarial zero-one
loss, with common hypothesis sets. In particular, we fix some calibration results
presented in prior work for a family of linear models and significantly generalize
the results to the nonlinear hypothesis sets. Next, we show that H-calibration is
not sufficient to guarantee consistency and prove that, in the absence of any distributional assumption, no continuous surrogate loss is consistent in the adversarial
setting. This, in particular, proves that a claim made in prior work is inaccurate.
Next, we identify natural conditions under which some surrogate losses that we
describe in detail are H-consistent. We also report a series of empirical results
which show that many H-calibrated surrogate losses are indeed not H-consistent,
and validate our theoretical assumptions. Our adversarial H-consistency results
are novel, even for the case where H is the family of all measurable functions.

1

Introduction

Complex multi-layer neural networks trained on large datasets have achieved a remarkable performance in several applications in recent years, in particular in speech and visual recognition tasks
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Krizhevsky et al., 2012). However, these rich models are susceptible to
imperceptible perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013). A complex neural network may, for example,
misclassify a traffic sign, as a result of a minor variation, which may be the presence of a small
advertisement sticker on the sign. Such misclassifications can have dramatic consequences in practice,
for example with self-driving cars. These concerns have motivated the study of adversarial robustness,
that is the design of classifiers that are robust to small `p norm input perturbations (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Madry et al., 2017; Tsipras et al., 2018; Carlini and Wagner, 2017). The standard 0/1 loss is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

