Revealing and Protecting Labels
in Distributed Training

Trung Dang∗
Boston University
trungvd@bu.edu

Om Thakkar
Google
omthkkr@google.com

Rajiv Mathews
Google
mathews@google.com

Swaroop Ramaswamy
Google
swaroopram@google.com

Peter Chin
Boston University
spchin@bu.edu

Françoise Beaufays
Google
fsb@google.com

Abstract
Distributed learning paradigms such as federated learning often involve transmission of model updates, or gradients, over a network, thereby avoiding transmission
of private data. However, it is possible for sensitive information about the training
data to be revealed from such gradients. Prior works have demonstrated that labels
can be revealed analytically from the last layer of certain models (e.g., ResNet),
or they can be reconstructed jointly with model inputs by using Gradients Matching [1] with additional knowledge about the current state of the model. In this work,
we propose a method to discover the set of labels of training samples from only the
gradient of the last layer and the id to label mapping. Our method is applicable to
a wide variety of model architectures across multiple domains. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method for model training in two domains - image classification, and automatic speech recognition. Furthermore, we show that existing
reconstruction techniques improve their efficacy when used in conjunction with our
method. Conversely, we demonstrate that gradient quantization and sparsification
can significantly reduce the success of the attack.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning paradigms such as federated learning [2] offer a mechanism for mobile devices to
collaboratively train deep learning models via transmission of model updates over the network, while
ensuring sensitive training data remains resident, locally, on device. Recent works have demonstrated
that information about training data can be revealed from a gradient, or a model update in general.
For instance, in the image classification domain, the leaked information ranges from some property
of the data like membership inference [3, 4], to pixel-wise accurate image reconstruction [1]. To
reconstruct the samples given to a model, Zhu et al. [1] propose Deep Leakage from Gradients (DLG),
or Gradients Matching (GM), a method that iteratively updates a dummy training sample to minimize
the distance of its gradient to a target gradient sent from a client. This has been used to successfully
reconstruct large images in a mini-batch [5, 6, 7]. The application of GM has also been demonstrated
in other domains, such as language modeling [1] and automatic speech recognition [8].
As opposed to model inputs being continuous, training labels being discrete prevents common
techniques like gradient descent from being trivially employed for reconstructing them. Instead,
training labels can be reconstructed jointly with model inputs by optimizing for continuous "pseudo"
labels (a probability distribution on labels) [1]. However, this method is not guaranteed to succeed,
∗

Work performed while at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

