Private and Non-private Uniformity Testing for
Ranking Data
Róbert Busa-Fekete
Google Research, New York, USA
busarobi@google.com

Dimitris Fotakis
National Technical University of Athens, Greece
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr

Manolis Zampetakis
University of California, Berkeley, USA
mzampet@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of uniformity testing for statistical data that consists of
rankings over m items, where the alternative class is restricted to Mallows models.
Testing ranking data is challenging because of the size of the large domain that
is factorial in m, therefore the tester needs to take advantage of some structure of
the alternative class. We show that uniform distribution can be distinguished from
Mallows model with O(m 1/2 ) samples based on simple pairwise statistics, which
allows us to test uniformity using only two samples, if m is large enough. We also
consider uniformity testing with central and local differential privacy (DP)
p constraints. We present a central DP algorithm that requires O(max{1/✏0 , 1/ m}),
where ✏0 is the privacy budget parameter. Interestingly, our uniformity testing
algorithm is straightforward to apply to the local DP scenario, since it works with
binary statistics that is extracted from the ranking data. We carry out large-scale experiments, including m = 10, 000, to show that our uniformity testing algorithms
scale gracefully with m.

1

Introduction

Testing whether the data conforms with a model is a fundamental problem in data analysis with
large number of applications in machine learning and data science. A special case of testing is the
uniformity testing, i.e. to distinguish between the case that an unknown distribution accessible via
samples is uniform versus ✏-far from uniform. Uniformity testing of discrete distribution has a long
history with several applications, and it is well-understood [3, 7, 11, 12, 29, 31] as well as under
differential privacy constraints [1, 2, 4].
In this paper, we assume that the statistical data consists of rankings over m items. The testing
problem that we study is to decide whether the data is generated from the uniform distribution over
rankings, i.e. the probability of observing any ranking is 1/m!, or from a distribution that is ✏-far
from the uniform one in terms of total variation distance. In general, this testing problem cannot
be tackled based on polynomial sample complexity, because the domain size for ranking data is m!.
Therefore, we restrict the alternative hypothesis class to the Mallows model, introduced by [25],
a.k.a. the exponential family on rankings. The Mallows model is widely used in ranking statistics
and machine learning. The model has two parameters, the central ranking ⇡0 2 Sm and the spread
parameter 2 [0, 1]. Based on these, the probability of observing a ranking ⇡ 2 Sm is proportional
to d(⇡,⇡0 ) , where d is a ranking distance, such as the number of discordant pairs, a.k.a. Kendall’s
tau distance. There are many applications of the Mallows model in Machine Learning, to name a few,
label ranking [24], online learning [9], recommendation systems [30, 23] and clustering [27].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

