Uniform Concentration Bounds toward a Unified
Framework for Robust Clustering

Debolina Paul∗
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
debolinap@stanford.edu

Saptarshi Chakraborty∗
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
saptarshic@berkeley.edu

Swagatam Das
Electronics & Communications Sciences Unit
Indian Statistical Institute
swagatam.das@isical.ac.in

Jason Xu‡
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
jason.q.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in center-based clustering continue to improve upon the drawbacks of Lloyd’s celebrated k-means algorithm over 60 years after its introduction.
Various methods seek to address poor local minima, sensitivity to outliers, and data
that are not well-suited to Euclidean measures of fit, but many are supported largely
empirically. Moreover, combining such approaches in a piecemeal manner can
result in ad hoc methods, and the limited theoretical results supporting each individual contribution may no longer hold. Toward addressing these issues in a principled
way, this paper proposes a cohesive robust framework for center-based clustering
under a general class of dissimilarity measures. In particular, we present a rigorous
theoretical treatment within a Median-of-Means (MoM) estimation framework,
showing that it subsumes several popular k-means variants. In addition to unifying
existing methods, we derive uniform concentration bounds that complete their
analyses, and bridge these results to the MoM framework via Dudley’s chaining
arguments. Importantly, we neither require any assumptions on the distribution of
the outlying observations nor on the relative number of observations n to features
p. We establish strong consistency and an error rate of O(n−1/2 ) under mild
conditions, surpassing the best-known results in the literature. The methods are
empirically validated thoroughly on real and synthetic datasets.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning, which seeks to discover naturally occurring
groups within a dataset. Among a plethora of algorithms in the literature, center-based methods
remain widely popular, with k-means [35, 33] as the most prominent example. Given n data points
X = {X i : i = 1, . . . , n} ⊂ Rp , k-means seeks to partition the data into k mutually exclusive and
exhaustive groups by minimizing the within cluster variance. Representing the cluster centroids
p
Θ = {θ 1 , . . . , θ k } ⊂ RP
, the k-means problem is formulated as the minimization of the objective
n
function fk-means (Θ) = i=1 min1≤j≤k d(X i , θ j ), where d(·, ·) is a dissimilarity measure. Taking
the squared Euclidean distance d(x, y) = kx − yk22 yields the classical k-means formulation.
Clustering via k-means is well-documented to be sensitive to initialization [54], prone to getting
stuck in poor local optima [57, 56, 17], and fragile against linearly non-separable clusters [39] or
∗

Joint first authors contributed equally

‡

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

