What can linearized neural networks actually say
about generalization?

Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
guillermo.ortizjimenez@epfl.ch

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
seyed.moosavi@inf.ethz.ch

Pascal Frossard
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
For certain infinitely-wide neural networks, the neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory
fully characterizes generalization, but for the networks used in practice, the empirical NTK only provides a rough first-order approximation. Still, a growing body
of work keeps leveraging this approximation to successfully analyze important
deep learning phenomena and design algorithms for new applications. In our work,
we provide strong empirical evidence to determine the practical validity of such
approximation by conducting a systematic comparison of the behavior of different
neural networks and their linear approximations on different tasks. We show that
the linear approximations can indeed rank the learning complexity of certain tasks
for neural networks, even when they achieve very different performances. However,
in contrast to what was previously reported, we discover that neural networks do
not always perform better than their kernel approximations, and reveal that the
performance gap heavily depends on architecture, dataset size and training task.
We discover that networks overfit to these tasks mostly due to the evolution of their
kernel during training, thus, revealing a new type of implicit bias.

1

Introduction

Due to their excellent practical performance, deep learning based methods are today the de facto
standard for many visual and linguistic learning tasks. Nevertheless, despite this practical success,
our theoretical understanding of how, and what, can neural networks learn is still in its infancy [1].
Recently, a growing body of work has started to explore the use of linear approximations to analyze
deep networks, leading to the neural tangent kernel (NTK) framework [2].
The NTK framework is based on the observation that for certain initialization schemes, the infinitewidth limit of many neural architectures can be exactly characterized using kernel tools [2]. This
reduces key questions in deep learning theory to the study of linear methods and convex functional
analysis, for which a rich set of theories exist [3]. This intuitive approach has been proved very fertile,
leading to important results in generalization and optimization of very wide networks [4–9].
The NTK theory, however, can only fully describe certain infinitely wide neural networks, and for the
narrow architectures used in practice, it only provides a first-order approximation of their training
dynamics (see Fig. 1). Despite these limitations, the intuitiveness of the NTK, which allows to use a
powerful set of theoretical tools to exploit it, has led to a rapid increase in the amount of research that
successfully leverages the NTK in applications, such as predicting generalization [10] and training
speed [11], explaining certain inductive biases [12–15] or designing new classifiers [16, 17].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

