Dataset Distillation with Infinitely Wide
Convolutional Networks
† ∗

Timothy Nguyen

♠

Roman Novak
†

DeepMind

Lechao Xiao

♠

♠

Jaehoon Lee

♠

Google Research, Brain Team

timothycnguyen@deepmind.com
{romann, xlc, jaehlee}@google.com

Abstract
The effectiveness of machine learning algorithms arises from being able to extract
useful features from large amounts of data. As model and dataset sizes increase,
dataset distillation methods that compress large datasets into significantly smaller
yet highly performant ones will become valuable in terms of training efficiency and
useful feature extraction. To that end, we apply a novel distributed kernel-based
meta-learning framework to achieve state-of-the-art results for dataset distillation
using infinitely wide convolutional neural networks. For instance, using only 10
datapoints (0.02% of original dataset), we obtain over 65% test accuracy on CIFAR10 image classification task, a dramatic improvement over the previous best test
accuracy of 40%. Our state-of-the-art results extend across many other settings for
MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and SVHN. Furthermore, we
perform some preliminary analyses of our distilled datasets to shed light on how
they differ from naturally occurring data.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become extraordinarily successful in a wide variety of settings through the
availability of large datasets [Krizhevsky et al., 2012, Devlin et al., 2018, Brown et al., 2020,
Dosovitskiy et al., 2020]. Such large datasets enable a neural network to learn useful representations
of the data that are adapted to solving tasks of interest. Unfortunately, it can be prohibitively costly to
acquire such large datasets and train a neural network for the requisite amount of time.
One way to mitigate this problem is by constructing smaller datasets that are nevertheless informative.
Some direct approaches to this include choosing a representative subset of the dataset (i.e. a coreset)
or else performing a low-dimensional projection that reduces the number of features. However, such
methods typically introduce a tradeoff between performance and dataset size, since what they produce
is a coarse approximation of the full dataset. By contrast, the approach of dataset distillation is to
synthesize datasets that are more informative than their natural counterparts when equalizing for
dataset size [Wang et al., 2018, Bohdal et al., 2020, Nguyen et al., 2021, Zhao and Bilen, 2021]. Such
resulting datasets will not arise from the distribution of natural images but will nevertheless capture
features useful to a neural network, a capability which remains mysterious and is far from being
well-understood [Ilyas et al., 2019, Huh et al., 2016, Hermann and Lampinen, 2020].
The applications of such smaller, distilled datasets are diverse. For nonparametric methods that scale
poorly with the training dataset (e.g. nearest-neighbors or kernel-ridge regression), having a reduced
dataset decreases the associated memory and inference costs. For the training of neural networks,
such distilled datasets have found several applications in the literature, including increasing the
∗

Work done while at Google Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

