LSH-SMILE: Locality Sensitive Hashing Accelerated
Simulation and Learning

Chonghao Sima
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA, 47907
simac@purdue.edu

Yexiang Xue
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA, 47907
yexiang@purdue.edu

Abstract
The advancement of deep neural networks over the last decade has enabled progress
in scientific knowledge discovery in the form of learning Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) directly from experiment data. Nevertheless, forward simulation
and backward learning of large-scale dynamic systems requires handling billions
mutually interacting elements, the scale of which overwhelms current computing
architectures. We propose Locality Sensitive Hashing Accelerated Simulation and
Learning (LSH-S MI L E), a unified framework to scale up both forward simulation
and backward learning of physics systems. LSH-S MI L E takes advantages of (i) the
locality of PDE updates, (ii) similar temporal dynamics shared by multiple elements.
LSH-S MI L E hashes elements with similar dynamics into a single hash bucket and
handles their updates at once. This allows LSH-S MI L E to scale with respect to
the number of non-empty hash buckets, a drastic improvement over conventional
approaches. Theoretically, we prove a novel bound on the errors introduced by
LSH-S MI L E. Experimentally, we demonstrate that LSH-S MI L E simulates physics
systems at comparable quality with exact approaches, but with way less time and
space complexity. Such savings also translate to better learning performance due
to LSH-S MI L E’s ability to propagate gradients over a long duration.

1

Introduction

Learning-driven scientific discovery has enjoyed rapid progress thanks to the advancement of deep
neural networks over the last decade. Since Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are widely used to
model physics systems, a fruitful line of research has been developed focusing on learning PDEs from
experimental data, including Finzi et al. [2020], Greydanus et al. [2019], Matsubara et al. [2020].
Nevertheless, successful applications of machine learning for scientific discovery still face multiple
challenges, many of which are computational. Both the forward simulation and backward learning
of large-scale dynamic systems requires handling billions mutually interacting elements, the scale
of which overwhelms current computing architectures. Forward simulation involves simulating the
trajectory of a PDE system from a given starting state. Recent work of Greydanus et al. [2019]
demonstrates such process can be represented using a neural network similar to ResNet. Backward
learning is to discover (the parameters of) the physics model automatically from experimental data,
which also attracts recent attention in Niu et al. [2020] and Xue et al. [2021]. Backward learning
can be achieved by embedding a neural network modeling the forward simulation into the overall
architecture and minimizing a loss function which penalizes the difference between the simulated
result and the observed data via back-propagation. In both forward simulation and backward learning,
billions of mutually interacting elements resulted from applying the finite difference or finite element
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

