Accurately Solving Rod Dynamics
with Graph Learning
Han Shao
KAUST
han.shao@kaust.edu.sa
Torsten Hädrich
KAUST
torsten.hadrich@kaust.edu.sa
Sören Pirk
Google Research
pirk@google.com

Tassilo Kugelstadt
RWTH Aachen University
kugelstadt@cs.rwth-aachen.de
Wojciech Pałubicki
AMU
wp06@amu.edu.pl

Jan Bender
RWTH Aachen University
bender@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Dominik L. Michels
KAUST
dominik.michels@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Iterative solvers are widely used to accurately simulate physical systems. These
solvers require initial guesses to generate a sequence of improving approximate
solutions. In this contribution, we introduce a novel method to accelerate iterative solvers for rod dynamics with graph networks (GNs) by predicting the initial
guesses to reduce the number of iterations. Unlike existing methods that aim to
learn physical systems in an end-to-end manner, our approach guarantees longterm stability and therefore leads to more accurate solutions. Furthermore, our
method improves the run time performance of traditional iterative solvers for rod
dynamics. To explore our method we make use of position-based dynamics (PBD)
as a common solver for physical systems and evaluate it by simulating the dynamics of elastic rods. Our approach is able to generalize across different initial conditions, discretizations, and realistic material properties. We demonstrate that it also
performs well when taking discontinuous effects into account such as collisions
between individual rods. Finally, to illustrate the scalability of our approach, we
simulate complex 3D tree models composed of over a thousand individual branch
segments swaying in wind fields.

1

Introduction

The numeric simulation of a dynamic system commonly comprises the derivation of the mathematical model given by the underlying differential equations and their integration forward in time. In the
context of physics-based systems, the mathematical model is usually based on first principles and
depending on the properties of the simulated system, the numerical integration of a complex system can be very resource demanding (Nealen et al., 2006), e.g., hindering interactive applications.
Enabled by the success of deep neural networks to serve as effective function approximators, researchers recently started investigating the applicability of neural networks for simulating dynamic
systems. While many physical phenomena can well be described within fixed spatial domains (e.g.,
in fluid dynamics) that can be learned with convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures (Chu
& Thuerey, 2017; Guo et al., 2016; Tompson et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2020), a large range of physical
systems can more naturally be represented as graphs. Examples include systems based on connected
particles (Müller et al., 2007), coupled oscillators (Michels & Desbrun, 2015; Michels et al., 2014),
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

