Maximum Likelihood Training of
Score-Based Diffusion Models
Conor Durkan˚
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
conor.durkan@ed.ac.uk

Yang Song˚
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu
Iain Murray
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
i.murray@ed.ac.uk

Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Score-based diffusion models synthesize samples by reversing a stochastic process
that diffuses data to noise, and are trained by minimizing a weighted combination
of score matching losses. The log-likelihood of score-based diffusion models can
be tractably computed through a connection to continuous normalizing flows, but
log-likelihood is not directly optimized by the weighted combination of score
matching losses. We show that for a specific weighting scheme, the objective upper
bounds the negative log-likelihood, thus enabling approximate maximum likelihood
training of score-based diffusion models. We empirically observe that maximum
likelihood training consistently improves the likelihood of score-based diffusion
models across multiple datasets, stochastic processes, and model architectures.
Our best models achieve negative log-likelihoods of 2.83 and 3.76 bits/dim on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 32 ˆ 32 without any data augmentation, on a par with
state-of-the-art autoregressive models on these tasks.

1

Introduction

Score-based generative models [44, 45, 48] and diffusion probabilistic models [43, 19] have recently
achieved state-of-the-art sample quality in a number of tasks, including image generation [48, 11],
audio synthesis [5, 27, 37], and shape generation [3]. Both families of models perturb data with a
sequence of noise distributions, and generate samples by learning to reverse this path from noise
to data. Through stochastic calculus, these approaches can be unified into a single framework [48]
which we refer to as score-based diffusion models in this paper.
The framework of score-based diffusion models [48] involves gradually diffusing the data distribution
towards a given noise distribution using a stochastic differential equation (SDE), and learning the
time reversal of this SDE for sample generation. Crucially, the reverse-time SDE has a closed-form
expression which depends solely on the time-dependent gradient field (a.k.a., score) of the perturbed
data distribution. This gradient field can be efficiently estimated by training a neural network (called
a score-based model [44, 45]) with a weighted combination of score matching losses [23, 56, 46] as
the objective. A key advantage of score-based diffusion models is that they can be transformed into
continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) [6, 15], thus allowing tractable likelihood computation with
numerical ODE solvers.
˚

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

