On the Suboptimality of Thompson Sampling in High
Dimensions
Raymond Zhang
ENS Paris Saclay, Département de Mathématiques, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
raymond.zhang@ens-paris-saclay.fr
Richard Combes
Centrale-Supelec, Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes (L2S), Gif-sur-Yvette, France
richard.combes@centralesupelec.fr

Abstract
In this paper we consider Thompson Sampling (TS) for combinatorial semi-bandits.
We demonstrate that, perhaps surprisingly, TS is sub-optimal for this problem in the
sense that its regret scales exponentially in the ambient dimension, and its minimax
regret scales almost linearly. This phenomenon occurs under a wide variety of
assumptions including both non-linear and linear reward functions, with Bernoulli
distributed rewards and uniform priors. We also show that including a fixed amount
of forced exploration to TS does not alleviate the problem. We complement our
theoretical results with numerical results and show that in practice TS indeed can
perform very poorly in some high dimensional situations.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of combinatorial bandits with semi-bandit feedback. At time t = 1, , ..., T
a learner selects a decision x(t) ∈ X where X ⊂ {0, 1}d is the set of available decisions. The
environment then draws a random vector Z(t) ∈ Rd . The learner then observes Y (t) = x(t) Z(t),
where denotes the Hadamard (elementwise) product. This setting is called semi bandit feedback.
We assume that (Z(t))t≥1 are i.i.d., and that Z1 (t), ..., Zd (t) are independent and distributed as
Zi (t) ∼ Bernoulli(θi ) for all t,i. Then the learner receives a reward f (x(t), Z(t)) where f is a
known function.
The goal is to minimize the regret:
T
n
o
X
R(T, θ) = T max Ef (x, Z(t)) −
Ef (x(t), Z(t)).
x∈X

t=1

Initially θ is unknown to the learner and minimizing regret involves exploring suboptimal decisions
just enough in order to identify the optimal decision. For any decision x ∈ X , define the reward gap
∆x = max{Ef (x, Z(t))} − Ef (x, Z(t)),
x∈X

which is the amount of regret incurred by choosing x instead of an optimal decision
n
o
x? ∈ arg max Ef (x, Z(t)) ,
x∈X

and ∆min = minx∈X :∆x >0 ∆x the minimal gap. We define m , maxx∈X
maximal decision.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

Pd

i=1 |xi | the size of the

