Tensor Normal Training for Deep Learning Models

Yi Ren, Donald Goldfarb
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
{yr2322, goldfarb}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Despite the predominant use of first-order methods for training deep learning models, second-order methods, and in particular, natural gradient methods, remain of
interest because of their potential for accelerating training through the use of curvature information. Several methods with non-diagonal preconditioning matrices,
including KFAC [34], Shampoo [18], and K-BFGS [15], have been proposed and
shown to be effective. Based on the so-called tensor normal (TN) distribution
[31], we propose and analyze a brand new approximate natural gradient method,
Tensor Normal Training (TNT), which like Shampoo, only requires knowledge
of the shape of the training parameters. By approximating the probabilistically
based Fisher matrix, as opposed to the empirical Fisher matrix, our method uses
the block-wise covariance of the sampling based gradient as the pre-conditioning
matrix. Moreover, the assumption that the sampling-based (tensor) gradient follows
a TN distribution, ensures that its covariance has a Kronecker separable structure,
which leads to a tractable approximation to the Fisher matrix. Consequently, TNT’s
memory requirements and per-iteration computational costs are only slightly higher
than those for first-order methods. In our experiments, TNT exhibited superior
optimization performance to state-of-the-art first-order methods, and comparable optimization performance to the state-of-the-art second-order methods KFAC
and Shampoo. Moreover, TNT demonstrated its ability to generalize as well as
first-order methods, while using fewer epochs.

1

Introduction

First-order methods are currently by far the most popular and successful optimization methods for
training deep learning models. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [39] uses the (stochastic) gradient
direction to guide its update at every iteration. Adaptive learning rate methods, including AdaGrad
[11], RMSprop [20], and Adam [23], scale each element of the gradient direction (possibly modified
to incorporate momentum) by the square root of the second moment of each element of the gradient.
These first-order methods use little curvature information to "pre-condition" the gradient direction;
SGD uses an identity pre-conditioning matrix, whereas the others use a diagonal matrix.
On the other hand, second-order methods attempt to greatly accelerate the optimization process by
exploring the rich curvature information of the problem. Traditional second-order methods such
as Newton’s method, BFGS [6, 13, 14, 41], and limited-memory BFGS (L-BFGS) [28], without
modification, are not practical in a deep learning setting, because these methods require enormous
amounts of memory and computational effort per iteration due to the huge number of parameters
such models have. Some second-order methods have been proposed to deal with the non-convexity
and stochasiticity of objective functions arising in machine learning (see e.g. [36, 7, 16, 44]), but
directly using these methods to train deep learning models still requires large amounts of memory
and computing resources.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

