Scaling up Continuous-Time Markov Chains
Helps Resolve Underspeciﬁcation

Alkis Gotovos
MIT
alkisg@mit.edu

Rebekka Burkholz
Harvard University
rburkholz@hsph.harvard.edu

John Quackenbush
Harvard University
johnq@hsph.harvard.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
Modeling the time evolution of discrete sets of items (e.g., genetic mutations) is a
fundamental problem in many biomedical applications. We approach this problem
through the lens of continuous-time Markov chains, and show that the resulting
learning task is generally underspeciﬁed in the usual setting of cross-sectional
data. We explore a perhaps surprising remedy: including a number of additional
independent items can help determine time order, and hence resolve underspeciﬁcation. This is in sharp contrast to the common practice of limiting the analysis to
a small subset of relevant items, which is followed largely due to poor scaling of
existing methods. To put our theoretical insight into practice, we develop an approximate likelihood maximization method for learning continuous-time Markov
chains, which can scale to hundreds of items and is orders of magnitude faster than
previous methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on synthetic
and real cancer data.

1

Introduction

Modeling the time evolution of physical processes with discrete states is an important machine learning problem that spans a wide range of application domains, including molecular dynamics (Crommelin & Vanden-Eijnden, 2006), phylogenetics (Suchard et al., 2001), and computational medicine
(Liu et al., 2015). Continuous-time markov chains have found success in such modeling tasks, supported by extensive research into learning and inference in such models (Opper & Sanguinetti, 2008;
Perkins, 2009; Archambeau & Opper, 2011; Rao & Teh, 2012).
While the majority of previous work has focused on modeling a relatively small number of discrete
states, many interesting applications involve the interaction between sets of items, which results in
exponentially large state spaces. For example, when modeling the time progression of cancer, we
want to consider a number of genetic alterations (e.g., mutations, copy number variations, etc.) that
exhibit complex time-related dependencies (Beerenwinkel et al., 2014). To model how sets of n
such alterations evolve over time, we need to consider a state space of size 2n . What makes the
problem even more challenging is the fact that the available data sets are typically cross-sectional;
that is, they consist of (unordered) sets of items observed at unknown time points without any further
information about the history of the underlying process.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of learning a particular parametric family of continuous-time
Markov chains from such cross-sectional data, and show that the resulting problem is in general
underspeciﬁed. The issue of underspeciﬁcation is many-faceted and has been shown to permeate a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

