Meta-Learning the Search Distribution of Black-Box
Random Search Based Adversarial Attacks
Maksym Yatsura
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
University of Tübingen
maksym.yatsura@de.bosch.com

Jan Hendrik Metzen
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
janhendrik.metzen@de.bosch.com

Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen
matthias.hein@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Adversarial attacks based on randomized search schemes have obtained state-of-theart results in black-box robustness evaluation recently. However, as we demonstrate
in this work, their efficiency in different query budget regimes depends on manual
design and heuristic tuning of the underlying proposal distributions. We study how
this issue can be addressed by adapting the proposal distribution online based on
the information obtained during the attack. We consider Square Attack, which is a
state-of-the-art score-based black-box attack, and demonstrate how its performance
can be improved by a learned controller that adjusts the parameters of the proposal
distribution online during the attack. We train the controller using gradient-based
end-to-end training on a CIFAR10 model with white box access. We demonstrate
that plugging the learned controller into the attack consistently improves its blackbox robustness estimate in different query regimes by up to 20% for a wide range
of different models with black-box access. We further show that the learned
adaptation principle transfers well to the other data distributions such as CIFAR100
or ImageNet and to the targeted attack setting1 .

1

Introduction

It was demonstrated that despite their impressive performance in various tasks, neural networks are
susceptible to small imperceptible perturbations in the input called adversarial examples [4]. This is a
concerning issue for real-world deployment of deep learning approaches, especially in safety-critical
domains such as autonomous driving [5]. But apart from practical concerns, adversarial examples
serve as a tool to better understand the true nature of artificial neural networks and capture their
inherent properties and differences from their biological counterparts [6].
Evaluating adversarial robustness is usually formulated as a constrained optimization problem [4].
However, finding the exact solution is typically intractable [7, 8]. Therefore, in practice one often
resorts to approximate methods called adversarial attacks that try to find adversarial examples within
a small number of iterations. A number of different adversarial attacks were proposed [8–10] that can
be distinguished into white- and black-box attacks. In white-box attacks, one assumes full access to
the model architecture and weights [8]. However, as white-box attacks typically rely on the gradient,
gradient obfuscation, which does not eliminate the existence of adversarial examples but makes it
significantly harder to find them gradient-based, can be a severe obstacle for certain attacks [11].
1

The code is available at https://github.com/boschresearch/meta-rs

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

