Understanding End-to-End Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning Methods as Implicit
Parameterization
Clement Gehring
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
clement@gehring.io
Kenji Kawaguchi
Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications
Harvard University
kkawaguchi@fas.harvard.edu
Jiaoyang Huang
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
jh4427@nyu.edu

Leslie Pack Kaelbling
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
lpk@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Estimating the per-state expected cumulative rewards is a critical aspect of reinforcement learning approaches, however the experience is obtained, but standard
deep neural-network function-approximation methods are often inefficient in this
setting. An alternative approach, exemplified by value iteration networks, is to
learn transition and reward models of a latent Markov decision process whose value
predictions fit the data. This approach has been shown empirically to converge
faster to a more robust solution in many cases, but there has been little theoretical
study of this phenomenon. In this paper, we explore such implicit representations
of value functions via theory and focused experimentation. We prove that, for a
linear parametrization, gradient descent converges to global optima despite nonlinearity and non-convexity introduced by the implicit representation. Furthermore,
we derive convergence rates for both cases which allow us to identify conditions
under which stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with this implicit representation
converges substantially faster than its explicit counterpart. Finally, we provide
empirical results in some simple domains that illustrate the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Whether done by averaging over trajectories or some intricate fitting procedure, estimating the
per-state expected cumulative rewards is a critical aspect of every reinforcement learning (RL)
approach. Efficiently learning these values in large complex domains still remains a challenge despite
advances in deep learning. One contributing factor comes from the difficulty of scaling model-based
methods which model the transition probabilities and rewards directly. While known to be sample
efficient, these methods have failed to fully leverage recent advances in deep learning, forcing the
use of less efficient but more scalable model-free methods which try to learn the values directly.
Even when achieving low one-step prediction error, models learned with large highly expressive
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

