DP-SSL: Towards Robust Semi-supervised Learning
with A Few Labeled Samples

Yi Xu1 Jiandong Ding2 Lu Zhang1 Shuigeng Zhou 1∗
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Alibaba Group
{yxu17, jdding, l_zhang19, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The scarcity of labeled data is a critical obstacle to deep learning. Semi-supervised
learning (SSL) provides a promising way to leverage unlabeled data by pseudo
labels. However, when the size of labeled data is very small (say a few labeled
samples per class), SSL performs poorly and unstably, possibly due to the low
quality of learned pseudo labels. In this paper, we propose a new SSL method called
DP-SSL that adopts an innovative data programming (DP) scheme to generate
probabilistic labels for unlabeled data. Different from existing DP methods that
rely on human experts to provide initial labeling functions (LFs), we develop a
multiple-choice learning (MCL) based approach to automatically generate LFs
from scratch in SSL style. With the noisy labels produced by the LFs, we design
a label model to resolve the conflict and overlap among the noisy labels, and
finally infer probabilistic labels for unlabeled samples. Extensive experiments
on four standard SSL benchmarks show that DP-SSL can provide reliable labels
for unlabeled data and achieve better classification performance on test sets than
existing SSL methods, especially when only a small number of labeled samples
are available. Concretely, for CIFAR-10 with only 40 labeled samples, DP-SSL
achieves 93.82% annotation accuracy on unlabeled data and 93.46% classification
accuracy on test data, which are higher than the SOTA results.

1

Introduction

The de-facto approaches to deep learning achieve phenomenal success with the release of huge labeled
datasets. However, large manually-labeled datasets are time-consuming and expensive to acquire,
especially when expert labelers are required. Nowadays, many techniques are proposed to alleviate
the burden of manual labeling and help to train models from scratch, such as active learning [1],
crowd-labeling [2], distant supervision [3], semi [4]/weak [5]/self-supervision [6]. Among them,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) is one of the most popular techniques to cope with the scarcity of
labeled data. Two major strategies of SSL are pseudo labels [7] and consistency regularization [8].
Pseudo labels (also called self-training [9]) utilize a model’s predictions as the labels to train the
model again, while consistency of regularization forces a model to make the same prediction under
different transformations. However, when the size of labeled data is small, SSL performance degrades
drastically in both accuracy and robustness. Fig. 1 shows the change of prediction error rate with
the number of labeled samples of CIFAR-10. When the number of labeled samples reduces from
250 to 40, error rates of major existing SSL methods increase from 4.74% (USADTM) to 36.49%
(MixMatch). One possible reason of performance deterioration is the quality degradation of learnt
pseudo labels when labeled data size is small. Therefore, in this paper we address this problem by
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

