Moshpit SGD: Communication-Efficient
Decentralized Training
on Heterogeneous Unreliable Devices

Max Ryabinin∗
Yandex, Russia
HSE University, Russia

Eduard Gorbunov∗
MIPT, Russia
HSE University, Russia
Yandex, Russia

Vsevolod Plokhotnyuk
Yandex, Russia
HSE University, Russia

Gennady Pekhimenko
University of Toronto, Canada
Vector Institute, Canada

Abstract
Training deep neural networks on large datasets can often be accelerated by using
multiple compute nodes. This approach, known as distributed training, can utilize
hundreds of computers via specialized message-passing protocols such as Ring
All-Reduce. However, running these protocols at scale requires reliable high-speed
networking that is only available in dedicated clusters. In contrast, many realworld applications, such as federated learning and cloud-based distributed training,
operate on unreliable devices with unstable network bandwidth. As a result, these
applications are restricted to using parameter servers or gossip-based averaging
protocols. In this work, we lift that restriction by proposing Moshpit All-Reduce —
an iterative averaging protocol that exponentially converges to the global average.
We demonstrate the efficiency of our protocol for distributed optimization with
strong theoretical guarantees. The experiments show 1.3x speedup for ResNet-50
training on ImageNet compared to competitive gossip-based strategies and 1.5x
speedup when training ALBERT-large on preemptible compute nodes.

1

Introduction

Many recent influential discoveries in deep learning were enabled by the trend of scaling model and
dataset size. Over the last decade, computer vision has grown from training models with 60 million
parameters [1] on 1.3 million images [2] to 15 times more parameters [3] and 200 times more training
data [4]. In natural language processing, the state-of-the-art language models [5] with 175 billion
parameters are trained on over 570GB of texts, and even this does not saturate the model quality [6].
Training these large models can take years even with a top-of-the-line GPU server [7]. As a result,
researchers and practitioners often have to run distributed training with multiple machines [8].
The dominant approach to distributed deep learning is data-parallel training [9], where each worker
processes a fraction of the training batch and then exchanges its gradients with peers. If done
naïvely, the gradient exchange step can overload the network as the number of workers increases. To
combat this issue, modern distributed training algorithms take advantage of communication-efficient
protocols, such as all-reduce [10]. These protocols allow workers to collectively compute the global
average gradient with a constant communication overhead, regardless of the total number of peers.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to mryabinin0@gmail.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

