Dynamics-Regulated Kinematic Policy for
Egocentric Pose Estimation
Zhengyi Luo1 Ryo Hachiuma 2 ⇤ Ye Yuan1 Kris Kitani1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Keio University
https://zhengyiluo.github.io/projects/kin_poly/

Figure 1: From egocentric videos, we infer physically-plausible 3D human pose and human-object interaction.

Abstract
We propose a method for object-aware 3D egocentric pose estimation that tightly
integrates kinematics modeling, dynamics modeling, and scene object information.
Unlike prior kinematics or dynamics-based approaches where the two components
are used disjointly, we synergize the two approaches via dynamics-regulated training. At each timestep, a kinematic model is used to provide a target pose using
video evidence and simulation state. Then, a prelearned dynamics model attempts
to mimic the kinematic pose in a physics simulator. By comparing the pose instructed by the kinematic model against the pose generated by the dynamics model,
we can use their misalignment to further improve the kinematic model. By factoring in the 6DoF pose of objects (e.g., chairs, boxes) in the scene, we demonstrate
for the first time, the ability to estimate physically-plausible 3D human-object
interactions using a single wearable camera. We evaluate our egocentric pose
estimation method in both controlled laboratory settings and real-world scenarios.

1

Introduction

From a video captured by a single head-mounted wearable camera (e.g., smartglasses, action camera,
body camera), we aim to infer the wearer’s global 3D full-body pose and interaction with objects in
the scene, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This is important for applications like virtual and augmented reality,
sports analysis, and wearable medical monitoring, where third-person views are often unavailable and
proprioception algorithms are needed for understanding the actions of the camera wearer. However,
this task is challenging since the wearer’s body is often unseen from a first-person view and the
⇤

Work done at Carnegie Mellon University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

