Recovery Analysis for Plug-and-Play Priors using the
Restricted Eigenvalue Condition

Jiaming Liu
Washington University in St. Louis
jiaming.liu@wustl.edu

M. Salman Asif
University of California, Riverside
sasif@ece.ucr.edu

Brendt Wohlberg
Los Alamos National Laboratory
brendt@ieee.org

Ulugbek S. Kamilov
Washington University in St. Louis
kamilov@wustl.edu

Abstract
The plug-and-play priors (PnP) and regularization by denoising (RED) methods
have become widely used for solving inverse problems by leveraging pre-trained
deep denoisers as image priors. While the empirical imaging performance and the
theoretical convergence properties of these algorithms have been widely investigated, their recovery properties have not previously been theoretically analyzed.
We address this gap by showing how to establish theoretical recovery guarantees
for PnP/RED by assuming that the solution of these methods lies near the fixedpoints of a deep neural network. We also present numerical results comparing the
recovery performance of PnP/RED in compressive sensing against that of recent
compressive sensing algorithms based on generative models. Our numerical results
suggest that PnP with a pre-trained artifact removal network provides significantly
better results compared to the existing state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Many imaging problems—such as denoising, inpainting, and super-resolution—can be formulated as
an inverse problem involving the recovery of an image x∗ ∈ Rn from noisy measurements
y = Ax∗ + e ,

(1)

where A ∈ Rm×n is the measurement operator and e ∈ Rm is the noise. Compressed sensing
(CS) [1, 2] is a related class of inverse problems that seek to recover a sparse vector x∗ from m < n
measurements. The sparse recovery is possible under certain assumptions on the measurement
matrix, such as the restricted isometry property (RIP) [1] or the restricted eigenvalue condition
(REC) [3, 4]. While traditional CS recovery relies on sparsity-promoting priors, recent work on
compressed sensing using generative models (CSGM) [5] has broadened this perspective to priors
specified through pre-trained generative models. CSGM has prompted a large amount of follow-up
work on the design and theoretical analysis of algorithms that can leverage generative models as
priors for image recovery [6–9].
Plug-and-play priors (PnP) [10, 11] and regularization by denoising (RED) [12] are two methods
related to CSGM that can also leverage pre-trained deep models as priors for inverse problems.
However, unlike CSGM, the regularization in PnP/RED is not based on restricting the solution to
the range of a generative model, but rather on denoising the iterates with an existing additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) removal method. The effectiveness of PnP/RED has been shown in a number
of inverse problems [13–18], which has prompted researchers to investigate the theoretical properties
and interpretations of PnP/RED algorithms [19–30].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

