MixACM: Mixup-Based Robustness Transfer via
Distillation of Activated Channel Maps

Muhammad Awais 1, 2∗†, Fengwei Zhou 1∗, Chuanlong Xie 1∗, Jiawei Li 1 ,
Sung-Ho Bae 2‡, Zhenguo Li 1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Department of Computer Science, Kyung-Hee University, South Korea
awais@khu.ac.kr, {zhoufengwei, xie.chuanlong, li.jiawei}@huawei.com,
shbae@khu.ac.kr, li.zhenguo@huawei.com
2

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarially crafted, small and imperceptible changes in the natural inputs. The most effective defense mechanism against
these examples is adversarial training which constructs adversarial examples during
training by iterative maximization of loss. The model is then trained to minimize
the loss on these constructed examples. This min-max optimization requires more
data, larger capacity models, and additional computing resources. It also degrades
the standard generalization performance of a model. Can we achieve robustness
more efficiently? In this work, we explore this question from the perspective of
knowledge transfer. First, we theoretically show the transferability of robustness
from an adversarially trained teacher model to a student model with the help of
mixup augmentation. Second, we propose a novel robustness transfer method called
Mixup-Based Activated Channel Maps (MixACM) Transfer. MixACM transfers
robustness from a robust teacher to a student by matching activated channel maps
generated without expensive adversarial perturbations. Finally, extensive experiments on multiple datasets and different learning scenarios show our method can
transfer robustness while also improving generalization on natural images.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have achieved impressive performance on a wide variety of challenging
tasks such as image recognition, natural language generation, game playing, etc. However, these
models are susceptible to even small changes in the input space. It is possible to craft tiny changes
in the input such that a model classifies unaltered input correctly but classifies the same input
incorrectly after small and visually imperceptible perturbations [71, 27]. These altered inputs are
known as adversarial examples, and this vulnerability of the state-of-the-art models has raised serious
concerns [41, 58, 10, 47].
Many defense mechanisms have been proposed to train deep models to be robust against such
adversarial perturbations. These techniques include defensive distillation [57], gradient regularization
[29, 58, 62], model compression [21, 45], activation pruning [23, 59], adversarial training [49],
etc. Among them, Adversarial Training (AT) is one general strategy that is the most effective [4].
∗

Equal Contribution.
This work was carried out at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. The webpage for the project is available at: awaisrauf.github.io/MixACM
‡
Corresponding Author.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

