Goal-Aware Cross-Entropy
for Multi-Target Reinforcement Learning

Kibeom Kim1,2 , Min Whoo Lee1 , Yoonsung Kim1 , Je-Hwan Ryu1 ,
Minsu Lee1,3∗, Byoung-Tak Zhang1,3∗
1
Seoul National University, 2 Surromind, 3 AIIS†
{kbkim, mwlee, yskim, jhryu, mslee, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning in a multi-target environment without prior knowledge about the targets
requires a large amount of samples and makes generalization difficult. To solve
this problem, it is important to be able to discriminate targets through semantic
understanding. In this paper, we propose goal-aware cross-entropy (GACE) loss,
that can be utilized in a self-supervised way using auto-labeled goal states alongside
reinforcement learning. Based on the loss, we then devise goal-discriminative
attention networks (GDAN) which utilize the goal-relevant information to focus on
the given instruction. We evaluate the proposed methods on visual navigation and
robot arm manipulation tasks with multi-target environments and show that GDAN
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of task success ratio, sample
efficiency, and generalization. Additionally, qualitative analyses demonstrate that
our proposed method can help the agent become aware of and focus on the given
instruction clearly, promoting goal-directed behavior.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been expanding to various fields including robotics, to solve
increasingly complex problems. For instance, RL has been gradually mastering skills such as robot
arm/hand manipulation on an object [2, 48, 36, 22] and navigation to a target destination [18, 39].
However, to benefit humans like the R2-D2 robot in the Star Wars, RL must extend to realistic settings
that require interaction with multiple objects or destinations, which is still challenging for RL.
For this reason, it is important for multi-target tasks to be considered. We use the term multi-target
tasks to refer to tasks that require the agent to interact with variable goals. In a multi-target task,
targets are possible goal candidates, which may be objects or key entities that play a decisive role in
determining the success or failure of the task execution. The goals may be selected among the targets
by the current multi-target task, specified with a cue or an instruction such as “Bring me a {spoon,
cup or specific object}” or “Go to the {kitchen, livingroom or specific destination}”. The states in
which the agent reaches the goal are called goal states.
Reinforcement learning allows learning multi-target or instruction-based tasks in an end-to-end
manner. Latest reinforcement learning studies on these tasks mainly focus on prior knowledge about
targets [27, 30, 8]. Other studies focus on learning representation on the environment [46] or about
the targets only implicitly [44]. These methods lead to insufficient understanding of the goal, and
sample-inefficiency and generalization problems arise.
For this matter, we propose a Goal-Aware Cross-Entropy (GACE) loss and Goal-Discriminative
Attention Networks (GDAN)2 for multi-target tasks in reinforcement learning. These methods, unlike
∗
2

Corresponding authors. † AI Institute, Seoul National University
Code available at https://github.com/kibeomKim/GACE-GDAN

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

