Actively Identifying Causal Effects with Latent
Variables Given Only Response Variable Observable

1

Tian-Zuo Wang1,2 and Zhi-Hua Zhou1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China,
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China.
{wangtz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In many real tasks, it is generally desired to study the causal effect on a specific
target (response variable) only, with no need to identify the thorough causal effects
involving all variables. In this paper, we attempt to identify such effects by a
few active interventions where only the response variable is observable. This task
is challenging because the causal graph is unknown and even there may exist
latent confounders. To learn the necessary structure for identifying the effects,
we provide the graphical characterization that allows us to efficiently estimate all
possible causal effects in a partially mixed ancestral graph (PMAG) by generalized
back-door criterion. The characterization guides learning a local structure with
the interventional data. Theoretical analysis and empirical studies validate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Identifying causal effects is one prominent task throughout empirical sciences. In many real problems,
we are generally desired to study the causal effect on a specific target only, i.e. response variable,
with no need to identify the thorough causal effects involving all variables. For example, a business
person wants to maximize profit. The person has many intervention methods such as lowering price,
increasing advertisement investment, improving quality, and so on. A valid approach to guide the
decisions is to estimate the causal effect of each variable on the response variable. We call it target
effect identification in this paper. After identifying all of these causal effects, the person could see
which intervention could lead to the most desired response (profit).
To achieve target effect identification, an ideal method is to intervene on each decision variable with
different attainable values and collect the interventional data of the response variable. However, when
there are many decision variables and many attainable values for each variable, it will take enormous
number of interventions, which is economically unfeasible. Considering that there is usually a large
amount of observational data in reality, we hope to exploit mainly the observational data to achieve it.
The main obstacle here is that the causal graph of all involved variables is not available, which makes
causal effect identification intractable. Hence, we learn the structure at first. As shown by Verma and
Pearl [1], only a Markov equivalence class could be learned with observational data without further
assumptions, where there are possibly unidentified causal relations resulting in unidentified causal
effects. To reveal these effects, we further learn the causal relations in the Markov equivalence class
by introducing a small amount of active hard interventions, i.e., we force some variable to a known
value [2, 3, 4]. In practice, generally one can only observe part of variables under interventions rather
than all of those, e.g., a business person can observe his profit, but does not know other companies’
profit. To make the method applicable in a broader scenario, we consider an extreme situation that
only the response variable is observable, which could be trivially extended to any settings with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

