Probabilistic Tensor Decomposition of Neural
Population Spiking Activity

Hugo Soulat
Gatsby Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
hugos@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Sepiedeh Keshavarzi
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
s.keshavarzi@ucl.ac.uk

Troy W. Margrie
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
t.margrie@ucl.ac.uk

Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
maneesh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
The firing of neural populations is coordinated across cells, in time, and across
experimental conditions or repeated experimental trials, and so a full understanding
of the computational significance of neural responses must be based on a separation
of these different contributions to structured activity. Tensor decomposition is an
approach to untangling the influence of multiple factors in data that is common in
many fields. However, despite some recent interest in neuroscience, wider applicability of the approach is hampered by the lack of a full probabilistic treatment
allowing principled inference of a decomposition from non-Gaussian spike-count
data. Here, we extend the Pólya-Gamma (PG) augmentation, previously used in
sampling-based Bayesian inference, to implement scalable variational inference
in non-conjugate spike-count models. Using this new approach, we develop techniques related to automatic relevance determination to infer the most appropriate
tensor rank, as well as to incorporate priors based on known brain anatomy such as
the segregation of cell response properties by brain area. We apply the model to
neural recordings taken under conditions of visual-vestibular sensory integration,
revealing how the encoding of self- and visual-motion signals is modulated by the
sensory information available to the animal.

1

Introduction

Large-scale neural population recording offers a unique window through which to study brain
computations that involve the coordinated action of many neurons. Although such rich data sets are
increasingly common, the information they contain can only be put to full use once we are able to
separate the underlying factors that contribute to the neural activity in a simple and interpretable way.
Rich data sets often fit naturally within a multidimensional array or tensor, and a variety of tensor
decomposition techniques are available to identify factorial contributions that shape such data. But
whereas tensor decompositions have long been used in fields such as chemometrics [1] or computer
vision [2], until recently their use in neuroscience had been limited to the study of continuous traces
like EEG [3], fMRI signals [4] or LFP [5]. Encouragingly, in the last few years, tensor methods
have proven useful to segregate the influence of time dynamics, trial to trial variability [6, 7] or
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

