Revisiting Model Stitching to Compare Neural
Representations

Yamini Bansal
Harvard University
ybansal@g.harvard.edu

Preetum Nakkiran
Harvard University
preetum@cs.harvard.edu

Boaz Barak
Harvard University
b@boazbarak.org

Abstract
We revisit and extend model stitching (Lenc & Vedaldi 2015) as a methodology
to study the internal representations of neural networks. Given two trained and
frozen models A and B, we consider a “stitched model” formed by connecting the
bottom-layers of A to the top-layers of B, with a simple trainable layer between
them. We argue that model stitching is a powerful and perhaps under-appreciated
tool, which reveals aspects of representations that measures such as centered kernel
alignment (CKA) cannot. Through extensive experiments, we use model stitching
to obtain quantitative verifications for intuitive statements such as “good networks
learn similar representations”, by demonstrating that good networks of the same
architecture, but trained in very different ways (e.g.: supervised vs. self-supervised
learning), can be stitched to each other without drop in performance. We also give
evidence for the intuition that “more is better” by showing that representations
learnt with (1) more data, (2) bigger width, or (3) more training time can be
“plugged in” to weaker models to improve performance. Finally, our experiments
reveal a new structural property of SGD which we call “stitching connectivity”,
akin to mode-connectivity: typical minima reached by SGD can all be stitched to
each other with minimal change in accuracy.

1

Introduction

The success of deep neural networks can, arguably, be attributed to the intermediate features or
representations learnt by them [Rumelhart et al., 1985]. While neural networks are trained in an
end-to-end fashion with no explicit constraints on their intermediate representations, there is a body
of evidence that suggests that they learn rich a representation of the data along the way [Goh et al.,
2021, Olah et al., 2017]. However, theoretically we understand very little about how to formally
characterize these representations, let alone why representation learning occurs. For instance, there
are various ad-hoc pretraining methods [Chen et al., 2020a,b], that are purported to perform well by
learning good representations, but it is unclear which aspects of these methods (objective, training
algorithm, architecture) are crucial for representation learning and if these methods learn qualitatively
different representations at all.
Moreover, we have an incomplete understanding of the relations between different representations.
Are all “good representations” essentially the same, or is each representation “good” in its own unique
way? That is, even when we train good end-to-end models (i.e., small test loss), the internals of these
models could potentially be very different from one another. A priori, the training process could
evolve in either one of the following extreme scenarios (see Figure 1):
(1) In the “snowflakes” scenario, training with different initialization, architectures, and objectives
(e.g., supervised vs self-supervised) will result in networks with very different internals, which are
completely incompatible with one another. For example, even if we train two models with identical
data, architecture, and task, but starting from two different initializations, we may end up at local
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

