Three Operator Splitting with Subgradients,
Stochastic Gradients, and Adaptive Learning Rates

Alp Yurtsever?
Umeå University
alp.yurtsever@umu.se
Alex Gu? & Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{gua,suvrit}@mit.edu

Abstract
Three Operator Splitting (TOS) (Davis & Yin, 2017) can minimize the sum of
multiple convex functions effectively when an efficient gradient oracle or proximal
operator is available for each term. This requirement often fails in machine learning
applications: (i) instead of full gradients only stochastic gradients may be available;
and (ii) instead of proximal operators, using subgradients to handle complex
penalty functions may be more efficient and realistic. Motivated by these concerns,
we analyze three potentially valuable extensions of TOS. The first two permit
√
using subgradients and stochastic gradients, and are shown to ensure a O(1/ t)
convergence rate. The third extension A DAP T OS endows TOS with adaptive stepsizes. For the important setting of optimizing a convex loss over the intersection
of convex sets A DAP T OS attains universal convergence rates, i.e., the rate adapts
to the unknown smoothness degree of the objective function. We compare our
proposed methods with competing methods on various applications.

1

Introduction

We study convex optimization problems of the form
min

x∈Rn

φ(x) := f (x) + g(x) + h(x),

(1)

where f : Rn → R and g, h : Rn → R ∪ {+∞} are proper, lower semicontinuous and convex functions. Importantly, this template captures constrained problems via indicator functions. To avoid
pathological examples, we assume that the relative interiors of dom(f ), dom(g) and dom(h) have a
nonempty intersection.
Problem (1) is motivated by a number of applications in machine learning, statistics, and signal
processing, where the three functions comprising the objective φ model data fitting, structural
priors, or decision constraints. Examples include overlapping group lasso (Yuan et al., 2011),
isotonic regression (Tibshirani et al., 2011), dispersive sparsity (El Halabi & Cevher, 2015), graph
transduction (Shivanna et al., 2015), learning with correlation matrices (Higham & Strabić, 2016),
and multidimensional total variation denoising (Barbero & Sra, 2018).
An important technique for addressing composite problems is operator splitting (Bauschke et al.,
2011). However, the basic proximal-(sub)gradient method may be unsuitable for Problem (1) since it
Alp Yurtsever and Alex Gu contributed equally to this paper. The paper is based primarily on the work done
while Alp Yurtsever was at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

