Landmark-Guided Subgoal Generation
in Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

1

Junsu Kim1
Younggyo Seo1
Jinwoo Shin1,2
2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{junsu.kim, younggyo.seo, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Goal-conditioned hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) has shown promising
results for solving complex and long-horizon RL tasks. However, the action space
of high-level policy in the goal-conditioned HRL is often large, so it results in poor
exploration, leading to inefficiency in training. In this paper, we present HIerarchical reinforcement learning Guided by Landmarks (HIGL), a novel framework for
training a high-level policy with a reduced action space guided by landmarks, i.e.,
promising states to explore. The key component of HIGL is twofold: (a) sampling
landmarks that are informative for exploration and (b) encouraging the high-level
policy to generate a subgoal towards a selected landmark. For (a), we consider two
criteria: coverage of the entire visited state space (i.e., dispersion of states) and
novelty of states (i.e., prediction error of a state). For (b), we select a landmark as
the very first landmark in the shortest path in a graph whose nodes are landmarks.
Our experiments demonstrate that our framework outperforms prior-arts across a
variety of control tasks, thanks to efficient exploration guided by landmarks.1

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated wide success in a variety of sequential decisionmaking problems, i.e., board games [38, 42], video games [1, 26, 38], and robotic control tasks
[15, 30, 53]. However, solving complex and long-horizon tasks has still remained a major challenge
in RL, where hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) provides a promising direction by enabling
control at multiple time scales via a hierarchical structure. Among HRL frameworks, goal-conditioned
HRL has long been recognized as an effective paradigm [5, 20, 29, 37], showing significant success
in a variety of long and complex tasks, e.g., navigation with locomotion [21, 54]. The framework
comprises a high-level policy and a low-level policy; the former breaks the original task into a series
of subgoals, and the latter aims to reach those subgoals.
The effectiveness of goal-conditioned HRL depends on the acquisition of effective and semantically
meaningful subgoals. To this end, several strategies have been proposed, e.g., learning the subgoal
representation space [6, 11, 21, 29, 31, 32, 35, 44, 50] or utilizing domain-specific knowledge for
pre-defining subgoal space [28, 54]. However, the learned or pre-defined subgoal space is often too
large, which results in poor high-level exploration, leading to inefficient training. To address this
issue, Zhang et al. [54] recently proposed a reduction of the high-level action space into the k-step
adjacency region around the current state. This approach, however, is limited in that it considers all
the states within the k-step adjacency region equally as the candidate actions for the high-level policy,
without considering the novelty of states, which is crucial for exploration.
1

Code is available https://github.com/junsu-kim97/HIGL

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

