Generic Neural Architecture Search via Regression

Yuhong Li1 , Cong Hao2 , Pan Li3 , Jinjun Xiong4 , Deming Chen1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign1 , Georgia Institute of Technology2 ,
Purdue University3 , University at Buffalo 4
leeyh@illinois.edu, callie.hao@ece.gatech.edu, panli@purdue.edu,
jinjun@buffalo.edu, dchen@illinois.edu

Abstract
Most existing neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms are dedicated to and
evaluated by the downstream tasks, e.g., image classification in computer vision.
However, extensive experiments have shown that, prominent neural architectures,
such as ResNet in computer vision and LSTM in natural language processing,
are generally good at extracting patterns from the input data and perform well on
different downstream tasks. In this paper, we attempt to answer two fundamental
questions related to NAS. (1) Is it necessary to use the performance of specific
downstream tasks to evaluate and search for good neural architectures? (2) Can we
perform NAS effectively and efficiently while being agnostic to the downstream
tasks? To answer these questions, we propose a novel and generic NAS framework,
termed Generic NAS (GenNAS). GenNAS does not use task-specific labels but
instead adopts regression on a set of manually designed synthetic signal bases
for architecture evaluation. Such a self-supervised regression task can effectively
evaluate the intrinsic power of an architecture to capture and transform the input
signal patterns, and allow more sufficient usage of training samples. Extensive
experiments across 13 CNN search spaces and one NLP space demonstrate the
remarkable efficiency of GenNAS using regression, in terms of both evaluating
the neural architectures (quantified by the ranking correlation Spearman’s ρ between the approximated performances and the downstream task performances)
and the convergence speed for training (within a few seconds). For example, on
NAS-Bench-101, GenNAS achieves 0.85 ρ while the existing efficient methods
only achieve 0.38. We then propose an automatic task search to optimize the
combination of synthetic signals using limited downstream-task-specific labels,
further improving the performance of GenNAS. We also thoroughly evaluate GenNAS’s generality and end-to-end NAS performance on all search spaces, which
outperforms almost all existing works with significant speedup. For example, on
NASBench-201, GenNAS can find near-optimal architectures within 0.3 GPU hour.
Our code has been made available at: https://github.com/leeyeehoo/GenNAS

1

Introduction

Most existing neural architecture search (NAS) approaches aim to find top-performing architectures
on a specific downstream task, such as image classification [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], semantic segmentation [6,
7, 8], neural machine translation [9, 10, 11] or more complex tasks like hardware-software codesign [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. They either directly search on the target task using the target dataset
(e.g., classification on CIFAR-10 [2, 17] ), or search on a proxy dataset and then transfer to the target
one (e.g. CIFAR-10 to ImageNet) [18, 3]. However, extensive experiments show that prominent
neural architectures are generally good at extracting patterns from the input data and perform well to
different downstream tasks. For example, ResNet [19] being a prevailing architecture in computer
vision, shows outstanding performance across various datasets and tasks [20, 21, 22], because of its
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

