Deformable Butterfly: A Highly Structured and
Sparse Linear Transform

Rui Lin1,∗

Jie Ran1,∗ King Hung Chiu2 Grazinao Chesi1 Ngai Wong1,∗
1
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Emial Address: {linrui, jieran, chesi, nwong}@eee.hku.hk
2
United Microelectronics Centre (Hong Kong) Limited,
Hong Kong Science Park, N.T., Hong Kong
Emial Address: khchiu@umechk.com

Abstract
We introduce a new kind of linear transform named Deformable Butterfly (DeBut)
that generalizes the conventional butterfly matrices and can be adapted to various
input-output dimensions. It inherits the fine-to-coarse-grained learnable hierarchy
of traditional butterflies and when deployed to neural networks, the prominent
structures and sparsity in a DeBut layer constitutes a new way for network compression. We apply DeBut as a drop-in replacement of standard fully connected
and convolutional layers, and demonstrate its superiority in homogenizing a neural
network and rendering it favorable properties such as light weight and low inference
complexity, without compromising accuracy. The natural complexity-accuracy
tradeoff arising from the myriad deformations of a DeBut layer also opens up new
rooms for analytical and practical research. The codes and Appendix are publicly
available at: https://github.com/ruilin0212/DeBut.

1

Introduction

The linear mapping in deep neural networks (DNNs) are mostly realized in the form of fully connected
(FC) or convolutional (CONV) layers. These layers, together with feed-forward or feedback paths and
nonlinear activations, then induce a plethora of neural architectures such as multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) [29, 23, 12], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [11, 18, 31, 32], recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) [3, 13, 30] and Transformers [33, 9], just to name a few. Although latest researches
have designed and constructed highly capable networks (such as the GPT-3 [1]), the nature of
DNNs still remains largely black-box and inaccessible due to its extreme nonlinearity. In fact, even
the seemingly trivial linear transform can become rather non-trivial when structures are imposed.
Prominent examples are the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and convolution operators which can be
cast as linear mappings and formulated as matrix multiplications. Yet they are distinguished by their
underlying butterfly and circulant structures, respectively, that act as strong structural priors and lead
to very distinct behaviors.
Nonetheless, relatively little attention has been paid to deriving adaptable, or even better, learnable
and structured fast linear transforms in DNNs. Among the works to compactly parametrize an FC
layer in a DNN, a representative method is called the Fastfood Transform [20] that belongs to the
category of kernel methods [4, 26] and employs random projection for feature learning. In particular,
Fastfood uses Hadamard transform combined with diagonal Gaussian matrices to approximate a
Gaussian random matrix. Adaptive Fastfood [34] further allows those diagonal matrices to become
∗

RL, JR, and NW contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

