Generalization of Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
Algorithms: Recurring and Unseen Tasks

Alireza Fallah
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
afallah@mit.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the generalization properties of Model-Agnostic MetaLearning (MAML) algorithms for supervised learning problems. We focus on
the setting in which we train the MAML model over m tasks, each with n data
points, and characterize its generalization error from two points of view: First, we
assume the new task at test time is one of the training tasks, and we show that,
for strongly convex objective functions, the expected excess population loss is
bounded by O(1/mn). Second, we consider the MAML algorithm’s generalization
to an unseen task and show that the resulting generalization error depends on the
total variation distance between the underlying distributions of the new task and
the tasks observed during the training process. Our proof techniques rely on the
connections between algorithmic stability and generalization bounds of algorithms.
In particular, we propose a new definition of stability for meta-learning algorithms,
which allows us to capture the role of both the number of tasks m and number of
samples per task n on the generalization error of MAML.

1

Introduction

In several machine learning problems, it is of interest to design algorithms that can be adjusted
based on previous experiences and tasks to perform better on a new task. In particular, metalearning algorithms achieve such a goal through various approaches, including finding a proper
meta-initialization for the new task [1–3], updating the model architecture [4–6], or learning the
parameters of optimization algorithms [7, 8].
A popular meta-learning framework that has shown promise in practice is Model-Agnostic MetaLearning (MAML), which was first introduced in [1]. MAML algorithm uses available training data
on a number of tasks to come up with a meta-initialization that performs well after it is slightly
updated at test time with respect to the new task. In other words, unlike standard supervised learning,
in which we aim to find a model that generalize well to a new task without any adaptation step, in
MAML our goal is to find an initial model for learning a new task when we have access to limited
labeled data for that task to run one (or a few) step(s) of stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
As shown in Fig. 1, in MAML we are given m tasks with m corresponding datasets {Si }m
i=1 in the
∗
training phase. Once the model is trained (wtrain
), a new task is revealed at test time for which we
have access to K labeled samples drawn from Dtest . We use these labeled samples of the new task to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

