Fairness via Representation Neutralization

Mengnan Du1∗, Subhabrata Mukherjee2 , Guanchu Wang3 , Ruixiang Tang3 ,
Ahmed Hassan Awadallah2 , Xia Hu3
1
Texas A&M University 2 Microsoft Research 3 Rice University
dumengnan@tamu.edu, {submukhe,hassanam}@microsoft.com
{guanchu.wang,rt39,xia.hu}@rice.edu

Abstract
Existing bias mitigation methods for DNN models primarily work on learning debiased encoders. This process not only requires a lot of instance-level annotations for
sensitive attributes, it also does not guarantee that all fairness sensitive information
has been removed from the encoder. To address these limitations, we explore the
following research question: Can we reduce the discrimination of DNN models
by only debiasing the classification head, even with biased representations as inputs? To this end, we propose a new mitigation technique, namely, Representation
Neutralization for Fairness (RNF) that achieves fairness by debiasing only the
task-specific classification head of DNN models. To this end, we leverage samples
with the same ground-truth label but different sensitive attributes, and use their
neutralized representations to train the classification head of the DNN model. The
key idea of RNF is to discourage the classification head from capturing undesirable
correlation between fairness sensitive information in encoder representations with
specific class labels. To address low-resource settings with no access to sensitive
attribute annotations, we leverage a bias-amplified model to generate proxy annotations for sensitive attributes. Experimental results over several benchmark
datasets demonstrate our RNF framework to effectively reduce discrimination of
DNN models with minimal degradation in task-specific performance.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made significant advances in recent times [1, 2, 3], and have
been deployed in many real-world applications. However, DNNs often suffer from biases and
show discrimination towards certain demographics, especially in high-stake applications, such as
criminal justice, employment, loan approval, credit scoring, etc [4, 5, 6]. For example, COMPAS, an
algorithmic recidivism predictor, is likely to associate African-American offenders with higher risk
scores compared to Caucasians while having a similar profile [7]. This brings significant harm to
both society and individuals, thus leading to recent focus on mitigation techniques to alleviate the
adverse effects of DNN biases.
Existing debiasing methods usually work on learning debiased representations at the encoderlevel. One representative family of methods perform mitigation by explicitly learning debiased
representations, either through adversarial learning [8, 9, 10] or invariant risk minimization [11, 12].
Another family of methods [13, 14, 15] implicitly learn debiased representations by incorporating
explanation during model training to suppress it from paying high attention to biased features in the
original input. Essentially, the above methods aim to remove the bias from deep representations.
Learning debiased representations is a technically challenging problem. Firstly, it is hard to remove
all fairness sensitive information in the encoder. The suppression of fairness sensitive information
∗

Part of the work was done while the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

