Learning to Ground Multi-Agent Communication
with Autoencoders
Toru Lin
MIT CSAIL
torulk@mit.edu

Minyoung Huh
MIT CSAIL
minhuh@mit.edu

Chris Stauffer
Facebook AI
cstauffer@fb.com

Ser-Nam Lim
Facebook AI
sernamlim@fb.com

Phillip Isola
MIT CSAIL
phillipi@mit.edu

Abstract
Communication requires having a common language, a lingua franca, between
agents. This language could emerge via a consensus process, but it may require
many generations of trial and error. Alternatively, the lingua franca can be given
by the environment, where agents ground their language in representations of the
observed world. We demonstrate a simple way to ground language in learned
representations, which facilitates decentralized multi-agent communication and
coordination. We find that a standard representation learning algorithm – autoencoding – is sufficient for arriving at a grounded common language. When agents
broadcast these representations, they learn to understand and respond to each
other’s utterances and achieve surprisingly strong task performance across a variety
of multi-agent communication environments.

1

Introduction

An essential aspect of communication is that each pair of speaker and listener must share a common
understanding of the symbols being used [8]. For artificial agents interacting in an environment,
with a communication channel but without an agreed-upon communication protocol, this raises
the question: how can meaningful communication emerge before a common language has been
established?
To address this challenge, prior works have used supervised learning [18], centralized learning [14,
17, 28], or differentiable communication [6, 17, 28, 32, 41]. Yet, none of these mechanisms is
representative of how communication emerges in nature, where animals and humans have evolved
communication protocols without supervision and without a centralized coordinator [35]. The
communication model that most closely resembles language learning in nature is a fully decentralized
model, where agents’ policies are independently optimized. However, decentralized models perform
poorly even in simple communication tasks [17] or with additional inductive biases [10].
We tackle this challenge by first making the following observations on why emergent communication
is difficult in a decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning setting. A key problem that prevents
agents from learning meaningful communication is the lack of a common grounding in communication
symbols [3, 10, 19]. In nature, the emergence of a common language is thought to be aided by physical
biases and embodiment [29, 42] – we can only produce certain vocalizations, these sounds only can
be heard a certain distance away, these sounds bear similarity to natural sounds in the environment,
etc. – yet artificial communication protocols are not a priori grounded in aspects of the environment
Project page, code, and videos can be found at https://toruowo.github.io/marl-ae-comm/.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

