CogView: Mastering Text-to-Image Generation via
Transformers
Ming Ding† , Zhuoyi Yang† , Wenyi Hong† , Wendi Zheng† , Chang Zhou‡ , Da Yin† ,
Junyang Lin‡ , Xu Zou† , Zhou Shao♠ , Hongxia Yang‡ , Jie Tang†♠
†
Tsinghua University ‡ DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group ♠ BAAI
{dm18@mails, jietang@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-to-Image generation in the general domain has long been an open problem,
which requires both a powerful generative model and cross-modal understanding.
We propose CogView, a 4-billion-parameter Transformer with VQ-VAE tokenizer
to advance this problem. We also demonstrate the finetuning strategies for various
downstream tasks, e.g. style learning, super-resolution, text-image ranking and
fashion design, and methods to stabilize pretraining, e.g. eliminating NaN losses.
CogView achieves the state-of-the-art FID on the blurred MS COCO dataset,
outperforming previous GAN-based models and a recent similar work DALL-E. 1
A beautiful young blond
woman talking on a phone.

Chinese traditional draw‐
ing. Statue of Liberty.

A Big Ben clock towering A couple wearing leather bik‐
A tiger is playing football.
er garb rides a motorcycle.
over the city of London.

Oil painting. Lion.

Sketch. Houses.

A coﬀee cup printed with
a cat. Sky background.

Cartoon. A tiger is playing
football.

A man is flying to the
moon on his bicycle

Super-resolutionmid-lake pavilion

Figure 1: Samples generated by CogView. The text in the first line is either from MS COCO (outside
our training set) or user queries on our demo website. The images in the second line are finetuned
results for different styles or super-resolution. The actual input text is in Chinese, which is translated
into English here for better understanding. More samples for captions from MS COCO are included
in Appendix F.

1

Introduction
“There are two things for a painter, the eye and the mind... eyes, through which
we view the nature; brain, in which we organize sensations by logic for meaningful
expression.” (Paul Cézanne [17])
1

Codes and models are at https://github.com/THUDM/CogView. We also have a demo website of our
latest model at https://wudao.aminer.cn/CogView/index.html (without post-selection).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

