Systematic Generalization with Edge Transformers

Leon Bergen
University of California, San Diego
lbergen@ucsd.edu

Timothy J. O’Donnell
McGill University
Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute (Mila)
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Dzmitry Bahdanau
Element AI, a ServiceNow company
McGill University
Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute (Mila)
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Recent research suggests that systematic generalization in natural language understanding remains a challenge for state-of-the-art neural models such as Transformers and Graph Neural Networks. To tackle this challenge, we propose Edge
Transformer, a new model that combines inspiration from Transformers and rulebased symbolic AI. The first key idea in Edge Transformers is to associate vector
states with every edge, that is, with every pair of input nodes—as opposed to just
every node, as it is done in the Transformer model. The second major innovation is
a triangular attention mechanism that updates edge representations in a way that is
inspired by unification from logic programming. We evaluate Edge Transformer on
compositional generalization benchmarks in relational reasoning, semantic parsing,
and dependency parsing1 . In all three settings, the Edge Transformer outperforms
Relation-aware, Universal and classical Transformer baselines.

1

Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become ubiquitous in natural language processing and
deep learning more generally (e.g., Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020; Carion et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, systematic (or compositional) generalization benchmarks remain challenging for this
class of models, including large instances with extensive pre-training (Keysers et al., 2020; Tsarkov
et al., 2020; Gontier et al., 2020; Furrer et al., 2020). Similarly, despite their increasing application to
a variety of reasoning and inference problems, the ability of Graph Neural Networks’ (GNN) (Gori
et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009; Veličković et al., 2018) to generalize systematically has also been
recently called into question (Sinha et al., 2019, 2020). Addressing these challenges to systematic
generalization is critical both for robust language understanding and for reasoning from other kinds
of knowledge bases.
In this work, inspired by symbolic AI, we seek to equip Transformers with additional representational
and computational capacity to better capture the kinds of information processing that underlie
systematicity. Our intuition is that classical Transformers can be interpreted as a kind of inferential
system similar to a continuous relaxation of a subset of the Prolog logic programming language.
In particular, as we discuss in the next section, Transformers can be seen as implementing a kind
of reasoning over properties of entities—for example, RED(·) or TABLE(·)—where any relations
1

Code for our experiments can be found at: github.com/bergen/EdgeTransformer

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

