Improving Calibration through the Relationship with
Adversarial Robustness
Yao Qin

Xuezhi Wang
Alex Beutel
Ed H. Chi
Google Research
{yaoqin, xuezhiw, alexbeutel, edchi}@google.com

Abstract
Neural networks lack adversarial robustness, i.e., they are vulnerable to adversarial
examples that through small perturbations to inputs cause incorrect predictions.
Further, trust is undermined when models give miscalibrated predictions, i.e., the
predicted probability is not a good indicator of how much we should trust our
model. In this paper, we study the connection between adversarial robustness and
calibration and find that the inputs for which the model is sensitive to small perturbations (are easily attacked) are more likely to have poorly calibrated predictions.
Based on this insight, we examine if calibration can be improved by addressing
those adversarially unrobust inputs. To this end, we propose Adversarial Robustness based Adaptive Label Smoothing (AR-AdaLS) that integrates the correlations
of adversarial robustness and calibration into training by adaptively softening labels
for an example based on how easily it can be attacked by an adversary. We find
that our method, taking the adversarial robustness of the in-distribution data into
consideration, leads to better calibration over the model even under distributional
shifts. In addition, AR-AdaLS can also be applied to an ensemble model to further
improve model calibration.

1

Introduction

The robustness of machine learning algorithms is becoming increasingly important as ML systems
are being used in higher-stakes applications. In one line of research, neural networks are shown
to lack adversarial robustness – small perturbations to the input can successfully fool classifiers
into making incorrect predictions (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Carlini & Wagner,
2017b; Madry et al., 2017; Qin et al., 2020b). In largely separate lines of work, researchers have
studied uncertainty in model’s predictions. For example, models are often miscalibrated where the
predicted confidence is not indicative of the true likelihood of the model being correct (Guo et al.,
2017; Thulasidasan et al., 2019; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2020; Kull et al., 2019).
The calibration issue is exacerbated when models are asked to make predictions on data different
from the training distribution (Snoek et al., 2019), which becomes an issue in practical settings where
it is important that we can trust model predictions under distributional shift.
Despite robustness, in all its forms, being a popular area of research, the relationship between these
perspectives has not been extensively explored previously. In this paper, we study the correlation
between adversarial robustness and calibration. We discover that input data points that are sensitive
to small adversarial perturbations (are easily attacked) are more likely to have poorly calibrated
predictions. This holds true on a number of network architectures for classification and on all
the datasets that we consider: CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). This suggests that the miscalibrated predictions on those
adversarially unrobust data points greatly degrades the performance of model calibration. Based on
this insight, we hypothesize and study if calibration can be improved by giving different supervision
to the model depending on adversarial robustness of each training data.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

