Capacity and Bias of
Learned Geometric Embeddings for Directed Graphs
Michael Boratko⇤,1 , Dongxu Zhang⇤,1 , Nicholas Monath†,1 , Luke Vilnis†,1 ,
Kenneth L. Clarkson2 , Andrew McCallum1
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
IBM Research
{mboratko, dongxuzhang, nmonath, luke, mccallum}@cs.umass.edu
klclarks@us.ibm.com

Abstract
A wide variety of machine learning tasks such as knowledge base completion,
ontology alignment, and multi-label classification can benefit from incorporating
into learning differentiable representations of graphs or taxonomies. While vectors
in Euclidean space can theoretically represent any graph, much recent work shows
that alternatives such as complex, hyperbolic, order, or box embeddings have
geometric properties better suited to modeling real-world graphs. Experimentally
these gains are seen only in lower dimensions, however, with performance benefits
diminishing in higher dimensions. In this work, we introduce a novel variant
of box embeddings that uses a learned smoothing parameter to achieve better
representational capacity than vector models in low dimensions, while also avoiding
performance saturation common to other geometric models in high dimensions.
Further, we present theoretical results that prove box embeddings can represent
any DAG. We perform rigorous empirical evaluations of vector, hyperbolic, and
region-based geometric representations on several families of synthetic and realworld directed graphs. Analysis of these results exposes correlations between
different families of graphs, graph characteristics, model size, and embedding
geometries, providing useful insights into inductive biases of various differentiable
graph representations.

1

Introduction

Embedding-based methods are a cornerstone of modern approaches to modeling graph data. Geometric embeddings, which represent elements using objects with richer geometric structure (such as
boxes [60], cones [27, 58], discs [55], densities [2, 59], and elements of hyperbolic space [39, 40])
have recently been proposed as a powerful alternative to standard vector embedding models for representing asymmetric relationships. Modeling such asymmetric relationships is central to discovering
embedded representations of directed graphs, such as DAG-structured taxonomies, where geometric
embeddings have been shown empirically to be more effective [39, 58, 60].
The success of geometric embeddings largely rests on exploiting inherent biases intrinsic to the
particular geometry chosen. The negative curvature of hyperbolic space, for example, provides
an inductive bias which is believed to better model the exponential increase of nodes in trees [39,
61, 62]. Region-based representations, on the other hand, model directional edges via containment
relationships [58, 60]. As containment is, itself, transitive, these models would seemingly have a
natural bias toward representing transitive relationships. While previous work has empirically tested
⇤

Equal Contribution. † Now at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

