A Theory of the Distortion-Perception Tradeoff in
Wasserstein Space

Dror Freirich
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
drorfrc@gmail.com

Tomer Michaeli
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Ron Meir
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
rmeir@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
The lower the distortion of an estimator, the more the distribution of its outputs
generally deviates from the distribution of the signals it attempts to estimate. This
phenomenon, known as the perception-distortion tradeoff, has captured significant
attention in image restoration, where it implies that fidelity to ground truth images
comes at the expense of perceptual quality (deviation from statistics of natural
images). However, despite the increasing popularity of performing comparisons on
the perception-distortion plane, there remains an important open question: what is
the minimal distortion that can be achieved under a given perception constraint?
In this paper, we derive a closed form expression for this distortion-perception
(DP) function for the mean squared-error (MSE) distortion and the Wasserstein-2
perception index. We prove that the DP function is always quadratic, regardless
of the underlying distribution. This stems from the fact that estimators on the DP
curve form a geodesic in Wasserstein space. In the Gaussian setting, we further
provide a closed form expression for such estimators. For general distributions,
we show how these estimators can be constructed from the estimators at the two
extremes of the tradeoff: The global MSE minimizer, and a minimizer of the
MSE under a perfect perceptual quality constraint. The latter can be obtained as a
stochastic transformation of the former.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems that involve signal reconstruction from partial or noisy measurements, arise in
numerous scientific domains. Examples range from medical imaging to tomography, microscopy,
astronomy and audio enhancement. In many such problems it is desired to design an estimator that
(i) has a small reconstruction error (low distortion), and (ii) outputs reconstructions that cannot be
told apart from valid signals (good perceptual quality). Interestingly, however, it has been shown that
the lower the average distortion of an estimator, the more the distribution of its outputs generally
deviates from the distribution of the signals it attempts to estimate [4]. In other words, low distortion
generally comes at the price of poor perceptual quality, and vice versa. This phenomenon, known as
the perception-distortion tradeoff, has found particular interest in the image restoration domain (see
Fig. 1), where algorithms are now commonly being evaluated using both distortion measures and
perception indices [5].
Unfortunately, despite the increasing popularity of performing comparisons on the perceptiondistortion plane, the minimal distortion that can be achieved under a given perception constraint (red
curve in Fig. 1) remains an open question. Blau and Michaeli [4] investigated several properties
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

