Twice regularized MDPs and the equivalence between
robustness and regularization

Esther Derman∗
Technion

Matthieu Geist
Google Research, Brain Team

Shie Mannor
Technion, NVIDIA Research

Abstract
Robust Markov decision processes (MDPs) aim to handle changing or partially
known system dynamics. To solve them, one typically resorts to robust optimization
methods. However, this significantly increases computational complexity and limits
scalability in both learning and planning. On the other hand, regularized MDPs
show more stability in policy learning without impairing time complexity. Yet,
they generally do not encompass uncertainty in the model dynamics. In this work,
we aim to learn robust MDPs using regularization. We first show that regularized
MDPs are a particular instance of robust MDPs with uncertain reward. We thus
establish that policy iteration on reward-robust MDPs can have the same time
complexity as on regularized MDPs. We further extend this relationship to MDPs
with uncertain transitions: this leads to a regularization term with an additional
dependence on the value function. We finally generalize regularized MDPs to twice
regularized MDPs (R2 MDPs), i.e., MDPs with both value and policy regularization.
The corresponding Bellman operators enable developing policy iteration schemes
with convergence and robustness guarantees. It also reduces planning and learning
in robust MDPs to regularized MDPs.

1

Introduction

MDPs provide a practical framework for solving sequential decision problems under uncertainty
[30]. However, the chosen strategy can be very sensitive to sampling errors or inaccurate model
estimates. This can lead to complete failure in common situations where the model parameters
vary adversarially or are simply unknown [22]. Robust MDPs aim to mitigate such sensitivity by
assuming that the transition and/or reward function (P, r) varies arbitrarily inside a given uncertainty
set U [17, 27]. In this setting, an optimal solution maximizes a performance measure under the
worst-case parameters. It can be thought of as a dynamic zero-sum game with an agent choosing
the best action while Nature imposes it the most adversarial model. As such, solving robust MDPs
involves max-min problems, which can be computationally challenging and limits scalability.
In recent years, several methods have been developed to alleviate the computational concerns raised
by robust reinforcement learning (RL). Apart from [23, 24] that consider specific types of coupled
uncertainty sets, all rely on a rectangularity assumption without which the problem can be NP-hard
[2, 40]. This assumption is key to deriving tractable solvers of robust MDPs such as robust value
iteration [2, 11] or more general robust modified policy iteration (MPI) [18]. Yet, reducing time
complexity in robust Bellman updates remains challenging and is still researched today [15, 11].
At the same time, the empirical success of regularization in policy search methods has motivated
a wide range of algorithms with diverse motivations such as improved exploration [12, 20] or
stability [34, 13]. Geist et al. [10] proposed a unified view from which many existing algorithms
can be derived. Their regularized MDP formalism opens the path to error propagation analysis
∗

Contact author: estherderman@campus.technion.ac.il

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

