TransformerFusion: Monocular RGB Scene
Reconstruction using Transformers

Aljaž Božič 1

Pablo Palafox 1

Justus Thies 1,2

Angela Dai 1

Matthias Nießner 1

1

2

Technical University of Munich
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
aljazbozic.github.io/transformerfusion

Abstract
We introduce TransformerFusion, a transformer-based 3D scene reconstruction
approach. From an input monocular RGB video, the video frames are processed
by a transformer network that fuses the observations into a volumetric feature
grid representing the scene; this feature grid is then decoded into an implicit 3D
scene representation. Key to our approach is the transformer architecture that
enables the network to learn to attend to the most relevant image frames for each
3D location in the scene, supervised only by the scene reconstruction task. Features
are fused in a coarse-to-fine fashion, storing fine-level features only where needed,
requiring lower memory storage and enabling fusion at interactive rates. The
feature grid is then decoded to a higher-resolution scene reconstruction, using
an MLP-based surface occupancy prediction from interpolated coarse-to-fine 3D
features. Our approach results in an accurate surface reconstruction, outperforming
state-of-the-art multi-view stereo depth estimation methods, fully-convolutional 3D
reconstruction approaches, and approaches using LSTM- or GRU-based recurrent
networks for video sequence fusion.

1

Introduction

Monocular 3D reconstruction is a core task in 3D computer vision, aiming to reconstruct a complete
and accurate 3D geometry of an object or an environment from only 2D observations captured by an
RGB camera. A geometric understanding is key to applications such as robotic or autonomous vehicle
navigation or interaction, as well as model creation and scene editing for augmented and virtual reality.
In addition, geometric scene reconstructions form the basis for 3D scene understanding, supporting
tasks such as 3D object detection, semantic, and instance segmentation [34, 35, 36, 29, 7, 43, 15, 16].
While state-of-the-art SLAM systems [3, 41] achieve robust and scale-accurate camera tracking
leveraging both visual and inertial measurements, dense and complete 3D reconstruction of largescale environments from monocular video remains a very challenging problem – particularly for
interactive settings. Simultaneously, notable progress has been made on multi-view depth estimation,
estimating depth from pairs of images by averaging features extracted from the images in a feature
cost volume [42, 17, 19, 38, 13]. Unfortunately, averaging features across a full video sequence can
lead to equal-weight treatment of each individual frame, despite some frames possibly containing
less information in various regions (e.g., from motion blur, rolling shutter artifacts, very glancing or
partial views of objects), making high-fidelity scene reconstruction challenging.
Inspired by the recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) that leverage transformer-based
models for sequence to sequence modelling [40, 11, 2], we propose a transformer-based method that
fuses a sequence of RGB input frames into a 3D representation of a scene at interactive rates. Key to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

