Conditioning Sparse Variational Gaussian Processes
for Online Decision-making
Wesley J. Maddox
New York University
wjm363@nyu.edu

Samuel Stanton
New York University
ss13641@nyu.edu

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
With a principled representation of uncertainty and closed form posterior updates,
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a natural choice for online decision making. However,
Gaussian processes typically require at least O(n2 ) computations for n training
points, limiting their general applicability. Stochastic variational Gaussian processes (SVGPs) can provide scalable inference for a dataset of fixed size, but
are difficult to efficiently condition on new data. We propose online variational
conditioning (OVC), a procedure for efficiently conditioning SVGPs in an online
setting that does not require re-training through the evidence lower bound with
the addition of new data. OVC enables the pairing of SVGPs with advanced lookahead acquisition functions for black-box optimization, even with non-Gaussian
likelihoods. We show OVC provides compelling performance in a range of applications including active learning of malaria incidence, and reinforcement learning on
MuJoCo simulated robotic control tasks.

1

Introduction

Intelligent systems should be able to quickly and efficiently adapt to new data, adjusting their prior
beliefs in response to the most recent events. These characteristics are desirable whether the system
in question is controlling the actuators of a robot, tuning the power output of a laser, or monitoring
the changing preferences of users on an online platform. What these applications share in common
is a constant stream of new information. In this paper, we are interested in efficient conditioning,
meaning that we wish to efficiently update a posterior distribution after receiving new data.
The ability of Gaussian process (GP) regression models to condition on new data in closed form has
made them a popular choice for Bayesian optimization (BO), active learning, and control [24]. All
of these settings share similar characteristics: there is an “outer loop”, where new data is acquired
from the real world (e.g. an expensive simulator), interleaved with an “inner loop”, which chooses
where to collect data. In BO, for example, the “inner loop” is the optimization of an acquisition
function evaluated using a surrogate model of the true objective. Simple acquisition functions, e.g.
expected improvement (EI), consider only the current state of the surrogate, while more sophisticated
acquisition functions “look ahead” to consider the effect of hypothetical observations on future
surrogate states. One such acquisition function, batch knowledge gradient (qKG), defines the one-step
Bayes-optimal data batch as the batch that maximizes the expected surrogate maximum after the
batch has been acquired [2, 84]. Advanced acquisition functions like qKG require the surrogate to
have both efficient posterior sampling and efficient conditioning on new data.
GP regression has two major limitations that have prevented its large scale deployment for online
decision-making. First, the computational and memory consumption of exact GPs grows at least
quadratically with the amount of data [25, 65], generally limiting their usage to BO problems with
fewer than 1, 000 function evaluations [24, 2, 79]. Second, they are limited to applications that have
continuous real-valued responses, enabling modelling with solely a Gaussian likelihood. Stochastic
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

