Iterative Teaching by Label Synthesis

Weiyang Liu1,2,* Zhen Liu3,* Hanchen Wang1,* Liam Paull3,4 Bernhard Schölkopf2 Adrian Weller1,5
2 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 Mila, Université de Montréal 4 CIFAR AI Chair
5 The Alan Turing Institute * Equal Contribution
{wl396@cam.ac.uk, zhen.liu.2@umontreal.ca}

1 University of Cambridge

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of iterative machine teaching, where a
teacher provides examples sequentially based on the current iterative learner. In
contrast to previous methods that have to scan over the entire pool and select
teaching examples from it in each iteration, we propose a label synthesis teaching
framework where the teacher randomly selects input teaching examples (e.g.,
images) and then synthesizes suitable outputs (e.g., labels) for them. We show that
this framework can avoid costly example selection while still provably achieving
exponential teachability. We propose multiple novel teaching algorithms in this
framework. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the value of our framework.

1

Introduction

Machine teaching [103, 106] studies the problem of constructing a minimal dataset for a target
concept such that a learner can learn the concept based on this dataset. Machine teaching has diverse
applications ranging from crowd sourcing [71, 72, 100, 101] to model robustness [2, 3, 54, 63].
Machine teaching also has nice connections with curriculum learning [7] and coresets [1, 28].
Based on the learner, machine teaching can be
(a) Vanilla Iterative Teaching
performed in either batch or sequential fashion.
Select
Teaching
The majority of prior work studies batch machine
Examples
teaching [42, 56, 102, 103], where a teacher conLearner
Teacher
Pool
structs a minimal batch set of training samples
and provides it to a student in one shot without
Randomly
further interactions. Then the student keeps learn- Sample
Examples
Teacher
ing from this batch dataset for the target concept.
Learner
(b) Label Synthesis Teaching
The size of such a minimal batch set is called
teaching dimension [22]. Differently, sequential Figure 1: Comparison of vanilla iterative machine
machine teaching [38, 43, 44, 61] bridges the gap teaching and label synthesis teaching. The red dotted
between machine teaching and practical learning frames indicate the teacher’s efforts.
algorithms by studying the sequential (i.e., iterative) learner such as neural networks. A typical example is iterative machine teaching (IMT) [43, 44]
where the teacher guides a learner to a target concept by interacting with the learner (e.g., feeding
training samples) in every iteration. The minimum number of such iterations is called the iterative
teaching dimension. One of the largest challenges in sequential teaching is how to effectively and
efficiently provide teaching examples to the iterative learner. Usually we are mostly interested in the
pool-based teaching in IMT since it well matches the setting of modern machine learning. However,
exploring
all the possible teaching trajectories is computationally prohibitive. For example, there are

m n
possible
teaching trajectories (n is the number of iterations) if we select k samples per iteration
k
from a pool of size m. Due to such a huge search space, the selection of teaching examples is a
combinatorial problem that is inherently difficult to solve. IMT [43] performs the teaching sample
selection with a greedy policy, but it could be substantially sub-optimal in certain cases [38] and its
computational complexity also scales linearly with the size of the dataset.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

