Structure-Aware Random Fourier Kernel for Graphs

Jinyuan Fang1,2 , Qiang Zhang3,4,5 , Zaiqiao Meng6,7 , Shangsong Liang1,2,7∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, China
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
5
AZFT Knowledge Engine Lab, China
6
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom
7
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
{fangjy6@gmail.com; qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn; zaiqiao.meng@gmail.com}
{liangshangsong@gmail.com}

Abstract
Gaussian Processes (GPs) define distributions over functions and their generalization capabilities depend heavily on the choice of kernels. In this paper, we propose
a novel structure-aware random Fourier (SRF) kernel for GPs that brings several
benefits when modeling graph-structured data. First, SRF kernel is defined with
a spectral distribution based on the Fourier duality given by the Bochner’s theorem, transforming the kernel learning problem to a distribution inference problem.
Second, SRF kernel admits a random Fourier feature formulation that makes the
kernel scalable for optimization. Third, SRF kernel enables to leverage geometric
structures by taking subgraphs as inputs. To effectively optimize GPs with SRF kernel, we develop a variational EM algorithm, which alternates between an inference
procedure (E-step) and a learning procedure (M-step). Experimental results on five
real-world datasets show that our model can achieve state-of-the-art performance
in two typical graph learning tasks, i.e., object classification and link prediction.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Process (GP) is a typical Bayesian non-parametric method for function learning. Choosing
appropriate kernels profoundly improves the generalization performance of GPs on various learning
tasks [1, 2]. Stationary kernels, such as Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel, are common choices of
GP kernels and have been successfully applied in many regression and classification problems [3, 4, 5].
However, due to their restricted smoothness assumption and the limited expressiveness, stationary
kernels may not be capable for complex data structures, such as graph-structured data [6], where both
object features and geometric structures are essential.
To improve GP’s performance on data with complex structures, some expressive kernels have been
proposed. Two typical expressive kernels are: compositional kernels [7, 8, 9], which are obtained
based on the kernel composition rules [10], and deep kernels [11, 12], which are defined as the stack
of a deep neural network and a base kernel. Alternatively, the spectral kernels are defined in the
spectral domain [2, 13, 14]. Nonetheless, when modeling graph-structured data, prior kernels face
several challenges. First of all, the flexibility and expressiveness of these kernels are limited by the
simple base kernels upon which they are built, and the optimization of base kernels is computationally
expensive [15]. Second, these kernels are usually feature-based, which indicates that they capture the
similarities between graph objects based solely on object features. It may be inefficient for them to
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

