Heterogeneous Multi-player Multi-armed Bandits:
Closing the Gap and Generalization

Chengshuai Shi
University of Virginia
cs7ync@virginia.edu
Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Wei Xiong
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
wxiongae@connect.ust.hk
Jing Yang
The Pennsylvania State University
yangjing@psu.edu

Abstract
Despite the significant interests and many progresses in decentralized multi-player
multi-armed bandits (MP-MAB) problems in recent years, the regret gap to the
natural centralized lower bound in the heterogeneous MP-MAB setting remains
open. In this paper, we propose BEACON – Batched Exploration with Adaptive
COmmunicatioN – that closes this gap. BEACON accomplishes this goal with
novel contributions in implicit communication and efficient exploration. For the
former, we propose a novel adaptive differential communication (ADC) design
that significantly improves the implicit communication efficiency. For the latter, a
carefully crafted batched exploration scheme is developed to enable incorporation
of the combinatorial upper confidence bound (CUCB) principle. We then generalize
the existing linear-reward MP-MAB problems, where the system reward is always
the sum of individually collected rewards, to a new MP-MAB problem where
the system reward is a general (nonlinear) function of individual rewards. We
extend BEACON to solve this problem and prove a logarithmic regret. BEACON
bridges the algorithm design and regret analysis of combinatorial MAB (CMAB)
and MP-MAB, two largely disjointed areas in MAB, and the results in this paper
suggest that this previously ignored connection is worth further investigation.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the application of cognitive radio (Anandkumar et al., 2010, 2011; Gai et al., 2010), the
multi-player version of the multi-armed bandits problem (MP-MAB) has sparked significant interests
in recent years. MP-MAB takes player interactions into account by having multiple decentralized
players simultaneously play the bandit game and interact with each other through arm collisions.
Prior MP-MAB studies mostly focus on the homogeneous variant, where the bandit model is assumed
to be the same across players (Liu and Zhao, 2010; Rosenski et al., 2016; Besson and Kaufmann, 2018).
Recent attentions have shifted towards the more general MP-MAB model with player-dependent
bandit instances (i.e., the heterogeneous variant) (Bistritz and Leshem, 2018, 2020; Tibrewal et al.,
2019; Boursier et al., 2020). However, unlike the homogeneous variant, the current understanding of
the heterogeneous setting is still limited.
• Recent advances (Boursier and Perchet, 2019; Wang et al., 2020) show that for the homogeneous
setting, decentralized MP-MAB algorithms can achieve almost the same performance as centralized
ones. However, state-of-the-art results in heterogeneous variants still have significant gaps from
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

