SGD: The Role of Implicit Regularization, Batch-size
and Multiple Epochs
Satyen Kale
Google Research, NY
satyen@google.com

Ayush Sekhari
Cornell University
as3663@cornell.edu

Karthik Sridharan
Cornell University
ks999@cornell.edu

Abstract
Multi-epoch, small-batch, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has been the method
of choice for learning with large over-parameterized models. A popular theory for
explaining why SGD works well in practice is that the algorithm has an implicit
regularization that biases its output towards a good solution. Perhaps the theoretically most well understood learning setting for SGD is that of Stochastic Convex
p
Optimization (SCO), where it is well known that SGD learns at a rate of O(1/ n),
where n is the number of samples. In this paper, we consider the problem of SCO
and explore the role of implicit regularization, batch size and multiple epochs for
SGD. Our main contributions are threefold:
1. We show that for any regularizer, there is an SCO problem for which Regularized Empirical Risk Minimzation fails to learn. This automatically rules out
any implicit regularization based explanation for the success of SGD.
2. We provide a separation between SGD and learning via Gradient Descent on
empirical loss (GD) in terms of sample complexity. We show that there is an
SCO problem such that GD with any step size and number of iterations can
5/12
e
only learn at a suboptimal rate: at least ⌦(1/n
).
3. We present a multi-epoch variant of SGD commonly used in practice. We
prove that this algorithm is at least as good as single pass SGD in the worst
case. However, for certain SCO problems, taking multiple passes over the
dataset can significantly outperform single pass SGD.
We extend our results to the general learning setting by showing a problem which is
learnable for any data distribution, and for this problem, SGD is strictly better than
RERM for any regularization function. We conclude by discussing the implications
of our results for deep learning, and show a separation between SGD and ERM for
two layer diagonal neural networks.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of stochastic optimization of the form:
Minimize F (w)

(1)

where the objective F : Rd 7! R is given by F (w) = Ez⇠D [f (w; z)]. The goal is to perform
the minimization based only on samples S = {z1 , . . . , zn } drawn i.i.d. from some distribution D.
Standard statistical learning problems can be cast as stochastic optimization problems, with F (w)
being the population loss and f (w, z) being the instantaneous loss on sample z for the model w.
Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO). Perhaps the most well studied stochastic optimization
problem is that of SCO. We define a problem to be an instance of a SCO problem if,
Assumption I: Population loss F is convex.
(2)
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

