Robust Contrastive Learning Using Negative Samples
with Diminished Semantics
Songwei Ge
Univeristy of Maryland
songweig@cs.umd.edu

Shlok Mishra
Univeristy of Maryland
shlokm@cs.umd.edu

Chun-Liang Li
Google Cloud AI
chunliang@google.com

Haohan Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
haohanw@cs.cmu.edu

David Jacobs
Univeristy of Maryland
dwj@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised learning has recently made exceptional progress because of the development of more effective contrastive learning methods. However, CNNs are prone
to depend on low-level features that humans deem non-semantic. This dependency
has been conjectured to induce a lack of robustness to image perturbations or
domain shift. In this paper, we show that by generating carefully designed negative
samples, contrastive learning can learn more robust representations with less dependence on such features. Contrastive learning utilizes positive pairs that preserve
semantic information while perturbing superficial features in the training images.
Similarly, we propose to generate negative samples in a reversed way, where only
the superfluous instead of the semantic features are preserved. We develop two
methods, texture-based and patch-based augmentations, to generate negative samples. These samples achieve better generalization, especially under out-of-domain
settings. We also analyze our method and the generated texture-based samples,
showing that texture features are indispensable in classifying particular ImageNet
classes and especially finer classes. We also show that model bias favors texture
and shape features differently under different test settings. Our code, trained
models, and ImageNet-Texture dataset can be found at https://github.com/
SongweiGe/Contrastive-Learning-with-Non-Semantic-Negatives.

1

Introduction

Recent studies on self-supervised learning have shown great success in learning visual representations
without human annotations. The gap between unsupervised and supervised learning has been progressively closed by contrastive learning [53, 48, 7, 18, 49, 6, 16, 56]. In the meantime, CNNs trained in
the supervised setting are known to learn correlations between labels and superfluous features such
as local patches [4, 3], texture [14], high-frequency components [51], and even artificially added
features [26], which has raised concerns about deploying these models in a real scenario [30, 15].
CNNs trained by contrastive learning methods are no exception [23]. In this paper, we propose to
construct negative samples that only preserve non-semantic features. We show that using contrastive
learning methods trained with these negative samples can mitigate these concerns.
Contrastive learning methods exploit carefully designed augmentations to construct positive pairs
and pull their representations together. These augmentations are crucial to contrastive learning [7, 6].
A common assumption behind these augmentations is to preserve the semantics of the input images
while perturbing other superficial signals. This inspires us to generate negative samples and inject
additional implicit biases on the visual features learned by the models. Specifically, we utilize
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

