Geometry Processing with Neural Fields

Guandao Yang ∗
Cornell University

Serge Belongie
University of Copenhagen

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
Most existing geometry processing algorithms use meshes as the default shape
representation. Manipulating meshes, however, requires one to maintain high
quality in the surface discretization. For example, changing the topology of a
mesh usually requires additional procedures such as remeshing. This paper instead
proposes the use of neural fields for geometry processing. Neural fields can
compactly store complicated shapes without spatial discretization. Moreover,
neural fields are infinitely differentiable, which allows them to be optimized for
objectives that involve higher-order derivatives. This raises the question: can
geometry processing be done entirely using neural fields? We introduce loss
functions and architectures to show that some of the most challenging geometry
processing tasks, such as deformation and filtering, can be done with neural fields.
Experimental results show that our methods are on par with the well-established
mesh-based methods without committing to a particular surface discretization.
Code is available at https://github.com/stevenygd/NFGP.

1

Introduction

In many graphics applications, users may want to edit digital shapes using just a few clicks, such
as making a character bow by dragging the head downwards. Such manipulation from sparse input
requires geometry processing algorithms. Most of these algorithms use polygonal meshes to represent
shapes [11]. Polygonal meshes were created initially for researchers as a representation of real-world
shapes that they can both interpret and manipulate [14, 52, 78]. However, developing algorithms
that automatically manipulate meshes is often difficult since they involve discretizing the surface.
For example, changing the topology of a mesh, such as turning a sphere into a torus, will break
such discretization and require additional repair procedures such as remeshing [2, 3]. Given that
shape editing is increasingly performed by algorithms, it seems worthwhile to search for a shape
representation that is more amenable to automatic geometry processing.
An alternative to the polygonal mesh is an implicit representation, in which the surface is represented
by a level set of a field: {x|f (x) = c} [22, 39, 63]. Since it is easy to change shape topology using
implicit representations, people have applied them for geometry processing tasks such as shape
merging [8, 51, 54]. These works store implicit fields using voxels or octrees, which introduce
memory-intensive spatial discretization. Recent research addresses this by using continuous neural
networks to represent implicit fields [19, 45, 46, 56]. These neural fields possess several advantages
in addition to the merits inherited from implicit representation: they are compact to store [23, 45]
and can produce high-quality continuous surfaces at arbitrary resolutions [45, 56]. The community
has achieved compelling results using neural fields in a variety of applications [47, 64, 73, 84].
Notwithstanding these results, it is still unclear whether shape editing tasks challenging for implicit
fields (e.g., deformation and filtering) can be performed with neural fields. In this paper, we ask: can
geometry processing be done entirely using neural fields?
∗

Email: gy46@cornell.edu. This work is done while Guandao was interning at Intel Labs.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

