Visualizing the Emergence of Intermediate Visual
Patterns in DNNs
Mingjie Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
limingjie0608@sjtu.edu.cn

Shaobo Wang
Harbin Institute of Technology
181110315@stu.hit.edu.cn

Quanshi Zhang∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a method to visualize the discrimination power of intermediatelayer visual patterns encoded by a DNN. Specifically, we visualize (1) how the
DNN gradually learns regional visual patterns in each intermediate layer during the
training process, and (2) the effects of the DNN using non-discriminative patterns
in low layers to construct disciminative patterns in middle/high layers through
the forward propagation. Based on our visualization method, we can quantify
knowledge points (i.e. the number of discriminative visual patterns) learned by
the DNN to evaluate the representation capacity of the DNN. Furthermore, this
method also provides new insights into signal-processing behaviors of existing
deep-learning techniques, such as adversarial attacks and knowledge distillation.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved superior performance in various tasks, but the black-box
nature of DNNs makes it difficult for people to understand its internal behavior. Visualization methods
are usually considered as the most direct way to understand the DNN. Recently, several attempts
have been made to visualize the DNN from different aspects, e.g. illustrating the visual appearance
that maximizes the prediction score of a given category [50, 66, 35], inverting intermediate-layer
features to network inputs [12], extracting receptive fields of neural activations [73], estimating
saliency/importance/attribution maps [74, 45, 75, 32], visualizing the sample distribution, such as
PCA [38], t-SNE [54], etc.
In spite of above explanations of the DNN, there is still a large gap between visual explanations of
the patterns in the DNN and the theoretical analysis of the DNN’s discrimination power. In other
words, visualization results usually cannot reflect the discrimination power of features in the DNN.
Therefore, instead of simply visualizing the entire sample, we divide intermediate-layer features into
feature components, each of which represents a specific image region. We visualize the discrimination
power of these feature components, and we consider discriminative feature components as knowledge
points learned by the DNN. Based on above methods, we can diagnose the feature representation of a
pre-trained DNN from the following perspectives.
• We visualize the emergence of intermediate visual patterns in a temporal-spatial manner and evaluate
their discrimination power. (1) We visualize how the discrimination power of each individual visual
∗
Corresponding author. This work was done under the supervison of Dr. Quanshi Zhang. He is with the
John Hopcroft Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

