Robustness via Uncertainty-aware Cycle Consistency

Uddeshya Upadhyay1
1

University of Tübingen

Yanbei Chen1
2

Zeynep Akata1,2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image translation refers to learning inter-image-domain mapping without corresponding image pairs. Existing methods learn deterministic
mappings without explicitly modelling the robustness to outliers or predictive
uncertainty, leading to performance degradation when encountering unseen perturbations at test time. To address this, we propose a novel probabilistic method
based on Uncertainty-aware Generalized Adaptive Cycle Consistency (UGAC),
which models the per-pixel residual by generalized Gaussian distribution, capable of modelling heavy-tailed distributions. We compare our model with a
wide variety of state-of-the-art methods on various challenging tasks including
unpaired image translation of natural images, using standard datasets, spanning
autonomous driving, maps, facades, and also in medical imaging domain consisting of MRI. Experimental results demonstrate that our method exhibits stronger
robustness towards unseen perturbations in test data. Code is released here: https:
//github.com/ExplainableML/UncertaintyAwareCycleConsistency.

1

Introduction

Translating an image from a distribution, i.e. source domain, to an image in another distribution, i.e.
target domain, with a distribution shift is an ill-posed problem as a unique deterministic one-to-one
mapping may not exist between the two domains. Furthermore, since the correspondence between
inter-domain samples may be missing, their joint-distribution needs to be inferred from a set of
marginal distributions. However, as infinitely many joint distributions can be decomposed into a fixed
set of marginal distributions [1, 2, 3], the problem is ill-posed in the absence of additional constraints.
Deep learning-based methods tackle the image-to-image translation task by learning inter-domain
mappings in a paired or unpaired manner. Paired image translation methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] exploit
the inter-domain correspondence by penalizing the per-pixel residual (using l1 or l2 norm) between
the output and corresponding ground-truth sample. Unpaired image translation approaches [1, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14] often use adversarial networks with an additional constraint on the image or feature space
imposing structure on the underlying joint distribution of the images from the different domains.
Both paired and unpaired image translation approaches often learn a deterministic mapping between
the domains where every pixel in the input domain is mapped to a fixed pixel value in the output
domain. However, such a deterministic formulation can lead to mode collapse while at the same time
not being able to quantify the model predictive uncertainty important for critical applications, e.g.,
medical image analysis. It is desirable to test the performance of the model on unseen perturbed input
at test-time, to improve their applicability in the real world. While robustness to outliers is a focus in
some domains [15, 16, 17, 18], it has not attracted as much attention in unpaired translation.
To address these limitations, we propose an unpaired (unsupervised) probabilistic image-to-image
translation method trained without inter-domain correspondence in an end-to-end manner. The
probabilistic nature of this method provides uncertainty estimates for the predictions. Moreover,
modelling the residuals between the predictions and the ground-truth with heavy-tailed distributions
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

