Shared Independent Component Analysis for
Multi-Subject Neuroimaging

Hugo Richard
Inria
Université Paris-Saclay
Palaiseau, France

Pierre Ablin
DMA
CNRS and ENS
Paris, France

Bertrand Thirion
Inria
Université Paris-Saclay
Palaiseau, France

Alexandre Gramfort
Inria
Université Paris-Saclay
Palaiseau, France

Aapo Hyvärinen
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland

Abstract
We consider shared response modeling, a multi-view learning problem where
one wants to identify common components from multiple datasets or views. We
introduce Shared Independent Component Analysis (ShICA) that models each
view as a linear transform of shared independent components contaminated by
additive Gaussian noise. We show that this model is identifiable if the components
are either non-Gaussian or have enough diversity in noise variances. We then show
that in some cases multi-set canonical correlation analysis can recover the correct
unmixing matrices, but that even a small amount of sampling noise makes Multiset
CCA fail. To solve this problem, we propose to use joint diagonalization after
Multiset CCA, leading to a new approach called ShICA-J. We show via simulations
that ShICA-J leads to improved results while being very fast to fit. While ShICA-J
is based on second-order statistics, we further propose to leverage non-Gaussianity
of the components using a maximum-likelihood method, ShICA-ML, that is both
more accurate and more costly. Further, ShICA comes with a principled method
for shared components estimation. Finally, we provide empirical evidence on fMRI
and MEG datasets that ShICA yields more accurate estimation of the components
than alternatives.

1

Introduction

In many data science problems, data are available through different views. Generally, the views
represent different measurement modalities such as audio and video, or the same text that may be
available in different languages. Our main interest here is neuroimaging where recordings are made
from multiple subjects. In particular, it is of interest to find common patterns or responses that are
shared between subjects when they receive the same stimulation or perform the same cognitive task
[16, 51].
A popular line of work to perform such shared response modeling is group Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) methods. The fastest methods [14, 58] are among the most popular, yet they are not
grounded on principled probabilistic models for the multiview setting. More principled approaches
exist [51, 27], but they do not model subject-specific deviations from the shared response. However,
such deviations are expected in most neuroimaging settings, as the magnitude of the response may
differ from subject to subject [46], as may any noise due to heartbeats, respiratory artefacts or head
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

