Improving Contrastive Learning on Imbalanced Seed
Data via Open-World Sampling

1

Ziyu Jiang1 , Tianlong Chen2 , Ting Chen3 , Zhangyang Wang2
Texas A&M University, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 Google Research, Brain Team

jiangziyu@tamu.edu, {tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu, iamtingchen@google.com

Abstract
Contrastive learning approaches have achieved great success in learning visual
representations with few labels of the target classes. That implies a tantalizing
possibility of scaling them up beyond a curated “seed" benchmark, to incorporating
more unlabeled images from the internet-scale external sources to enhance its
performance. However, in practice, larger amount of unlabeled data will require
more computing resources due to the bigger model size and longer training needed.
Moreover, open-world unlabeled data usually follows an implicit long-tail class
or attribute distribution, many of which also do not belong to the target classes.
Blindly leveraging all unlabeled data hence can lead to the data imbalance as well
as distraction issues. This motivates us to seek a principled approach to strategically select unlabeled data from an external source, in order to learn generalizable,
balanced and diverse representations for relevant classes. In this work, we present
an open-world unlabeled data sampling framework called Model-Aware K-center
(MAK), which follows three simple principles: (1) tailness, which encourages
sampling of examples from tail classes, by sorting the empirical contrastive loss
expectation (ECLE) of samples over random data augmentations; (2) proximity,
which rejects the out-of-distribution outliers that may distract training; and (3)
diversity, which ensures diversity in the set of sampled examples. Empirically,
using ImageNet-100-LT (without labels) as the seed dataset and two “noisy” external data sources, we demonstrate that MAK can consistently improve both the
overall representation quality and the class balancedness of the learned features, as
evaluated via linear classifier evaluation on full-shot and few-shot settings. The
code is available at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/MAK.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning has been successfully applied to learning strong visual representations in an
unsupervised manner [1–5]. The promise of label-free learning makes it appealing to scale up
contrastive learning with massive unannotated data, e.g., from internet-scale sources [6]. However,
training with a larger amount of unlabeled data is not cheap. As shown in [1, 2], contrastive learning
needs a bigger model and longer training compared to supervised counterparts. With a larger amount
of data, it also requires more compute resources (for bigger model and longer training). With a
limited computing budget, it is likely that the out-of-distribution data in the wild would suppress the
learning of relevant features.
Moreover, different from standard benchmarks that are carefully curated and well balanced across
classes (e.g., ImageNet), the data distribution in the open world are extremely diverse and always
exhibits long tails [7, 8]. A few very recent works [9–11] have studied whether contrastive learning
can still generalize well in those long-tail scenarios. And they found that while contrastive learning
learns more balanced feature space than its supervised counterpart , it still exhibits certain vulnerability
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

