The effectiveness of feature attribution methods and
its correlation with automatic evaluation scores
Giang Nguyen∗
Auburn University
nguyengiangbkhn@gmail.com

Daeyoung Kim
KAIST
kimd@kaist.ac.kr

Anh Nguyen∗
Auburn University
anh.ng8@gmail.com

Abstract
Explaining the decisions of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) model is increasingly
critical in many real-world, high-stake applications. Hundreds of papers have
either proposed new feature attribution methods, discussed or harnessed these
tools in their work. However, despite humans being the target end-users, most
attribution methods were only evaluated on proxy automatic-evaluation metrics
[60, 78, 80]. In this paper, we conduct the first user study to measure attribution
map effectiveness in assisting humans in ImageNet classification and Stanford
Dogs fine-grained classification, and when an image is natural or adversarial (i.e.
contains adversarial perturbations). Overall, feature attribution is surprisingly not
more effective than showing humans nearest training-set examples. On a harder
task of fine-grained dog categorization, presenting attribution maps to humans
does not help, but instead hurts the performance of human-AI teams compared to
AI alone. Importantly, we found automatic attribution-map evaluation measures
to correlate poorly with the actual human-AI team performance. Our findings
encourage the community to rigorously test their methods on the downstream
human-in-the-loop applications and to rethink the existing evaluation metrics.

1

Introduction

Why did a computer vision system suspect that a person had breast cancer [77], or was an US
capitol rioter [2], or a shoplifter [3]? The explanations for such high-stake predictions made by
existing Artificial Intelligence (AI) agents can impact human lives in various aspects, from social
[22], to scientific [54], and legal [3, 23, 31]. An image classifier’s decisions can be explained via an
attribution map (AM) [13], i.e. a heatmap that highlights the input pixels that are important for or
against a predicted label. AMs can be useful in localizing tumors in x-rays [61], reflecting biases
[41] and memory [56] of image classifiers, or teaching humans to distinguish butterflies [48].
Via AMs, part of the thought process of AIs is now transparent to humans, enabling human-AI
collaboration opportunities. Can machines and humans work together to improve the accuracy of
humans in image classification? This question remains largely unknown although, in other non-image
domains, AMs have been found useful to humans in the downstream tasks [12, 39, 47, 66, 66].
Furthermore, it is also unknown whether any existing automatic evaluation scores may predict such
effectiveness of AMs to humans, the target user of AMs. Most AMs were often only evaluated on
∗

Corresponding authors. Work done when GN was at KAIST.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

