When Are Solutions Connected in Deep Networks?

Quynh Nguyen
MPI-MIS, Germany
quynh.nguyen@mis.mpg.de

Pierre Bréchet
MPI-MIS, Germany
pierre.brechet@mis.mpg.de

Marco Mondelli
IST Austria
marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at

Abstract
The question of how and why the phenomenon of mode connectivity occurs in
training deep neural networks has gained remarkable attention in the research
community. From a theoretical perspective, two possible explanations have been
proposed: (i) the loss function has connected sublevel sets, and (ii) the solutions
found by stochastic gradient descent are dropout stable. While these explanations
provide insights into the phenomenon, their assumptions are not always satisfied in
practice. In particular, the first approach requires the network to have one layer with
order of N neurons (N being the number of training samples), while the second
one requires the loss to be almost invariant after removing half of the neurons at
each layer (up to some rescaling of the remaining ones). In this work, we improve
both conditions by exploiting the quality of the features at every intermediate layer
together with a milder over-parameterization requirement. More specifically, we
show that: (i) under generic assumptions on the features of
√ intermediate layers,
it suffices that the last two hidden layers have order of N neurons, and (ii)
if subsets of features at each layer are linearly separable, then almost no overparameterization is needed to show the connectivity. Our experiments confirm that
the proposed condition ensures the connectivity of solutions found by stochastic
gradient descent, even in settings where the previous requirements do not hold.

1

Introduction

The aim of this work is to provide further theoretical insights into the mode connectivity phenomenon
which has recently attracted some considerable attention from the research community (i.e. training
a neural network via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) from different random initializations often
leads to solutions that could be connected by a path of low loss) [2, 9, 11, 12, 15]. Existing theoretical
insights from optimization landscape analysis suggest that, for over-parameterized networks, the
loss function has connected sublevel sets, and hence the solutions found by SGD are also connected
[32, 37, 43]. However, in order for such a result to hold, the network needs to have one wide layer
with at least N + 1 neurons (N being the number of training samples) [33]. This bound is also
known to be tight for 2-layer networks. Here, we would like to understand the above phenomenon
for deep and mildly over-parameterized networks (i.e. we aim to prove weaker guarantees under
milder conditions). The idea is that, even when the sublevel sets are disconnected, SGD may only
concentrate in a (large) region with connected minima, see e.g. Figure 1. This leads to the question
that whether one can characterize the properties of the solutions found by SGD which capture the
mode connectivity phenomenon, for mildly over-parameterized networks. Along this line, a recent
work [24] proposed the so-called “dropout stability” condition, that is, removing half the neurons
from every hidden layer leads to almost no change in the value of the loss. As shown in the prior
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

