Confidence-Aware Imitation Learning
from Demonstrations with Varying Optimality

Songyuan Zhang1∗ , Zhangjie Cao2∗, Dorsa Sadigh2 , Yanan Sui1
National Engineering Lab for Neuromodulation, SAE, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA
szhang21@mit.edu, {caozj,dorsa}@cs.stanford.edu, ysui@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Most existing imitation learning approaches assume the demonstrations are drawn
from experts who are optimal, but relaxing this assumption enables us to use a
wider range of data. Standard imitation learning may learn a suboptimal policy
from demonstrations with varying optimality. Prior works use confidence scores or
rankings to capture beneficial information from demonstrations with varying optimality, but they suffer from many limitations, e.g., manually annotated confidence
scores or high average optimality of demonstrations. In this paper, we propose
a general framework to learn from demonstrations with varying optimality that
jointly learns the confidence score and a well-performing policy. Our approach,
Confidence-Aware Imitation Learning (CAIL) learns a well-performing policy
from confidence-reweighted demonstrations, while using an outer loss to track the
performance of our model and to learn the confidence. We provide theoretical guarantees on the convergence of CAIL and evaluate its performance in both simulated
and real robot experiments. Our results show that CAIL significantly outperforms
other imitation learning methods from demonstrations with varying optimality. We
further show that even without access to any optimal demonstrations, CAIL can
still learn a successful policy, and outperforms prior work.

1

Introduction

We consider an imitation learning setting that learns a well-performing policy from a mixture of
demonstrations with varying optimality ranging from random trajectories to optimal demonstrations.
As opposed to standard imitation learning, where the demonstrations come from experts and thus
are optimal, this benefits from a larger and more diverse source of data. Note that different from
setting that the demonstrations are optimal but lack some causal factors [31], in our setting, the
demonstrations can be suboptimal. However, this introduces a new set of challenges. First, one
needs to select useful demonstrations beyond the optimal ones. We are interested in settings where
we do not have sufficient expert demonstrations in the mixture so we have to rely on learning from
sub-optimal demonstrations that can still be successful at parts of the task. Second, we need to be
able to filter the negative effects of useless or even malicious demonstrations, e.g., demonstrations
that implicitly fail the tasks.
To address the above challenges, we propose to use a measure of confidence to indicate the likelihood
that a demonstration is optimal. A confidence score can provide a fine-grained characterization of each
demonstration’s optimality. For example, it can differentiate between near-optimal demonstrations or
adversarial ones. By reweighting demonstrations with a confidence score, we can simultaneously learn
from useful but sub-optimal demonstrations while avoiding the negative effects of malicious ones. So
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

