Turing Completeness of Bounded-Precision Recurrent
Neural Networks
Stephen Chung∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
minghaychung@umass.edu

Hava Siegelmann∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
hava@umass.edu

Abstract
Previous works have proved that recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are Turingcomplete. However, in the proofs, the RNNs allow for neurons with unbounded
precision, which is neither practical in implementation nor biologically plausible.
To remove this assumption, we propose a dynamically growing memory module
made of neurons of fixed precision. The memory module dynamically recruits
new neurons when more memories are needed, and releases them when memories
become irrelevant. We prove that a 54-neuron bounded-precision RNN with
growing memory modules can simulate a Universal Turing Machine, with time
complexity linear in the simulated machine’s time and independent of the memory
size. The result is extendable to various other stack-augmented RNNs. Furthermore,
we analyze the Turing completeness of both unbounded-precision and boundedprecision RNNs, revisiting and extending the theoretical foundations of RNNs.

1

Introduction

Symbolic (such as Turing Machines) and sub-symbolic processing (such as adaptive neural networks)
are two competing methods of representing and processing information, each with its own advantages.
An ultimate way to combine symbolic and sub-symbolic capabilities is by enabling the running of
algorithms on a neural substrate, which means a neural network that can simulate a Universal Turing
Machine (UTM). Previous works [1, 2, 3] have shown that this is possible – there exists a recurrent
neural network (RNN) that can simulate a UTM. These proofs assumed a couple of neurons with
unbounded precision that equals the number of symbols used in the Turing tape. Here we provide an
alternative simulation of a UTM by RNNs with bounded-precision neurons only.
The general idea works as follows. The Turing Machine’s tape is stored in a growing memory
module, which is a stack of neurons with pushing and popping operations controlled by neurons
in the RNN. The size of the growing memory module is determined by the usage of the Turing
tape - it dynamically recruits new neurons when more memories are needed and releases them when
memories become irrelevant. The neurons in the stack, except for the top neuron, are not regularly
updated (and hence can be referred to as passive), saving computational cost for memories that are
not in the focus of the computing and do not require change. Using growing memory modules, a
54-neuron bounded-precision RNN is constructed that can simulate any Turing Machine.
Our proposed growing memory modules are inspired by biological memory systems. The process
of dynamically recruiting new neurons when more memories are necessary is also observed in
biological memory systems. Neurogenesis is the process by which new neurons are produced in
the central nervous system; it is most active during early development, but continues through life.
* Both authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

