Neural Relightable Participating Media Rendering

Quan Zheng1,2 , Gurprit Singh1 , Hans-Peter Seidel1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190 Beijing, China
{qzheng, gsingh, hpseidel}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
1

Abstract
Learning neural radiance fields of a scene has recently allowed realistic novel view
synthesis of the scene, but they are limited to synthesize images under the original
fixed lighting condition. Therefore, they are not flexible for the eagerly desired
tasks like relighting, scene editing and scene composition. To tackle this problem,
several recent methods propose to disentangle reflectance and illumination from
the radiance field. These methods can cope with solid objects with opaque surfaces
but participating media are neglected. Also, they take into account only direct
illumination or at most one-bounce indirect illumination, thus suffer from energy
loss due to ignoring the high-order indirect illumination. We propose to learn
neural representations for participating media with a complete simulation of global
illumination. We estimate direct illumination via ray tracing and compute indirect
illumination with spherical harmonics. Our approach avoids computing the lengthy
indirect bounces and does not suffer from energy loss. Our experiments on multiple
scenes show that our approach achieves superior visual quality and numerical
performance compared to state-of-the-art methods, and it can generalize to deal
with solid objects with opaque surfaces as well.

1

Introduction

From natural phenomenons like fog and cloud to ornaments like jade artworks and wax figures,
participating media objects are pervasive in both real life and virtual content like movies or games.
Inferring the bounding geometry and scattering properties of participating media objects from
observed images is a long-standing problem in both computer vision and graphics. Traditional
methods addressed the problem by exploiting specialized structured lighting patterns [1, 2, 3] or using
discrete representations [4]. These methods, however, require the bounding geometry of participating
media objects to be known.
Learning neural radiance fields or neural scene representations [5, 6, 7] has achieved remarkable
progress in image synthesis. They are able to optimize the representations with the assistance of a
differentiable ray marching process. However, these methods are mostly designed for novel view
synthesis and have baked in materials and lighting into the radiance fields or surface color. Therefore,
they can hardly support downstream tasks such as relighting and scene editing. Recent work [8, 9] has
taken initial steps to disentangle the lighting and materials from radiance. For material, their methods
are primarily designed for solid objects with opaque surfaces, thus they assume an underlying surface
at each point with a normal and a BRDF. The assumed prior, however, does not apply to non-opaque
participating media which has no internal surfaces. For lighting, neural reflectance field [8] simulates
direct illumination from a single point light, whereas NeRV [9] handles direct illumination and
one-bounce indirect illumination. They generally suffer from the energy loss issue due to ignoring
the high-order indirect illumination. However, indirect lighting from multiple scattering plays a
significant role in the final appearance [10] of participating media.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

