Learning to Delegate for Large-scale Vehicle Routing
Sirui Li⇤
MIT
siruil@mit.edu

Zhongxia Yan*
MIT
zxyan@mit.edu
Cathy Wu
MIT
cathywu@mit.edu

Abstract
Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) form a class of combinatorial problems with wide
practical applications. While previous heuristic or learning-based works achieve
decent solutions on small problem instances, their performance deteriorates in
large problems. This article presents a novel learning-augmented local search
framework to solve large-scale VRP. The method iteratively improves the solution
by identifying appropriate subproblems and delegating their improvement to a
black box subsolver. At each step, we leverage spatial locality to consider only
a linear number of subproblems, rather than exponential. We frame subproblem
selection as regression and train a Transformer on a generated training set of
problem instances. Our method accelerates state-of-the-art VRP solvers by 10x to
100x while achieving competitive solution qualities for VRPs with sizes ranging
from 500 to 3000. Learned subproblem selection offers a 1.5x to 2x speedup
over heuristic or random selection. Our results generalize to a variety of VRP
distributions, variants, and solvers.

1

Introduction

Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) have enjoyed ample applications in logistics and ride-hailing
services [23] around the world for decades. While determining the optimal solution to a VRP is
NP-hard [25], there have been numerous attempts to solve VRPs both exactly and approximately:
provable algorithms have been designed for specific problem instances up to size 130 [28], and
powerful heuristic solvers such as LKH-3 [13] and HGS [49, 48] find good solutions in practice for
problems of size more than 1000. However, heuristics methods often suffer from inflexibility due to
extensive hand-crafting and the heavy computational burden from lengthy iterative procedures, as in
the case of LKH-3. For example, LKH-3 takes more than an hour to solve a size 2000 CVRP instance
(Table 1), which is impractical for applications such as large-scale courier or municipal services.
More recently, machine learning methods inspired by the Pointer Network [50] provide alternatives
to traditional solvers: the learning-based methods greatly reduce computation time while maintaining
decent solution quality on small problem instances (less than 100 cities), by training on diverse sets
of problem distributions either via supervised [50] or reinforcement learning [29, 20]. However, these
methods remain difficult to scale, and few report results on problems of size more than 200.
Our work aims to address scalability by learning to identify smaller subproblems which can be readily
solved by existing methods. Our learned subproblem selector guides the problem-solving process
to focus local improvement on promising subregions. While there exists a combinatorial number
⇤

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

