One Loss for All:
Deep Hashing with a Single
Cosine Similarity based Learning Objective
∗

∗

Jiun Tian Hoe1
Kam Woh Ng2,3
†
Chee Seng Chan1
Yi-Zhe Song2,3

Tianyu Zhang4
Tao Xiang2,3

1

CISiP, Universiti Malaya, Malaysia
CVSSP, University of Surrey, U.K.
3
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence
4
Geek+, China
2

Abstract
A deep hashing model typically has two main learning objectives: to make the
learned binary hash codes discriminative and to minimize a quantization error.
With further constraints such as bit balance and code orthogonality, it is not uncommon for existing models to employ a large number (>4) of losses. This leads to
difficulties in model training and subsequently impedes their effectiveness. In this
work, we propose a novel deep hashing model with only a single learning objective.
Specifically, we show that maximizing the cosine similarity between the continuous
codes and their corresponding binary orthogonal codes can ensure both hash code
discriminativeness and quantization error minimization. Further, with this learning
objective, code balancing can be achieved by simply using a Batch Normalization
(BN) layer and multi-label classification is also straightforward with label smoothing. The result is an one-loss deep hashing model that removes all the hassles of
tuning the weights of various losses. Importantly, extensive experiments show that
our model is highly effective, outperforming the state-of-the-art multi-loss hashing
models on three large-scale instance retrieval benchmarks, often by significant
margins. Code is available at https://github.com/kamwoh/orthohash

1

Introduction

A key building block of a real-world large-scale image retrieval system is hashing. The objective
of image hashing is to represent the content of an image using a binary code for efficient storage
and accurate retrieval. Recently, deep hashing methods [48, 23] have shown great improvements
over conventional hashing methods [46, 15, 16, 22, 36, 37, 19]. Furthermore, deep hashing methods
can be grouped by how the similarity of the learned hashing codes are measured, namely pointwise
[49, 54, 40, 12, 50], pairwise [25, 23, 5, 4], triplet-wise [45, 32], or listwise [52]. Among them,
pointwise methods have a O(N ) computational complexity, whilst the complexity of the others are
of at least O(N 2 ) for N data points. This means that for large-scale problems, only the pointwise
methods are tractable [49]. They are thus the focus of most recent studies.
A deep hashing neural network naturally has multiple learning objectives. Specifically, given an image
input, the network outputs a continuous code (feature vector) which is then converted into a binary
∗
†

equal contribution.
corresponding author (cs.chan@um.edu.my).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

