Compositional Reinforcement Learning
from Logical Specifications

Kishor Jothimurugan
University of Pennsylvania

Suguman Bansal
University of Pennsylvania

Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania

Rajeev Alur
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
We study the problem of learning control policies for complex tasks given by
logical specifications. Recent approaches automatically generate a reward function
from a given specification and use a suitable reinforcement learning algorithm to
learn a policy that maximizes the expected reward. These approaches, however,
scale poorly to complex tasks that require high-level planning. In this work, we
develop a compositional learning approach, called D I RL, that interleaves highlevel planning and reinforcement learning. First, D I RL encodes the specification
as an abstract graph; intuitively, vertices and edges of the graph correspond to
regions of the state space and simpler sub-tasks, respectively. Our approach then
incorporates reinforcement learning to learn neural network policies for each edge
(sub-task) within a Dijkstra-style planning algorithm to compute a high-level plan
in the graph. An evaluation of the proposed approach on a set of challenging
control benchmarks with continuous state and action spaces demonstrates that it
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to automatically learning control policies for
continuous control tasks—e.g., for challenging tasks such as walking [11] and grasping [6], control
of multi-agent systems [31, 22], and control from visual inputs [28]. A key challenge facing RL is
the difficulty in specifying the goal. Typically, RL algorithms require the user to provide a reward
function that encodes the desired task. However, for complex, long-horizon tasks, providing a suitable
reward function can be a daunting task, requiring the user to manually compose rewards for individual
subtasks. Poor reward functions can make it hard for the RL algorithm to achieve the goal; e.g., it can
result in reward hacking [3], where the agent learns to optimize rewards without achieving the goal.
Recent work has proposed a number of high-level languages for specifying RL tasks [5, 29, 24, 34, 19].
A key feature of these approaches is that they enable the user to specify tasks compositionally—i.e.,
the user can independently specify a set of short-term subgoals, and then ask the robot to perform a
complex task that involves achieving some of these subgoals. Existing approaches for learning from
high-level specifications typically generate a reward function, which is then used by an off-the-shelf
RL algorithm to learn a policy. Recent works based on Reward Machines [19, 35] have proposed
RL algorithms that exploit the structure of the specification to improve learning. However, these
algorithms are based on model-free RL at both the high- and low-levels instead of model-based
RL. Model-free RL has been shown to outperform model-based approaches on low-level control
tasks [10]; however, at the high-level, it is unable to exploit the large amount of available structure.
Thus, these approaches scale poorly to long horizon tasks involving complex decision making.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

