Higher Order Kernel Mean Embeddings to Capture
Filtrations of Stochastic Processes
Cristopher Salvi 1
cristopher.salvi@maths.ox.ac.uk

Maud Lemercier 2
maud.lemercier@warwick.ac.uk

Chong Liu 3
chong.liu@maths.ox.ac.uk

Blanka Horvath 4
blanka.horvath@kcl.ac.uk

Theodoros Damoulas 2
t.damoulas@warwick.ac.uk

Terry Lyons 1
terry.lyons@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Stochastic processes are random variables with values in some space of paths.
However, reducing a stochastic process to a path-valued random variable ignores
its filtration, i.e. the flow of information carried by the process through time. By
conditioning the process on its filtration, we introduce a family of higher order
kernel mean embeddings (KMEs) that generalizes the notion of KME and captures
additional information related to the filtration. We derive empirical estimators
for the associated higher order maximum mean discrepancies (MMDs) and prove
consistency. We then construct a filtration-sensitive kernel two-sample test able
to pick up information that gets missed by the standard MMD test. In addition,
leveraging our higher order MMDs we construct a family of universal kernels
on stochastic processes that allows to solve real-world calibration and optimal
stopping problems in quantitative finance (such as the pricing of American options)
via classical kernel-based regression methods. Finally, adapting existing tests for
conditional independence to the case of stochastic processes, we design a causaldiscovery algorithm to recover the causal graph of structural dependencies among
interacting bodies solely from observations of their multidimensional trajectories.

1

Introduction

The idea of embedding probability distributions into a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
via kernel mean embeddings (KMEs) has become ubiquitous in many areas of statistics and data
science such as hypothesis testing [1, 2], non-linear regression [3, 4], distribution regression [5, 6]
etc. Despite strong progress in the study of KMEs, most of the examples considered in the literature
tend to focus on random variables supported on some finite (possibly high) dimensional euclidean
spaces like Rd . The study of KMEs for function-valued random variables has been largely ignored.
Stochastic processes are random variables with values in some space of paths. However, reducing a
stochastic process to a path-valued random variable ignores its filtration, which can be informally
thought of as the flow of information carried by the process through time. A question that naturally
1

University of Oxford & The Alan Turing Institute
University of Warwick & The Alan Turing Institute
3
University of Oxford
4
King’s College London, The Alan Turing Institute & Technical University of Munich
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

