Robust Auction Design in the Auto-bidding World
Santiago Balseiro
Columbia University and Google
srb2155@columbia.edu

Yuan Deng
Google
dengyuan@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google
mirrokni@google.com

Jieming Mao
Google
maojm@google.com

Song Zuo
Google
szuo@google.com

Abstract
In classic auction theory, reserve prices are known to be effective for improving
revenue for the auctioneer against quasi-linear utility maximizing bidders. The
introduction of reserve prices, however, usually do not help improve total welfare
of the auctioneer and the bidders. In this paper, we focus on value maximizing
bidders with return on spend constraints—a paradigm that has drawn considerable
attention recently as more advertisers adopt auto-bidding algorithms in advertising
platforms—and show that the introduction of reserve prices has a novel impact
on the market. Namely, by choosing reserve prices appropriately the auctioneer
can improve not only the total revenue but also the total welfare. Our results also
demonstrate that reserve prices are robust to bidder types, i.e., reserve prices work
well for different bidder types, such as value maximizers and utility maximizers,
without using bidder type information. We generalize these results for a variety of
auction mechanisms such as VCG, GSP, and first-price auctions. Moreover, we
show how to combine these results with additive boosts to improve the welfare
of the outcomes of the auction further. Finally, we complement our theoretical
observations with an empirical study confirming the effectiveness of these ideas
using data from online advertising auctions.

1

Introduction

As auto-bidding—the practice of using optimization algorithms to procure advertising slots—is
becoming the prevalent option in online advertising, a growing body of work is revisiting auction
theory from the lens of the auto-bidding world [Aggarwal et al., 2019, Babaioff et al., 2021, Balseiro
et al., 2021a, Deng et al., 2021b, Golrezaei et al., 2021c]. A benefit of auto-bidding is that it simplifies
advertisers’ bidding process by asking advertisers for their high-level goals and then bidding on behalf
of the advertisers.1 The main difference with classic auction theory stems from the model adopted for
agent behavior. Unlike the classic utility maximization model, where each agent aims to maximize
its own quasi-linear utility given by the difference between value and payment, the behavior of an
auto-bidding agent is determined by its underlying optimization algorithm. In particular, the prevalent
adopted model for the behavior of auto-bidding agents is that of value maximization, where each
agent aims to maximize total values subject to an ROS (return on spend) constraint on the average
spend per opportunity. For example, two common auto-bidding strategies are target CPA (cost per
acquisition) and target ROAS (return on ad spend) auto-bidding, in which an algorithm optimizes the
1

See https://support.google.com/google-ads/answer/6268637 and https://www.facebook.com/business/m/onesheeters/value-optimization-with-roas-bidding; and Aggarwal et al. [2019], Balseiro et al. [2021a], Deng et al.
[2021b] for more background introductions.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

