Structured Dropout Variational Inference
for Bayesian Neural Networks

Son Nguyen†,1 Duong Nguyen3 Khai Nguyen1 Khoat Than3,1 Hung Bui∗,1 Nhat Ho∗,2
1

VinAI Research, Viet Nam
University of Texas, Austin
3
Hanoi University of Science and Technology
2

Abstract
Approximate inference in Bayesian deep networks exhibits a dilemma of how
to yield high fidelity posterior approximations while maintaining computational
efficiency and scalability. We tackle this challenge by introducing a novel variational structured approximation inspired by the Bayesian interpretation of Dropout
regularization. Concretely, we focus on the inflexibility of the factorized structure
in Dropout posterior and then propose an improved method called Variational
Structured Dropout (VSD). VSD employs an orthogonal transformation to learn a
structured representation on the variational Gaussian noise with plausible complexity, and consequently induces statistical dependencies in the approximate posterior.
Theoretically, VSD successfully addresses the pathologies of previous Variational
Dropout methods and thus offers a standard Bayesian justification. We further
show that VSD induces an adaptive regularization term with several desirable
properties which contribute to better generalization. Finally, we conduct extensive
experiments on standard benchmarks to demonstrate the effectiveness of VSD over
state-of-the-art variational methods on predictive accuracy, uncertainty estimation,
and out-of-distribution detection.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) [49, 63] offer a probabilistic interpretation for deep learning
models by imposing a prior distribution on the weight parameters and aiming to infer a posterior
distribution instead of only point estimates. By marginalizing over this posterior for prediction,
BNNs perform a procedure of ensemble learning. These principles improve the model generalization,
robustness and allow for uncertainty quantification. However, exactly computing the posterior of
non-linear BNNs is infeasible and approximate inference has been devised. The core challenge is
how to construct an expressive approximation for the true posterior while maintaining computational
efficiency and scalability, especially for modern deep learning architectures.
Variational inference is a popular deterministic approximation approach to deal with this challenge.
The first practical methods were proposed in [22, 8, 39], in which the approximate posteriors
are assumed to be fully factorized distributions, also called mean-field variational inference. In
general, the mean-field approximation family encourages several advantages in inference including
computational tractability and effective optimization with the stochastic gradient-based methods.
However, it ignores the strong statistical dependencies among random weights of neural nets, leading
to the inability to capture the complicated structure of the true posterior and to estimate the true
model uncertainty.
∗

These two authors contributed equally. † Correspondence to Son Nguyen: <v.sonnv27@vinai.io>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

