Scalable Quasi-Bayesian Inference for Instrumental
Variable Regression

1

Ziyu Wang1,* , Yuhao Zhou1,* , Tongzheng Ren2 , Jun Zhu1,‡
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin

{wzy196,yuhaoz.cs}@gmail.com, tongzheng@utexas.edu, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed an upsurge of interest in employing flexible machine
learning models for instrumental variable (IV) regression, but the development of
uncertainty quantification methodology is still lacking. In this work we present a
scalable quasi-Bayesian procedure for IV regression, building upon the recently
developed kernelized IV models. Contrary to Bayesian modeling for IV, our approach does not require additional assumptions on the data generating process,
and leads to a scalable approximate inference algorithm with time cost comparable to the corresponding point estimation methods. Our algorithm can be further
extended to work with neural network models. We analyze the theoretical properties of the proposed quasi-posterior, and demonstrate through empirical evaluation
the competitive performance of our method.

1

Introduction

Instrumental variable (IV) regression is a standard approach for estimating causal effect from confounded observational data. In the presence of confounding, any regression method estimating
E(y | x) cannot recover the causal relation f † between the outcome y and the treatment x, since
the residual u = y − f † (x) is correlated with x due to the unobserved confounders. IV regression
enables identification of the causal effect through the introduction of instruments, variables z that
are known to influence y only through x.
IV regression is widely used in economics [1], epidemiology [2] and clinical research [3], but modeling nonlinear effect in IV regression can be challenging. Recent years have seen great development
in adopting modern machine learning models for IV regression [4–8]. However, there is still a lack
of uncertainty quantification measures for these flexible IV models. Uncertainty quantification is especially important for IV analysis, since unlike in standard supervised learning scenarios, we do not
have (unconfounded) validation data, from which we could deduce the error pattern of the estimated
model. Moreover, the instrument of choice may be weak, meaning that it only provides limited
information for x; in such cases point estimators suffer from high variance [9]. This problem is exacerbated in the nonparametric setting, where IV estimation is usually an ill-posed inverse problem,
where instruments provide vanishing information for the higher-order nonlinear effects [10].
The IV setting brings unique challenges for uncertainty quantification. For example, while it is
natural to consider a Bayesian approach, specification of the likelihood requires knowledge of the
entire data generating process, which is typically unavailable in IV regression. Consequently, most,
if not all, existing work on Bayesian IV [11–15] assumes the following data generating process:
∗
ZW and YZ contribute equally. ‡ JZ is the corresponding author. An extended version is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08750v2.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

