Risk Minimization from Adaptively Collected Data:
Guarantees for Supervised and Policy Learning

Aurélien Bibaut
Netflix
abibaut@netflix.com

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University and Netflix
kallus@cornell.edu

Antoine Chambaz
Université de Paris
antoine.chambaz@u-paris.fr

Maria Dimakopoulou
Netflix
mdimakopoulou@netflix.com

Mark van der Laan
University of California, Berkeley
laan@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is the workhorse of machine learning, whether
for classification and regression or for off-policy policy learning, but its modelagnostic guarantees can fail when we use adaptively collected data, such as the
result of running a contextual bandit algorithm. We study a generic importance
sampling weighted ERM algorithm for using adaptively collected data to minimize
the average of a loss function over a hypothesis class and provide first-of-their-kind
generalization guarantees and fast convergence rates. Our results are based on a
new maximal inequality that carefully leverages the importance sampling structure
to obtain rates with the good dependence on the exploration rate in the data. For
regression, we provide fast rates that leverage the strong convexity of squared-error
loss. For policy learning, we provide regret guarantees that close an open gap
in the existing literature whenever exploration decays to zero, as is the case for
bandit-collected data. An empirical investigation validates our theory.

1

Introduction

Adaptive experiments, wherein intervention policies are continually updated as in the case of contextual bandit algorithms, offer benefits in learning efficiency and better outcomes for participants in the
experiment. They also make the collected data dependent and complicate standard machine learning
approaches for model-agnostic risk minimization, such as empirical risk minimization (ERM). Given
a loss function and a hypothesis class, ERM seeks the hypothesis that minimizes the sample average
loss. This can be used for regression, classification, and even off-policy policy optimization. An
extensive literature has shown that, for independent data, ERM enjoys model-agnostic, best-in-class
risk guarantees and even fast rates under certain convexity and/or margin assumptions [e.g. 5, 6, 35,
among others]. However, these guarantees fail under contextual-bandit-collected data, both because
of covariate shift due to using a context-dependent logging policy and because of the policy’s dataadaptive evolution as more data are collected. A straightforward and popular approach to deal with
the covariate shift is importance sampling (IS) weighting, whereby we weight samples by the inverse
of the policy’s probability of choosing the observed action. Unfortunately, applying standard maximal
inequalities for sequentially dependent data to study guarantees of this leads to poor dependence on
these weights, and therefore incorrect rates whenever exploration is decaying and the weights diverge
to infinity, as happens when collecting data using a contextual bandit algorithm.
In this paper, we provide a thorough theoretical analysis of IS weighted ERM (ISWERM; pronounced
“ice worm”) that yields the correct rates on the convergence of excess risk under decaying exploration.
To achieve this, we present a novel localized maximal inequality for IS weighted sequential empirical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

