Stochastic Anderson Mixing for Nonconvex
Stochastic Optimization

Fuchao Wei1 , Chenglong Bao3,4∗ , Yang Liu1,2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
3
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University
4
Yanqi Lake Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications
1

Abstract
Anderson mixing (AM) is an acceleration method for fixed-point iterations. Despite
its success and wide usage in scientific computing, the convergence theory of AM
remains unclear, and its applications to machine learning problems are not well explored. In this paper, by introducing damped projection and adaptive regularization
to the classical AM, we propose a Stochastic Anderson Mixing (SAM) scheme to
solve nonconvex stochastic optimization problems. Under mild assumptions, we
establish the convergence theory of SAM, including the almost sure convergence to
stationary points and the worst-case iteration complexity. Moreover, the complexity
bound can be improved when randomly choosing an iterate as the output. To further
accelerate the convergence, we incorporate a variance reduction technique into the
proposed SAM. We also propose a preconditioned mixing strategy for SAM which
can empirically achieve faster convergence or better generalization ability. Finally,
we apply the SAM method to train various neural networks including the vanilla
CNN, ResNets, WideResNet, ResNeXt, DenseNet and LSTM. Experimental results
on image classification and language model demonstrate the advantages of our
method.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization is important in various areas such as statistics [15], machine learning [4, 54]
and power systems [25]. In this paper, we consider the following stochastic optimization problem:
min f (x) = Eξ [F (x; ξ)] ,

x∈Rd

(1)

where F : Rd × Ξ → R is continuously differentiable and possibly nonconvex and the random
variable ξ ∈ Ξ may follow an unknown probability distribution. It is assumed that only noisy
information about the gradient of f is available through calls to some stochastic first-order oracle
(SFO). One special case of (1) is the empirical risk minimization problem:
T

1X
min f (x) =
fξ (x),
T i=1 i
x∈Rd
def

(2)

where fξi : Rd → R is the loss function corresponding to the i-th data sample and T denotes the
number of data samples. T can be extremely large such that it prohibits the computation of the full
gradient ∇f . Thus designing efficient and effective numerical algorithms for solving problem (1) or
(2) with rigorous theoretical analysis is a challenging task.
∗

Corresponding author. clbao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

