Can fMRI reveal the representation of syntactic
structure in the brain?
Leila Wehbe
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
lwehbe@cmu.edu

Aniketh Janardhan Reddy
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
ajreddy@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
While studying semantics in the brain, neuroscientists use two approaches. One is
to identify areas that are correlated with semantic processing load. Another is to
find areas that are predicted by the semantic representation of the stimulus words.
However, most studies of syntax have focused only on identifying areas correlated
with syntactic processing load. One possible reason for this discrepancy is that
representing syntactic structure in an embedding space such that it can be used
to model brain activity is a non-trivial computational problem. Another possible
reason is that it is unclear if the low signal-to-noise ratio of neuroimaging tools
such as functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) can allow us to reveal
the correlates of complex (and perhaps subtle) syntactic representations. In this
study, we propose novel multi-dimensional features that encode information about
the syntactic structure of sentences. Using these features and fMRI recordings of
participants reading a natural text, we model the brain representation of syntax.
First, we find that our syntactic structure-based features explain additional variance
in the brain activity of various parts of the language system, even after controlling
for complexity metrics that capture processing load. At the same time, we see that
regions well-predicted by syntactic features are distributed in the language system
and are not distinguishable from those processing semantics. Our code and data
will be available at https://github.com/anikethjr/brain_syntactic_representations.

1

Introduction

Neuroscientists have long been interested in how the brain processes syntax. To date, there is no
consensus on which brain regions are involved in processing it. Classically, only a small number of
regions in the left hemisphere were thought to be involved in language processing. More recently, the
language system was proposed to involve a set of brain regions spanning the left and right hemisphere
[1]. Similarly, some findings show that syntax is constrained to specific brain regions [2, 3], while
other findings show syntax is distributed throughout the language system [4–6].
The biological basis of syntax was first explored through studies of the impact of brain lesions on
language comprehension or production [7] and later through non-invasive neuroimaging experiments
that record brain activity while subjects perform language tasks, using methods such as functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) or electroencephalography (EEG). These experiments usually
isolate syntactic processing by contrasting the activity between a difficult syntactic condition and an
easier one and by identifying regions that increase in activity with syntactic effort [3]. An example
of these conditions is reading a sentence with an object-relative clause (e.g. “The rat that the cat
chased was tired"), which is more taxing than reading a sentence with a subject-relative clause
(e.g. “The cat that chased the rat was tired"). In the past decade, this approach was extended to
study syntactic processing in naturalistic settings such as when reading or listening to a story [8–11].
Because such complex material is not organized into conditions, neuroscientists have instead devised
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

