Structured Denoising Diffusion Models in Discrete
State-Spaces
Jacob Austin⇤, Daniel D. Johnson⇤, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow & Rianne van den Berg†
Google Research, Brain Team
{jaaustin,ddjohnson,jonathanho,dtarlow,riannevdberg}@google.com

Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [17] have shown impressive
results on image and waveform generation in continuous state spaces. Here, we
introduce Discrete Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (D3PMs), diffusionlike generative models for discrete data that generalize the multinomial diffusion
model of Hoogeboom et al. [18], by going beyond corruption processes with uniform transition probabilities. This includes corruption with transition matrices that
mimic Gaussian kernels in continuous space, matrices based on nearest neighbors
in embedding space, and matrices that introduce absorbing states. The third allows us to draw a connection between diffusion models and autoregressive and
mask-based generative models. We show that the choice of transition matrix is an
important design decision that leads to improved results in image and text domains.
We also introduce a new loss function that combines the variational lower bound
with an auxiliary cross entropy loss. For text, this model class achieves strong
results on character-level text generation while scaling to large vocabularies on
LM1B. On the image dataset CIFAR-10, our models approach the sample quality
and exceed the log-likelihood of the continuous-space DDPM model.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling is a core problem in machine learning, useful both for benchmarking our ability
to capture statistics of natural datasets and for downstream applications that require generating
high-dimensional data like images, text, and speech waveforms. There has been a great deal of
progress with the development of methods like GANs [14, 3], VAEs [22, 32], large autoregressive
neural network models [43, 42, 44], normalizing flows [31, 11, 21, 30], and others, each with their
own tradeoffs in terms of sample quality, sampling speed, log-likelihoods, and training stability.
Recently, diffusion models [36] have emerged as a compelling alternative for image [17, 39] and audio [7, 23] generation, achieving comparable sample quality to GANs and log-likelihoods comparable
to autoregressive models with fewer inference steps. A diffusion model is a parameterized Markov
chain trained to reverse a predefined forward process, which is a stochastic process constructed to
gradually corrupt training data into pure noise. Diffusion models are trained using a stable objective
closely related to both maximum likelihood and score matching [19, 45], and they admit faster
sampling than autoregressive models by using parallel iterative refinement [28, 38, 40, 37].
Although diffusion models have been proposed in both discrete and continuous state spaces [36],
most recent work has focused on Gaussian diffusion processes that operate in continuous state spaces
(e.g. for real-valued image and waveform data). Diffusion models with discrete state spaces have
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
⇤
†

Equal contributions
Now at Microsoft Research

