Non-approximate Inference
for Collective Graphical Models on Path Graphs
via Discrete Difference of Convex Algorithm

Yasunori Akagi
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
yasunori.akagi.cu@hco.ntt.co.jp

Naoki Marumo
NTT Communication Science Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
naoki.marumo.ec@hco.ntt.co.jp

Hideaki Kim
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
hideaki.kin.cn@hco.ntt.co.jp

Takeshi Kurashima
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
takeshi.kurashima.uf@hco.ntt.co.jp

Hiroyuki Toda
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
hiroyuki.toda.xb@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
The importance of aggregated count data, which is calculated from the data of
multiple individuals, continues to increase. Collective Graphical Model (CGM)
is a probabilistic approach to the analysis of aggregated data. One of the most
important operations in CGM is maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference of unobserved variables under given observations. Because the MAP inference problem
for general CGMs has been shown to be NP-hard, an approach that solves an
approximate problem has been proposed. However, this approach has two major
drawbacks. First, the quality of the solution deteriorates when the values in the
count tables are small, because the approximation becomes inaccurate. Second,
since continuous relaxation is applied, the integrality constraints of the output are
violated. To resolve these problems, this paper proposes a new method for MAP
inference for CGMs on path graphs. Our method is based on the Difference of
Convex Algorithm (DCA), which is a general methodology to minimize a function
represented as the sum of a convex function and a concave function. In our algorithm, important subroutines in DCA can be efficiently calculated by minimum
convex cost flow algorithms. Experiments show that the proposed method outputs
higher quality solutions than the conventional approach.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the importance of aggregated count data, which is calculated from the data of multiple
individuals, has been increasing [21, 27]. Although technologies for acquiring individual data such
as sensors and GPS have greatly advanced, it is still very difficult to handle individual data due to
privacy concerns and the difficulty of tracking individuals. However, there are many situations where
data aggregated from multiple individuals can be obtained and utilized easily. For example, Mobile
Spatial Statistics [22], which is the hourly population data of fixed-size square grids calculated from
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

