Identification and Estimation of Joint
Probabilities of Potential Outcomes in
Observational Studies with Covariate
Information
Ryusei Shingaki
Manabu Kuroki
Graduate School of Engineering Science, Yokohama National University
shingaki-ryusei-kw@ynu.jp kuroki-manabu-zm@ynu.ac.jp

Abstract
The joint probabilities of potential outcomes are fundamental components of
causal inference in the sense that (i) if they are identifiable, then the causal
risk is also identifiable, but not vise versa (Pearl, 2009; Tian and Pearl, 2000)
and (ii) they enable us to evaluate the probabilistic aspects of “necessity”,
“sufficiency”, and “necessity and sufficiency”, which are important concepts
of successful explanation (Watson, et al., 2020). However, because they are
not identifiable without any assumptions, various assumptions have been
utilized to evaluate the joint probabilities of potential outcomes, e.g., the
assumption of monotonicity (Pearl, 2009; Tian and Pearl, 2000), the independence between potential outcomes (Robins and Richardson, 2011), the
condition of gain equality (Li and Pearl, 2019), and the specific functional
relationships between cause and effect (Pearl, 2009). Unlike existing identification conditions, in order to evaluate the joint probabilities of potential
outcomes without such assumptions, this paper proposes two types of novel
identification conditions using covariate information. In addition, when
the joint probabilities of potential outcomes are identifiable through the
proposed conditions, the estimation problem of the joint probabilities of
potential outcomes reduces to that of singular models and thus they can
not be evaluated by standard statistical estimation methods. To solve the
problem, this paper proposes a new statistical estimation method based on
the augmented Lagrangian method and shows the asymptotic normality of
the proposed estimators. Given space constraints, the proofs, the details
on the statistical estimation method, some numerical experiments, and the
case study are provided in the supplementary material.

1

Introduction

1.1

Practical Background

In practical science, it is crucial to evaluate the likelihood of one event causing another event.
For example, epidemiologists pay attention to determining the likelihood of a particular
exposure being the cause of a particular disease. In order to assess such likelihood from
statistical data, the probabilities of causation have been developed, which can be divided
into “necessary causation”, “sufficient causation”, and “necessary-and-sufficient causation”.
In addition, recently, in the field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), it has been
pointed out that “necessity”, “sufficiency”, and “necessity and suffciency” are the important
concepts of successful explanation and the probabilities of causation play an important role
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

