Variance-Aware Off-Policy Evaluation with Linear
Function Approximation

Yifei Min∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
CT 06511
yifei.min@yale.edu

Tianhao Wang∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
CT 06511
tianhao.wang@yale.edu

Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem in reinforcement learning with
linear function approximation, which aims to estimate the value function of a target
policy based on the offline data collected by a behavior policy. We propose to
incorporate the variance information of the value function to improve the sample
efficiency of OPE. More specifically, for time-inhomogeneous episodic linear
Markov decision processes (MDPs), we propose an algorithm, VA-OPE, which
uses the estimated variance of the value function to reweight the Bellman residual
in Fitted Q-Iteration. We show that our algorithm achieves a tighter error bound
than the best-known result. We also provide a fine-grained characterization of
the distribution shift between the behavior policy and the target policy. Extensive
numerical experiments corroborate our theory.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been a hot spot in both theory and practice in the past decade. Many
efficient algorithms have been proposed and theoretically analyzed for finding the optimal policy
adopted by an agent to maximize the long-term cumulative rewards. In contrast to online RL where
the agent actively interacts with the environment, offline RL (a.k.a., batch RL) [25, 24] aims to extract
information from past data and use this information to learn the optimal policy. There has been much
empirical success of offline RL in various application domains [4, 6, 37, 40, 36].
Among various tasks of offline RL, an important task is called off-policy evaluation (OPE), which
evaluates the performance of a target policy π given offline data generated by a behavior policy π̄.
Most existing theoretical works on OPE are in the setting of tabular MDPs [34, 26, 11, 16, 45, 47–49],
where the state space S and the action space A are both finite. However, real-world applications
often have high-dimensional or even infinite-dimensional state and action spaces, where function
approximation is required for computational tractability and generalization. While provably efficient
online RL with linear function approximation has been widely studied recently [46, 17, 50, 15, 3, 54],
little work has been done for analyzing OPE with linear function approximation, with one notable
exception by Duan et al. [10]. More specifically, Duan et al. [10] analyzed a regression-based
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

