Probabilistic Margins for Instance Reweighting
in Adversarial Training

Qizhou Wang1,∗ , Feng Liu2,∗ , Bo Han1,† , Tongliang Liu3 , Chen Gong4,5 ,
Gang Niu6 , Mingyuan Zhou7 , Masashi Sugiyama6,8
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
DeSI Lab, Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
3
TML Lab, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
4
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of MoE
5
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
6
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)
7
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
8
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo
{csqzwang, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, feng.liu@uts.edu.au,
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, chen.gong@njust.edu.cn, gang.niu.ml@gmail.com
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Reweighting adversarial data during training has been recently shown to improve
adversarial robustness, where data closer to the current decision boundaries are
regarded as more critical and given larger weights. However, existing methods
measuring the closeness are not very reliable: they are discrete and can take only a
few values, and they are path-dependent, i.e., they may change given the same start
and end points with different attack paths. In this paper, we propose three types
of probabilistic margin (PM), which are continuous and path-independent, for
measuring the aforementioned closeness and reweighting adversarial data. Specifically, a PM is defined as the difference between two estimated class-posterior
probabilities, e.g., such a probability of the true label minus the probability of
the most confusing label given some natural data. Though different PMs capture
different geometric properties, all three PMs share a negative correlation with the
vulnerability of data: data with larger/smaller PMs are safer/riskier and should
have smaller/larger weights. Experiments demonstrated that PMs are reliable and
PM-based reweighting methods outperformed state-of-the-art counterparts.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarial examples that are generated by changing natural
inputs with malicious perturbation [17, 20, 37, 39]. Those examples are imperceptible to human eyes
but can fool deep models to make wrong predictions with high confidence [3, 35]. As deep learning
has been deployed in many real-life scenarios and even safety-critical systems [15, 16, 28], it is
crucial to make such deep models reliable and safe [19, 25, 30]. To obtain more reliable deep models,
adversarial training (AT) [2, 10, 29] was proposed as one of the most effective methodologies against
adversary attacks (i.e., maliciously changing natural inputs). Specifically, during training, it simulates
adversarial examples (e.g., via project gradient descent (PGD) [1, 29, 46, 41]) and train a classifier
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

