Rethinking and Reweighting the Univariate Losses for
Multi-Label Ranking: Consistency and Generalization

Guoqiang Wu∗, Chongxuan Li∗ , Kun Xu, Jun Zhu†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
{guoqiangwu90, chongxuanli1991, kunxu.thu}@gmail.com,
dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The (partial) ranking loss is a commonly used evaluation measure for multi-label
classification, which is usually optimized with convex surrogates for computational
efficiency. Prior theoretical efforts on multi-label ranking mainly focus on (Fisher)
consistency analyses. However, there is a gap between existing theory and practice
— some inconsistent pairwise losses can lead to promising performance, while
some consistent univariate losses usually have no clear superiority in practice. To
take a step towards filling up this gap, this paper presents a systematic study from
two complementary perspectives of consistency and generalization error bounds of
learning algorithms. We theoretically find two key factors of the distribution (or
dataset) that affect the learning guarantees of algorithms: the instance-wise class
imbalance and the label size c. Specifically, in an extremely imbalanced case, the
algorithm with the consistent univariate loss has an error √
bound of O(c), while
the one with the inconsistent pairwise loss depends on O( c) as shown in prior
work. This may shed light on the superior performance of pairwise methods in
practice, where real datasets are usually highly imbalanced. Moreover, we present
an inconsistent
√ reweighted univariate loss-based algorithm that enjoys an error
bound of O( c) for promising performance as well as the computational efficiency
of univariate losses. Finally, experimental results confirm our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Multi-Label Classification (MLC) [1] is an important task, in which each instance is associated with
multiple labels simultaneously. It has been widely applied to text categorization [2], bioinformatics [3],
multimedia annotation [4], information retrieval [5]. Various measures [6, 7] have been developed to
evaluate MLC’s performance from diverse aspects owing to its complexity. Among them, the ranking
loss (RL) (or partial ranking loss, PRL) [2, 8] is a commonly used measure in practice (or in theory).
Formally, the RL calculates the fraction of pairs that a positive label does not precede a negative
label according to the rank given by a score function (or predictor). Minimizing such a loss is usually
referred to as Multi-Label Ranking (MLR) [9], which is the consideration in this paper.
Since RL is non-convex and discontinuous, existing methods [6] seek to optimize certain convex
surrogate losses for computational efficiency. These surrogate losses can be divided into two main
categories: pairwise ones [8] and univariate ones [9], which have their own advantages and limitations
in terms of computational costs, theory and empirical performance.
∗
Equal contribution. G. Wu is now at School of Software, Shandong University and C. Li is now at Gaoling
School of AI, Renmin University of China. The work was done when they were at Tsinghua University.
†
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

