Average-Reward Learning and Planning with Options

Yi Wan† , Abhishek Naik† , Richard S. Sutton†‡
{wan6,anaik1,rsutton}@ualberta.ca
†
‡
University of Alberta, Amii
DeepMind
Edmonton, Canada
Edmonton, Canada

Abstract
We extend the options framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning from discounted Markov decision processes (MDPs) to average-reward MDPs.
Our contributions include general convergent off-policy inter-option learning algorithms, intra-option algorithms for learning values and models, as well as samplebased planning variants of our learning algorithms. Our algorithms and convergence proofs extend those recently developed by Wan, Naik, and Sutton. We
also extend the notion of option-interrupting behavior from the discounted to the
average-reward formulation. We show the efficacy of the proposed algorithms with
experiments on a continuing version of the Four-Room domain.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a formalism of trial-and-error learning in which an agent interacts
with an environment to learn a behavioral strategy that maximizes a notion of reward. In many
problems of interest, a learning agent may need to predict the consequences of its actions over
multiple levels of temporal abstraction. The options framework provides a way for defining courses
of actions over extended time scales, and for learning, planning, and representing knowledge with
them (Sutton, Precup, & Singh 1999, Sutton & Barto 2018). The options framework was originally
proposed within the discounted formulation of RL in which the agent tries to maximize the expected
discounted return from each state. We extend the options framework from the discounted formulation
to the average-reward formulation in which the goal is to find a policy that maximizes the rate of
reward.
The average-reward formulation is of interest because, once genuine function approximation is
introduced, there is no longer a well-defined discounted formulation of the continuing RL problem
(see Sutton & Barto 2018, Section 10.4; Naik et al. 2019). If we want to take advantage of options
in acting, learning, and planning in the continuing (non-episodic) RL setting, then we must extend
options to the average-reward formulation.
Given a Markov decision process (MDP) and a fixed set of options, learning and planning algorithms
can be divided into two classes. The first class consists of inter-option algorithms, which enable an
agent to learn or plan with options instead of primitive actions. Given an option, the learning and
planning updates for this option in these algorithms occur only after the option’s actual or simulated
execution. Algorithms in this class are also called semi-MDP (SMDP) algorithms because given
an MDP, the decision process that selects among a set of options, executing each to termination,
is an SMDP (Sutton et al. 1999). The second class consists of algorithms in which learning or
planning updates occur after each state-action transition within options’ execution — these are called
intra-option algorithms. From a single state-action transition, these algorithms can learn or plan to
improve the values or policies for all options that may generate that transition, and are therefore
potentially more efficient than SMDP algorithms.
Several inter-option (SMDP) learning algorithms have been proposed for the average-reward formulation (see, e.g., Das et al. 1999, Gosavi 2004, Vien & Chung 2008). To the best of our knowledge,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

