Learning Riemannian metric for disease progression
modeling

Samuel Gruffaz
Inria Paris
Ecole normale supérieure Paris-Saclay
samuel.gruffaz@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Pierre-Emmanuel Poulet
Paris Brain Institute
Inria Paris
pierre-emmanuel.poulet@inria.fr

Etienne Maheux
Paris Brain Institute
Inria Paris
etienne.maheux@icm-institute.org

Bruno Jedynak∗
Maseeh Professor of Mathematical Sciences
Fariborz Maseeh Hall, room 464P
Portland, OR 97201
bruno.jedynak@pdx.edu

Stanley Durrleman†
Paris Brain Institute
Inria Paris
Inserm, CNRS, Sorbonne University
stanley.durrleman@inria.fr

for the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative ‡

Abstract
Linear mixed-effect models provide a natural baseline for estimating disease progression using longitudinal data. They provide interpretable models at the cost
of modeling assumptions on the progression profiles and their variability across
subjects. A significant improvement is to embed the data in a Riemannian manifold
and learn patient-specific trajectories distributed around a central geodesic. A
few interpretable parameters characterize subject trajectories at the cost of a prior
choice of the metric, which determines the shape of the trajectories. We extend
this approach by learning the metric from the data allowing more flexibility while
keeping the interpretability. Specifically, we learn the metric as the push-forward
of the Euclidean metric by a diffeomorphism. This diffeomorphism is estimated
iteratively as the composition of radial basis functions belonging to a reproducible
kernel Hilbert space. The metric update allows us to improve the forecasting of
imaging and clinical biomarkers in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. Our results compare favorably to the 56 methods benchmarked
in the TADPOLE challenge.
∗

This work was partially supported by NIH R01AG027161 and R01EY032284.
This research has also received funding from the program "Investissements d’avenir" ANR-10-IAIHU-06.
This work was also funded in part by the French government under management of Agence Nationale de la
Recherche as part of the "Investissements d’avenir" program, reference ANR-19-P3IA-0001 (PRAIRIE 3IA
Institute) and by ANR under the joint programme in neurodegenerative diseases (JPND) ANR-19-JPW2-000
(E-DADS).
‡
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to
the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wpcontent/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

