Differentially Private Stochastic Optimization:
New Results in Convex and Non-Convex Settings

Raef Bassily
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Translational Data Analytics Institute (TDAI)
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Cristóbal Guzmán
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Twente
Inst. for Mathematical and Comput. Eng.
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile
c.guzman@utwente.nl

Michael Menart
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
menart.2@osu.edu

Abstract
We study differentially private stochastic optimization in convex and non-convex
settings. For the convex case, we focus on the family of non-smooth generalized
linear losses (GLLs). Our algorithm for the ℓ2 setting achieves optimal excess
population risk in near-linear time, while the best known differentially private
algorithms for general convex losses run in super-linear time.
algorithm for the
q Our

log d
ℓ1 setting has nearly-optimal excess population risk Õ
nε , and circumvents
the dimension dependent lower bound of [AFKT21] for general non-smooth convex
losses. In the differentially private non-convex setting, we provide several new
algorithms for approximating stationary points of the population risk. For the
ℓ1 -case with smooth losses and polyhedral constraint, we provide the ﬁrst nearly
2/3 
d
dimension independent rate, Õ log
in linear time. For the constrained ℓ2 -case
(nε)1/3

1
d1/5
with smooth losses, we obtain a linear-time algorithm with rate Õ n1/3
+ (nε)
2/5 .
Finally, for the ℓ2 -case we provide the ﬁrst method for non-smooth weakly convex

d1/6
1
+ (nε)
stochastic optimization with rate Õ n1/4
which matches the best existing
1/3
√
non-private algorithm when d = O( n). We also extend all our results above
for the non-convex ℓ2 setting to the ℓp setting, where 1 < p ≤ 2, with only
polylogarithmic (in the dimension) overhead in the rates.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization (SO) is a fundamental and pervasive problem in machine learning, statistics
and operations research. Here, the goal is to minimize the expectation of a loss function (often referred
to as the population risk), given only access to a sample of i.i.d. draws from a distribution. When
such a sample entails privacy concerns, differential privacy (DP) becomes an important algorithmic
desideratum.
Consequently, differentially private stochastic optimization (DP-SO) has been actively investigated
for over a decade. Despite major progress in this area, some crucial problems remain with existing
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

