Test-Time Collective Prediction
Celestine Mendler-Dünner∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
cmendler@tuebingen.mpg.de

Wenshuo Guo
University of California, Berkeley
wguo@cs.berkeley.edu

Stephen Bates
University of California, Berkeley
stephenbates@cs.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
An increasingly common setting in machine learning involves multiple parties,
each with their own data, who want to jointly make predictions on future test
points. Agents wish to benefit from the collective expertise of the full set of
agents to make better predictions than they would individually, but may not be
willing to release labeled data or model parameters. In this work, we explore
a decentralized mechanism to make collective predictions at test time, that is
inspired by the literature in social science on human consensus-making. Building
on a query model to facilitate information exchange among agents, our approach
leverages each agent’s pre-trained model without relying on external validation,
model retraining, or data pooling. A theoretical analysis shows that our approach
recovers inverse mean-squared-error (MSE) weighting in the large-sample limit
which is known to be the optimal way to combine independent, unbiased estimators.
Empirically, we demonstrate that our scheme effectively combines models with
differing quality across the input space: the proposed consensus prediction achieves
significant gains over classical model averaging, and even outperforms weighted
averaging schemes that have access to additional validation data. Finally, we
propose a decentralized Jackknife procedure as a tool to evaluate the sensitivity of
the collective predictions with respect to a single agent’s opinion.

1

Introduction

Large-scale datasets are often collected from diverse sources, by multiple parties, and stored across
different machines. In many scenarios centralized pooling of data is not possible due to privacy
concerns, data ownership, or storage constraints. The challenge of doing machine learning in such
distributed and decentralized settings has motivated research in areas of federated learning [Konečný
et al., 2015, McMahan et al., 2017], distributed learning [Dean et al., 2012, Gupta and Raskar, 2018],
as well as hardware and software design [Zaharia et al., 2016, Moritz et al., 2018].
While the predominant paradigm in distributed machine learning is collaborative learning of one
centralized model, this level of coordination across machines at the training stage is sometimes not
feasible. In this work, we instead aim for collective prediction at test time without posing any specific
requirement at the training stage. Combining the predictions of pre-trained machine learning models
has been considered in statistics and machine learning in the context of ensemble methods, including
bagging [Breiman, 1996a] and stacking [Wolpert, 1992]. In this work, we explore a new perspective
on this aggregation problem and investigate whether insights from the social sciences on how humans
reach a consensus can help us design more effective aggregation schemes that fully take advantage of
∗

most of the work conducted while at UC Berkeley.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

