Transformers Generalize DeepSets and Can be
Extended to Graphs and Hypergraphs

Jinwoo Kim, Saeyoon Oh, Seunghoon Hong
School of Computing, KAIST
{jinwoo-kim, saeyoon17, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a generalization of Transformers to any-order permutation invariant
data (sets, graphs, and hypergraphs). We begin by observing that Transformers
generalize DeepSets, or first-order (set-input) permutation invariant MLPs. Then,
based on recently characterized higher-order invariant MLPs, we extend the concept
of self-attention to higher orders and propose higher-order Transformers for order-k
data (k = 2 for graphs and k > 2 for hypergraphs). Unfortunately, higher-order
Transformers turn out to have prohibitive complexity O(n2k ) to the number of input
nodes n. To address this problem, we present sparse higher-order Transformers that
have quadratic complexity to the number of input hyperedges, and further adopt the
kernel attention approach to reduce the complexity to linear. In particular, we show
that the sparse second-order Transformers with kernel attention are theoretically
more expressive than message passing operations while having an asymptotically
identical complexity. Our models achieve significant performance improvement
over invariant MLPs and message-passing graph neural networks in large-scale
graph regression and set-to-(hyper)graph prediction tasks. Our implementation is
available at https://github.com/jw9730/hot.

1

Introduction

Graph is a universal data modality used to model social networks [28], chemical compounds [10],
biological structures [9], and interactions in particle physics [21, 29]. Recent graph neural networks
(GNNs) adopt a message-passing scheme [39, 37, 32], where the node features are propagated and
aggregated recurrently according to the neighborhood structure given in the input graph. Despite the
simplicity, the local and recurrent nature makes them unable to discover dependency between any two
nodes with a distance longer than the message-passing steps [11]. The locality of message-passing is
also known to be related to the over-smoothing problem that prevents scaling of GNNs [23, 4, 27].
An alternative approach is using a more general set of operations that involve global interactions
while respecting the permutation symmetry of graphs. Such operations either produce the same
output regardless of the node ordering of input graph (permutation invariance), or commute with node
reordering (permutation equivariance). Message-passing is an equivariant operation, but is restricted
to local neighborhoods defined by the input graph. Recently, Maron et. al. (2019) [26] characterized
the full space of invariant and equivariant linear layers. It turned out that these layers span not only
the local neighborhood interactions of message-passing GNNs, but also global interactions such as
the one between disconnected nodes, and even edge-to-node, or node-to-edge interactions (Figure 1).
Notably, their formulation naturally extends to layers with different input & output orders (e.g., edge
in, node out), and higher-order layers for hypergraphs. In theory, an invariant MLP composed of
these layers should be more powerful than message-passing GNNs as they can model long-range
dependency between nodes (Figure 1). However, they are currently not widely adopted due to
relatively low performance and high asymptotic memory complexity.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

