Implicit SVD for Graph Representation Learning

Sami Abu-El-Haija ∗
USC Information Sciences Institute
sami@haija.org

Hesham Mostafa, Marcel Nassar
Intel Labs
{hesham.mostafa,marcel.nassar}@intel.com

Valentino Crespi, Greg Ver Steeg, Aram Galstyan
USC Information Sciences Institute
{vcrespi,gregv,galstyan}@isi.edu

Abstract
Recent improvements in the performance of state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for
Graph Representational Learning (GRL) have come at the cost of significant
computational resource requirements for training, e.g., for calculating gradients
via backprop over many data epochs. Meanwhile, Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) can find closed-form solutions to convex problems, using merely a handful
of epochs. In this paper, we make GRL more computationally tractable for those
with modest hardware. We design a framework that computes SVD of implicitly
defined matrices, and apply this framework to several GRL tasks. For each task,
we derive linear approximation of a SOTA model, where we design (expensiveto-store) matrix M and train the model, in closed-form, via SVD of M, without
calculating entries of M. By converging to a unique point in one step, and without
calculating gradients, our models show competitive empirical test performance
over various graphs such as article citation and biological interaction networks.
More importantly, SVD can initialize a deeper model, that is architected to be nonlinear almost everywhere, though behaves linearly when its parameters reside on a
hyperplane, onto which SVD initializes. The deeper model can then be fine-tuned
within only a few epochs. Overall, our procedure trains hundreds of times faster
than state-of-the-art methods, while competing on empirical test performance. We
open-source our implementation at: https://github.com/samihaija/isvd

1

Introduction

Truncated Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) provides solutions to a variety of mathematical
problems, including computing a matrix rank, its pseudo-inverse, or mapping its rows and columns
onto the orthonormal singular bases for low-rank approximations. Machine Learning (ML) software
frameworks (such as TensorFlow) offer efficient SVD implementations, as SVD can estimate solutions
for a variaty of tasks, e.g., in computer vision [Turk and Pentland, 1991], weather prediction [Molteni
et al., 1996], recommendation [Koren et al., 2009], language [Deerwester et al., 1990, Levy and
Goldberg, 2014], and more-relevantly, graph representation learning (GRL) [Qiu et al., 2018].
SVD’s benefits include training models, without calculating gradients, to arrive at globally-unique
solutions, optimizing Frobenius-norm objectives (§2.3), without requiring hyperparameters for the
learning process, such as the choice of the learning algorithm, step-size, regularization coefficient,
etc. Typically, one constructs a design matrix M, such that, its decomposition provides a solution
to a task of interest. Unfortunately, existing popular ML frameworks [Abadi et al., 2016, Paszke
et al., 2019] cannot calculate the SVD of an arbitrary linear matrix given its computation graph: they
∗

Part of this work was done during internship at Intel Labs.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

