Counterfactual Explanations in
Sequential Decision Making Under Uncertainty

Stratis Tsirtsis
MPI-SWS
stsirtsis@mpi-sws.org

Abir De
IIT Bombay
abir@cse.iitb.ac.in

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez
MPI-SWS
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Methods to find counterfactual explanations have predominantly focused on onestep decision making processes. In this work, we initiate the development of
methods to find counterfactual explanations for decision making processes in
which multiple, dependent actions are taken sequentially over time. We start
by formally characterizing a sequence of actions and states using finite horizon
Markov decision processes and the Gumbel-Max structural causal model. Building
upon this characterization, we formally state the problem of finding counterfactual
explanations for sequential decision making processes. In our problem formulation,
the counterfactual explanation specifies an alternative sequence of actions differing
in at most k actions from the observed sequence that could have led the observed
process realization to a better outcome. Then, we introduce a polynomial time
algorithm based on dynamic programming to build a counterfactual policy that
is guaranteed to always provide the optimal counterfactual explanation on every
possible realization of the counterfactual environment dynamics. We validate our
algorithm using both synthetic and real data from cognitive behavioral therapy and
show that the counterfactual explanations our algorithm finds can provide valuable
insights to enhance sequential decision making under uncertainty.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a rising interest on the potential of machine learning models to assist
and enhance decision making in high-stakes applications such as justice, education and healthcare [1–
3]. In this context, machine learning models and algorithms have been used not only to predict the
outcome of a decision making process from a set of observable features but also to find what would
have to change in (some of) the features for the outcome of a specific process realization to change.
For example, in loan decisions, a bank may use machine learning both to estimate the probability that
a customer repays a loan and to find by how much a customer may need to reduce her credit card
debt to increase the probability of repayment over a given threshold. Here, our focus is on the latter,
which has been often referred to as counterfactual explanations.
The rapidly growing literature on counterfactual explanations has predominantly focused on one-step
decision making processes as the one described above [4–6]. In such settings, the probability that an
outcome occurs is typically estimated using a supervised learning model and finding counterfactual
explanations reduces to a search problem across the space of features and model predictions [7–11].
Moreover, it has been argued that, to obtain counterfactual explanations that are actionable and have
the predicted effect on the outcome, one should favor causal models [12–14]. In this work, our
goal is instead to find counterfactual explanations for decision making processes in which multiple,
dependent actions are taken sequentially over time. In this setting, the (final) outcome of the process
depends on the overall sequence of actions and the counterfactual explanation specifies an alternative
sequence of actions differing in at most k actions from the observed sequence that could have led the
process realization to a better outcome. For example, in medical treatment, assume a physician takes a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

