Continual Learning via Local Module Composition

Oleksiy Ostapenko12 Pau Rodríguez3 Massimo Caccia123 Laurent Charlin145
1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 ServiceNow, 4 HEC Montréal,
5
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Modularity is a compelling solution to continual learning (CL), the problem of
modeling sequences of related tasks. Learning and then composing modules to
solve different tasks provides an abstraction to address the principal challenges of
CL including catastrophic forgetting, backward and forward transfer across tasks,
and sub-linear model growth. We introduce local module composition (LMC),
an approach to modular CL where each module is provided a local structural
component that estimates a module’s relevance to the input. Dynamic module composition is performed layer-wise based on local relevance scores. We demonstrate
that agnosticity to task identities (IDs) arises from (local) structural learning that is
module-specific as opposed to the task- and/or model-specific as in previous works,
making LMC applicable to more CL settings compared to previous works. In addition, LMC also tracks statistics about the input distribution and adds new modules
when outlier samples are detected. In the first set of experiments, LMC performs
favorably compared to existing methods on the recent Continual Transfer-learning
Benchmark without requiring task identities. In another study, we show that the
locality of structural learning allows LMC to interpolate to related but unseen tasks
(OOD), as well as to compose modular networks trained independently on different
task sequences into a third modular network without any fine-tuning. Finally, in
search for limitations of LMC we study it on more challenging sequences of 30
and 100 tasks, demonstrating that local module selection becomes much more
challenging in presence of a large number of candidate modules. In this setting
best performing LMC spawns much fewer modules compared to an oracle based
baseline, however it reaches a lower overall accuracy. The codebase is available
under https://github.com/oleksost/LMC.

1

Introduction

The goal of continual learning (CL) is to learn efficiently from a non-stationary stream of tasks
without (catastrophically) forgetting previous tasks [62]. CL is often modeled as a trade-off between
knowledge retention (stability) and knowledge expansion (plasticity) [26, 64]. Parameter sharing can
provide control over this trade-off. For example, learning a single model shared across tasks results in
better knowledge transfer and faster learning at the expense of forgetting [46, 57]. Conversely, learning
a separate model per task eliminates forgetting but minimizes transfer and data efficiency [2, 41].
Modular learning aims at balancing transfer and forgetting by learning a set of specialized modules
that can be recomposed to solve (new) tasks while only updating a subset of relevant modules or
adding new modules [6, 47, 27]. In principle, a modular learner capable of composing modules in
meaningful structures can provide additional benefits including (i) computational gains due to only
executing modules that are relevant to a task [47, 4]; (ii) memory gains due to instantiating a sub-linear
number of modules w.r.t. the number of tasks; (iii) systematic [8] and out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization [18] through knowledge recombination; and (iv) biological plausibility [91, 90, 96].
corresponding author: oleksiy.ostapenko@t-online.de
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

