Distilling Meta Knowledge on Heterogeneous Graph
for Illicit Drug Trafficker Detection on Social Media

Yiyue Qian1,2 , Yiming Zhang1 , Yanfang Ye1,2∗ , Chuxu Zhang3∗
Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, USA
2
Department of Compute Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Brandeis University, USA
{yiyue.qian, yiming.zhang10, yanfang.ye}@case.edu, chuxuzhang@brandeis.edu

1

Abstract
Driven by the considerable profits, the crime of drug trafficking (a.k.a. illicit
drug trading) has co-evolved with modern technologies, e.g., social media such as
Instagram has become a popular platform for marketing and selling illicit drugs.
The activities of online drug trafficking are nimble and resilient, which call for
novel techniques to effectively detect, disrupt, and dismantle illicit drug trades.
In this paper, we propose a holistic framework named MetaHG to automatically
detect illicit drug traffickers on social media (i.e., Instagram), by tackling the
following two new challenges: (1) different from existing works which merely
focus on analyzing post content, MetaHG is capable of jointly modeling multimodal content and relational structured information on social media for illicit drug
trafficker detection; (2) in addition, through the proposed meta-learning technique,
MetaHG addresses the issue of requiring sufficient data for model training. More
specifically, in our proposed MetaHG, we first build a heterogeneous graph (HG) to
comprehensively characterize the complex ecosystem of drug trafficking on social
media. Then, we employ a relation-based graph convolutional neural network to
learn node (i.e., user) representations over the built HG, in which we introduce
graph structure refinement to compensate the sparse connection among entities in
the HG for more robust node representation learning. Afterwards, we propose a
meta-learning algorithm for model optimization. A self-supervised module and
a knowledge distillation module are further designed to exploit unlabeled data
for improving the model. Extensive experiments based on the real-world data
collected from Instagram demonstrate that the proposed MetaHG outperforms
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

As the market of illicit drugs (e.g., heroin, synthetic opioids such as Fentanyl) is considerably lucrative, the crime of drug trafficking (a.k.a. illicit drug trading) has never stopped but co-evolved with
the advance of modern technologies, e.g., the practice of illicit drug trade has transformed from the
physical world to online platforms. It has been shown that major social media platforms, including
Instagram, Twitter, Snapchat, and Facebook, have become direct-to-consumer marketing mediums
for illicit drug traffickers [25]. As illustrated in Figure 1, due to the convenience and popularity, drug
traffickers can easily create accounts on these platforms to advertise and sell drugs by posting codewords (e.g., street name) and images of drugs that are in stock (shown in Figure 1.(a)); they can also
post their drug sale websites and utilize social media platforms for promotion (shown in Figure 1.(b)).
Buyers can access illicit drugs and trade with vendors easily through these social media platforms.
∗

Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

