Keeping Your Eye on the Ball:
Trajectory Attention in Video Transformers

Mandela Patrick∗
Facebook AI
mandelapatrick@fb.com
Ishan Misra
Facebook AI
imisra@fb.com

Dylan Campbell∗
University of Oxford
dylan@robots.ox.ac.uk
Florian Metze
Facebook AI
fmetze@fb.com

Andrea Vedaldi
Facebook AI
vedaldi@fb.com

Yuki Asano∗
University of Oxford
yuki@robots.ox.ac.uk

Christoph Feichtenhofer
Facebook AI
feichtenhofer@fb.com
João F. Henriques
University of Oxford
joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In video transformers, the time dimension is often treated in the same way as the
two spatial dimensions. However, in a scene where objects or the camera may move,
a physical point imaged at one location in frame t may be entirely unrelated to what
is found at that location in frame t + k. These temporal correspondences should
be modeled to facilitate learning about dynamic scenes. To this end, we propose a
new drop-in block for video transformers—trajectory attention—that aggregates
information along implicitly determined motion paths. We additionally propose a
new method to address the quadratic dependence of computation and memory on
the input size, which is particularly important for high resolution or long videos.
While these ideas are useful in a range of settings, we apply them to the specific task
of video action recognition with a transformer model and obtain state-of-the-art
results on the Kinetics, Something–Something V2, and Epic-Kitchens datasets.
Code and models are available at: https://github.com/facebookresearch/
Motionformer.

1

Introduction

Transformers [75] have become a popular architecture across NLP [32], vision [20] and speech [5].
The self-attention mechanism in the transformer works well for different types of data and across
domains. However, its generic nature and its lack of inductive biases also mean that transformers
typically require extremely large amounts of data for training [56, 9], or aggressive domain-specific
augmentations [71]. This is particularly true for video data, for which transformers are also applicable [50], but where statistical inefficiencies are exacerbated. While videos carry rich temporal
information, they can also contain redundant spatial information from neighboring frames. Vanilla
self-attention applied to videos compares pairs of image patches extracted at all possible spatial
locations and frames. This can lead it to focus on the redundant spatial information rather than the
temporal information, as we show by comparing normalization strategies in our experiments.
We therefore contribute a variant of self-attention, called trajectory attention, which is better able
to characterize the temporal information contained in videos. For the analysis of still images,
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

