CHARTING AND NAVIGATING THE SPACE OF
SOLUTIONS FOR RECURRENT NEURAL
NETWORKS
Elia Turner
Department of Mathematics
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
eliaturner@campus.technion.ac.il

Kabir Dabholkar
Department of Mathematics
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
kabir@campus.technion.ac.il

Omri Barak
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratory
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
omri.barak@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) were successfully used to
model the way neural activity drives task-related behavior in animals, operating under the implicit assumption that the obtained solutions are universal. Observations
in both neuroscience and machine learning challenge this assumption. Animals can
approach a given task with a variety of strategies, and training machine learning
algorithms introduces the phenomenon of underspecification. These observations
imply that every task is associated with a space of solutions. To date, the structure
of this space is not understood, limiting the approach of comparing RNNs with
neural data. Here, we characterize the space of solutions associated with various
tasks. We first study a simple two-neuron network on a task that leads to multiple
solutions. We trace the nature of the final solution back to the network’s initial
connectivity and identify discrete dynamical regimes that underlie this diversity.
We then examine three neuroscience-inspired tasks: Delayed discrimination, Interval discrimination, and Time reproduction. For each task, we find a rich set of
solutions. One layer of variability can be found directly in the neural activity of
the networks. An additional layer is uncovered by testing the trained networks’
ability to extrapolate, as a perturbation to a system often reveals hidden structure.
Furthermore, we relate extrapolation patterns to specific dynamical objects and
effective algorithms found by the networks. We introduce a tool to derive the
reduced dynamics of networks by generating a compact directed graph describing
the essence of the dynamics with regards to behavioral inputs and outputs. Using
this representation, we can partition the solutions to each task into a handful of
types and show that neural features can partially predict them. Taken together,
our results shed light on the concept of the space of solutions and its uses both in
Machine learning and in Neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning operates in an over-parameterized regime, implying that many different
parameter-sets can achieve low error on a given training set (1). This observation implies that
for every task, there exists a space of solutions that can implement it. What are the properties of
such a solution space? Are networks able to learn solutions that capture the intended underlying
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

