Relaxing Local Robustness

Klas Leino
Carnegie Mellon University
kleino@cs.cmu.edu

Matt Fredrikson
Carnegie Mellon University
mfredrik@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Certifiable local robustness, which rigorously precludes small-norm adversarial
examples, has received significant attention as a means of addressing security
concerns in deep learning. However, for some classification problems, local
robustness is not a natural objective, even in the presence of adversaries; for example,
if an image contains two classes of subjects, the correct label for the image may be
considered arbitrary between the two, and thus enforcing strict separation between
them is unnecessary. In this work, we introduce two relaxed safety properties for
classifiers that address this observation: (1) relaxed top-k robustness, which serves
as the analogue of top-k accuracy; and (2) affinity robustness, which specifies which
sets of labels must be separated by a robustness margin, and which can be -close in
`p space. We show how to construct models that can be efficiently certified against
each relaxed robustness property, and trained with very little overhead relative
to standard gradient descent. Finally, we demonstrate experimentally that these
relaxed variants of robustness are well-suited to several significant classification
problems, leading to lower rejection rates and higher certified accuracies than can
be obtained when certifying “standard” local robustness1 .

1

Introduction

The discovery of adversarial examples [9, 24, 28] has led to security concerns in deep learning. A
growing body of work has sought to address this problem by providing provable guarantees that a
model’s predictions are robust to small-norm perturbations [3, 5, 8, 13, 16, 21, 22, 25, 29, 31, 32, 33].
This objective is typically captured by ensuring that a model satisfies point-wise local robustness;
i.e., given a point, x, the model’s predictions must remain invariant over the -ball centered at x. Local
robustness is accompanied by a metric, verified-robust accuracy (VRA), which corresponds to the
fraction of points that are both correctly classified and locally robust.
In some contexts, however, it is not always clear that VRA is the most desirable objective or the most natural metric for measuring a model’s success against adversaries. For example, in some contexts, not all
adversarial examples are equally bad—this may reflect simply that a mistake is understandable, even if
it was caused by an adversary (e.g., if a model mistakenly predicts an image of a leopard to be a jaguar); or
that the correct label may be arbitrary in certain cases (e.g., if an image contains two classes of subjects).
For similar sorts of reasons, some computer vision tasks often use top-k accuracy as a benchmark
metric that relaxes standard accuracy, allowing a prediction to be considered correct so long as the
correct label appears among the model’s k highest logit outputs. In many applications, top-k accuracy
is considered a more suitable metric/objective than standard top-1 accuracy [1]; meanwhile, studied
robustness properties are typically only defined with respect to a single predicted class. Thus, as
part of this work, we introduce an analogous relaxation of local robustness to top-k accuracy, which
we call relaxed top-K (RTK) robustness (Section 3, Definition 3). Moreover, we demonstrate how
1

our code is publicly available at https://github.com/klasleino/gloro

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

