SAPE: Spatially-Adaptive Progressive Encoding
for Neural Optimization

Amir Hertz
Tel Aviv University
amirhertz@mail.tau.ac.il
Raja Giryes
Tel Aviv University
raja@tauex.tau.ac.il

Or Perel
Tel Aviv University
orr.perel@gmail.com

Olga Sorkine-Hornung
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
sorkine@inf.ethz.ch

Daniel Cohen-Or
Tel Aviv University
cohenor@gmail.com

Abstract
Multilayer-perceptrons (MLP) are known to struggle with learning functions of
high-frequencies, and in particular cases with wide frequency bands. We present a
spatially adaptive progressive encoding (SAPE) scheme for input signals of MLP
networks, which enables them to better fit a wide range of frequencies without
sacrificing training stability or requiring any domain specific preprocessing. SAPE
gradually unmasks signal components with increasing frequencies as a function of
time and space. The progressive exposure of frequencies is monitored by a feedback
loop throughout the neural optimization process, allowing changes to propagate at
different rates among local spatial portions of the signal space. We demonstrate the
advantage of SAPE on a variety of domains and applications, including regression
of low dimensional signals and images, representation learning of occupancy
networks, and a geometric task of mesh transfer between 3D shapes.

1

Introduction

Neural implicit functions have recently emerged as a powerful representation paradigm for modeling
complex signals. Their continuous nature sets them apart from typical discrete representations
(i.e. pixels, voxels, meshes), allowing to capture high resolution details in various domains such as
images [41, 43], 3d shapes [31, 6] and radiance fields [30, 32], while retaining a reasonably compact
representation. In this formulation, a deep neural network is trained with the goal of faithfully
mapping input coordinates to a corresponding target domain, effectively learning the representation
of signal properties such as magnitude, color, or shape occupancy.
Implementing implicit neural representations with common neural structures, e.g., multilayer pereceptrons with ReLU activations (ReLU MLPs), proves to be challenging in the presence of signals with
high frequencies. Consequently, recent works have demonstrated that deep implicit networks benefit
from mapping the input coordinates [30, 43], or the intermediate features [41] to positional encodings.
That is, before feeding them into a neural layer, they are first transformed to an overparameterized,
high dimensional space, typically by multiple periodic functions.
Positional encodings1 have been shown to enable highly detailed mappings of signals by MLP
networks. For example, Fourier Feature Networks [43] suggested to map input coordinates of signals
to a high dimensional space using sinusoidal functions. In their work, they show that the frequency
1
In this paper, we use the term “positional encodings” in lower case letters to denote the family of encoding
methods that map coordinates to a higher dimensional space. Not to be confused with the term “Positional
Encoding” coined by [30, 43], which refers to a particular mapping scheme in this family.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

