Learning Large Neighborhood Search Policy for
Integer Programming

Yaoxin Wu
SCALE@NTU Corp Lab
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wuyaoxin@ntu.edu.sg

Wen Song∗
Shandong University
Qingdao, China
wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn

Zhiguang Cao
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology
A*STAR, Singapore
zhiguangcao@outlook.com

Jie Zhang
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a deep reinforcement learning (RL) method to learn large neighborhood
search (LNS) policy for integer programming (IP). The RL policy is trained as the
destroy operator to select a subset of variables at each step, which is reoptimized
by an IP solver as the repair operator. However, the combinatorial number of
variable subsets prevents direct application of typical RL algorithms. To tackle
this challenge, we represent all subsets by factorizing them into binary decisions
on each variable. We then design a neural network to learn policies for each
variable in parallel, trained by a customized actor-critic algorithm. We evaluate the
proposed method on four representative IP problems. Results show that it can find
better solutions than SCIP in much less time, and significantly outperform other
LNS baselines with the same runtime. Moreover, these advantages notably persist
when the policies generalize to larger problems. Further experiments with Gurobi
also reveal that our method can outperform this state-of-the-art commercial solver
within the same time limit.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) have been widely studied in computer science and
operations research, which cover numerous real-world tasks in many fields such as communication,
transportation and manufacturing [1]. Most COPs are very difficult to solve efficiently due to their
NP-hardness. The performance of classic methods, including exact and heuristic algorithms [2], is
generally limited by hand-crafted policies that are costly to design, since considerable trial-and-error
and domain knowledge are needed. On the other hand, it is common in practice that similar instances
with shared structure are frequently solved, and differ only in data that normally follows a distribution
[3]. This provides a chance for machine learning to automatically generate heuristics or policies. In
doing so, the learned alternatives are expected to save massive manual work in algorithm design, and
raise the performance of the algorithm on a class of problems.
Recently, a number of works apply deep (reinforcement) learning to automatically design heuristic
algorithms, either in constructive or improving fashion. Different from construction heuristics that
sequentially extend partial solutions to complete ones [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], learning improvement
heuristics can often deliver high solution quality by iteratively reoptimizing an initial solution using
∗

Wen Song is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

