Inverse Problems Leveraging
Pre-trained Contrastive Representations

Sriram Ravula∗
The University of Texas at Austin
Electrical and Computer Engineering
sriram.ravula@utexas.edu

Georgios Smyrnis∗
The University of Texas at Austin
Electrical and Computer Engineering
gsmyrnis@utexas.edu

Matt Jordan
The University of Texas at Austin
Computer Science
mjordan@cs.utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
Electrical and Computer Engineering
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We study a new family of inverse problems for recovering representations of
corrupted data. We assume access to a pre-trained representation learning network
R(x) that operates on clean images, like CLIP. The problem is to recover the
representation of an image R(x), if we are only given a corrupted version A(x),
for some known forward operator A. We propose a supervised inversion method
that uses a contrastive objective to obtain excellent representations for highly
corrupted images. Using a linear probe on our robust representations, we achieve
a higher accuracy than end-to-end supervised baselines when classifying images
with various types of distortions, including blurring, additive noise, and random
pixel masking. We evaluate on a subset of ImageNet and observe that our method is
robust to varying levels of distortion. Our method outperforms end-to-end baselines
even with a fraction of the labeled data in a wide range of forward operators.

1

Introduction

Modern representation learning networks like CLIP [35] are showing incredible performance for
image classification, even for zero-shot problems with labels not seen during training. Training these
encoders comes at a staggering cost and requires datasets and computing resources only available to
very few organizations. In this paper we show how to leverage this pretrained power for a new family
of problems in the presence of image corruptions or other types of measurements.
Inverse problems involve reconstructing an unknown vector x from measurements y = A(x).
Typically, the forward operator A corrupts the unknown vector x and reduces its dimension, i.e.
the observations y live in a lower-dimensional space compared to x. In the special case of linear
inverse problems, the forward operator is simply a matrix and the measurements are in the form
y = Ax + noise. Special cases of linear inverse problems include image denoising, inpainting,
super-resolution, compressed sensing used in medical tomography, seismic geological imaging and
many others, see e.g. [31] for a recent overview.
∗

Equal contribution.
Code available at https://github.com/Sriram-Ravula/Contrastive-Inversion.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

