How to transfer algorithmic reasoning knowledge to
learn new algorithms?

Louis-Pascal A. C. Xhonneux∗
Université de Montréal
Mila
xhonneul@mila.quebec

Andreea Deac
Université de Montréal
Mila
deacandr@mila.quebec

Petar Veličković
DeepMind, London UK
petarv@google.com

Jian Tang
HEC Montréal
Mila
jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Learning to execute algorithms is a fundamental problem that has been widely
studied. Prior work [1] has shown that to enable systematic generalisation on
graph algorithms it is critical to have access to the intermediate steps of the program/algorithm. In many reasoning tasks, where algorithmic-style reasoning is
important, we only have access to the input and output examples. Thus, inspired
by the success of pre-training on similar tasks or data in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision, we set out to study how we can transfer
algorithmic reasoning knowledge. Specifically, we investigate how we can use
algorithms for which we have access to the execution trace to learn to solve similar
tasks for which we do not. We investigate two major classes of graph algorithms,
parallel algorithms such as breadth-first search and Bellman-Ford and sequential
greedy algorithms such as Prim and Dijkstra. Due to the fundamental differences
between algorithmic reasoning knowledge and feature extractors such as used in
Computer Vision or NLP, we hypothesise that standard transfer techniques will not
be sufficient to achieve systematic generalisation. To investigate this empirically
we create a dataset including 9 algorithms and 3 different graph types. We validate
this empirically and show how instead multi-task learning can be used to achieve
the transfer of algorithmic reasoning knowledge.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning [2] has been responsible for significant successes in multiple areas of machine
learning, including Natural Language Processing (NLP) [3, 4] and Computer Vision (CV) [5]. Pretraining and reusing the learned weights, by freezing them as feature extractors, or fine-tuning from
them as an initialisation, are common approaches to transfer in these domains. This has enabled
successful learning on problems where data is limited in some form.
Algorithmic reasoning on graphs [1, 6] is a fundamental problem that has been studied under the
assumption that we have access to the execution traces of the algorithms we want to learn. In practice,
such as many real world reasoning tasks, this may not be true. Due to the limited data, we look to
transfer learning to enable us to solve algorithmic tasks without intermediate steps. Specifically, we
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

