Mini-Batch Consistent Slot Set Encoder for
Scalable Set Encoding

Andreis Bruno1 , Jeffrey Ryan Willette1 , Juho Lee1,2 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST 1 , South Korea
AITRICS 2 , South Korea
{andries, jwillette, juholee, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Most existing set encoding algorithms operate under the implicit assumption that all
the set elements are accessible, and that there are ample computational and memory
resources to load the set into memory during training and inference. However, both
assumptions fail when the set is excessively large such that it is impossible to load
all set elements into memory, or when data arrives in a stream. To tackle such
practical challenges in large-scale set encoding, the general set-function constraints
of permutation invariance and equivariance are not sufficient. We introduce a
new property termed Mini-Batch Consistency (MBC) that is required for large
scale mini-batch set encoding. Additionally, we present a scalable and efficient
attention-based set encoding mechanism that is amenable to mini-batch processing
of sets, and capable of updating set representations as data arrives. The proposed
method adheres to the required symmetries of invariance and equivariance as well
as maintaining MBC for any partition of the input set. We perform extensive
experiments and show that our method is computationally efficient and results in
rich set encoding representations for set-structured data.

1

Introduction

Recent interest in neural network architectures that operate on sets [14, 6] has garnered momentum
given that many problems in machine learning can be reformulated as learning functions on sets.
Problems such as point cloud classification [13], image reconstruction [3, 4, 7], classification, set
prediction [8], and set extension can all be cast in this framework of learning functions over sets.
Given that sets have no explicit structure on the set elements, such functions are required to conform
to symmetric properties such as permutation invariance or equivariance for consistent processing.
A defining property of many practical functions over sets involves an encoding of the input set to a
vector representation, the set encoding. This set encoding is then used for downstream tasks such as
reconstruction or classification. In DeepSets [14], a sum-decomposable family of functions is derived
for a class of neural network architectures that encode a given set to such a representation. However,
the simplicity of the functions derived in DeepSets makes it ineffective for modeling pairwise
interactions between the elements of the sets. Set Transformers [6] remedy this by using Transformers
[12] to model higher order interactions resulting in rich and expressive set representations.
In all these works, there is an implicit assumption in the experimental setup that the cardinality of the
set is manageable, and that there are ample computational resources available for processing all the
elements during the set encoding process. However in real-world applications such as large scale point
cloud classification and data intensive applications in particle physics, the set size can be extremely
large. In such cases, even if one has access to a set encoding function that is linear w.r.t. the number
of elements in the set, it is still impossible to encode such sets in a single batch since we may not be
able to load the full set into memory. Current encoding methods deal with this issue by sampling
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

