Low-Rank Subspaces in GANs

Jiapeng Zhu1 Ruili Feng2,3 Yujun Shen4 Deli Zhao2
Zheng-Jun Zha3 Jingren Zhou2 Qifeng Chen1∗
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Alibaba Group
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 ByteDance Inc.
{jengzhu0, ruilifengustc, shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com
zhazj@ustc.edu.cn jingren.zhou@alibaba-inc.com cqf@ust.hk

Abstract
The latent space of a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) has been shown
to encode rich semantics within some subspaces. To identify these subspaces,
researchers typically analyze the statistical information from a collection of
synthesized data, and the identified subspaces tend to control image attributes
globally (i.e., manipulating an attribute causes the change of an entire image).
By contrast, this work introduces low-rank subspaces that enable more precise
control of GAN generation. Concretely, given an arbitrary image and a region
of interest (e.g., eyes of face images), we manage to relate the latent space to
the image region with the Jacobian matrix and then use low-rank factorization to
discover steerable latent subspaces. There are three distinguishable strengths of
our approach that can be aptly called LowRankGAN. First, compared to analytic
algorithms in prior work, our low-rank factorization of Jacobians is able to find
the low-dimensional representation of attribute manifold, making image editing
more precise and controllable. Second, low-rank factorization naturally yields a
null space of attributes such that moving the latent code within it only affects the
outer region of interest. Therefore, local image editing can be simply achieved by
projecting an attribute vector into the null space without relying on a spatial mask
as existing methods do. Third, our method can robustly work with a local region
from one image for analysis yet well generalize to other images, making it much
easy to use in practice. Extensive experiments on state-of-the-art GAN models
(including StyleGAN2 and BigGAN) trained on various datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our LowRankGAN1 .

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), which can produce high-fidelity images visually
indistinguishable from real ones [18, 19, 4], have made tremendous progress in many real-world
applications [16, 39, 32, 10, 38, 27, 7, 34]. Some recent studies [12, 26, 17] show that pre-trained
GAN models spontaneously learn rich knowledge in latent spaces such that moving latent codes
towards some certain directions can cause corresponding attribute change in images. In this way, we
are able to control the generation process by identifying semantically meaningful latent subspaces.
For latent semantic discovery, one of the most straightforward ways is to first generate a collection
of image synthesis, then label these images regarding a target attribute, and finally find the latent
separation boundary through supervised training [12, 26, 17]. Prior work [30, 25, 14] has pointed
out that the above pipeline could be limited by the labeling step (e.g., unable to identify semantics
∗
1

denotes the corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/zhujiapeng/LowRankGAN/.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

