Searching the Search Space of Vision Transformer

Minghao Chen1,∗ , Kan Wu2,∗ , Bolin Ni3,∗ , Houwen Peng4,† ,
Bei Liu4 , Jianlong Fu4 , Hongyang Chao2 , Haibin Ling1
1
Stony Brook University, 2 Sun Yat-sen University,
3
Institute of Automation, CAS, 4 Microsoft Research

Abstract
Vision Transformer has shown great visual representation power in substantial
vision tasks such as recognition and detection, and thus been attracting fast-growing
efforts on manually designing more effective architectures. In this paper, we
propose to use neural architecture search to automate this process, by searching
not only the architecture but also the search space. The central idea is to gradually
evolve different search dimensions guided by their E-T Error computed using a
weight-sharing supernet. Moreover, we provide design guidelines of general vision
transformers with extensive analysis according to the space searching process,
which could promote the understanding of vision transformer. Remarkably, the
searched models, named S3 (short for Searching the Search Space), from the
searched space achieve superior performance to recently proposed models, such
as Swin, DeiT and ViT, when evaluated on ImageNet. The effectiveness of S3
is also illustrated on object detection, semantic segmentation and visual question
answering, demonstrating its generality to downstream vision and vision-language
tasks. Code and models will be available at here.

1

Introduction

Vision transformer recently has drawn great attention in computer vision because of its high model
capability and superior potentials in capturing long-range dependencies. Building on top of transformers [41], modern state-of-the-art models, such as ViT [10] and DeiT [40], are able to achieve
competitive performance on image classification and downstream vision tasks [13, 20] compared to
CNN models. There are fast-growing efforts on manually designing more effective architectures to
further unveil the power of vision transformer [27, 53, 15].
Neural architecture search (NAS) as a powerful technique for automating the design of networks has
shown its superiority to manual design [58, 39]. For NAS methods, search space is crucial because it
determines the performance bounds of architectures during the search. It has been observed that the
improvement of search space induced a favorable impact on the performance of many state-of-the-art
models [2, 16, 50]. Researchers have devoted ample efforts to the design of CNN space [45, 12, 42].
However, limited attention is paid to Transformer counterparts, leading to the dilemma of search
space design when finding more effective and efficient transformer architectures.
In this paper, we propose to Search the Search Space (S3) by automatically refining the main
changeable dimensions of transformer architectures. In particular, we try to answer the following
two key questions: 1) How to effectively and efficiently measure a specific search space? 2) How to
automatically change a defective search space to a good one without human prior knowledge?
For the first question, we propose a new measurement called E-T Error for search space quality
estimation and utilize a once-for-all supernet for effective and efficient computing. Specifically, the
“E” part in the E-T error is similar to the error empirical distribution function used in [35] focusing on
∗

Equal contributions. Work done when Minghao, Kan, Bolin are interns of MSRA. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

