The Sensory Neuron as a Transformer:
Permutation-Invariant Neural Networks for
Reinforcement Learning
Yujin Tang†
Google Brain
yujintang@google.com

David Ha†
Google Brain
hadavid@google.com

Abstract
In complex systems, we often observe complex global behavior emerge from a
collection of agents interacting with each other in their environment, with each
individual agent acting only on locally available information, without knowing
the full picture. Such systems have inspired development of artificial intelligence
algorithms in areas such as swarm optimization and cellular automata. Motivated
by the emergence of collective behavior from complex cellular systems, we build
systems that feed each sensory input from the environment into distinct, but identical neural networks, each with no fixed relationship with one another. We show
that these sensory networks can be trained to integrate information received locally,
and through communication via an attention mechanism, can collectively produce a
globally coherent policy. Moreover, the system can still perform its task even if the
ordering of its inputs is randomly permuted several times during an episode. These
permutation invariant systems also display useful robustness and generalization
properties that are broadly applicable. Interactive demo and videos of our results:
https://attentionneuron.github.io/

1

Introduction

Sensory substitution refers to the brain’s ability to use one sensory modality (e.g., touch) to supply
environmental information normally gathered by another sense (e.g., vision). Numerous studies have
demonstrated that humans can adapt to changes in sensory inputs, even when they are fed into the
wrong channels [5, 6, 25, 64]. But difficult adaptations–such as learning to “see” by interpreting
visual information emitted from a grid of electrodes placed on one’s tongue [6], or learning to ride a
“backwards” bicycle [64]–require months of training to attain mastery. Can we do better, and create
artificial systems that can rapidly adapt to sensory substitutions, without the need to be retrained?

Figure 1: Comparison of visual input intended for the game player, and what our system receives.
We partition the visual input from CarRacing (Left) and Atari Pong (right) into a 2D grid of small
patches, and randomly permute their ordering. Each sensory neuron in the system receives a stream
of visual input at a particular permuted patch location, and through coordination, must complete the
task at hand, even if the visual ordering is randomly permuted again several times during an episode.
†

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

