Reliable Estimation of KL Divergence using a
Discriminator in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space

Sandesh Ghimire , Aria Masoomi, Jennifer Dy
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University
sandesh@ece.neu.edu, masoomi.a@northeastern.edu, jdy@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Estimating Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence from samples of two distributions is
essential in many machine learning problems. Variational methods using neural
network discriminator have been proposed to achieve this task in a scalable manner.
However, we noted that most of these methods using neural network discriminators
suffer from high fluctuations (variance) in estimates and instability in training. In
this paper, we look at this issue from statistical learning theory and function space
complexity perspective to understand why this happens and how to solve it. We
argue that the cause of these pathologies is lack of control over the complexity of the
neural network discriminator function space and could be mitigated by controlling
it. To achieve this objective, we 1) present a novel construction of the discriminator
in the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), 2) theoretically relate the error
probability bound of the KL estimates to the complexity of the discriminator in
the RKHS space, 3) present a scalable way to control the complexity (RKHS
norm) of the discriminator for a reliable estimation of KL divergence, and 4) prove
the consistency of the proposed estimator. In three different applications of KL
divergence – estimation of KL, estimation of mutual information and Variational
Bayes – we show that by controlling the complexity as developed in the theory, we
are able to reduce the variance of KL estimates and stabilize the training.

1

Introduction

Estimating Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence from data samples is an essential component in many
machine learning problems including Bayesian inference, calculation of mutual information or
methods using information theoretic objectives. Variational formulation of Bayesian Inference
requires KL divergence computation, which could be challenging when we only have finite samples
from two distributions. Similarly, computation of information theoretic objectives like mutual
information requires computation of KL divergence between the joint and the product of marginals.
KL divergence estimation from samples was studied thoroughly by Nguyen et al. [1] using a
variational technique, convex optimization and RKHS norm regularization, while also providing
theoretical guarantees and insights. However, their technique requires handling the whole dataset
at once and is not scalable. Many modern models need to use KL divergence with large scale data,
and often with neural networks, for example total correlation variational autoencoder (TC-VAE) [2],
adversarial variational Bayes (AVB) [3], information maximizing GAN (InfoGAN) [4], and amortized
MAP [5] all need to compute KL divergence in a deep learning setup. These large scale models have
imposed new requirements on KL divergence estimation like scalability (able to handle large amount
of data samples) and minibatch compatibility (compatible with minibatch-based optimization).
Methods like Nguyen et al. [1] are not suitable in the large scale setup. These modern needs were
later met by modern neural network based methods such as variational divergence minimization
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

