On the Stochastic Stability of Deep Markov Models

Ján Drgoňa1 , Sayak Mukherjee1 , Jiaxin Zhang2 , Frank Liu2 , Mahantesh Halappanavar1
1
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, Washington, USA
2
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA
{jan.drgona, sayak.mukherjee, mahantesh.halappanavar}@pnnl.gov
{zhangj, liufy}@ornl.gov

Abstract
Deep Markov models (DMM) are generative models that are scalable and expressive generalization of Markov models for representation, learning, and inference
problems. However, the fundamental stochastic stability guarantees of such models
have not been thoroughly investigated. In this paper, we provide sufficient conditions of DMM’s stochastic stability as defined in the context of dynamical systems
and propose a stability analysis method based on the contraction of probabilistic
maps modeled by deep neural networks. We make connections between the spectral properties of neural network’s weights and different types of used activation
functions on the stability and overall dynamic behavior of DMMs with Gaussian
distributions. Based on the theory, we propose a few practical methods for designing constrained DMMs with guaranteed stability. We empirically substantiate our
theoretical results via intuitive numerical experiments using the proposed stability
constraints.

1

Introduction

Modeling, analysis, and control of dynamical systems are of utmost importance for various physical
and engineered systems such as fluid dynamics, oscillators, power grids, transportation networks,
and autonomous driving, to name just a few. The systems are generally subjected to uncertainties
arising from a plethora of factors such as exogenous noise, plant-model mismatch, and unmodeled
system dynamics, which have led researchers to model the dynamics in stochastic frameworks. One
of the most commonly used probabilistic frameworks to model dynamical system is the Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs) [Rabiner and Juang, 1986, Eddy, 1996] which in their vanilla form have
been extensively investigated for representation, learning, and inference problems [Ghahramani and
Jordan, 1997, Cappé et al., 2006, Beal et al., 2002]. One of its variants, the Gaussian state space
models, have been used in the systems and control community for decades [Beckers and Hirche,
2016, Eleftheriadis et al., 2017].
It has been shown that expressivity of Markov models to emulate complex dynamics and sequential
behaviors is greatly improved by parametrizing such models using deep neural networks, giving
rise to Deep Markov Models (DMMs) [Krishnan et al., 2017]. Main research activities have been
focused on the inference of these models. In particular, works such as Awiszus and Rosenhahn [2018],
Liu et al. [2019], Mustafa et al. [2019], Qu et al. [2019] proposed parametrizing the probability
distributions using deep neural networks for modeling various complex dynamical systems. Despite
the rising popularity of DMMs, many of their theoretical properties such as robustness to perturbations,
and stability of the generated trajectories remain open research questions. Many natural systems
exhibit complex yet stable dynamical behavior that is described by converging trajectories towards an
attractor set [Brayton and Tong, 1979]. Additionally, safety-critical systems such as an autonomous
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

