Rethinking the Variational Interpretation of
Accelerated Optimization Methods

Peiyuan Zhang∗
ETH Zurich
talantyeri@gmail.com

Antonio Orvieto∗
ETH Zurich
aorvieto@ethz.ch

Hadi Daneshmand
Inria Paris
seyed.daneshmand@inria.fr

Abstract
The continuous-time model of Nesterov’s momentum provides a thought-provoking
perspective for understanding the nature of the acceleration phenomenon in convex
optimization. One of the main ideas in this line of research comes from the field of
classical mechanics and proposes to link Nesterov’s trajectory to the solution of
a set of Euler-Lagrange equations relative to the so-called Bregman Lagrangian.
In the last years, this approach led to the discovery of many new (stochastic)
accelerated algorithms and provided a solid theoretical foundation for the design
of structure-preserving accelerated methods. In this work, we revisit this idea
and provide an in-depth analysis of the action relative to the Bregman Lagrangian
from the point of view of calculus of variations. Our main finding is that, while
Nesterov’s method is a stationary point for the action, it is often not a minimizer
but instead a saddle point for this functional in the space of differentiable curves.
This finding challenges the main intuition behind the variational interpretation of
Nesterov’s method and provides additional insights into the intriguing geometry of
accelerated paths.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on the problem of unconstrained convex optimization, i.e. to find
x∗ ∈ arg min f (x),

(P)

x∈Rd

for some lower bounded convex L-smooth2 loss f ∈ C 1 (Rd , R).
Nesterov’s acceleration. Nemirovskii and Yudin (1983) showed that no gradient-based optimizer
can converge to a solution of (P) faster than O(k −2 ), where k is the number of gradient evaluations3 .
While Gradient Descent (GD) converges like O(k −1 ), the optimal rate O(k −2 ) is achieved by the
celebrated Accelerated Gradient Descent (AGD) method, proposed by Nesterov (1983):
k−1
xk+1 = yk − η∇f (yk ) , with yk = xk +
(xk − xk−1 ).
(AGD)
k+2
The intuition behind Nesterov’s method and the fundamental reason behind acceleration is, to this
day, an active area of research (Allen-Zhu and Orecchia, 2014; Defazio, 2019; Ahn, 2020).
ODE models. Towards understanding the acceleration mechanism, Su et al. (2016) made an
interesting observation: the convergence rate gap between GD and AGD is retained in the continuoustime limits (as the step-size η vanishes):
3
Ẋ + ∇f (X) = 0 (GD-ODE),
Ẍ + Ẋ + ∇f (X) = 0 (AGD-ODE)
t
∗

Equal Contribution.
A differentiable function f : Rd → R is said to be β-smooth if it has β-Lipschitz gradients.
3
This lower bound holds just for k < d hence it is only interesting in the high-dimensional setting.

2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

