On the Universality of Graph Neural Networks
on Large Random Graphs

Nicolas Keriven
CNRS, GIPSA-lab, Grenoble, France
nicolas.keriven@cnrs.fr

Alberto Bietti
NYU Center for Data Science, New York, USA
alberto.bietti@nyu.edu

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS, LJAD, Nice, France
samuel.vaiter@cnrs.fr

Abstract
We study the approximation power of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on latent
position random graphs. In the large graph limit, GNNs are known to converge to
certain “continuous” models known as c-GNNs, which directly enables a study of
their approximation power on random graph models. In the absence of input node
features however, just as GNNs are limited by the Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism
test, c-GNNs will be severely limited on simple random graph models. For instance,
they will fail to distinguish the communities of a well-separated Stochastic Block
Model (SBM) with constant degree function. Thus, we consider recently proposed
architectures that augment GNNs with unique node identifiers, referred to as
Structural GNNs here (SGNNs). We study the convergence of SGNNs to their
continuous counterpart (c-SGNNs) in the large random graph limit, under new
conditions on the node identifiers. We then show that c-SGNNs are strictly more
powerful than c-GNNs in the continuous limit, and prove their universality on
several random graph models of interest, including most SBMs and a large class
of random geometric graphs. Our results cover both permutation-invariant and
permutation-equivariant architectures.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are deep architectures defined over graph data that have garnered a
lot of attention in recent years. They represent the state-of-the-art in many graph Machine Learning
(graph ML) problems, and have been successfully applied to e.g. node clustering [7], semi-supervised
learning [24], quantum chemistry [17], and so on. See [5, 44, 18, 21] for reviews.
As the universality of Multi-Layers Perceptrons (MLP) is one of the foundational theorems in deep
learning – that is, any continuous function can be approximated arbitrarily well by an MLP – in
the last few years the approximation power of GNNs has been a topic of great interest. In the
absence of special node features, i.e. when one has only access to the graph structure, the crux of the
problem has been proven to be the capacity of GNNs to solve the graph isomorphism problem, that
is, deciding when two graphs are permutations of each other or not (a difficult problem for which no
polynomial algorithm is known [4]). Indeed, this property is directly linked to the approximation
power of GNNs [8, 3]. In this light, the landmark paper [45] proves that classical GNNs are at best as
powerful as the famous Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test [43] for graph isomorphism. Since then, several
works [45, 31, 8] have derived new architectures, for instance involving high-order tensors [31],
with improved discriminative power equivalent to “higher-order” variants of the WL test. In another
line of works, several recent papers have advocated the use of unique node identifiers [28, 27], with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

