Fast Doubly-Adaptive MCMC to Estimate the Gibbs
Partition Function with Weak Mixing Time Bounds

Shahrzad Haddadan r ∗
Brown University
The Data Science Initiative
shahrzad.haddadan@gmail.com
Yue Zhuang r
Brown University
The Data Science Initiative
yue_zhuang1@brown.edu

Cyrus Cousins r
Brown University
Department of Computer Science
cyrus_cousins@brown.edu

Eli Upfal
Brown University
Department of Computer Science
eliezer_upfal@brown.edu

Abstract
We present a novel method for reducing the computational complexity of rigorously
estimating the partition functions (normalizing constants) of Gibbs (Boltzmann)
distributions, which arise ubiquitously in probabilistic graphical models.
A major obstacle to practical applications of Gibbs distributions is the need to
estimate their partition functions. The state of the art in addressing this problem is
multi-stage algorithms, which consist of a cooling schedule, and a mean estimator
in each step of the schedule. While the cooling schedule in these algorithms
is adaptive, the mean estimation computations use MCMC as a black-box to
draw approximate samples. We develop a doubly adaptive approach, combining
the adaptive cooling schedule with an adaptive MCMC mean estimator, whose
number of Markov chain steps adapts dynamically to the underlying chain. Through
rigorous theoretical analysis, we prove that our method outperforms the state of the
art algorithms in several factors: (1) The computational complexity of our method
is smaller; (2) Our method is less sensitive to loose bounds on mixing times, an
inherent component in these algorithms; and (3) The improvement obtained by our
method is particularly significant in the most challenging regime of high-precision
estimation. We demonstrate the advantage of our method in experiments run on
classic factor graphs, such as voting models and Ising models.

1

Introduction

The Gibbs (Boltzmann) distribution is a family of probability distributions of exponential form. First
introduced in the context of statistical mechanics [25], Gibbs distributions are now ubiquitous in
a variety of other disciplines, such as chemistry [24, 31], economics [1, 54] and machine learning.
Gibbs distributions are typically used to model the global state of a system as a function of a collection
of interdependent random variables, each representing local states in the system. The dependencies
∗

r indicates randomized ordering and equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

