IQ-Learn: Inverse soft-Q Learning for Imitation
Divyansh Garg
Shuvam Chakraborty Chris Cundy
Jiaming Song Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
{divgarg, shuvamc, cundy, tsong, ermon}@stanford.edu

Abstract
In many sequential decision-making problems (e.g., robotics control, game playing, sequential prediction), human or expert data is available containing useful
information about the task. However, imitation learning (IL) from a small amount
of expert data can be challenging in high-dimensional environments with complex dynamics. Behavioral cloning is a simple method that is widely used due to
its simplicity of implementation and stable convergence but doesn’t utilize any
information involving the environment’s dynamics. Many existing methods that
exploit dynamics information are difficult to train in practice due to an adversarial
optimization process over reward and policy approximators or biased, high variance
gradient estimators. We introduce a method for dynamics-aware IL which avoids
adversarial training by learning a single Q-function, implicitly representing both
reward and policy. On standard benchmarks, the implicitly learned rewards show a
high positive correlation with the ground-truth rewards, illustrating our method can
also be used for inverse reinforcement learning (IRL). Our method, Inverse soft-Q
learning (IQ-Learn) obtains state-of-the-art results in offline and online imitation
learning settings, significantly outperforming existing methods both in the number
of required environment interactions and scalability in high-dimensional spaces,
often by more than 3x.

1

Introduction

Imitation of an expert has long been recognized as a powerful approach for sequential decisionmaking [29, 1], with applications as diverse as healthcare [39], autonomous driving [41], and playing
complex strategic games [8]. In the imitation learning (IL) setting, we are given a set of expert
trajectories, with the goal of learning a policy which induces behavior similar to the expert’s. The
learner has no access to the reward, and no explicit knowledge of the dynamics.
The simple behavioural cloning [34] approach simply maximizes the probability of the expert’s
actions under the learned policy, approaching the IL problem as a supervised learning problem.
While this can work well in simple environments and with large quantities of data, it ignores the
sequential nature of the decision-making problem, and small errors can quickly compound when the
learned policy departs from the states observed under the expert. A natural way of introducing the
environment dynamics is by framing the IL problem as an Inverse RL (IRL) problem, aiming to learn
a reward function under which the expert’s trajectory is optimal, and from which the learned imitation
policy can be trained [1]. This framing has inspired several approaches which use rewards either
explicitly or implicitly to incorporate dynamics while learning an imitation policy [17, 10, 33, 22].
However, these dynamics-aware methods are typically hard to put into practice due to unstable
learning which can be sensitive to hyperparameter choice or minor implementation details [21].
In this work, we introduce a dynamics-aware imitation learning method which has stable, nonadversarial training, allowing us to achieve state-of-the-art performance on imitation learning bench35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

