Bounds all around: training energy-based models
with bidirectional bounds
Cong Geng, Jia Wang, Zhiyong Gao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{gengcong, jiawang, zhiyong.gao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Jes Frellsen∗, Søren Hauberg∗
Technical University of Denmark
{jefr, sohau}@dtu.dk

Abstract
Energy-based models (EBMs) provide an elegant framework for density estimation,
but they are notoriously difficult to train. Recent work has established links to
generative adversarial networks, where the EBM is trained through a minimax
game with a variational value function. We propose a bidirectional bound on
the EBM log-likelihood, such that we maximize a lower bound and minimize an
upper bound when solving the minimax game. We link one bound to a gradient
penalty that stabilize training, thereby provide grounding for best engineering
practice. To evaluate the bounds we develop a new and efficient estimator of the
Jacobi-determinant of the EBM generator. We demonstrate that these developments
stabilize training and yield high-quality density estimation and sample generation.

1

Energy-based models

Energy-based models (EBMs) are probabilistic models that draw inspiration from physics and have a
long history in machine learning (Hopfield, 1982; Hinton and Sejnowski, 1983; Smolensky, 1986).
An EBM is specified in terms of an energy function Eθ : X → R that is parameterized by θ and
defines a probability distribution over X from the Gibbs density:
Z
exp(−Eθ (x))
pθ (x) =
,
Zθ = exp(−Eθ (x))dx,
(1)
Zθ
where Zθ is the normalization constant or partition function. In principle, any density can be described
this way for a suitable choice of Eθ . EBMs are typically learned using maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE), where we wish to find a value of θ that minimized the negative data log-likelihood:
L(θ) := −Ex∼pdata (x) [log pθ (x)] = Ex∼pdata [Eθ (x)] + log Zθ ,

(2)

where pdata is the data generating distribution.
The fundamental challenge with EBMs for non-standard energy functions is the lack of a closed-form
expression for the normalization constant, Zθ , which hinders exact pointwise density evaluation,
sampling and learning. Therefore, these tasks are traditionally performed using approximate methods
such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC, Metropolis et al., 1953; Neal et al., 2011). Similar to
the Boltzmann learning rule (Hinton and Sejnowski, 1983; Osogami, 2017), gradient-based learning
for MLE involves evaluating the gradient ∇θ L(θ) = Ex∼pdata [∇θ Eθ (x)] − Ex∼pθ [∇θ Eθ (x)], where
the expectation in the last term necessitates MCMC approximation. Recently, a series of papers (Kim
and Bengio, 2016; Kumar et al., 2019; Abbasnejad et al., 2020; Che et al., 2020) have established
links between EBMs and Wasserstein GANs (WGANs, Arjovsky et al., 2017), such that EBMs can be
approximately learned through a minimax game. Xie et al. (2017, 2018c) and Wu et al. (2018) also
employed the adversarial game of EBM. This allows for significant improvements in EBM learning
over MCMC based methods (Grathwohl et al., 2021).
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

