Revisiting Discriminator in GAN Compression:
A Generator-discriminator Cooperative Compression
Scheme
Shaojie Li1∗, Jie Wu2 , Xuefeng Xiao2 , Fei Chao1 , Xudong Mao1 , Rongrong Ji1,3†
1
Media Analysis and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
ByteDance Inc 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University

Abstract
Recently, a series of algorithms have been explored for GAN compression, which
aims to reduce tremendous computational overhead and memory usages when
deploying GANs on resource-constrained edge devices. However, most of the
existing GAN compression work only focuses on how to compress the generator,
while fails to take the discriminator into account. In this work, we revisit the role of
discriminator in GAN compression and design a novel generator-discriminator cooperative compression scheme for GAN compression, termed GCC. Within GCC, a
selective activation discriminator automatically selects and activates convolutional
channels according to a local capacity constraint and a global coordination constraint, which help maintain the Nash equilibrium with the lightweight generator
during the adversarial training and avoid mode collapse. The original generator
and discriminator are also optimized from scratch, to play as a teacher model to
progressively refine the pruned generator and the selective activation discriminator.
A novel online collaborative distillation scheme is designed to take full advantage
of the intermediate feature of the teacher generator and discriminator to further
boost the performance of the lightweight generator. Extensive experiments on various GAN-based generation tasks demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization
of GCC. Among them, GCC contributes to reducing 80% computational costs
while maintains comparable performance in image translation tasks. Our code and
models are available at: https://github.com/SJLeo/GCC

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been widely popularized in diverse image synthesis
tasks, such as image generation [16, 50], image translation [64, 30] and super resolution [35, 59].
However, the ultra-high computational and memory overhead of GANs hinder its deployment on
resource-constrained edge devices. To alleviate this issue, a series of traditional model compression
algorithms, i.e., network pruning [18, 36], weight quantization [39, 26], low-rank decomposition [10,
19], knowledge distillation [22, 52], and efficient architecture design [29, 55] have been applied to
reduce calculational consumptions of GANs.
Previous work [56, 12, 61] attempted to directly employ network pruning methods to compress the
generator but obtain unimpressive results, as shown in Figure 1(a). The similar phenomenon also
occurred in SAGAN shown in Appendix A. A potential reason is that these methods failed to take into
account the generator and the discriminator must follow the Nash equilibrium state to avoid the mode
∗
†

This work was done when Shaojie Li was a intern at Bytedance Inc.
Corresponding Author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

