BatchQuant: Quantized-for-all Architecture Search
with Robust Quantizer
Haoping Bai∗ Meng Cao

Ping Huang

Jiulong Shan

Apple
{haoping_bai, mengcao, huang_ping, jiulong_shan}@apple.com

Abstract
As the applications of deep learning models on edge devices increase at an accelerating pace, fast adaptation to various scenarios with varying resource constraints
has become a crucial aspect of model deployment. As a result, model optimization
strategies with adaptive configuration are becoming increasingly popular. While
single-shot quantized neural architecture search enjoys flexibility in both model
architecture and quantization policy, the combined search space comes with many
challenges, including instability when training the weight-sharing supernet and
difficulty in navigating the exponentially growing search space. Existing methods
tend to either limit the architecture search space to a small set of options or limit
the quantization policy search space to fixed precision policies. To this end, we
propose BatchQuant, a robust quantizer formulation that allows fast and stable
training of a compact, single-shot, mixed-precision, weight-sharing supernet. We
employ BatchQuant to train a compact supernet (offering over 1076 quantized subnets) within substantially fewer GPU hours than previous methods. Our approach,
Quantized-for-all (QFA), is the first to seamlessly extend one-shot weight-sharing
NAS supernet to support subnets with arbitrary ultra-low bitwidth mixed-precision
quantization policies without retraining. QFA opens up new possibilities in joint
hardware-aware neural architecture search and quantization. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method on ImageNet and achieve SOTA Top-1 accuracy under
a low complexity constraint (< 20 MFLOPs). The code and models will be made
publicly available at https://github.com/bhpfelix/QFA.

1

Introduction

In order to deploy deep learning models on resource-constrained edge devices, careful model optimization, including pruning and quantization is required. While existing works have demonstrated
the effectiveness of model optimization techniques in speeding up model inference [1, 2, 3, 4], model
optimization increases human labor by introducing extra hyperparameters. Consequently, automated
methods such as neural architecture search (NAS) [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] and
automated quantization policy search [17, 18, 19] have emerged to alleviate the human bandwidth
required for obtaining compact models with good performance.
In this paper, we focus on finding the best of both worlds—the best combination of architecture and
mixed-precision quantization policy. However, combining two complex search spaces is inherently
challenging, not to mention that quantization usually requires a lengthy quantization-aware training
(QAT) procedure to recover performance. Thus, previous methods tend to employ proxies to estimate
the performance of an architecture and quantization policy combination. For example, APQ [20]
performs QAT on each of 5000 architecture and quantization policy combinations for 0.2 GPU hours
∗

Corresponding author: Haoping Bai haoping_bai@apple.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

