Robust Pose Estimation in Crowded Scenes with
Direct Pose-Level Inference
Dongkai Wang
Peking University
dongkai.wang@pku.edu.cn

Shiliang Zhang
Peking University
slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn

Gang Hua
Wormpex AI Research
ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation in crowded scenes is challenging because overlapping
and occlusions make it difficult to detect person bounding boxes and infer pose
cues from individual keypoints. To address those issues, this paper proposes a
direct pose-level inference strategy that is free of bounding box detection and keypoint grouping. Instead of inferring individual keypoints, the Pose-level Inference
Network (PINet) directly infers the complete pose cues for a person from his/her
visible body parts. PINet first applies the Part-based Pose Generation (PPG) to
infer multiple coarse poses for each person from his/her body parts. Those coarse
poses are refined by the Pose Refinement module through incorporating pose priors,
and finally are fused in the Pose Fusion module. PINet relies on discriminative
body parts to differentiate overlapped persons, and applies visual body cues to
infer the global pose cues. Experiments on several crowded scenes pose estimation
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of PINet. For instance, it achieves 59.8%
AP on the OCHuman dataset, outperforming the recent works by a large margin† .

1

Introduction

Multi-Person Pose Estimation (MPPE) performs both detection and pose keypoint localization for all
persons appearing in an image. Due to its importance in human activity understanding, human-object
interaction, human parsing, et al., MPPE has attracted increasing attention in recent years. Current
MPPE research can be summarized into two categories according to their pipelines, i.e. i) top-down
methods [5, 18, 29, 25], which detect person bounding boxes and perform pose estimation for each
bounding box, and ii) bottom-up methods [1, 20, 13, 17, 9, 7] that first detect body keypoints, then
assign them into corresponding persons. A more detailed review will be presented in Sec. 2.
The above two lines of research have significantly boosted the performance of MPPE. However,
performing MPPE is still challenging in crowded scenarios, where occlusions and person overlapping
commonly occur. It is difficult to detect accurate bounding boxes due to overlapped persons. The
commonly used Non-maximum Suppression (NMS) in detection frameworks also tends to suppress
dense bounding boxes, leading to many undetected persons. Those issues degrade the accuracy of
top-down methods. Person overlapping and occlusions lead to invisible keypoints, making it difficult
for bottom-up methods to infer accurate pose cues from individual keypoints. As shown in many
works, applying existing MPPE methods in crowded scenes gets inferior performance [10, 22].
As illustated in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), existing works generally suffer from difficulties of person detection
and keypoint grouping in crowded scenarios. This paper targets to perform MPPE with a new pipeline,
which is free of bounding box detection and keypoint grouping. We regard the human pose as an
inference objective, and directly infer the complete pose cues, i.e., locations of all body keypoints,
for a person from his/her visible body parts. In other words, we rely on discriminative visible body
†

Code is available at: https://github.com/kennethwdk/PINet

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

