Flow Network based Generative Models for
Non-Iterative Diverse Candidate Generation
Emmanuel Bengio1,2 , Moksh Jain1,5 , Maksym Korablyov1
Doina Precup1,2,4 , Yoshua Bengio1,3
1
2
Mila, McGill University, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 DeepMind, 5 Microsoft

Abstract
This paper is about the problem of learning a stochastic policy for generating
an object (like a molecular graph) from a sequence of actions, such that the
probability of generating an object is proportional to a given positive reward for
that object. Whereas standard return maximization tends to converge to a single
return-maximizing sequence, there are cases where we would like to sample a
diverse set of high-return solutions. These arise, for example, in black-box function
optimization when few rounds are possible, each with large batches of queries,
where the batches should be diverse, e.g., in the design of new molecules. One
can also see this as a problem of approximately converting an energy function to a
generative distribution. While MCMC methods can achieve that, they are expensive
and generally only perform local exploration. Instead, training a generative policy
amortizes the cost of search during training and yields to fast generation. Using
insights from Temporal Difference learning, we propose GFlowNet, based on a
view of the generative process as a flow network, making it possible to handle the
tricky case where different trajectories can yield the same final state, e.g., there
are many ways to sequentially add atoms to generate some molecular graph. We
cast the set of trajectories as a flow and convert the flow consistency equations into
a learning objective, akin to the casting of the Bellman equations into Temporal
Difference methods. We prove that any global minimum of the proposed objectives
yields a policy which samples from the desired distribution, and demonstrate the
improved performance and diversity of GFlowNet on a simple domain where there
are many modes to the reward function, and on a molecule synthesis task.

1

Introduction

The maximization of expected return R in reinforcement learning (RL) is generally achieved by
putting all the probability mass of the policy π on the highest-return sequence of actions. In this paper,
we study the scenario where our objective is not to generate the single highest-reward sequence of
actions but rather to sample a distribution of trajectories whose probability is proportional to a given
positive return or reward function. This can be useful in tasks where exploration is important, i.e., we
want to sample from the leading modes of the return function. This is equivalent to the problem of
turning an energy function into a corresponding generative model, where the object to be generated is
obtained via a sequence of actions. By changing the temperature of the energy function (i.e., scaling
it multiplicatively) or by taking the power of the return, one can control how selective the generator
should be, i.e., only generate from around the highest modes at low temperature or explore more with
a higher temperature.
A motivating application for this setup is iterative black-box optimization where the learner has
access to an oracle which can compute a reward for a large batch of candidates at each round, e.g., in
drug-discovery applications. Diversity of the generated candidates is particularly important when the
oracle is itself uncertain, e.g., it may consist of cellular assays which is a cheap proxy for clinical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

