Unfolding Taylor’s Approximations
for Image Restoration

Man Zhou1

Xueyang Fu 1∗ Zeyu Xiao1
Aiping Liu 1
Gang Yang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
{manman}@mail.ustc.edu.cn xyfu@ustc.edu.cn

Zhiwei Xiong 1

Abstract
Deep learning provides a new avenue for image restoration, which demands a delicate balance between fine-grained details and high-level contextualized information
during recovering the latent clear image. In practice, however, existing methods
empirically construct encapsulated end-to-end mapping networks without deepening into the rationality, and neglect the intrinsic prior knowledge of restoration
task. To solve the above problems, inspired by Taylor’s Approximations, we unfold
Taylor’s Formula to construct a novel framework for image restoration. We find the
main part and the derivative part of Taylor’s Approximations take the same effect
as the two competing goals of high-level contextualized information and spatial
details of image restoration respectively. Specifically, our framework consists of
two steps, correspondingly responsible for the mapping and derivative functions.
The former first learns the high-level contextualized information and the later combines it with the degraded input to progressively recover local high-order spatial
details. Our proposed framework is orthogonal to existing methods and thus can be
easily integrated with them for further improvement, and extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness and scalability of our proposed framework. Code
will be publicly available upon acceptance.

1

Introduction

Image restoration has long been an important task in computer vision, which demands a delicate balance between spatial fine-grained details and high-level contextualized information while recovering
a latent clear image from a given degraded observation. It is a highly ill-posed issue as there exists
infinite feasible results for single degraded image. Representative image restoration tasks include
image deraining, image deblurring.
Much research efforts have been devoted to solve the single image restoration problem, which can
be categorized into two groups: traditional optimization methods [16, 36] and deep learning based
methods. In detail, various natural images priors have been developed in traditional image restoration
methods to regularize the solution space of the latent clear image, e.g., low-rank prior [36, 42], dark
channel prior [31, 32, 54], graph-based prior [28, 2], total variation regularization [5, 8, 1] and sparse
image priors [29, 56]. However, these priors are difficult to design and the methods are difficult to
optimize, limiting their practical usage.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been applied in numerous high-level computer vision
problems and obtained promising improvement in image restoration tasks over traditional methods [52, 63, 15, 26, 45, 25, 7, 66, 67, 10, 37]. However, most existing CNN-based image restoration
methods empirically construct encapsulated end-to-end mapping networks without deepening into
the rationality, and neglect the intrinsic properties of the degradation process. Specifically, it makes
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

