Asymptotically Exact Error Characterization of
Offline Policy Evaluation with Misspecified Linear
Models
Kohei Miyaguchi
IBM Research – Tokyo
miyaguchi@ibm.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of offline policy evaluation (OPE) with Markov decision
processes (MDPs), where the goal is to estimate the utility of given decisionmaking policies based on static datasets. Recently, theoretical understanding of
OPE has been rapidly advanced under (approximate) realizability assumptions,
i.e., where the environments of interest are well approximated with the given
hypothetical models. On the other hand, the OPE under unrealizability has not
been well understood as much as in the realizable setting despite its importance in
real-world applications. To address this issue, we study the behavior of a simple
existing OPE method called the linear direct method (DM) under the unrealizability.
Consequently, we obtain an asymptotically exact characterization of the OPE error
in a doubly robust form. Leveraging this result, we also establish the nonparametric
consistency of the tile-coding estimators under quite mild assumptions.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of offline data-driven decision optimization, wherein static records of
previous interactions between decision makers and the environmental system of interest are given. The
possible application areas include autonomous driving vehicles, natural-language dialogue systems,
recommender systems, financial portfolio optimization and healthcare treatment optimization.
The framework of offline reinforcement learning (RL) is one of the promising approaches to this
task (Levine et al., 2020). In the standard RL, the environment and the decision-making policy are
respectively modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs) M and conditional distributions of
actions π (Sutton and Barto, 2018), where each series of consecutive interactions between M and
π are abstracted as a stochastic sequence of state s, action a and reward r, called an episode. The
objective of the offline RL is then formalized as the maximization of the policy value J(π), the
expected value of the total reward obtained from a single episode, given a static dataset of previous
interactions.
The crucial part of the problem is that the dataset is static; No additional interaction with the
environment is allowed. This constraint poses several unique challenges to the problem. First, the
policies we are optimizing, i.e., the target policies, cannot be run in the actual environment. Second,
the policies used to generate the dataset, i.e., the behavior policies, are often unknown and may be
totally different from the target policies. Consequently, it is even difficult to accurately estimate
the value of target policies. This is problematic especially in consideration of real-life applications
involving financial costs and healthcare risks.
To address the issue of policy value estimation, the problem of offline policy evaluation (OPE)
have been extensively studied in the literature. A class of OPE algorithms are referred as the
direct methods (DMs), in which some characteristics of M are assumed to be realizable under some
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

