All Tokens Matter: Token Labeling for Training
Better Vision Transformers
Zihang Jiang1∗

Qibin Hou2,1†

Xiaojie Jin4
1

Li Yuan3

Daquan Zhou1

Anran Wang4

National University of Singapore
3

Peking University

4

Yujun Shi1

Jiashi Feng4
2

Nankai University

ByteDance

{jzh0103,andrewhoux,ylustcnus,zhoudaquan21,shiyujun1016}@gmail.com
xjjin0731@gmail.com, anran.wang@bytedance.com, jshfeng@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present token labeling—a new training objective for training
high-performance vision transformers (ViTs). Different from the standard training
objective of ViTs that computes the classification loss on an additional trainable
class token, our proposed one takes advantage of all the image patch tokens to compute the training loss in a dense manner. Specifically, token labeling reformulates
the image classification problem into multiple token-level recognition problems
and assigns each patch token with an individual location-specific supervision generated by a machine annotator. Experiments show that token labeling can clearly
and consistently improve the performance of various ViT models across a wide
spectrum. For a vision transformer with 26M learnable parameters serving as an
example, with token labeling, the model can achieve 84.4% Top-1 accuracy on
ImageNet. The result can be further increased to 86.4% by slightly scaling the
model size up to 150M, delivering the minimal-sized model among previous models (250M+) reaching 86%. We also show that token labeling can clearly improve
the generalization capability of the pretrained models on downstream tasks with
dense prediction, such as semantic segmentation. Our code and model are publicly
available at https://github.com/zihangJiang/TokenLabeling.

1

Introduction

Transformers [39] have achieved great performance for almost all the natural language processing
(NLP) tasks over the past years [4, 14, 24]. Motivated by such success, recently, many researchers
attempt to build transformer models for vision tasks, and their encouraging results have shown the
great potential of transformer based models for image classification [6, 15, 25, 36, 40, 46], especially
the strong benefits of the self-attention mechanism in building long-range dependencies between
pairs of input tokens.
Despite the importance of gathering long-range dependencies, recent work on local data augmentation [57] has demonstrated that well modeling and leveraging local information for image classification would avoid biasing the model towards skewed and non-generalizable patterns and substantially
∗
†

Work done as an intern at ByteDance AI Lab.
Corresponding author. Part of this work was done as a research fellow at NUS.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

