Generative vs Discriminative:
Rethinking The Meta-Continual Learning

Mohammadamin Banayeeanzade∗, Rasoul Mirzaiezadeh∗ ,
Hosein Hasani∗ , Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
m.banayeean@gmail.com, mirzaierasoul75@gmail.com
hasanih@ce.sharif.edu, soleymani@sharif.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved human-level capabilities in various learning
tasks. However, they generally lose performance in more realistic scenarios like
learning in a continual manner. In contrast, humans can incorporate their prior
knowledge to learn new concepts efficiently without forgetting older ones. In
this work, we leverage meta-learning to encourage the model to learn how to
learn continually. Inspired by human concept learning, we develop a generative
classifier that efficiently uses data-driven experience to learn new concepts even
from few samples while being immune to forgetting. Along with cognitive and
theoretical insights, extensive experiments on standard benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method. The ability to remember all previous
concepts, with negligible computational and structural overheads, suggests that
generative models provide a natural way for alleviating catastrophic forgetting,
which is a major drawback of discriminative models. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/aminbana/GeMCL.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have gained great success in a wide variety of tasks in various fields [26, 28].
However, in many real-world scenarios, where the data samples are neither i.i.d. nor available all at
once, most of them lose performance on the older data points; a phenomenon known as catastrophic
forgetting [13]. Continual learning, also called lifelong learning, aims to tackle this problem [48].
Animals as intelligent learning agents can easily learn a sequence of different tasks with minimum
interference and forgetting [55, 12]. When facing new problems, the brain does not rewire all of the
wirings [37, 5] but utilizes lifelong accumulated inductive biases to efficiently learn new concepts
[9, 4]. In the field of cognitive and neuroscience, there exist two special cases of concept learning
named prototypical and exemplar-based learning [44, 2, 59, 7]. Bayesian inference is another aspect
of learning in the brain which aims to consider uncertainty [24, 31, 16, 4, 23]. In this paper, we
integrate the hypothesis of generative concept learning and the Bayesian approach by considering
a distribution over each concept. Figure 1 compares different characteristics and expressive power
of the mentioned concept learning approaches. Inspired by the biological mechanism of learning,
we suggest that the generative approach in category learning is an important principle for continual
learning problems. Although the Bayesian approach requires proper priors about each concept,
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

