On the Out-of-distribution Generalization of
Probabilistic Image Modelling

Mingtian Zhang 1,2∗

Andi Zhang 2,3∗

Steven McDonagh 2

1

AI Center, University College London, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge
mingtian.zhang.17@ucl.ac.uk az381@cam.ac.uk steven.mcdonagh@huawei.com
3

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and lossless compression constitute two problems that can be solved by the training of probabilistic models on a first dataset
with subsequent likelihood evaluation on a second dataset, where data distributions differ. By defining the generalization of probabilistic models in terms of
likelihood we show that, in the case of image models, the OOD generalization
ability is dominated by local features. This motivates our proposal of a Local
Autoregressive model that exclusively models local image features towards improving OOD performance. We apply the proposed model to OOD detection tasks
and achieve state-of-the-art unsupervised OOD detection performance without the
introduction of additional data. Additionally, we employ our model to build a new
lossless image compressor: NeLLoC (Neural Local Lossless Compressor) and
report state-of-the-art compression rates and model size.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling has achieved great success in the modeling of images. Likelihood based
models, e.g. Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) [22], Flow [21], Pixel CNN [49, 41] are shown to
successfully generate high quality images, in addition to estimating underlying densities.
The goal of probabilistic modelling is to use a model pθ to approximate the unknown data distribution
pd using the training data {x1 , . . . , xN } ∼ pd . A common method to learn parameters θ is to
minimize some divergence between pd and pθ , for example, a popular choice is the KL divergence
Z
KL(pd ||pθ ) = −H(pd ) − log pθ (x)pd (x)dx,
(1)
where the entropy of the data distribution is a constant. Since we only have access to finite pd data
samples x1 , . . . , xN , the second term is typically approximated using a Monte Carlo estimation
N
1 X
KL(pd ||pθ ) ≈ −
log pθ (xn ) − const..
(2)
N n=1
Minimizing the KL divergence is therefore equivalent to Maximum Likelihood Estimation. A typical
PM
1
evaluation criterion for the learned models is the test likelihood M
m=1 log pθ (xm ), with test set
{x1 , . . . , xM } ∼ pd . We refer to this evaluation as in-distribution (ID) generalization, since both
training and test data are sampled from the same distribution pd . However, in this work, we are
interested in out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization such that the test data are drawn from po ,
where po 6= pd . To motivate our study of this topic, we firstly introduce two applications: lossless
compression and OOD detection, that both can make use of the OOD generalization property.
∗

Co-first author, the work was done during an internship in Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

