Towards mental time travel: a hierarchical memory
for reinforcement learning agents

Andrew K. Lampinen
DeepMind
London, UK
lampinen@deepmind.com

Stephanie C. Y. Chan
DeepMind
London, UK
scychan@deepmind.com

Andrea Banino
DeepMind
London, UK
abanino@deepmind.com

Felix Hill
DeepMind
London, UK
felixhill@deepmind.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning agents often forget details of the past, especially after delays or distractor tasks. Agents with common memory architectures struggle to
recall and integrate across multiple timesteps of a past event, or even to recall the
details of a single timestep that is followed by distractor tasks. To address these
limitations, we propose a Hierarchical Chunk Attention Memory (HCAM), which
helps agents to remember the past in detail. HCAM stores memories by dividing
the past into chunks, and recalls by first performing high-level attention over coarse
summaries of the chunks, and then performing detailed attention within only the
most relevant chunks. An agent with HCAM can therefore “mentally time-travel”—
remember past events in detail without attending to all intervening events. We
show that agents with HCAM substantially outperform agents with other memory architectures at tasks requiring long-term recall, retention, or reasoning over
memory. These include recalling where an object is hidden in a 3D environment,
rapidly learning to navigate efficiently in a new neighborhood, and rapidly learning and retaining new object names. Agents with HCAM can extrapolate to task
sequences an order of magnitude longer than they were trained on, and can even
generalize zero-shot from a meta-learning setting to maintaining knowledge across
episodes. HCAM improves agent sample efficiency, generalization, and generality
(by solving tasks that previously required specialized architectures). Our work is a
step towards agents that can learn, interact, and adapt in complex and temporallyextended environments.

1

Introduction

Human learning and generalization relies on our detailed memory of the past [55, 52, 16, 30, 43]. If
we watch a show, we can generally recall its scenes in some detail afterward. If we explore a new
neighborhood, we can recall our paths through it in order to plan new routes. If we are exposed to a new
noun, we can find that object by name later. We experience relatively little interference from delays
or intervening events. Indeed, human episodic memory has been compared to “mental time travel”
[55, 52, 37]—we are able to transport ourselves into a past event and re-live it in sequential detail,
without attending to everything that has happened since. That is, our recall is both sparse (we attend
to a small chunk of the past, or a few chunks) and detailed (we recover a large amount of information
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

