Fine-Grained Neural Network Explanation by
Identifying Input Features with Predictive
Information
Yang Zhang ∗
Technical University of Munich
ya.zhang@tum.de

Ashkan Khakzar *
Technical University of Munich
ashkan.khakzar@tum.de

Yawei Li
LMU University Hospital  , Munich
yawei.li@med.uni-muenchen.de

Azade Farshad
Technical University of Munich
azade.farshad@tum.de

Seong Tae Kim †
Kyung Hee University, South Korea
st.kim@khu.ac.kr

Nassir Navab
Technical University of Munich
nassir.navab@tum.de

Abstract
One principal approach for illuminating a black-box neural network is feature attribution, i.e. identifying the importance of input features for the network’s prediction.
The predictive information of features is recently proposed as a proxy for the
measure of their importance. So far, the predictive information is only identified for
latent features by placing an information bottleneck within the network. We propose a method to identify features with predictive information in the input domain.
The method results in fine-grained identification of input features’ information and
is agnostic to network architecture. The core idea of our method is leveraging a
bottleneck on the input that only lets input features associated with predictive latent
features pass through. We compare our method with several feature attribution
methods using mainstream feature attribution evaluation experiments. The code 1
is publicly available.

1

Introduction

Feature attribution – identifying the contribution of input features to the output of the neural network
function – is one principal approach for explaining the predictions of black-box neural networks.
In recent years, a plethora of feature attribution methods is proposed. The solutions range from
axiomatic methods [1, 2, 3] derived from game theory [4] to contribution backpropagation methods
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, given a specific neural network and an input-output pair, existing feature
attribution methods show dissimilar results. In order to evaluate which method correctly explains
the prediction, the literature proposes several attribution evaluation experiments [10, 11, 12, 9]. The
attribution evaluation experiments reveal that methods that look visually interpretable to humans
or even methods with solid theoretical grounding are not identifying contributing input features
[13, 12, 14]. The divergent results of different attribution methods and the insights from evaluation
experiments show that the feature attribution problem remains unsolved. Though there is no silver
∗
1

denotes equal contribution  Department of Dermatology and Allergology † corresponding author
https://github.com/CAMP-eXplain-AI/InputIBA

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

