Robust Inverse Reinforcement Learning under
Transition Dynamics Mismatch

Luca Viano
LIONS, EPFL
Parameswaran Kamalaruban∗
The Alan Turing Institute

Yu-Ting Huang
EPFL
Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge
& The Alan Turing Institute

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL

Abstract
We study the inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) problem under a transition
dynamics mismatch between the expert and the learner. Specifically, we consider
the Maximum Causal Entropy (MCE) IRL learner model and provide a tight
upper bound on the learner’s performance degradation based on the `1 -distance
between the transition dynamics of the expert and the learner. Leveraging insights
from the Robust RL literature, we propose a robust MCE IRL algorithm, which
is a principled approach to help with this mismatch. Finally, we empirically
demonstrate the stable performance of our algorithm compared to the standard
MCE IRL algorithm under transition dynamics mismatches in both finite and
continuous MDP problems.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1, 2, 3, 4] have demonstrated impressive performance in games [5, 6], continuous control [7], and robotics [8]. Despite these successes, a broader
application of RL in real-world domains is hindered by the difficulty of designing a proper reward
function. Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) addresses this issue by inferring a reward function
from a given set of demonstrations of the desired behavior [9, 10]. IRL has been extensively studied,
and many algorithms have already been proposed [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
Almost all IRL algorithms assume that the expert demonstrations are collected from the same
environment as the one in which the IRL agent is trained. However, this assumption rarely holds in
real world because of many possible factors identified by [17]. For example, consider an autonomous
car that should learn by observing expert demonstrations performed on another car with possibly
different technical characteristics. There is often a mismatch between the learner and the expert’s
transition dynamics, resulting in poor performance that are critical in healthcare [18] or autonomous
driving [19]. Indeed, the performance degradation of an IRL agent due to transition dynamics
mismatch has been noted empirically [20, 21, 22, 23], but without theoretical guidance.
To this end, our work first provides a theoretical study on the effect of such mismatch in the context
of the infinite horizon Maximum Causal Entropy (MCE) IRL framework [24, 25, 26]. Specifically,
we bound the potential decrease in the IRL learner’s performance as a function of the `1 -distance
between the expert and the learner’s transition dynamics. We then propose a robust variant of the
MCE IRL algorithm to effectively recover a reward function under transition dynamics mismatch,
mitigating degradation. There is precedence to our robust IRL approach, such as [27] that employs
∗

Correspondence to: Parameswaran Kamalaruban <kparameswaran@turing.ac.uk>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

