How Modular Should Neural Module Networks Be
for Systematic Generalization?
Vanessa D’Amario 1, 3

Tomotake Sasaki 2, 3

Xavier Boix 1, 3

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 2 Fujitsu Limited, Japan
3
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, USA
vanessad@mit.edu, tomotake.sasaki@fujitsu.com, xboix@mit.edu

Abstract
Neural Module Networks (NMNs) aim at Visual Question Answering (VQA) via
composition of modules that tackle a sub-task. NMNs are a promising strategy to
achieve systematic generalization, ie. overcoming biasing factors in the training
distribution. However, the aspects of NMNs that facilitate systematic generalization are not fully understood. In this paper, we demonstrate that the degree of
modularity of the NMN have large influence on systematic generalization. In a
series of experiments on three VQA datasets (VQA-MNIST, SQOOP, and CLEVRCoGenT), our results reveal that tuning the degree of modularity, especially at the
image encoder stage, reaches substantially higher systematic generalization. These
findings lead to new NMN architectures that outperform previous ones in terms of
systematic generalization.

1

Introduction

The combinatorial nature of vision [1] is an open challenge for learning machines tackling Visual
Question Answering (VQA) [2–7]. The amount of possible combinations of object categories,
attributes, relations, context and visual tasks is exponentially large, and any training set contains a
limited amount of such combinations. The ability to generalize to combinations not included in the
training set, ie. the so-called systematic generalization [8–10], is a hallmark of intelligence.
Recent research has shown that Neural Module Networks (NMNs) are a promising approach for
systematic generalization in VQA [5, 11]. NMNs infer a program layout containing a sequence of
sub-tasks, where each sub-task is associated to a module consisting of a neural network [12, 13].
The aspects that facilitate systematic generalization in NMNs are not fully understood. Recent works
demonstrate that modular approaches are helpful for object recognition tasks with novel combinations
of category and viewpoints [14] and also novel combinations of visual attributes [15]. Bahdanau et
al. [11] have demonstrated the importance of using an appropriate program layout for systematic
generalization, and Bahdanau et al. [5] in another paper have shown that the module’s network architecture also impacts systematic generalization. These results highlight that using modules to tackle
sub-tasks and using compositions of these modules facilitates systematic generalization. However,
there is a central question at the heart of modular approaches that remains largely unaddressed: what
sub-tasks should be tackled by a module? Namely, is it best for systematic generalization to use a
large degree of modularity such that modules tackle very specific sub-tasks, or is it best to use a
smaller degree of modularity?
In this paper, we investigate what sub-tasks a module should perform in order to facilitate systematic
generalization in VQA. We analyse different degrees of modularity as in the example of Figure 1,
where NMNs could have three different degrees of modularity: (i) a unique module for tackling all
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

