Federated Graph Classification over Non-IID Graphs
Han Xie, Jing Ma, Li Xiong, Carl Yang⇤
Department of Computer Science, Emory University
{han.xie, jing.ma, lxiong, j.carlyang}@emory.edu

Abstract
Federated learning has emerged as an important paradigm for training machine
learning models in different domains. For graph-level tasks such as graph classification, graphs can also be regarded as a special type of data samples, which can be
collected and stored in separate local systems. Similar to other domains, multiple
local systems, each holding a small set of graphs, may benefit from collaboratively
training a powerful graph mining model, such as the popular graph neural networks (GNNs). To provide more motivation towards such endeavors, we analyze
real-world graphs from different domains to confirm that they indeed share certain
graph properties that are statistically significant compared with random graphs.
However, we also find that different sets of graphs, even from the same domain or
same dataset, are non-IID regarding both graph structures and node features. To
handle this, we propose a graph clustered federated learning (GCFL) framework
that dynamically finds clusters of local systems based on the gradients of GNNs,
and theoretically justify that such clusters can reduce the structure and feature
heterogeneity among graphs owned by the local systems. Moreover, we observe
the gradients of GNNs to be rather fluctuating in GCFL which impedes high-quality
clustering, and design a gradient sequence-based clustering mechanism based on
dynamic time warping (GCFL+). Extensive experimental results and in-depth
analysis demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed frameworks.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) as a distributed learning paradigm that trains centralized models on decentralized data has attracted much attention recently [28, 53, 25, 18, 17]. FL allows local systems to benefit
from each other while keeping their own data private. Especially, for local systems with scarce training data or lack of diverse distributions, FL provides them with the potentiality to leverage the power
of data from others, in order to facilitate the performance on their own local tasks. One important
problem FL concerns is data distribution heterogeneity, since the decentralized data, collected by
different institutes using different methods and aiming at different tasks, are highly likely to follow
non-identical distributions. Prior works approach this problem from different aspects, including
optimization process [25, 18], personalized FL [13, 6, 8], clustered FL [9, 15, 2], etc.
As more advanced techniques are developed for learning with graph data, using graphs to model
and solve real-world problems becomes more popular. One important scenario of graph learning is
graph classification, where models such as graph kernels [44, 34, 36, 45] and graph neural networks
[21, 43, 49, 46, 47, 48] are used to predict graph-level labels based on the features and structures
of graphs. One real scenario of graph classification is molecular property prediction, which is an
important task in cheminformatics and AI medicine. In the area of bioinformatics, graph classification
can be used to learn the representation of proteins and classify them into enzymes or non-enzymes.
For collaboration networks, sub-networks can be classified regarding the information of research
areas, topics, genre, etc. More applicable scenarios include geographic networks, temporal networks,
etc.
⇤

Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

