Unadversarial Examples: Designing Objects for Robust Vision

Hadi Salman∗
hady@mit.edu
MIT†

Andrew Ilyas∗
ailyas@mit.edu
MIT

Logan Engstrom∗
engstrom@mit.edu
MIT

Sai Vemprala
saihv@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research

Aleksander M ˛
adry
madry@mit.edu
MIT

Ashish Kapoor
akapoor@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We study a class of computer vision settings wherein one can modify the design of the objects being recognized. We develop a framework that leverages this
capability—and deep networks’ unusual sensitivity to input perturbations—to design “robust objects,” i.e., objects that are explicitly optimized to be confidently
classified. Our framework yields improved performance on standard benchmarks,
a simulated robotics environment, and physical-world experiments.1

1

Introduction

Performing reliably on unseen or shifting data distributions is a difficult challenge for modern computer vision systems. For example, slight rotations and translations of images suffice to reduce
the accuracy of state-of-the-art classifiers [ETT+19; ALG+19; KMF18]. Similarly, models that
attain near human-level performance on benchmarks exhibit significantly degraded performance
when faced with even mild image corruptions and transformations [HD19; KSH+19]. In fact, when
an adversary is allowed to modify inputs directly, standard vision models can be manipulated into
predicting arbitrary outputs (cf. adversarial examples [BCM+13; SZS+14]). While robustness interventions and additional training data can improve out-of-distribution behavior, they do not fully
close the gap between model performance on standard heldout data and on corrupted/otherwise unfamiliar data [TDS+20; HBM+20]. The situation is worse still when test-time distribution is underor mis-specified, which occurs commonly in practice.
How can we change this state of affairs? We propose a new approach to image recognition in the
face of unforeseen corruptions or distribution shifts. This approach is rooted in a reconsideration of
the problem setup itself. Specifically, we observe that in many situations, a system designer actually
controls, to some extent, the inputs that are fed into that model. For example, a drone operator
seeking to train a landing pad detector can modify the surface of the landing pad; and, a roboticist
training a perception model to recognize a small set of custom objects can slightly alter the texture
or design of these objects.
We find that such control over inputs can be leveraged to drastically improve our ability to tackle
computer vision tasks. In particular, it allows us to turn the input-sensitivity of modern vision
systems from a weakness into a strength. Instead of optimizing inputs to mislead models (e.g., as
in adversarial examples), we can alter inputs to reinforce correct behavior, yielding what we refer
to as “unadversarial examples.” Indeed, we show that even a simple gradient-based algorithm can
∗

Equal contribution.
Work partially completed while at Microsoft Research.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/unadversarial.

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

