Pay Better Attention to Attention: Head Selection in
Multilingual and Multi-Domain Sequence Modeling

Hongyu Gong, Yun Tang, Juan Miguel Pino, Xian Li
Facebook AI Research
{hygong,yuntang,juancarabina,xianl}@fb.com

Abstract
Multi-head attention has each of the attention heads collect salient information
from different parts of an input sequence, making it a powerful mechanism for
sequence modeling. Multilingual and multi-domain learning are common scenarios
for sequence modeling, where the key challenge is to maximize positive transfer
and mitigate negative interference across languages and domains. In this paper, we
find that non-selective attention sharing is sub-optimal for achieving good generalization across all languages and domains. We further propose attention sharing
strategies to facilitate parameter sharing and specialization in multilingual and
multi-domain sequence modeling. Our approach automatically learns shared and
specialized attention heads for different languages and domains. Evaluated in various tasks including speech recognition, text-to-text and speech-to-text translation,
the proposed attention sharing strategies consistently bring gains to sequence models built upon multi-head attention. For speech-to-text translation, our approach
yields an average of +2.0 BLEU over 13 language directions in multilingual setting
and +2.0 BLEU over 3 domains in multi-domain setting.

1

Introduction

Recent progress on deep learning models, in particular multi-head attention, has brought significant
gains to sequence modeling tasks including speech recognition (Moritz et al., 2020), text-to-text
translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), and speech-to-text translation (Vila et al., 2018; Gangi et al., 2019).
Attention mechanism allows a model to focus on informative parts of the inputs, and multi-head
attention computes attention over inputs by multiple heads independently. With each head attending
to different information, multi-head attention potentially captures more complicated data patterns and
extracts sophisticated knowledge.
Sequence modeling has attracted a lot of research interest in multilingual and multi-domain settings,
where a model is trained on data in multiple language directions and data from different domains
respectively. Key advantages of these settings are better data efficiency and the support of knowledge
transfer among languages or domains. This is critical for resource-limited scenarios. For example,
multilingual translation enhances the performance of low-resource languages via knowledge transfer
from high-resource languages (Gu et al., 2018; Inaguma et al., 2019b). Given the data scarcity in
individual domains, a common practice is to combine the data from various domains to augment the
training set (Wang et al., 2020d). Another appealing aspect of multilingual or multi-domain models is
their low deployment and maintenance costs compared with numerous models trained for individual
language pairs or domains.
Despite the positive knowledge transfer, negative interference has also been observed in multilingual
(or multi-domain) training especially when languages (or domains) are dissimilar. Recent studies
reveal from the optimization perspective that conflicting gradients in shared parameters is one cause of
interference between languages (or domains) (Yu et al., 2020). A promising direction for interference
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

