Learning Barrier Certificates: Towards Safe
Reinforcement Learning with Zero Training-time
Violations
Yuping Luo
Princeton University
yupingl@cs.princeton.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Training-time safety violations have been a major concern when we deploy reinforcement learning algorithms in the real world. This paper explores the possibility
of safe RL algorithms with zero training-time safety violations in the challenging
setting where we are only given a safe but trivial-reward initial policy without
any prior knowledge of the dynamics and additional offline data. We propose an
algorithm, Co-trained Barrier Certificate for Safe RL (CRABS),which iteratively
learns barrier certificates, dynamics models, and policies. The barrier certificates
are learned via adversarial training and ensure the policy’s safety assuming calibrated learned dynamics. We also add a regularization term to encourage larger
certified regions to enable better exploration. Empirical simulations show that zero
safety violations are already challenging for a suite of simple environments with
only 2-4 dimensional state space, especially if high-reward policies have to visit
regions near the safety boundary. Prior methods require hundreds of violations to
achieve decent rewards on these tasks, whereas our proposed algorithms incur zero
violations.

1

Introduction

Researchers have demonstrated that reinforcement learning (RL) can solve complex tasks such as
Atari games [Mnih et al., 2015], Go [Silver et al., 2017], dexterous manipulation tasks [Akkaya et al.,
2019], and many more robotics tasks in simulated environments [Haarnoja et al., 2018]. However,
deploying RL algorithms to real-world problems still faces the hurdle that they require many unsafe
environment interactions. For example, a robot’s unsafe environment interactions include falling
and hitting other objects, which incur physical damage costly to repair. Many recent deep RL
works reduce the number of environment interactions significantly (e.g., see Haarnoja et al. [2018],
Fujimoto et al. [2018], Janner et al. [2019], Dong et al. [2020], Luo et al. [2019], Chua et al. [2018]
and reference therein), but the number of unsafe interactions is still prohibitive for safety-critical
applications such as robotics, medicine, or autonomous vehicles [Berkenkamp et al., 2017].
Reducing the number of safety violations may not be sufficient for these safety-critical applications—
we may have to eliminate them. This paper explores the possibility of safe RL algorithms with zero
safety violations in both training time and test time. We also consider the challenging setting where
we are only given a safe but trivial-reward initial policy.
A recent line of works on safe RL design novel actor-critic based algorithms under the constrained
policy optimization formulation [Thananjeyan et al., 2021, Srinivasan et al., 2020, Bharadhwaj et al.,
2020, Yang et al., 2020, Stooke et al., 2020]. They significantly reduce the number of training-time
safety violations. However, these algorithms fundamentally learn the safety constraints by contrasting
the safe and unsafe trajectories. In other words, because the safety set is only specified through the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

