Memory Efficient Meta-Learning with Large Images

John Bronskill∗
University of Cambridge
jfb54@cam.ac.uk
Katja Hofmann
Microsoft Research
kahofman@microsoft.com

Daniela Massiceti∗
Microsoft Research
dmassiceti@microsoft.com

Massimiliano Patacchiola∗
University of Cambridge
mp2008@cam.ac.uk

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research
senowoz@microsoft.com

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Meta learning approaches to few-shot classification are computationally efficient at
test time, requiring just a few optimization steps or single forward pass to learn a
new task, but they remain highly memory-intensive to train. This limitation arises
because a task’s entire support set, which can contain up to 1000 images, must be
processed before an optimization step can be taken. Harnessing the performance
gains offered by large images thus requires either parallelizing the meta-learner
across multiple GPUs, which may not be available, or trade-offs between task
and image size when memory constraints apply. We improve on both options by
proposing LITE, a general and memory efficient episodic training scheme that
enables meta-training on large tasks composed of large images on a single GPU.
We achieve this by observing that the gradients for a task can be decomposed into
a sum of gradients over the task’s training images. This enables us to perform a
forward pass on a task’s entire training set but realize significant memory savings
by back-propagating only a random subset of these images which we show is an
unbiased approximation of the full gradient. We use LITE to train meta-learners
and demonstrate new state-of-the-art accuracy on the real-world ORBIT benchmark
and 3 of the 4 parts of the challenging VTAB+MD benchmark relative to leading
meta-learners. LITE also enables meta-learners to be competitive with transfer
learning approaches but at a fraction of the test time computational cost, thus
serving as a counterpoint to the recent narrative that transfer learning is all you
need for few-shot classification.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning approaches to few-shot classification are very computationally efficient. Once metatrained, they can learn a new task at test time with as few as 1-5 optimization steps [1, 2] or a
single forward pass through the model [3–5] and with minimal or no hyper-parameter tuning. In
contrast, transfer learning approaches based on fine-tuning typically rely on a large pre-trained feature
extractor, and instead take 100s-1000s of optimization steps at test time in order to learn a task [6],
thus incurring a high computational cost for each new task encountered. This makes meta-learned
solutions attractive in compute-constrained deployments, or scenarios where the model must learn
multiple different tasks or update on-the-fly (e.g. in continual and online learning settings [7–10]).
However, a crucial barrier to progress is that meta-learning approaches are memory-intensive to
train and thus cannot easily leverage large images for a performance boost, as recent fine-tuning
approaches have done. This limitation arises because a meta-learner must back-propagate through all
∗

Authors contributed equally

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

