Asynchronous Stochastic Optimization
Robust to Arbitrary Delays

Alon Cohen
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research Israel
alonco@tauex.tau.ac.il

Amit Daniely
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and Google Research Israel
amit.daniely@mail.huji.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research Israel
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Yoel Drori
Google Research Israel
dyoel@google.com

Mariano Schain
Google Research Israel
marianos@google.com

Abstract
We consider stochastic optimization with delayed gradients where, at each time step 𝑡,
the algorithm makes an update using a stale stochastic gradient from step 𝑡 − 𝑑𝑡 for
some arbitrary delay 𝑑𝑡 . This setting abstracts asynchronous distributed optimization
where a central server receives gradient updates computed by worker machines.
These machines can experience computation and communication loads that might
vary significantly over time. In the general non-convex smooth optimization setting,
we give a simple and efficient algorithm that requires 𝑂 ( σ2 /ϵ4P
+ τ/ϵ2 ) steps for
1
finding an ϵ-stationary point 𝑥, where τ is the average delay 𝑇 𝑇𝑡=1 𝑑𝑡 and σ2 is
the variance of the stochastic gradients. This improves over previous work, which
showed that stochastic gradient decent achieves the same rate but with respect to
the maximal delay max𝑡 𝑑𝑡 , that can be significantly larger than the average delay
especially in heterogeneous distributed systems. Our experiments demonstrate the
efficacy and robustness of our algorithm in cases where the delay distribution is
skewed or heavy-tailed.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based iterative optimization methods are widely used in large-scale machine learning
applications as they are extremely simple to implement and use, and come with mild computational
requirements. On the other hand, in their standard formulation they are also inherently serial and
synchronous due to their iterative nature. For example, in stochastic gradient descent (SGD), each step
involves an update of the form 𝑥 𝑡+1 = 𝑥 𝑡 − η𝑔𝑡 where 𝑥 𝑡 is the current iterate, and 𝑔𝑡 is a (stochastic)
gradient vector evaluated at 𝑥 𝑡 . To progress to the next step of the method, the subsequent iterate 𝑥 𝑡+1
has to be fully determined by the end of step 𝑡 as it is required for future gradient queries. Evidently,
this scheme has to wait for the computation of the gradient 𝑔𝑡 to complete (this is often the most
computationally intensive part in SGD) before it can evaluate 𝑥 𝑡+1 .
In modern large scale machine learning applications, a direct serial implementation of gradient
methods like SGD is overly costly, and parallelizing the optimization process over several cores or
machines is desired. Perhaps the most common parallelization approach is via mini-batching, where
computation of stochastic gradients is distributed across several worker machines that send updates to
a parameter server. The parameter server is responsible for accruing the individual updates into a
single averaged gradient, and consequently, updating the optimization parameters using this gradient.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

