Profiling Pareto Front With Multi-Objective
Stein Variational Gradient Descent
Xingchao Liu ∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
xcliu@utexas.edu

Xin T. Tong
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
mattxin@nus.edu.sg

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.texas.edu

Abstract
Finding diverse and representative Pareto solutions from the Pareto front is a key
challenge in multi-objective optimization (MOO). In this work, we propose a
novel gradient-based algorithm for profiling Pareto front by using Stein variational
gradient descent (SVGD). We also provide a counterpart of our method based on
Langevin dynamics. Our methods iteratively update a set of points in a parallel
fashion to push them towards the Pareto front using multiple gradient descent,
while encouraging the diversity between the particles by using the repulsive force
mechanism in SVGD, or diffusion noise in Langevin dynamics. Compared with
existing gradient-based methods that require predefined preference functions, our
method can work efficiently in high dimensional problems, and can obtain more
diverse solutions evenly distributed in the Pareto front. Moreover, our methods
are theoretically guaranteed to converge to the Pareto front. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method, especially the SVGD algorithm, through extensive
experiments, showing its superiority over existing gradient-based algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many scientific and engineering problems involve optimizing multiple conflicting objectives [5, 28,
4, 24], including, for example, designing wireless sensors [12], building electric power systems [30],
and training neural networks with multiple tasks [35]. With multiple conflicting objectives, it is
impossible to find a single solution that optimizes all the objectives simultaneously. Instead, it is
essential to find a set of diverse solutions in the Pareto front that represent different preferences on
the different objective functions, so that the users can have a global view of how the optimal trade-off
of the different objectives look like and select the solution according to their own preference.
Unfortunately, profiling the Pareto fronts casts a key computational challenge, especially for high
dimensional problems [5, 12, 28]. Traditionally, a large literature has been devoted to developing
black-box, derivative-free algorithms that are suitable for black-box optimization, such as these
based on evolutionary algorithms [8] and Bayesian optimization [25, 1, 39]. However, the black-box
algorithms tend to be expensive and can only be applied to small scale problems due to the lack of
gradient information. Gradient-based MOO algorithms have been catching attention only recently,
which include mainly multiple gradient descent (MGD) based methods [10, 22, 27]. However,
∗

Code is available at https://github.com/gnobitab/MultiObjectiveSampling.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

