Minimax Optimal Quantile and Semi-Adversarial
Regret via Root-Logarithmic Regularizers

Jeffrey Negrea∗
University of Toronto
jeffrey.negrea@mail.utoronto.ca

Blair Bilodeau∗
University of Toronto
blair.bilodeau@mail.utoronto.ca

Nicolò Campolongo
Spanflug Technologies GmbH
nico.campolongo@spanflug.de

Francesco Orabona
Boston University
francesco@orabona.com

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto
daniel.roy@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Quantile (and, more generally, KL) regret bounds, such as those achieved by
NormalHedge (Chaudhuri, Freund, and Hsu 2009) and its variants, relax the
goal of competing against the best individual expert to only competing against
a majority of experts on adversarial data. More recently, the semi-adversarial
paradigm (Bilodeau, Negrea, and Roy 2020) provides an alternative relaxation of
adversarial online learning by considering data that may be neither fully adversarial
nor stochastic (i.i.d.). We achieve the minimax optimal regret in both paradigms
using FTRL with separate, novel, root-logarithmic regularizers, both of which
can be interpreted as yielding variants of NormalHedge. We extend existing KL
regret upper bounds, which hold uniformly over target distributions, to possibly
uncountable expert classes with arbitrary priors; provide the first full-information
lower bounds for quantile regret on finite expert classes (which are tight); and
provide an adaptively minimax optimal algorithm for the semi-adversarial paradigm
that adapts to the true, unknown constraint faster, leading to uniformly improved
regret bounds over existing methods.

1

Introduction

We focus on the setting of learning with expert advice [V90; LW94], where in each round the learner
selects a probability distribution over experts, observes the loss of each expert, and incurs the average
loss of the experts under the learner’s selected distribution. The learner’s objective is to minimize
regret against some mixture of the experts, which is the difference between their cumulative loss and
the cumulative loss of the expert mixture over T rounds.
The classical “worst-case” online learning paradigm assumes that the losses are adversarial—that
is, they are chosen to make the learner perform as poorly as possible—and demands that the learner
competes against the best-performing expert. However, there are many real-world settings where
this assumption is too pessimistic, and consequently we focus on designing algorithms with provable
guarantees that adapt to easier notions of both data and performance measures. A non-exhaustive list
∗

Equal contribution authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

