Stability and Generalization of Bilevel Programming
in Hyperparameter Optimization

Fan Bao∗, Guoqiang Wu∗ , Chongxuan Li∗ , Jun Zhu†, Bo Zhang
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Huawei Joint Center for AI
BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
bf19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,{guoqiangwu90, chongxuanli1991}@gmail.com,
{dcszj, dcszb}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The (gradient-based) bilevel programming framework is widely used in hyperparameter optimization and has achieved excellent performance empirically. Previous
theoretical work mainly focuses on its optimization properties, while leaving the
analysis on generalization largely open. This paper attempts to address the issue by
presenting an expectation bound w.r.t. the validation set based on uniform stability.
Our results can explain some mysterious behaviours of the bilevel programming
in practice, for instance, overfitting to the validation set. We also present an expectation bound for the classical cross-validation algorithm. Our results suggest
that gradient-based algorithms can be better than cross-validation under certain
conditions in a theoretical perspective. Furthermore, we prove that regularization
terms in both the outer and inner levels can relieve the overfitting problem in
gradient-based algorithms. In experiments on feature learning and data reweighting
for noisy labels, we corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter optimization (HO) is a common problem arising from various fields including
neural architecture search [24, 8], feature learning [10], data reweighting for imbalanced or noisy
samples [33, 37, 9, 35], and semi-supervised learning [14]. Formally, HO seeks the hyperparameterhypothesis pair that achieves the lowest expected risk on testing samples from an unknown distribution.
Before testing, however, only a set of training samples and a set of validation ones are given. The
validation and testing samples are assumed to be from the same distribution. In contrast, depending
on the task, the underlying distributions of the training and testing samples can be the same [24, 10]
or different [33].
Though various methods [17] have been developed to solve HO (See Section 5 for a comprehensive
review), the bilevel programming (BP) [6, 32, 10] framework is a natural solution and has achieved
excellent performance in practice [24]. BP consists of two nested search problems: in the inner
level, it seeks the best hypothesis (e.g., a prediction model) on the training set given a specific
configuration of the hyperparameter (e.g., the model architectures), while in the outer level, it seeks
the hyperparameter (and its associated hypothesis) that results in the best hypothesis in terms of the
error on the validation set.
∗
Equal contribution. G. Wu is now at School of Software, Shandong University and C. Li is now at Gaoling
School of AI, Renmin University of China. The work was done when they were at Tsinghua University.
†
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

