A sampling-based circuit for optimal decision making

Cristina Savin
Center for Neural Science
Center for Data Science
New York University
New York, NY 10003
csavin@nyu.edu

Camille E. Rullán Buxó
Center for Neural Science
New York University
New York, NY 10003
ch2880@nyu.edu

Abstract
Many features of human and animal behavior can be understood in the framework
of Bayesian inference and optimal decision making, but the biological substrate of
such processes is not fully understood. Neural sampling provides a flexible code
for probabilistic inference in high dimensions and explains key features of sensory
responses under experimental manipulations of uncertainty. However, since it
encodes uncertainty implicitly, across time and neurons, it remains unclear how
such representations can be used for decision making. Here we propose a spiking
network model that maps neural samples of a task-specific marginal distribution
into an instantaneous representation of uncertainty via a procedure inspired by
online kernel density estimation, so that its output can be readily used for decision
making. Our model is consistent with experimental results at the level of single
neurons and populations, and makes predictions for how neural responses and
decisions could be modulated by uncertainty and prior biases. More generally, our
work brings together conflicting perspectives on probabilistic brain computation.
One of the central questions of perception is how organisms reliably estimate hidden or abstract
quantities of interest using noisy and ambiguous sensory information. Almost equally important is
representing the reliability of these estimates, especially in complex environments and situations
of risk, where the uncertainty associated with a choice may radically change the optimal course of
action. From basic functions, such as cue combination or motor control, to higher level cognitive
tasks, such as decision making and planning, there is substantial evidence that both humans and
animals represent and use uncertainty information to guide their actions [1]. Neural correlates have
been identified in a number of regions, including the orbitofrontal cortex [2], the cingulate cortex [3],
and the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) [4, 5], but the principles behind how uncertainty is represented
in neural circuits to support circuit computations remain hotly debated.
Since behavior has been shown to be Bayes-optimal in many situations [6], the problem of perception
can be modelled in the framework of Bayesian inference, whereby an observer combines prior
information with current observations according to an internal model to arrive at a posterior estimate
of a quantity of interest (the ‘latent variable’). Moreover, natural statistics are strongly non-Gaussian
and there is evidence that human subjects use varied, non-Gaussian prior representations to support
behavior [7, 8], so observers must be able to perform inference flexibly, efficiently and adaptively.
This raises two questions: which neural organizations allow for these kinds of computations, and how
are the associated neural representations mapped into behaviorally relevant action plans?
Currently there are several theories for how neural activity may represent probability distributions.
One large class of models assume that neural responses encode parameters of underlying posterior
distributions; this includes probabilistic population codes [9, 10], their predecessors, kernel density
estimators and distributional population codes [11, 12], and most recently, distributed distributional
codes (DDC) [13]. A second class of models relies on stochasticity in recurrent circuits to approxi35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), .

