Enabling Fast Differentially Private SGD
via Just-in-Time Compilation and Vectorization

Pranav Subramani∗
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
pranav.subramani@uwaterloo.ca

Nicholas Vadivelu∗
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
nbvadive@uwaterloo.ca

Gautam Kamath
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
g@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
A common pain point in differentially private machine learning is the significant
runtime overhead incurred when executing Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DPSGD), which may be as large as two orders of magnitude. We
thoroughly demonstrate that by exploiting powerful language primitives, including
vectorization, just-in-time compilation, and static graph optimization, one can
dramatically reduce these overheads, in many cases nearly matching the best nonprivate running times. These gains are realized in two frameworks: one is JAX,
which provides rich support for these primitives through the XLA compiler. We
also rebuild core parts of TensorFlow Privacy, integrating more effective vectorization as well as XLA compilation, granting significant memory and runtime
improvements over previous release versions. Our proposed approaches allow us to
achieve up to 50x speedups compared to the best alternatives. Our code is available
at https://github.com/TheSalon/fast-dpsgd.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has recently experienced tremedous growth, being used to solve problems with
unprecedented accuracy in a myriad of domains. However, not all domains are alike—while many
datasets are freely available, we often would like to train ML models on sensitive data. Troublingly,
it has been demonstrated that disregarding these concerns, or even using heuristic and best-effort
privacy approaches, can result in significant leakage of private information [9, 12]. Differential
privacy (DP) [16] has emerged as a strong and rigorous notion of data privacy, capable of protecting
against privacy violations in a variety of settings.
One of the workhorse algorithms in machine learning is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) which has
a differentially private analogue, DPSGD [43, 8, 2] which was introduced as a drop-in replacement
for SGD. The primary differences include a per-example gradient clipping step and a batch-level
addition of Gaussian noise. While these modifications seem relatively innocuous, they have so far led
to non-trivial costs in terms of running time and final accuracy. In this paper, we address and mitigate
the running time overhead of DPSGD.
Most modern machine learning frameworks allow efficient access to average minibatch gradients, and
not at a per-example level. Access to these objects is critical in DPSGD, as well as other applications
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

