Breaking the centralized barrier for cross-device
federated learning∗

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
EPFL
sai.karimireddy@epfl.ch
Mehryar Mohri
Google Research
mohri@google.com

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Sashank J. Reddi
Google Research
sashank@google.com

Satyen Kale
Google Research
satyenkale@google.com

Sebastian U. Stich
EPFL
sebastian.stich@epfl.ch

Ananda Theertha Suresh
Google Research
theertha@google.com

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a challenging setting for optimization due to the heterogeneity of the data across different clients which can cause a client drift phenomenon. In fact, designing an algorithm for FL that is uniformly better than
simple centralized training has been a major open problem thus far. In this work,
we propose a general algorithmic framework, M IME, which i) mitigates client
drift and ii) adapts an arbitrary centralized optimization algorithm such as momentum and Adam to the cross-device federated learning setting. M IME uses a
combination of control-variates and server-level optimizer state (e.g. momentum)
at every client-update step to ensure that each local update mimics that of the centralized method run on i.i.d. data. We prove a reduction result showing that M IME
can translate the convergence of a generic algorithm in the centralized setting into
convergence in the federated setting. Moreover, we show that, when combined
with momentum-based variance reduction, M IME is provably faster than any centralized method–the first such result. We also perform a thorough experimental
exploration of M IME’s performance on real world datasets (implemented here).

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an increasingly important large-scale learning framework where the training data remains distributed over a large number of clients, which may be mobile phones or network
sensors [38, 37, 43, 44, 28]. A server then orchestrates the clients to train a single model, here referred to as a server model, without ever transmitting client data over the network, thereby providing
some basic levels of data privacy and security.
Two important settings are distinguished in FL [28, Table 1]: the cross-device and the cross-silo
settings. The cross-silo setting corresponds to a relatively small number of reliable clients, typically
organizations, such as medical or financial institutions. In contrast, in the cross-device federated
learning setting, the number of clients may be extremely large and include, for example, all 3.5 billion active android phones [25]. Thus, in that setting, we may never make even a single pass over
∗

This work was also appears under the alternative title “Mime: Mimicking Centralized Stochastic Algorithms in Federated Learning” [31].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

