On The Structure of Parametric Tournaments with
Application to Ranking from Pairwise Comparisons

Vishnu Veerathu∗
Cohesity Inc.
ofvishnuveerathu@gmail.com

Arun Rajkumar
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Robert Bosch Center for Data Science and AI
arunr@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
We consider the classical problem of finding the minimum feedback arc set on
tournaments (MFAST). The problem is NP-hard in general and we study it for
important classes of tournaments that arise naturally in the problem of learning to
rank from pairwise comparisons. Specifically, we consider tournaments classes
that arise out of parametric preference matrices that can lead to cyclic preference
relations. We investigate their structural properties via forbidden sub tournament
configurations. Towards this, we introduce Tournament Dimension - a combinatorial parameter that characterizes the size of a forbidden configuration for rank r
tournament classes i.e., classes that arise out of pairwise preference matrices which
lead to rank r skew-symmetric matrices under a suitable link function. Our main result is a polynomial-time algorithm - Rank2Rank - that solves the MFAST problem
for the rank 2 tournament class. This is achieved via a geometric characterization
that relies on our explicit construction of a forbidden configuration for this class.
Building on our understanding of the rank-2 tournament class, we propose a
very general and flexible parametric pairwise preference model called the localglobal model which subsumes the popular Bradley-Terry-Luce/Thurstone classes to
capture locally cyclic as well as globally acyclic preference relations. We develop
a polynomial-time algorithm - BlockRank2Rank- to solve the MFAST problem
on the associated Block-Rank 2 tournament class.
As an application, we study the problem of learning to rank from pairwise comparisons under the proposed local-global preference model. Exploiting our structural
characterization, we propose PairwiseBlockRank - a pairwise ranking algorithm
for this class. We show sample complexity bounds of PairwiseBlockRank to
learn a good ranking under the proposed model. Finally, we conduct experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets to show the efficacy of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

A tournament is a complete directed graph. Given a tournament T, the classical feedback arc set
on tournament (MFAST) problem asks for the minimum number of edges that must be removed
(or whose orientation reversed) in T to make it acyclic [3]. The problem is known to be NP-hard
for general tournaments [6]. We investigate the MFAST problem for several classes of tournaments
which naturally occur in learning to rank from pairwise comparisons. In particular, we wish to study
the MFAST problem on tournament classes which arise out of parametric pairwise preference classes.
Popular parametric preference models such as the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) [4; 17] and Thurstone
models [25] give rise to acyclic tournament matrices for which the MFAST problem is trivial. Our
∗

Cohesity, Inc, has neither endorsed nor sponsored this research or its publication in any way; the author’s
research opinions and findings are his own.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

