Repulsive Deep Ensembles are Bayesian
Francesco D’Angelo
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
dngfra@gmail.com

Vincent Fortuin
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
fortuin@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Deep ensembles have recently gained popularity in the deep learning community
for their conceptual simplicity and efficiency. However, maintaining functional
diversity between ensemble members that are independently trained with gradient
descent is challenging. This can lead to pathologies when adding more ensemble
members, such as a saturation of the ensemble performance, which converges to
the performance of a single model. Moreover, this does not only affect the quality
of its predictions, but even more so the uncertainty estimates of the ensemble, and
thus its performance on out-of-distribution data. We hypothesize that this limitation
can be overcome by discouraging different ensemble members from collapsing to
the same function. To this end, we introduce a kernelized repulsive term in the
update rule of the deep ensembles. We show that this simple modification not only
enforces and maintains diversity among the members but, even more importantly,
transforms the maximum a posteriori inference into proper Bayesian inference.
Namely, we show that the training dynamics of our proposed repulsive ensembles
follow a Wasserstein gradient flow of the KL divergence to the true posterior.
We study repulsive terms in weight and function space and empirically compare
their performance to standard ensembles and Bayesian baselines on synthetic and
real-world prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

There have been many recent advances on the theoretical properties of sampling algorithms for
approximate Bayesian inference, which changed our interpretation and understanding of them.
Particularly worth mentioning is the work of Jordan et al. [38], who reinterpret Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) as a gradient flow of the KL divergence over the Wasserstein space of probability
measures. This new formulation allowed for a deeper understanding of approximate inference
methods but also inspired the inception of new and more efficient inference strategies. Following
this direction, Liu and Wang [51] recently proposed the Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD)
method to perform approximate Wasserstein gradient descent. Conceptually, this method, which
belongs to the family of particle-optimization variational inference (POVI), introduces a repulsive
force through a kernel acting in the parameter space to evolve a set of samples towards high-density
regions of the target distribution without collapsing to a point estimate.
Another method which has achieved great success recently are ensembles of neural networks (socalled deep ensembles), which work well both in terms of predictive performance [42, 80] as well as
uncertainty estimation [65], and have also been proposed as a way to perform approximate inference
in Bayesian neural networks [82, 36]. That being said, while they might allow for the averaging of
predictions over several hypotheses, they do not offer any guarantees for the diversity between those
hypotheses nor do they provably converge to the true Bayesian posterior under any meaningful limit.
In this work, we show how the introduction of a repulsive term between the members in the ensemble,
inspired by SVGD, not only naïvely guarantees the diversity among the members, avoiding their
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

