Deep Molecular Representation Learning via Fusing
Physical and Chemical Information

1

Shuwen Yang1∗ , Ziyao Li2∗, Guojie Song1†, Lingsheng Cai1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligence (MOE),
Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
{swyang,leeeezy,gjsong,cailingsheng}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecular representation learning is the first yet vital step in combining deep learning and molecular science. To push the boundaries of molecular representation
learning, we present PhysChem, a novel neural architecture that learns molecular representations via fusing physical and chemical information of molecules.
PhysChem is composed of a physicist network (PhysNet) and a chemist network
(ChemNet). PhysNet is a neural physical engine that learns molecular conformations through simulating molecular dynamics with parameterized forces; ChemNet
implements geometry-aware deep message-passing to learn chemical / biomedical
properties of molecules. Two networks specialize in their own tasks and cooperate
by providing expertise to each other. By fusing physical and chemical information,
PhysChem achieved state-of-the-art performances on MoleculeNet, a standard
molecular machine learning benchmark. The effectiveness of PhysChem was
further corroborated on cutting-edge datasets of SARS-CoV-2.

1

Introduction

The intersection between deep learning and molecular science has recently caught the eye of researchers in both areas. Remarkable progress was made in applications including molecular property
prediction [36, 16], molecular graph generation [37, 12, 28], and virtual screening for drug discovery
[8, 31], yet learning representations for molecules remains the first yet vital step. Molecular representation learning, or learning molecular fingerprints, aims to encode input notations of molecules
into numerical vectors, which later serve as features for downstream tasks. Earlier deep molecular
representation methods generally used off-the-shelf network architectures including message-passing
neural networks [9], graph attention networks [36] and Transformers [11, 24]. These methods took
either line notations (e.g. SMILES3 ) or graph notations (i.e. structural formulas) of molecules
as inputs, whereas physical and chemical essence of molecules was largely neglected. Notably, a
trend of integrating 3D conformations (i.e. the 3D Cartesian coordinates of atoms) into molecular
representations recently emerged [4, 15, 29], while most of these methods assume the availability of
labeled conformations of target molecules.
In order to push the boundaries of molecular representation learning, we revisited molecules from both
physical and chemical perspectives. Modern physicists generally regard molecules as particle systems
that continuously move following the laws of (quantum) mechanics. The dominant conformations of
molecules reflect the equilibriums of these micro mechanical systems, and are thus of wide interest.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.
3
SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Specification [34]) is a widely used protocol that specifies
(non-unique) line notations for molecules, CCO for ethanol, for example.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

