Learning Generative Vision Transformer with
Energy-Based Latent Space for Saliency Prediction

Jing Zhang1 , Jianwen Xie1 , Nick Barnes2 , Ping Li1
1
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research
2
The Australian National University
{zjnwpu, jianwen.kenny, pingli98}@gmail.com, nick.barnes@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Vision transformer networks have shown superiority in many computer vision
tasks. In this paper, we take a step further by proposing a novel generative vision
transformer with latent variables following an informative energy-based prior for
salient object detection. Both the vision transformer network and the energy-based
prior model are jointly trained via Markov chain Monte Carlo-based maximum
likelihood estimation, in which the sampling from the intractable posterior and prior
distributions of the latent variables are performed by Langevin dynamics. Further,
with the generative vision transformer, we can easily obtain a pixel-wise uncertainty
map from an image, which indicates the model confidence in predicting saliency
from the image. Different from the existing generative models which define the
prior distribution of the latent variables as a simple isotropic Gaussian distribution,
our model uses an energy-based informative prior which can be more expressive
to capture the latent space of the data. We apply the proposed framework to both
RGB and RGB-D salient object detection tasks. Extensive experimental results
show that our framework can achieve not only accurate saliency predictions but
also meaningful uncertainty maps that are consistent with the human perception.

1

Introduction

In the field of computer vision, salient object detection [64, 65, 16, 17, 5, 89] (SOD) or visual saliency
prediction, which aims at highlighting objects more attentive than the surrounding areas in images, has
achieved significant performance improvement with the deep convolutional neural network revolution.
Given a set of training images along with their saliency annotations, the conventional SOD models
seek to learn a deterministic one-to-one mapping from image domain to saliency domain.
Two main issues exist in the above conventional deep saliency prediction framework: (i) the convolution operation based on sliding window makes the deep saliency prediction model less effective in
modeling the global contrast of the image, which is essential for salient object detection [7]; (ii) the
one-to-one deterministic mapping mechanism makes the current framework not only impossible to
represent the pixel-wise uncertainty in predicting salient objects, but also hard to handle incomplete
data in a weakly supervised scenario [89]. Besides, given an image, the saliency output of a human
is subjective, therefore, a stochastic generative model is more natural than a deterministic model
for representing saliency prediction. Although [85] introduces a conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) [56] for RGB-D salient object detection, the potential posterior collapse problem [23] makes
the stochastic predictions less effective in generating meaningful uncertainty estimation.
Motivated by the above two issues, we propose a novel framework, the generative vision transformer,
for salient object detection, where a vision transformer structure [40] is used as a backbone and latent
variables are introduced in designing our generative framework. On the one hand, transformers [60]
have proven to be very effective in long-range dependency modeling, and are capable of modeling
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

