Locality Sensitive Teaching

Zhaozhuo Xu
Rice University
zx22@rice.edu

Beidi Chen
Stanford University
beidic@stanford.edu

Weiyang Liu
University of Cambridge and MPI-IS Tübingen
wl396@cam.ac.uk
Yingyan Lin
Rice University
yingyan.lin@rice.edu

Chaojian Li
Rice University
chaojian.li@rice.edu
Le Song
Biomap and MBZUAI
dasongle@gmail.com

Anshumali Shrivastava
Rice University and ThirdAI Corp.
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
The emergence of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) sheds light on applying the machine teaching (MT) algorithms for online personalized education on home devices. This direction becomes more promising during the COVID-19 pandemic
when in-person education becomes infeasible. However, as one of the most influential and practical MT paradigms, iterative machine teaching (IMT) is prohibited
on IoT devices due to its inefficient and unscalable algorithms. IMT is a paradigm
where a teacher feeds examples iteratively and intelligently based on the learner’s
status. In each iteration, current IMT algorithms greedily traverse the whole training set to find an example for the learner, which is computationally expensive in
practice. We propose a novel teaching framework, Locality Sensitive Teaching
(LST), based on locality sensitive sampling, to overcome these challenges. LST
has provable near-constant time complexity, which is exponentially better than
the existing baseline. With at most 425.12× speedups and 99.76% energy savings
over IMT, LST is the first algorithm that enables energy and time efficient machine
teaching on IoT devices. Owing to LST’s substantial efficiency and scalability, it
is readily applicable in real-world education scenarios.

1

Introduction

During the COVID-19 pandemic, there is an increasing demand for learning at home. Computerbased personalized education (CBPE) [1, 2, 3] on Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices become essential
as it improves the accessibility of students to the educational resources and reduces the potential
privacy risks. Due to the popularity of Coursera, Duolingo, and EdX, online on-device education has become increasingly more important nowadays. To better understand and improve the
CBPE approaches in this context, we consider machine teaching (MT) [4] as a simplified yet helpful
paradigm. Specifically, MT defines the problem where a machine teacher constructs a minimal set of
examples that allows a student to learn a target concept repeatedly. However, MT on the IoT device
is still prohibitive for two primary reasons: (1) MT technique does not allow real-time interaction
between teachers and students. It is designed to work over a static set and cannot incorporate realtime student feedback, (2) MT can not support on-device training due to the expensive cost spent in
constructing this minimal teaching set.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

