Optimal Best-Arm Identification Methods for
Tail-Risk Measures
Shubhada Agrawal
TIFR, Mumbai, India
shubhadaiitd@gmail.com

Wouter M. Koolen
CWI, Amsterdam
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Sandeep Juneja
TIFR, Mumbai, India
juneja@tifr.res.in

Abstract
Conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) and value-at-risk (VaR) are popular tail-risk
measures in finance and insurance industries as well as in highly reliable, safetycritical uncertain environments where often the underlying probability distributions
are heavy-tailed. We use the multi-armed bandit best-arm identification framework
and consider the problem of identifying the arm from amongst finitely many that has
the smallest CVaR, VaR, or weighted sum of CVaR and mean. The latter captures
the risk-return trade-off common in finance. Our main contribution is an optimal δcorrect algorithm that acts on general arms, including heavy-tailed distributions, and
matches the lower bound on the expected number of samples needed, asymptotically
(as δ approaches 0). The algorithm requires solving a non-convex optimization
problem in the space of probability measures, that requires delicate analysis. Enroute, we develop new non-asymptotic, anytime-valid, empirical-likelihood-based
concentration inequalities for tail-risk measures.

1

Introduction

Tail risk is a common term used to quantify losses occurring due to rare events, and has been an
important topic in finance, insurance and other safety critical uncertain environments. [44] first
formalized the problem of identifying optimal investment in financial assets as a multi-criteria
optimization problem of maximizing the average return, while minimizing the risk (measured via
variance). Since then, several other risk measures have been considered. Lately, risk-measures based
on tails of the distribution, like the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) and value-at-risk (VaR), have
gained popularity in financial regulations and risk management (see, [48, 47]), where the underlying
probability distributions are mostly heavy tailed (i.e. having infinite moment generating function for
all θ > 0). Informally, for a probability measure η, VaR at level π ∈ (0, 1) is the π th quantile for η,
i.e., the outcome below which there is exactly π mass. CVaR at level π is the conditional expectation
of η, conditioned on values beyond the VaR at level π. See Section 2 for precise definitions, and
[50, 46] for applications of these risk measures in finance and optimization. As opposed to VaR,
CVaR is a coherent risk-measure, and is a preferable metric (see, [5] for precise definition and
properties of coherence). Outside finance, these tail-risk measures are being used to control risk in
operations management, for example, in inventory management [4], supply chain management [51],
etc. Recently, coherent risk measures, especially CVaR, have also been used in connection with
fairness in machine learning [58].
The importance of these risk measures in the sequential decision making set-up has well been
acknowledged (see, [49, 42]). Typically in the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) literature, the
quality of an arm is measured using its mean. Tight asymptotic and finite time guarantees exist for
different MAB problems with performance measured by the mean (see, [27, 36, 16, 13, 1, 7, 53]).
Also, see [12] for a survey of the variants of stochastic MAB problems. However, maximizing the
average reward is not always the primary desirable objective. In clinical trials, for example, the
treatment that is good on average might result in adverse outcomes for some patients. In finance, one
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

