Instance-Dependent Bounds for Zeroth-order
Lipschitz Optimization with Error Certificates

François Bachoc
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse & University Paul Sabatier
francois.bachoc@math.univ-toulouse.fr
Tommaso Cesari
Toulouse School of Economics
tommaso-renato.cesari@univ-toulouse.fr
Sébastien Gerchinovitz
IRT Saint Exupéry & Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse
sebastien.gerchinovitz@irt-saintexupery.com

Abstract
We study the problem of zeroth-order (black-box) optimization of a Lipschitz
function f defined on a compact subset X of Rd , with the additional constraint that
algorithms must certify the accuracy of their recommendations. We characterize
the optimal number of evaluations of any Lipschitz function f to find and certify
an approximate maximizer of f at accuracy ε. Under a weak assumption on X ,
is shown to be nearly proportional to the integral
Rthis optimal sample complexity
dx/(max(f ) − f (x) + ε)d . This result, which was only (and partially) known
X
in dimension d = 1, solves an open problem dating back to 1991. In terms of
techniques, our upper bound relies on a packing bound by Bouttier et al. (2020) for
the Piyavskii-Shubert algorithm that we link to the above integral. We also show
that a certified version of the computationally tractable DOO algorithm matches
these packing and integral bounds. Our instance-dependent lower bound differs
from traditional worst-case lower bounds in the Lipschitz setting and relies on a
local worst-case analysis that could likely prove useful for other learning tasks.

1

Introduction

The problem of optimizing a black-box function f with as few evaluations of f as possible arises in
many scientific and industrial fields such as computer experiments (Jones et al., 1998; Richet et al.,
2013) or automatic selection of hyperparameters in machine learning (Bergstra et al., 2011). For
safety-critical applications, e.g., in aircraft or nuclear engineering, using sample-efficient methods
is not enough. Certifying the accuracy of the output of the optimization method can be a crucial
additional requirement (Vanaret et al., 2013). As a concrete example, Azzimonti et al. (2021) describe
a black-box function in nuclear engineering whose output is a k-effective multiplication factor, for
which a higher value corresponds to a higher nuclear hazard. Certifying the optimization error is a
way to certify the worst-case k-effective factor, which may be required by safety authorities.
In this paper, we formally study the problem of finding and certifying an ε-approximate maximizer
of a Lipschitz function f of d variables and characterize the optimal number of evaluations of any
such function f to achieve this goal. We start by formally defining the setting.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

