Taming Communication and Sample Complexities in
Decentralized Policy Evaluation for Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Xin Zhang∗
Dept. of Statistics
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50010
xinzhang@iastate.edu
Zhengyuan Zhu
Dept. of Statistics
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50010
zhuz@iastate.edu

Zhuqing Liu∗
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, 43210
liu.9384@osu.edu

Jia Liu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, 43210
liu@ece.osu.edu

Songtao Lu
IBM Research AI
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
songtao@ibm.com

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has received increasing
attention in recent years and has found many scientific and engineering applications. However, a key challenge arising from many cooperative MARL algorithm
designs (e.g., the actor-critic framework) is the policy evaluation problem, which
can only be conducted in a decentralized fashion. In this paper, we focus on
decentralized MARL policy evaluation with nonlinear function approximation,
which is often seen in deep MARL. We first show that the empirical decentralized MARL policy evaluation problem can be reformulated as a decentralized
nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax saddle point problem. We then develop a
decentralized gradient-based descent ascent algorithm called GT-GDA that enjoys
a convergence rate of O(1/T ). To further reduce the sample complexity, we propose two decentralized stochastic optimization algorithms called GT-SRVR and
GT-SRVRI, which enhance GT-GDA by variance reduction techniques. We show
that all algorithms all enjoy an O(1/T ) convergence rate to a stationary point of the
reformulated minimax problem. Moreover, the fast convergence rates√
of GT-SRVR
and GT-SRVRI imply O(−2 ) communication complexity and O(m n−2 ) sample complexity, where m is the number of agents and n is the length of trajectories.
To our knowledge, this paper is the first work that achieves O(−2 ) in both sample
and communication complexities in decentralized policy evaluation for cooperative
MARL. Our extensive experiments also corroborate the theoretical results of our
proposed decentralized policy evaluation algorithms.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has found important applications in many
scientific and engineering fields, such as robotic network [45, 22, 41], sensor network [6, 40, 43], and
power network [5, 11, 15, 16], just to name a few. In MARL, multiple agents observe the current
joint state over a network, perform their own actions based on the current state, and transition to
∗

Xin Zhang and Zhuqing Liu contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

