Mixture Proportion Estimation and PU Learning:
A Modern Approach

Saurabh Garg1 , Yifan Wu1 , Alex Smola2 , Sivaraman Balakrishnan1 , Zachary C. Lipton1
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
Given only positive examples and unlabeled examples (from both positive and
negative classes), we might hope nevertheless to estimate an accurate positiveversus-negative classifier. Formally, this task is broken down into two subtasks:
(i) Mixture Proportion Estimation (MPE)—determining the fraction of positive
examples in the unlabeled data; and (ii) PU-learning—given such an estimate,
learning the desired positive-versus-negative classifier. Unfortunately, classical
methods for both problems break down in high-dimensional settings. Meanwhile,
recently proposed heuristics lack theoretical coherence and depend precariously
on hyperparameter tuning. In this paper, we propose two simple techniques: Best
Bin Estimation (BBE) (for MPE); and Conditional Value Ignoring Risk (CVIR),
a simple objective for PU-learning. Both methods dominate previous approaches
empirically, and for BBE, we establish formal guarantees that hold whenever we
can train a model to cleanly separate out a small subset of positive examples.
Our final algorithm (TED)n , alternates between the two procedures, significantly
improving both our mixture proportion estimator and classifier1 .

1

Introduction

When deploying k-way classifiers in the wild, what can we do when confronted with data from a
previously unseen class (k ` 1)? Theory dictates that learning under distribution shift is impossible
absent assumptions. And yet people appear to exhibit this capability routinely. Faced with new
surprising symptoms, doctors can recognize the presence of a previously unseen ailment and attempt
to estimate its prevalence. Similarly, naturalists can discover new species, estimate their range and
population, and recognize them reliably going forward.
To begin making this problem tractable, we might make the label shift assumption [37, 41, 29],
i.e., that while the class balance ppyq can change, the class conditional distributions ppx|yq do
not. Moreover, we might begin by focusing on the base case, where only one class has been seen
previously, i.e., k “ 1. Here, we possess (labeled) positive data from the source distribution, and
(unlabeled) data from the target distribution, consisting of both positive and negative instances. This
problem has been studied in the literature as learning from positive and unlabeled data [8, 27] and has
typically been broken down into two subtasks: (i) Mixture Proportion Estimation (MPE) where we
estimate α, the fraction of positives among the unlabeled examples; and (ii) PU-learning where this
estimate is incorporated into a scheme for learning a Positive-versus-Negative (PvN) binary classifier.
Traditionally, MPE and PU-learning have been motivated by settings involving large databases where
unlabeled examples are abundant and a small fraction of the total positives have been extracted. For
example, medical records might be annotated indicating the presence of certain diagnoses, but the
unmarked passages are not necessarily negative. This setup has also been motivated by protein and
1

Code is available at https://github.com/acmi-lab/PU_learning

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

