Deep inference of latent dynamics with
spatio-temporal super-resolution using selective
backpropagation through time
Feng Zhu*1 , Andrew R. Sedler*2 , Harrison A. Grier3 , Nauman Ahad4 , Mark A. Davenport4 ,
Matthew T. Kaufman5,6 , Andrea Giovannucci7,8,9 , and Chethan Pandarinath10,11
1

Neuroscience Graduate Program, Emory University
2
Center for Machine Learning, Georgia Tech
3
Computational Neuroscience Graduate Program, The University of Chicago
4
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Tech
5
Dept. of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, The University of Chicago
6
Neuroscience Institute, The University of Chicago
7
Joint Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, UNC Chapel Hill and NC State University
8
UNC Chapel Hill Neuroscience Center
9
NC State/UNC Closed-Loop Engineering for Advanced Rehabilitation (CLEAR)
10
Coulter Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Emory University and Georgia Tech
11
Dept. of Neurosurgery, Emory University

Abstract

Modern neural interfaces allow access to the activity of up to a million neurons
within brain circuits. However, bandwidth limits often create a trade-off between
greater spatial sampling (more channels or pixels) and the temporal frequency
of sampling. Here we demonstrate that it is possible to obtain spatio-temporal
super-resolution in neuronal time series by exploiting relationships among neurons,
embedded in latent low-dimensional population dynamics. Our novel neural network training strategy, selective backpropagation through time (SBTT), enables
learning of deep generative models of latent dynamics from data in which the set
of observed variables changes at each time step. The resulting models are able to
infer activity for missing samples by combining observations with learned latent
dynamics. We test SBTT applied to sequential autoencoders and demonstrate
more efficient and higher-fidelity characterization of neural population dynamics
in electrophysiological and calcium imaging data. In electrophysiology, SBTT
enables accurate inference of neuronal population dynamics with lower interface
bandwidths, providing an avenue to significant power savings for implanted neuroelectronic interfaces. In applications to two-photon calcium imaging, SBTT
accurately uncovers high-frequency temporal structure underlying neural population activity, substantially outperforming the current state-of-the-art. Finally, we
demonstrate that performance could be further improved by using limited, highbandwidth sampling to pretrain dynamics models, and then using SBTT to adapt
these models for sparsely-sampled data.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
* Contributed equally. Corresponding authors: fzhu23@emory.edu, {asedler,chethan}@gatech.edu

