Local Disentanglement in Variational Auto-Encoders
Using Jacobian L1 Regularization

Travers Rhodes
Department of Computer Science
Cornell Tech, Cornell University
New York, NY 10044
tsr42@cornell.edu

Daniel D. Lee
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Cornell Tech, Cornell University
New York, NY 10044
ddl46@cornell.edu

Abstract
There have been many recent advances in representation learning; however, unsupervised representation learning can still struggle with model identification issues
related to rotations of the latent space. Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) and
their extensions such as β-VAEs have been shown to improve local alignment
of latent variables with PCA directions, which can help to improve model disentanglement under some conditions. Borrowing inspiration from Independent
Component Analysis (ICA) and sparse coding, we propose applying an L1 loss to
the VAE’s generative Jacobian during training to encourage local latent variable
alignment with independent factors of variation in images of multiple objects or
images with multiple parts. We demonstrate our results on a variety of datasets,
giving qualitative and quantitative results using information theoretic and modularity measures that show our added L1 cost encourages local axis alignment of the
latent representation with individual factors of variation.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning takes a collection of image data from the world and figures out
how to organize and find patterns in the data without additional information about how the images
were generated. The ideal representation learning algorithm would compress high-dimensional
image data into a lower-dimensional latent representation that contains relevant information about the
ground-truth factors of variation that generated the image.
Inferring a good latent representation from a dataset is a difficult problem and is generally underspecified in algorithms. This underspecification is called the “model identification” problem, and
one example is the fact that representation learning algorithms often struggle to precise the correct
orientation of a latent space. That is, optimization criteria used to learn a representation function
might be equally well satisfied by an equivalent representation that is just a rotation of the latent
space by an arbitrary amount.
As commonly implemented (using axis-aligned Gaussian posterior distributions), Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) [1] and their extension, the β-VAE [2], solve the rotational part of the model
identification issue by tending to ensure that the generation function’s Jacobian matrix has orthogonal
columns (i.e., that the generative Jacobian matrix’s right singular values are aligned with the axes of
the latent space) [3, 4]. Intuitively, this is because the VAE’s stochastic reconstruction cost prefers to
budget higher precision (lower embedding noise) in the directions along which the generative Jacobian
changes most rapidly. Kumar and Poole [4] draw the parallel between this preferred orientation and
linear Principal Component Analysis (PCA). However, we note that learning algorithms that resolve
rotational identification issues through methods related to PCA will still suffer from an identifiability
issue related to rotations that mix the directions for which the generative Jacobian matrix has equal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

