Sim and Real: Better Together

Shirli Di Castro Shashua ∗
Technion Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
shirlidi@technion.ac.il
Shie Mannor
Technion and NVIDIA Research
Israel
shie@technion.ac.il
smannor@nvidia.com

Dotan Di Castro
Bosch Center of AI
Haifa, Israel
dotan.dicastro@il.bosch.com

Abstract
Simulation is used extensively in autonomous systems, particularly in robotic manipulation. By far, the most common approach is to train a controller in simulation,
and then use it as an initial starting point for the real system. We demonstrate
how to learn simultaneously from both simulation and interaction with the real
environment. We propose an algorithm for balancing the large number of samples
from the high throughput but less accurate simulation and the low-throughput,
high-fidelity and costly samples from the real environment. We achieve that by
maintaining a replay buffer for each environment the agent interacts with. We
analyze such multi-environment interaction theoretically, and provide convergence
properties, through a novel theoretical replay buffer analysis. We demonstrate the
efficacy of our method on a sim-to-real environment.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework where an agent interacts with an unknown environment,
receives a feedback from it, and optimizes its performance accordingly [44, 3]. There have been
attempts of learning a control policy directly from real world samples [28, 49, 36, 21]. However, in
many cases, learning from the actual environment may be slow, costly, or dangerous, while learning
from a simulated system can be fast, cheap, and safe. The advantages of learning from simulation are
counterbalanced by the reality-gap [18]: the loss of fidelity due to modeling limitations, parameter
errors, and lack of variety in physical properties. The quality of the simulation may vary: when the
simulation mimics the reality well, we can train the agent on the simulation and then transfer the
policy to the real environment, in a one shot manner (e.g., [2]). However in many cases, simulation
demonstrates low fidelity which leads to the following question: Can we mitigate the differences
between real environments ("real") and simulations ("sim") thereof, so as to train an agent that learns
from both, and performs well in the real one?
In this work, we propose to learn simultaneously on real and sim, while controlling the rate in which
we collect samples from each environment and controlling the rate in which we use these samples in
the policy optimization. This synergy offers a speed-fidelity trade-off and harnesses the advantage
of each domain. Moreover, the simulation speed encourages exploration that helps to accelerate the
learning process. The real system in turn can improve exploitation in the sense that it mitigates the
challenges of sim-to-real policy transfer, and encourages the learner to converge to relevant solutions.
∗

This research was conducted during an internship in Bosch Center of AI.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

