Spatio-Temporal Variational Gaussian Processes

Oliver Hamelijnck∗
The Alan Turing Institute /
University of Warwick
ohamelijnck@turing.ac.uk

William J. Wilkinson∗
Aalto University
william.wilkinson@aalto.fi

Arno Solin
Aalto University
arno.solin@aalto.fi

Niki A. Loppi
NVIDIA
nloppi@nvidia.com

Theodoros Damoulas
The Alan Turing Institute /
University of Warwick
tdamoulas@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a scalable approach to Gaussian process inference that combines
spatio-temporal filtering with natural gradient variational inference, resulting in a
non-conjugate GP method for multivariate data that scales linearly with respect
to time. Our natural gradient approach enables application of parallel filtering
and smoothing, further reducing the temporal span complexity to be logarithmic
in the number of time steps. We derive a sparse approximation that constructs a
state-space model over a reduced set of spatial inducing points, and show that for
separable Markov kernels the full and sparse cases exactly recover the standard
variational GP, whilst exhibiting favourable computational properties. To further
improve the spatial scaling we propose a mean-field assumption of independence
between spatial locations which, when coupled with sparsity and parallelisation,
leads to an efficient and accurate method for large spatio-temporal problems.

1

Introduction

Most real-world processes occur across space and time, exhibit complex dependencies, and are
observed through noisy irregular samples. Take, for example, the task of modelling air pollution
across a city. Such a task involves large amounts of noisy, partially-observed data with strong seasonal
effects governed by weather, traffic, human movement, etc. This setting motivates a probabilistic
perspective, allowing for the incorporation of prior knowledge and the quantification of uncertainty.
Gaussian processes (GP S, [38]) provide such a probabilistic modelling paradigm, but their inherent
cubic computational scaling in the number of data, N , limits their applicability to spatio-temporal
tasks. Arguably the most successful methods to address this issue are sparse GP S [37], which
summarise the true GP posterior through a reduced set of M inducing points and have dominant
computational scaling O(N M 2 ), and spatio-temporal GP S [43], which rewrite the GP prior as a
state-space model and use filtering to perform inference in O(N d3 ), where d is the dimensionality
of the state-space. Sparse GP S and spatio-temporal GP S have been combined by constructing a
Markovian system in which a set of spatial inducing points are tracked over time [24, 51].
However, existing methods for spatio-temporal GP S make approximations to the prior conditional
model [24] or do not exploit natural gradients [45], meaning they do not provide the same inference
and learning results as state-of-the-art variational GP S [26] in the presence of non-conjugate likelihoods or sparsity, which has hindered their widespread adoption. We introduce spatio-temporal
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

