On Linear Stability of SGD and Input-Smoothness of
Neural Networks
Chao Ma
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
chaoma@stanford.edu

Lexing Ying
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
lexing@stanford.edu

Abstract
The multiplicative structure of parameters and input data in the first layer of neural
networks is explored to build connection between the landscape of the loss function
with respect to parameters and the landscape of the model function with respect to
input data. By this connection, it is shown that flat minima regularize the gradient
of the model function, which explains the good generalization performance of
flat minima. Then, we go beyond the flatness and consider high-order moments
of the gradient noise, and show that Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) tends to
impose constraints on these moments by a linear stability analysis of SGD around
global minima. Together with the multiplicative structure, we identify the Sobolev
regularization effect of SGD, i.e. SGD regularizes the Sobolev seminorms of the
model function with respect to the input data. Finally, bounds for generalization
error and adversarial robustness are provided for solutions found by SGD under
assumptions of the data distribution.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the most widely used optimization algorithm to train neural
networks [25, 4]. By taking mini-batches of training data instead of all the data in each iteration, it
was firstly designed as a substitute of the gradient descent (GD) algorithm to reduce its computational
cost. Extensive researches are conducted on the convergence of SGD, both on convex and non-convex
objective functions [21, 22, 5, 3]. In these studies, convergence is usually proven in the cases where
the learning rate is sufficiently small, hence the gradient noise is small. In practice, however, SGD is
preferred over GD not only for the low computational cost, but also for the implicit regularization
effect that produces solutions with good generalization performance [7, 16]. Since a trajectory of
SGD tends to that of GD when the learning rate goes to 0, this implicit regularization effect must
come from the gradient noise induced by mini-batch and a moderate learning rate.
When studying the gradient noise of SGD, a majority of work treat SGD as an SDE, and studies
the noise of the SDE [15, 20, 17, 18, 32]. However, SGD is close to SDE only when the learning
rate is small, and it is unclear that in practical setting whether the Gaussian noise of SDE can
fully characterize the gradient noise of SGD. Some work resort to heavy-tailed noise like the Levy
process [27, 37]. Another perspective to study the behavior of SGD is by its linear stability [30, 12].
This is relevant when the learning rate is not very small. The linear stability theory can explain the
fast escape of SGD from sharp minima. The escape time derived from this theory depends on the
logarithm of the barrier height, while the escape time derived from the diffusion theory based on
SDE depends exponentially on the barrier height [32]. The former is more consistent with empirical
observations [30].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

