Regulating algorithmic filtering on social media
Sarah H. Cen
MIT EECS
shcen@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
MIT EECS
devavrat@mit.edu

Abstract
By filtering the content that users see, social media platforms have the ability to
influence users’ perceptions and decisions, from their dining choices to their voting
preferences. This influence has drawn scrutiny, with many calling for regulations on
filtering algorithms, but designing and enforcing regulations remains challenging.
In this work, we examine three questions. First, given a regulation, how would one
design an audit to enforce it? Second, does the audit impose a performance cost
on the platform? Third, how does the audit affect the content that the platform is
incentivized to filter? In response to these questions, we propose a method such
that, given a regulation, an auditor can test whether that regulation is met with
only black-box access to the filtering algorithm. We then turn to the platform’s
perspective. The platform’s goal is to maximize an objective function while meeting
regulation. We find that there are conditions under which the regulation does not
place a high performance cost on the platform and, notably, that content diversity
can play a key role in aligning the interests of the platform and regulators.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there have been increasing calls to regulate how social media platforms algorithmically
filter the content that appears on a user’s feed. For example, one may ask that the advertisements a
user sees not be based (explicitly or implicitly) on their sexual orientation [65] or that content related
to public health (e.g., COVID-19) does not reflect a user’s political affiliation [35].
However, translating a regulatory guideline into an auditing procedure has proven difficult. Developing such a method is the focus of this work. As our main contribution, we provide a general procedure
such that, given a regulation, an auditor can test whether the platform complies with the regulation.
Providing a general procedure is important because, without it, auditing is destined to be reactive:
auditors must design ways to enforce each regulation as they arise, and there is an inevitable delay
between design and enforcement in order to test the proposed solutions.
On the other hand, designing a general procedure is challenging because audits can have unintended
side effects on the social media ecosystem and its many stakeholders. As a result, we consider two
additional questions in this work:
1. How does the proposed auditing procedure affect the platform’s bottom line? We consider
whether the procedure imposes a high performance cost on the platform.
2. How does the auditing procedure affect the user’s content? We consider what type of content
the platform is incentivized to show the user when the platform complies with the regulation.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
Auditing procedure. As our main contribution, we provide a procedure such that, given a regulation,
an auditor can test whether the platform complies with the regulation (Section 3). We restrict our
attention to regulations that can be written in counterfactual form, including the two examples given
at the top of this Introduction. Namely, the procedure applies to any regulation that can be written as:
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

