Active Learning of Convex Halfspaces on Graphs

Maximilian Thiessen
Research Unit of Machine Learning
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
maximilian.thiessen@tuwien.ac.at

Thomas Gärtner
Research Unit of Machine Learning
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
thomas.gaertner@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We systematically study the query complexity of learning geodesically convex
halfspaces on graphs. Geodesic convexity is a natural generalisation of Euclidean
convexity and allows the definition of convex sets and halfspaces on graphs. We
prove an upper bound on the query complexity which is linear in the treewidth and
the minimum hull set size but only logarithmic in the diameter. We show tight lower
bounds along well-established separation axioms and identify the Radon number
as a central parameter of the query complexity and the VC dimension. While
previous bounds typically depend on the cut size of the labelling, all parameters in
our bounds can be computed from the unlabelled graph. We provide evidence that
ground-truth communities in real-world graphs are often convex and empirically
compare our proposed approach with other active learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

We systematically characterise active learning of geodesically convex halfspaces on graphs. While
unlabelled graphs such as social networks are readily accessible, obtaining many labels is tedious and
labour intensive. Active learning reduces the labelling effort by iteratively selecting informative data
points to be labelled. Graph-based active learning, in particular, has been successfully applied on
communication [Regol et al., 2020] and protein-protein-interaction networks [Vazquez et al., 2003,
Xiong et al., 2014]. While most previous approaches assume that the number of edges with differently
labelled vertices, the cut size, is small [Afshani et al., 2007, Guillory and Bilmes, 2009, Dasarathy
et al., 2015], we take a different approach and instead assume geodesic convexity: For every pair
of vertices with the same label it holds that every vertex on every shortest path between them also
has that label. This assumption is used, for example, by biologists on gene similarity networks
[Zhou et al., 2002] and cancer-related protein-protein-interaction networks [Li et al., 2012, 2013].
It also typically holds for connected subgraphs of collaboration networks [Marc and Šubelj, 2018,
Šubelj et al., 2019] and our preliminary experiments confirmed that many communities in community
detection datasets are convex. We derive bounds on the number of queries required to determine all
labels, that is, the query complexity, using concepts from convexity theory and geodesic convexity
spaces, which naturally generalise the regular Euclidean convexity. While learning convex sets and
halfspaces in Euclidean spaces has been intensively investigated in the machine learning community
for over half a century, geodesic convexity on graphs is understudied. For a concise presentation of
our theoretical results in this paper, we concentrate on active learning of halfspaces on graphs, that is,
the vertex set is partitioned into two classes which are both geodesically convex.
After introducing the concepts of graph and abstract convexity theory in Section 2, we derive general
label-independent upper and lower bounds on the query complexity. We discuss that such general
bounds can be loose on specific graphs and derive tighter lower bounds along the separation axioms
of abstract convexity theory in Section 3. This allows us to substantially reduce the gap between our
upper and lower bounds. Note that Euclidean spaces cannot be structured in a similar way: while
the separation axioms partition the space of all graphs into non-empty sets, all separation axioms
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

