A Note on Sparse Generalized Eigenvalue Problem

Yunfeng Cai, Guanhua Fang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
No. 10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing 100193, China
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, Washington 98004, USA
{yunfengcai, guanhuafang, liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
The sparse generalized eigenvalue problem (SGEP) aims to find the leading eigenvector with sparsity structure. SGEP plays an important role in statistical learning
and has wide applications including, but not limited to, sparse principal component analysis, sparse canonical correlation analysis and sparse Fisher discriminant
analysis, etc. Due to the sparsity constraint, the solution of SGEP entails interesting properties from both numerical and statistical perspectives. In this paper,
we provide a detailed sensitivity analysis for SGEP and establish the rate-optimal
perturbation bound under the sparse setting. Specifically, we show that the bound
is related to the perturbation/noise level and the recovery of the true support of
the leading eigenvector as well. We also investigate the estimator of SGEP via
imposing a non-convex regularization. Such estimator can achieve the optimal
error rate and can recover the sparsity structure as well. Extensive numerical
experiments corroborate our theoretical findings via using alternating direction
method of multipliers (ADMM)-based computational method.

1

Introduction

The sparse generalized eigenvalue problem (SGEP) is to solve the following constrained optimization
problem:
e
xT Ax
, subject to kxk0 ≤ k,
(1)
maxp
x∈R xT e
Bx
e B
e are both p-by-p symmetric matrices and B
e is (semi) positive definite; kxk0 denotes the
where A,
`0 -norm of x, i.e., the number of nonzero entries of x; k is an integer which may be much smaller
e and B
e usually have the
than p. For a fixed k, we let x∗ be the solution to (1). Moreover, matrices A
following decomposition:
e = A + E,
A

e = B + F,
B

(2)

where A, B are underlying symmetric matrices and B is positive definite. However, A and B are
unobserved in practice and they can be contaminated by some noise/perturbation matrices E and
F , respectively. Let λ1 be the largest generalized eigenvalue of matrix pair (A, B) and u1 be its
corresponding eigenvector which is also known as the leading eigenvector. In addition, u1 is always
assumed to be sparse, i.e., ku1 k0  p. Therefore, the SGEP is essentially to find an approximation
e B).
e
of u1 based on observation (A,
The SGEP is challenging due to the following aspects. First, the sparsity constraint optimization
problem (1) is NP-hard, since it is essentially a subset selection problem [19, 20]. To recover
the underlying sparsity structure, we need to try different k which is computationally expensive.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

