Transfer Learning of Graph Neural Networks with
Ego-graph Information Maximization

Qi Zhu1∗, Carl Yang2∗, Yidan Xu3 , Haonan Wang1 , Chao Zhang4 , Jiawei Han1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Emory University,
3
University of Washington, 4 Georgia Institute of Technology
1
{qiz3,haonan3,hanj}@illinois.edu, 2 j.carlyang@emory.edu,
3
yx2516@uw.edu, 4 chaozhang@gatech.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved superior performance in various
applications, but training dedicated GNNs can be costly for large-scale graphs.
Some recent work started to study the pre-training of GNNs. However, none of
them provide theoretical insights into the design of their frameworks, or clear requirements and guarantees towards their transferability. In this work, we establish
a theoretically grounded and practically useful framework for the transfer learning
of GNNs. Firstly, we propose a novel view towards the essential graph information
and advocate the capturing of it as the goal of transferable GNN training, which
motivates the design of E GI (Ego-Graph Information maximization) to analytically
achieve this goal. Secondly, when node features are structure-relevant, we conduct
an analysis of E GI transferability regarding the difference between the local graph
Laplacians of the source and target graphs. We conduct controlled synthetic experiments to directly justify our theoretical conclusions. Comprehensive experiments
on two real-world network datasets show consistent results in the analyzed setting
of direct-transfering, while those on large-scale knowledge graphs show promising
results in the more practical setting of transfering with fine-tuning.1

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been intensively studied recently [29, 26, 39, 68], due to their
established performance towards various real-world tasks [15, 69, 53], as well as close connections
to spectral graph theory [12, 9, 16]. While most GNN architectures are not very complicated, the
training of GNNs can still be costly regarding both memory and computation resources on real-world
large-scale graphs [10, 63]. Moreover, it is intriguing to transfer learned structural information across
different graphs and even domains in settings like few-shot learning [56, 44, 25]. Therefore, several
very recent studies have been conducted on the transferability of GNNs [21, 23, 22, 59, 31, 3, 47].
However, it is unclear in what situations the models will excel or fail especially when the pre-training
and fine-tuning tasks are different. To provide rigorous analysis and guarantee on the transferability
of GNNs, we focus on the setting of direct-transfering between the source and target graphs, under an
analogous setting of “domain adaptation” [7, 59].
In this work, we establish a theoretically grounded framework for the transfer learning of GNNs,
and leverage it to design a practically transferable GNN model. Figure 1 gives an overview of our
framework. It is based on a novel view of a graph as samples from the joint distribution of its k-hop
ego-graph structures and node features, which allows us to define graph information and similarity,
∗
1

These two authors contribute equally.
Code and processed data are available at https://github.com/GentleZhu/EGI.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Online.

