Identification of Partially Observed Linear Causal Models:
Graphical Conditions for the Non-Gaussian and
Heterogeneous Cases
Jeffrey Adams1∗ , Niels Richard Hansen1 , Kun Zhang2
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
2
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
ja@math.ku.dk, niels.r.hansen@math.ku.dk, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
In causal discovery, linear non-Gaussian acyclic models (LiNGAMs) have been
studied extensively. While the causally sufficient case is well understood, in many
real applications the observed variables are not causally related. Rather, they are
generated by latent variables, such as confounders and mediators, which may
themselves be causally related. Existing results on the identification of the causal
structure among the latent variables often require very strong graphical assumptions.
In this paper, we consider partially observed linear models with either non-Gaussian
or heterogeneous errors. In that case we give two graphical conditions which are
necessary for identification of the causal structure. These conditions are closely
related to sparsity of the causal edges. Together with one additional condition on
the coefficients, which holds generically for any graph, the two graphical conditions
are also sufficient for identifiability. These new conditions can be satisfied even
when the number of latent variables is very large. We demonstrate the validity of
our results on synthetic data.

1

Introduction

In the standard causal discovery problem, we are given non-experimental data and aim to learn the
direct causal relations between the observed variables [1, 2]. But in many applications, we do not
believe that all causal variables relevant to the observed system have been measured. While some
of the observed variables may interact directly, others might interact indirectly via latent mediators,
and still others could be generated by latent common causes; indeed, any pair of observed variables
may stand in all three relations at once. Further, the relevant latent variables may be causally related
themselves. For example, responses to psychometric questionnaires are usually thought of as noisy
views of various traits, and the researcher is predominately interested in the causal relations between
these hidden traits and their hierarchical structure. Similarly, in financial markets, stock returns may
be causally related, but may also be confounded or mediated by a complicated network of unmeasured
economic and political factors.
It is natural to ask what conditions are both necessary and sufficient for the identification of such
partially observed causal structures from observational data. Various sufficient conditions have
been proposed; however, these conditions are rather restrictive, and are not in general necessary for
identification of the full causal structure.
∗

The work presented in this article was started while JA was at CMU.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

