Instance-Dependent Label-Noise Learning under
Structural Causal Models
Yu Yao1 Tongliang Liu1† Mingming Gong2
Bo Han3 Gang Niu4 Kun Zhang5
1
TML Lab, University of Sydney; 2 University of Melbourne; 3 Hong Kong Baptist University;
4
RIKEN AIP; 5 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Label noise generally degenerates the performance of deep learning algorithms
because deep neural networks easily overfit label errors. Let X and Y denote the
instance and clean label, respectively. When Y is a cause of X, according to which
many datasets have been constructed, e.g., SVHN and CIFAR, the distributions of
P (X) and P (Y |X) are generally entangled. This means that the unsupervised
instances are helpful to learn the classifier and thus reduce the side effect of label
noise. However, it remains elusive on how to exploit the causal information to
handle the label-noise problem. We propose to model and make use of the causal
process in order to correct the label-noise effect. Empirically, the proposed method
outperforms all state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic and real-world labelnoise datasets.

1

Introduction

Learning with noisy labels can be dated back to [1] and has recently drawn a lot of attention
[15, 19, 11, 10, 28]. In real life, large-scale datasets are likely to contain label noise. It is partly
because that many cheap but imperfect data collection methods such as crowd-sourcing and web
crawling are widely used to build large-scale datasets. Training with such data usually lead to poor
generalization abilities of deep neural networks because they can memorize noisy labels [2, 33].
To improve the generalization ability of training with noisy labels, one family of existing label-noise
learning methods is to model how the label noise was generated [17, 19, 27, 34, 14]. Specifically,
these methods try to reveal the transition relationship from clean labels to noisy labels of instances,
i.e., the distribution P (Ỹ |Y, X), where Ỹ , Y and X are the random variables for the noisy label,
latent clean label, and instance, respectively. The advantage of modelling label noise is that given only
the noisy data, when the transition relationship is identifiable, classifiers can be learned to converge
to the optimal ones defined by the clean data, with theoretical guarantees. However, the transition
relationship is not identifiable in general. To make it identifiable, various assumptions have been
made on the transition relationship. For example, Natarajan et al. [17] assume that the transition
relationship is instance independent, i.e., P (Ỹ |Y, X) = P (Ỹ |Y ); Xia et al. [30] assume that the
P (Ỹ |Y, X) is dependent on different parts of an instance. Cheng et al. [7] assume that the label noise
rates are upper bounded. In practice, these assumptions may not be satisfied and are generally hard to
be verified given noisy data alone.
Inspired by causal learning [20, 25, 21, 23], we provide a causal perspective of label-noise learning
method named CausalNL. We exploit the causal information to help identifiability of the transition matrix P (Ỹ |Y, X) other than making assumptions directly on the transition relationship.
†

Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

