Least Square Calibration for Peer Reviews
Sijun Tan⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
st8eu@virginia.edu

Jibang Wu⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
jw7jb@virginia.edu

Xiaohui Bei
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore 637371
xhbei@ntu.edu.sg

Haifeng Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
hx4ad@virginia.edu

Abstract
Peer review systems such as conference paper review often suffer from the issue
of miscalibration. Previous works on peer review calibration usually only use
the ordinal information or assume simplistic reviewer scoring functions such as
linear functions. In practice, applications like academic conferences often rely on
manual methods, such as open discussions, to mitigate miscalibration. It remains
an important question to develop algorithms that can handle different types of
miscalibrations based on available prior knowledge. In this paper, we propose
a flexible framework, namely least square calibration (LSC), for selecting top
candidates from peer ratings. Our framework provably performs perfect calibration
from noiseless linear scoring functions under mild assumptions, yet also provides
competitive calibration results when the scoring function is from broader classes
beyond linear functions and with arbitrary noise. On our synthetic dataset, we
empirically demonstrate that our algorithm consistently outperforms the baseline
which select top papers based on the highest average ratings.

1

Introduction

Peer review has been essential to the advancement of academic research. In a typical conference
peer review process, the submitted papers are assigned to a set of external reviewers and will receive
cardinal scores from them. The final decision of which papers get accepted to the conference is
usually determined by the average score received for each paper. However, during such a process,
different reviewers may have different standards and biases in their evaluations. For example, the
same paper may receive a high score (e.g., 8 out of 10) from a lenient reviewer and a low score (e.g.,
2 out of 10) from some strict reviewer. As a result, the average score may not always reflect the true
quality of a paper. This issue is known as miscalibration, and is a prevalent problem in many other
online review systems as well such as TripAdvisor or Yelp. In order to ensure a fair and unbiased
outcome, it is crucial to the concept and to the success of a peer reviewing system to have an efficient
and effective calibration algorithm.
There has been a body of works attempting to address the miscalibration issue in peer reviews.
Most of these works can be categorized into two directions. The first line of works relies on
making simplifying assumptions on the form of miscalibration. For example, [19, 5, 10, 16, 27]
⇤

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

