arXiv:submit/4007495 [cs.LG] 1 Nov 2021

Don’t Generate Me:
Training Differentially Private Generative Models
with Sinkhorn Divergence

Tianshi Cao1,2,4
1

Alex Bie3∗

University of Toronto

tianshic@nvidia.com,

Arash Vahdat4
2

Vector Institute

yabie@uwaterloo.ca,

3

Sanja Fidler1,2,4

University of Waterloo

Karsten Kreis4
4

NVIDIA

{avahdat,sfidler,kkreis}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Although machine learning models trained on massive data have led to breakthroughs in several areas, their deployment in privacy-sensitive domains remains
limited due to restricted access to data. Generative models trained with privacy
constraints on private data can sidestep this challenge, providing indirect access
to private data instead. We propose DP-Sinkhorn, a novel optimal transport-based
generative method for learning data distributions from private data with differential privacy. DP-Sinkhorn minimizes the Sinkhorn divergence, a computationally
efficient approximation to the exact optimal transport distance, between the model
and data in a differentially private manner and uses a novel technique for controlling the bias-variance trade-off of gradient estimates. Unlike existing approaches
for training differentially private generative models, which are mostly based on
generative adversarial networks, we do not rely on adversarial objectives, which
are notoriously difficult to optimize, especially in the presence of noise imposed
by privacy constraints. Hence, DP-Sinkhorn is easy to train and deploy. Experimentally, we improve upon the state-of-the-art on multiple image modeling
benchmarks and show differentially private synthesis of informative RGB images.
Project page: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/DP-Sinkhorn.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning (ML) algorithms and their practical applications (e.g. recommender systems [1], personalized medicine [2], face recognition [3], speech synthesis [4], etc.) have become
increasingly data hungry and the use of personal data is often a necessity. Consequently, the importance of privacy protection has become apparent to both the public and academia.
Differential privacy (DP) is a rigorous definition of privacy that quantifies the amount of information
leaked by a user, participating in a data release [5, 6]. The degree of privacy protection is represented
by the privacy budget. DP was originally designed for answering queries to statistical databases. In a
typical setting, a data analyst (party wanting to use data; e.g. a healthcare company) sends a query to
a data curator (party in charge of safekeeping the database; e.g. a hospital), who makes the query on
the database and replies with a semi-random answer that preserves privacy. Responding to each new
query incurs a privacy cost. If the analyst has multiple queries, the curator must subdivide the privacy
budget to spend on each query. Once the budget is depleted, the curator can no longer respond to
queries, preventing the analyst from performing new, unanticipated tasks with the database.
Generative models can be applied as a general and flexible data-sharing medium [7, 8], sidestepping
the above problems. In this scenario, the curator first encodes private data into a generative model;
∗

Work done during internship at NVIDIA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

