Bayesian Optimization of Function Networks

Raul Astudillo
Cornell University
ra598@cornell.edu

Peter I. Frazier
Cornell University
pf98@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider Bayesian optimization of the output of a network of functions, where
each function takes as input the output of its parent nodes, and where the network takes significant time to evaluate. Such problems arise, for example, in
reinforcement learning, engineering design, and manufacturing. While the standard Bayesian optimization approach observes only the final output, our approach
delivers greater query efficiency by leveraging information that the former ignores:
intermediate output within the network. This is achieved by modeling the nodes of
the network using Gaussian processes and choosing the points to evaluate using,
as our acquisition function, the expected improvement computed with respect to
the implied posterior on the objective. Although the non-Gaussian nature of this
posterior prevents computing our acquisition function in closed form, we show that
it can be efficiently maximized via sample average approximation. In addition, we
prove that our method is asymptotically consistent, meaning that it finds a globally
optimal solution as the number of evaluations grows to infinity, thus generalizing
previously known convergence results for the expected improvement. Notably,
this holds even though our method might not evaluate the domain densely, instead
leveraging problem structure to leave regions unexplored. Finally, we show that
our approach dramatically outperforms standard Bayesian optimization methods in
several synthetic and real-world problems.

1

Introduction

We consider Bayesian optimization (BO) of objective functions defined by a series of time-consumingto-evaluate functions, f1 , . . . , fK , arranged in a directed acyclic network, so that each function takes
as input the output of its parent nodes. As we detail below, these problems arise in BO-based policy
search in reinforcement learning (Lizotte et al., 2007), optimization of complex systems modeled via
simulation, and calibration of time-consuming physics-based models.
To illustrate, we introduce a running example of vaccine manufacturing (Sekhon and Saluja, 2011),
focusing on the portion of the manufacturing process that uses live cells to produce proteins needed
in a vaccine. It begins with a cell culture, in which living cells are grown and used as “factories”
to produce proteins. This process is controlled by a vector, x1 , containing the temperature, pH,
and CO2 content used when growing these cells. The output of this process is the quantity of the
desired protein y1 = f1 (x1 ), i.e., the yield of this step, along with other byproducts. This output is
passed into a second process, purification, which removes byproducts and is controlled by a vector
x2 comprising temperature, pressure, and flow rate. The yield of the desired protein from this second
step is y2 = f2 (x2 , y1 ). This output enters a third step, formulation, in which we formulate the raw
protein into a form that can be distributed as controlled by a third set of parameters. This determines
the yield of the overall process y3 = f3 (x3 , y2 ). We wish to choose (x1 , x2 , x3 ) to maximize overall
protein yield. This problem is summarized as a function network in Figure 1.
The problem described above and other similar problems can be tackled with Bayesian optimization
(BO), which has been shown to perform well compared to other derivative-free global optimization
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

