Tactical Optimism and Pessimism for Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Ted Moskovitz
Gatsby Unit, UCL
ted@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk
Aldo Pacchiano
Microsoft Research
apacchiano@microsoft.com

Jack Parker-Holder
University of Oxford
jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk
Michael Arbel
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS⇤
michael.n.arbel@gmail.com

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In recent years, deep off-policy actor-critic algorithms have become a dominant
approach to reinforcement learning for continuous control. One of the primary
drivers of this improved performance is the use of pessimistic value updates to
address function approximation errors, which previously led to disappointing
performance. However, a direct consequence of pessimism is reduced exploration,
running counter to theoretical support for the efficacy of optimism in the face of
uncertainty. So which approach is best? In this work, we show that the most
effective degree of optimism can vary both across tasks and over the course of
learning. Inspired by this insight, we introduce a novel deep actor-critic framework,
Tactical Optimistic and Pessimistic (TOP) estimation, which switches between
optimistic and pessimistic value learning online. This is achieved by formulating
the selection as a multi-arm bandit problem. We show in a series of continuous
control tasks that TOP outperforms existing methods which rely on a fixed degree
of optimism, setting a new state of the art in challenging pixel-based environments.
Since our changes are simple to implement, we believe these insights can easily be
incorporated into a multitude of off-policy algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has begun to show significant empirical success in recent years, with
value function approximation via deep neural networks playing a fundamental role in this success [37,
49, 5]. However, this success has been achieved in a relatively narrow set of problem domains, and
an emerging set of challenges arises when one considers placing RL systems in larger systems. In
particular, the use of function approximators can lead to a positive bias in value computation [53],
and therefore systems that surround the learner do not receive an honest assessment of that value.
One can attempt to turn this vice into a virtue, by appealing to a general form of the optimism-underuncertainty principle—overestimation of the expected reward can trigger exploration of states and
actions that would otherwise not be explored. Such exploration can be dangerous, however, if there is
not a clear understanding of the nature of the overestimation.
⇤

Work mostly completed at the Gatsby Unit.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

