INDIGO: GNN-Based Inductive Knowledge Graph
Completion Using Pair-Wise Encoding
Shuwen Liu1 , Bernardo Cuenca Grau1 , Ian Horrocks1 , and Egor V. Kostylev2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{shuwen.liu, bernardo.cuenca.grau, ian.horrocks}@cs.ox.ac.uk
2
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo
egork@ifi.uio.no

Abstract
The aim of knowledge graph (KG) completion is to extend an incomplete KG
with missing triples. Popular approaches based on graph embeddings typically
work by first representing the KG in a vector space, and then applying a predefined
scoring function to the resulting vectors to complete the KG. These approaches
work well in transductive settings, where predicted triples involve only constants
seen during training; however, they are not applicable in inductive settings, where
the KG on which the model was trained is extended with new constants or merged
with other KGs. The use of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has recently been
proposed as a way to overcome these limitations; however, existing approaches
do not fully exploit the capabilities of GNNs and still rely on heuristics and adhoc scoring functions. In this paper, we propose a novel approach, where the
KG is fully encoded into a GNN in a transparent way, and where the predicted
triples can be read out directly from the last layer of the GNN without the need for
additional components or scoring functions. Our experiments show that our model
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on inductive KG completion benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are graph-structured knowledge bases where nodes and edges represent
entities of interest and their relations [7]. KGs are commonly represented as sets of triples in a standard
format such as the Resource Description Framework (RDF) [9]. Many prominent KGs are highly
incomplete, which limits their usefulness in practice; hence KG completion (or link prediction)—the
problem of extending a KG with missing triples—has received significant attention [14].
Most approaches to KG completion, such as TransE [3], DistMult [28], and RotatE [20], are based on
graph embedding techniques, which first embed the KG into a vector space (e.g., by learning a feature
vector for each entity) and then generate the predicted triples by applying a predefined scoring function
to the learnt vectors [14]. These models demonstrate good performance in transductive settings, where
missing triples are assumed to mention only constants already occurring in the incomplete KG. A key
limitation of these models, however, is that they are not applicable in inductive settings [5, 24, 21],
where missing triples may involve constants unseen during training; this setting is especially relevant
in practice since KGs are evolving: they may be extended with triples describing new objects or
integrated with external KGs. Consider, for instance, the KG inside the frame in Fig. 1, where an
embedding-based model has been used to extend the KG with the triple (Plato, lives, Greece); thus,
the model seems to have successfully learnt the pattern that students and their teachers tend to live in
the same country. Assume the graph is now extended with the triples
(Aristotle, student, Plato),

(R.Feynman, student, J.Wheeler),

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

(J.Wheeler, lives, USA),

