Implicit MLE: Backpropagating Through Discrete
Exponential Family Distributions

Mathias Niepert
NEC Laboratories Europe
mathias.niepert@neclab.eu

Pasquale Minervini
University College London
p.minervini@ucl.ac.uk

Luca Franceschi
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London
ucablfr@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Combining discrete probability distributions and combinatorial optimization problems with neural network components has numerous applications but poses several
challenges. We propose Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation (I-MLE), a
framework for end-to-end learning of models combining discrete exponential family distributions and differentiable neural components. I-MLE is widely applicable
as it only requires the ability to compute the most probable states and does not
rely on smooth relaxations. The framework encompasses several approaches such
as perturbation-based implicit differentiation and recent methods to differentiate
through black-box combinatorial solvers. We introduce a novel class of noise
distributions for approximating marginals via perturb-and-MAP. Moreover, we
show that I-MLE simplifies to maximum likelihood estimation when used in some
recently studied learning settings that involve combinatorial solvers. Experiments
on several datasets suggest that I-MLE is competitive with and often outperforms
existing approaches which rely on problem-specific relaxations.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks excel at perceptual tasks, they tend to generalize poorly whenever the
problem at hand requires some level of symbolic manipulation or reasoning, or exhibit some (known)
algorithmic structure. Logic, relations, and explanations, as well as decision processes, frequently
find natural abstractions in discrete structures, ill-captured by the continuous mappings of standard
neural nets. Several application domains, ranging from relational and explainable ML to discrete
decision-making [Mišić and Perakis, 2020], could benefit from general-purpose learning algorithms
whose inductive biases are more amenable to integrating symbolic and neural computation. Motivated
by these considerations, there is a growing interest in end-to-end learnable models incorporating
discrete components that allow, e.g., to sample from discrete latent distributions [Jang et al., 2017,
Paulus et al., 2020] or solve combinatorial optimization problems [Pogančić et al., 2019, Mandi et al.,
2020]. Discrete energy-based models (EBMs) [LeCun et al., 2006] and discrete world models [Hafner
et al., 2020] are additional examples of neural network based models that require the ability to
backpropagate through discrete probability distributions.
For complex discrete distributions, it is intractable to compute the exact gradients of the expected
loss. For combinatorial optimization problems, the loss is discontinuous, and the gradients are zero
almost everywhere. The standard approach revolves around problem-specific smooth relaxations,
which allow one to fall back to (stochastic) backpropagation. These strategies, however, require
tailor-made relaxations, presuppose access to the constraints and are, therefore, not always feasible
nor tractable for large state spaces. Moreover, reverting to discrete outputs at test time may cause
unexpected behavior. In other situations, discrete outputs are required at training time because one
has to make one of a number of discrete choices, such as accessing discrete memory or deciding on
an action in a game.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

