Bandit Learning with Delayed Impact of Actions

†

Wei Tang† , Chien-Ju Ho† , and Yang Liu⇤
Washington University in St. Louis, ⇤ University of California, Santa Cruz
{w.tang, chienju.ho}@wustl.edu, yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
We consider a stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem with delayed impact
of actions. In our setting, actions taken in the past impact the arm rewards in the
subsequent future. This delayed impact of actions is prevalent in the real world.
For example, the capability to pay back a loan for people in a certain social group
might depend on historically how frequently that group has been approved loan
applications. If banks keep rejecting loan applications to people in a disadvantaged
group, it could create a feedback loop and further damage the chance of getting
loans for people in that group. In this paper, we formulate this delayed and longterm impact of actions within the context of multi-armed bandits. We generalize
the bandit setting to encode the dependency of this “bias" due to the action history
during learning. The goal is to maximize the collected utilities over time while
taking into account the dynamics created by the delayed impacts of historical
actions. We propose an algorithm that achieves a regret of Õ(KT 2/3 ) and show a
matching regret lower bound of ⌦(KT 2/3 ), where K is the number of arms and
T is the learning horizon. Our results complement the bandit literature by adding
techniques to deal with actions with long-term impacts and have implications in
designing fair algorithms.

1

Introduction

Algorithms have been increasingly involved in high-stakes decision making. Examples include
approving/rejecting loan applications [23, 37], deciding on employment and compensation [5, 19],
and recidivism and bail decisions [1]. Automating these high-stakes decisions has raised ethical
concerns on whether it amplifies the discriminative bias against protected classes [52, 14]. There
have also been growing efforts towards studying algorithmic approaches to mitigate these concerns.
Most of the above efforts have focused on static settings: a utility-maximizing decision maker needs
to ensure her actions satisfy some fairness criteria at the decision time, without considering the
long-term impacts of actions. However, in practice, these decisions may often introduce long-term
impacts to the rewards and well-beings for the human agents involved. For example,
• A regional financial institute may decide on the fraction of loan applications from different social

groups to approve. These decisions could affect the development of these groups: The capability
of applicants from a group to pay back a loan might depend on the group’s socio-economic status,
which is influenced by how frequently applications from this group have been approved [6, 18].
• The police department may decide on the amount of patrol time or the probability of patrol in a
neighborhood (primarily populated with a demographic group). The likelihood to catch a crime in
a neighborhood might depend on how frequent the police decides to patrol this area [28, 26].
These observations raise the following concerns. If being insensitive with the long-term impact
of actions, the decision maker risks treating a historically disadvantaged group unfairly. Making
things even worse, these unfair and oblivious decisions might reinforce existing biases and make
it harder to observe the true potential for a disadvantaged group. While being a relatively under35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

