Detecting and Adapting to Irregular Distribution
Shifts in Bayesian Online Learning

Aodong Li1 Alex Boyd2 Padhraic Smyth1,2 Stephan Mandt1,2
1
Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Statistics
University of California, Irvine
{aodongl1, alexjb, mandt}@uci.edu
smyth@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of online learning in the presence of distribution shifts
that occur at an unknown rate and of unknown intensity. We derive a new Bayesian
online inference approach to simultaneously infer these distribution shifts and
adapt the model to the detected changes by integrating ideas from change point
detection, switching dynamical systems, and Bayesian online learning. Using a
binary ‘change variable,’ we construct an informative prior such that–if a change
is detected–the model partially erases the information of past model updates by
tempering to facilitate adaptation to the new data distribution. Furthermore, the
approach uses beam search to track multiple change-point hypotheses and selects
the most probable one in hindsight. Our proposed method is model-agnostic,
applicable in both supervised and unsupervised learning settings, suitable for an
environment of concept drifts or covariate drifts, and yields improvements over
state-of-the-art Bayesian online learning approaches.

1

Introduction

Deployed machine learning systems are often faced with the problem of distribution shift, where the
new data that the model processes is systematically different from the data the system was trained
on [Zech et al., 2018, Ovadia et al., 2019]. Furthermore, a shift can happen anytime after deployment,
unbeknownst to the users, with dramatic consequences for systems such as self-driving cars, robots,
and financial trading algorithms, among many other examples.
Updating a deployed model on new, representative data can help mitigate these issues and improve
general performance in most cases. This task is commonly referred to as online or incremental
learning. Such online learning algorithms face a tradeoff between remembering and adapting. If they
adapt too fast, their performance will suffer since adaptation usually implies that the model loses
memory of previously encountered training data (which may still be relevant to future predictions).
On the other hand, if a model remembers too much, it typically has problems adapting to new data
distributions due to its finite capacity.
The tradeoff between adapting and remembering can be elegantly formalized in a Bayesian online
learning framework, where a prior distribution is used to keep track of previously learned parameter
estimates and their confidences. For instance, variational continual learning (VCL) [Nguyen et al.,
2018] is a popular framework that uses a model’s previous posterior distribution as the prior for new
data. However, the assumption of such continual learning setups is usually that the data distribution
is stationary and not subject to change, in which case adaptation is not an issue.
This paper proposes a new Bayesian online learning framework suitable for non-stationary data
distributions. It is based on two assumptions: (i) distribution shifts occur irregularly and must be
inferred from the data, and (ii) the model requires not only a good mechanism to aggregate data but
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

