Assessing Fairness in the Presence of Missing Data

Yiliang Zhang
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
zylthu14@sas.upenn.edu

Qi Long ∗
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
qlong@upenn.edu

Abstract
Missing data are prevalent and present daunting challenges in real data analysis.
While there is a growing body of literature on fairness in analysis of fully observed
data, there has been little theoretical work on investigating fairness in analysis
of incomplete data. In practice, a popular analytical approach for dealing with
missing data is to use only the set of complete cases, i.e., observations with all
features fully observed to train a prediction algorithm. However, depending on the
missing data mechanism, the distribution of complete cases and the distribution
of the complete data may be substantially different. When the goal is to develop
a fair algorithm in the complete data domain where there are no missing values,
an algorithm that is fair in the complete case domain may show disproportionate
bias towards some marginalized groups in the complete data domain. To fill this
significant gap, we study the problem of estimating fairness in the complete data
domain for an arbitrary model evaluated merely using complete cases. We provide
upper and lower bounds on the fairness estimation error and conduct numerical
experiments to assess our theoretical results. Our work provides the first known
theoretical results on fairness guarantee in analysis of incomplete data.

1

Introduction

Mounting evidence [20, 8, 26, 42, 43] has suggested that powerful machine learning algorithms can
be unfair and lead to disproportionately unfavorable treatment decisions for marginalized groups.
In recent years, there has been a growing body of research on addressing the unfairness and bias of
machine learning algorithms [12].
Meanwhile, missing data are ubiquitous and present daunting challenges in real-world data analysis.
Particularly, missing data, if not adequately handled, would lead to biased estimations and improper
statistical inferences [29]. As such, analysis of incomplete data has been an active research area
[4, 33]. More recently, there is also a growing recognition that missing data may have deleterious
impact on algorithmic fairness. For example, in medicine, bias caused by missing values in electronic
health records is identified as a significant factor contributing to unfairness of machine learning (ML)
algorithms used in medicine that may exacerbate health care disparities [36, 20]. However, there has
been little reported research on assessing fairness of statistical and machine learning models using
datasets that contain missing values.
In the presence of missing data, one popular approach for analysis, particularly in biomedical studies,
is to use only the set of complete cases, i.e., observations with all features observed, discarding
incomplete cases. As a result, we can define two related yet distinct data domains, namely, the complete case domain and the complete data domain (see Section 2.1). In many biomedical applications,
∗
This work is partly supported by NIH grant R01GM124111 and RF1AG063481. The content is the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views of NIH.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

