Attention Bottlenecks for Multimodal Fusion
Arsha Nagrani

Shan Yang Anurag Arnab
Cordelia Schmid Chen Sun

Aren Jansen

{anagrani, shanyang, aarnab, arenjansen, cordelias, chensun}@google.com

Google Research

Abstract
Humans perceive the world by concurrently processing and fusing highdimensional inputs from multiple modalities such as vision and audio. Machine
perception models, in stark contrast, are typically modality-specific and optimised
for unimodal benchmarks, and hence late-stage fusion of final representations or
predictions from each modality (‘late-fusion’) is still a dominant paradigm for
multimodal video classification. Instead, we introduce a novel transformer based
architecture that uses ‘fusion bottlenecks’ for modality fusion at multiple layers.
Compared to traditional pairwise self-attention, our model forces information between different modalities to pass through a small number of bottleneck latents,
requiring the model to collate and condense relevant information in each modality
and share what is necessary. We find that such a strategy improves fusion performance, at the same time reducing computational cost. We conduct thorough
ablation studies, and achieve state-of-the-art results on multiple audio-visual classification benchmarks including Audioset, Epic-Kitchens and VGGSound. All code
and models will be released.

1

Introduction

Simultaneous multimodal sensations are a crucial enabler of human perceptual learning [50]. For
artificial learning systems, however, designing a unified model for modality fusion is challenging
due to a number of factors: (i) variations in learning dynamics between modalities [56], (ii) different
noise topologies, with some modality streams containing more information for the task at hand
than others, as well as (iii) specialised input representations. The difference in input representations
between audio and vision is particularly stark – many state of the art audio classification methods
rely on short term Fourier analysis to produce log-mel spectrograms, often using them as inputs to
CNN architectures designed for images [26, 48]. These time-frequency representations have different
distributions to images – multiple acoustic objects can have energy at the same frequency, and the
translation invariances of CNNs may no longer be a desired property (while an acoustic object can be
shifted in time, a shift in frequency could alter the meaning entirely). In contrast, the visual stream in
a video is three-dimensional (two spatial and one temporal), and while different spatial regions of
the image correspond to different objects, there is the unique challenge of high redundancy across
multiple frames. Hence input representations, and consequently neural network architectures and
benchmarks tend to vary wildly for different modalities. For simplicity, the dominant paradigm for
multimodal fusion therefore often consists of an ad-hoc scheme that involves integrating separate
audio and visual networks via their output representations or scores i.e. ‘late-fusion’ [22, 44].
In this work, we present a new transformer based model for audiovisual fusion in video. Despite
originally being proposed for NLP tasks, there has been recent interest in transformers [54] as
universal perceptual models [29], due to their ability to model dense correlations between tokens,
at the same time making few assumptions about their inputs (and because continuous perceptual
inputs can be tokenised). By dividing dense continuous signals into patches and rasterising them
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

