Multimodal and Multilingual Embeddings
for Large-Scale Speech Mining

Paul-Ambroise Duquenne
Facebook AI Research
padqn@fb.com

Hongyu Gong
Facebook AI Research
hygong@fb.com

Holger Schwenk
Facebook AI Research
schwenk@fb.com

Abstract
We present an approach to encode a speech signal into a fixed-size representation
which minimizes the cosine loss with the existing massively multilingual LASER
text embedding space. Sentences are close in this embedding space, independently
of their language and modality, either text or audio. Using a similarity metric
in that multimodal embedding space, we perform mining of audio in German,
French, Spanish and English from Librivox against billions of sentences from
Common Crawl. This yielded more than twenty thousand hours of aligned speech
translations. To evaluate the automatically mined speech/text corpora, we train
neural speech translation systems for several languages pairs. Adding the mined
data, achieves significant improvements in the BLEU score on the CoVoST2 and
the MUST-C test sets with respect to a very competitive baseline.
Our approach can also be used to directly perform speech-to-speech mining, without the need to first transcribe or translate the data. We obtain more than one
thousand three hundred hours of aligned speech in French, German, Spanish and
English. This speech corpus has the potential to boost research in speech-to-speech
translation which suffers from scarcity of natural end-to-end training data. All the
mined multimodal corpora will be made freely available.

1

Introduction

Neural approaches have evolved to the de-facto standard in machine translation (MT), namely textto-text and speech-to-text translation (Berard et al., 2016; Weiss et al., 2017), and more recently
speech-to-speech translation (Jia et al., 2019). While there is very promising research on unsupervised
MT, e.g. (Lample et al., 2018; Artetxe et al., 2017), or initialization of parts of the MT system by
approaches trained in a self-supervised manner, labeled data remains extremely useful to achieve
best performance. This labeled data is either used to directly train the MT system end-to-end, if
enough data is available, or to fine-tune an MT system which parts have been initialized with some
self-supervised methods. This type of approaches is commonly used in speech-to-text translation, see
for example (Tran et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020).
In the case of text-to-text (t2t) machine translation, the labeled data consists of source/target sentence
pairs, commonly named bitexts or parallel data. There are several international organisations which
produce human translation in several languages, best known are probably the European Commission
and the United Nations. These human translations have been collected and are distributed to the MT
community, e.g. the well known Europarl (Koehn, 2005) and UN corpora (Ziemski et al., 2016).
There is also a large body of research which aims in finding existing translation in huge collections of
monolingual texts, which are abundant on the the Internet for many languages. This bitext mining
has provided huge amounts of parallel data, in particular the ParaCrawl project (Esplà et al., 2019)
or the CCMatrix initiative (Schwenk et al., 2021). This data enabled training a multilingual t2t
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

