UFC-BERT: Unifying Multi-Modal Controls for
Conditional Image Synthesis

Zhu Zhang† , Jianxin Ma† , Chang Zhou† , Rui Men† , Zhikang Li† ,
Ming Ding‡ , Jie Tang‡ , Jingren Zhou† , and Hongxia Yang†
†
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, ‡ Tsinghua University
{zhangzhu950310}@gmail.com
{jason.mjx, ericzhou.zc, yang.yhx}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Conditional image synthesis aims to create an image according to some multi-modal
guidance in the forms of textual descriptions, reference images, and image blocks to
preserve, as well as their combinations. In this paper, instead of investigating these
control signals separately, we propose a new two-stage architecture, UFC-BERT, to
unify any number of multi-modal controls. In UFC-BERT, both the diverse control
signals and the synthesized image are uniformly represented as a sequence of
discrete tokens to be processed by Transformer. Different from existing two-stage
autoregressive approaches such as DALL-E and VQGAN, UFC-BERT adopts
non-autoregressive generation (NAR) at the second stage to enhance the holistic
consistency of the synthesized image, to support preserving specified image blocks,
and to improve the synthesis speed. Further, we design a progressive algorithm that
iteratively improves the non-autoregressively generated image, with the help of two
estimators developed for evaluating the compliance with the controls and evaluating
the fidelity of the synthesized image, respectively. Extensive experiments on a
newly collected large-scale clothing dataset M2C-Fashion and a facial dataset MultiModal CelebA-HQ verify that UFC-BERT can synthesize high-fidelity images that
comply with flexible multi-modal controls.

1

Introduction

Conditional image synthesis aims to create an image according to the given control signals. With
the increasing demand for flexible conditional image synthesis, various kinds of control signals
have been introduced into this field, which can be divided into three main modalities: (i) textual
controls (TC), including the class labels [1] and natural language descriptions [62, 54]; (ii) visual
controls (VC), such as a spatially-aligned sketch map for reference [17, 60] or another image for style
transfer [15, 27]; (iii) preservation controls (PC), which require the synthesized image to preserve
some given image blocks, e.g., image outpainting and inpainting [63, 69].
However, control signals of various modalities possess different characteristics. Existing works [62,
26, 61] hence typically design separate methods customized for each control modality. Moreover,
most of these approaches only utilize one type of control signal and cannot simultaneously combine
multiple types of controls in a concise and versatile model. This begs the question: can we integrate
any number of multi-modal control signals into a unified framework for flexible conditional image
synthesis? There are two inevitable challenges in this setting: (i) how to unify the multi-modal
controls and represent them in a unified form, especial when employing multiple control signals from
different modalities concurrently; (ii) how to guarantee the fulfillment of the multi-modal controls
while ensuring the fidelity of the synthesized image.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

