Evaluating model performance under worst-case
subpopulations

Mike Li∗
Decision, Risk, and Operations Division
Columbia Business School
New York, NY 10027
MLi24@gsb.columbia.edu

Hongseok Namkoong
Decision, Risk, and Operations Division
Columbia Business School
New York, NY 10027
namkoong@gsb.columbia.edu

Shangzhou Xia
Decision, Risk, and Operations Division
Columbia Business School
New York, NY 10027
SXia24@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
The performance of ML models degrades when the training population is different
from that seen under operation. Towards assessing distributional robustness, we
study the worst-case performance of a model over all subpopulations of a given
size, defined with respect to core attributes Z. This notion of robustness can consider arbitrary (continuous) attributes Z, and automatically accounts for complex
intersectionality in disadvantaged groups. We develop a scalable yet principled
two-stage estimation procedure that can evaluate the robustness of state-of-the-art
models. We prove that our procedure enjoys several finite-sample convergence
guarantees, including dimension-free convergence. Instead of overly conservative
notions based on Rademacher complexities, our evaluation error depends on the
dimension of Z only through the out-of-sample error in estimating the performance
conditional on Z. On real datasets, we demonstrate that our method certifies the
robustness of a model and prevents deployment of unreliable models.

1

Introduction

The training population typically does not accurately represent what the model will encounter
under operation. Model performance has been observed to substantially degrade under distribution
shift [16, 28, 69, 80, 53] in speech recognition [52], automated essay scoring [4], and wildlife
conservation [11]. Similar trends persist for state-of-the-art NLP and computer vision models [78, 74],
even on new data constructed under a near-identical process [57, 66]. Heavily engineered commercial
models are no exception [19], performing poorly on rare entities in named entity linking and examples
that require abstraction and distillation in summarization tasks [38].
A particularly problematic form of distribution shift comes from embedded power structures in
data collection. Data forms the infrastructure on which we build prediction models [30], and they
inherit socioeconomic and political inequities against marginalized communities. For example, out
of 10,000+ cancer clinical trials the National Cancer Institute funds, less than 5% of participants
were non-white [21]. Typical models replicate and perpetuate such bias, and their performance drops
significantly on underrepresented groups. Speech recognition systems work poorly for Blacks [52]
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

