Spatial Ensemble: a Novel Model Smoothing
Mechanism for Student-Teacher Framework
Tengteng Huang

Yifan Sun

Xun Wang

Haotian Yao∗ Chi Zhang

Megvii Technology
{huangtengteng, yaohaotian, zhangchi}@megvii.com,
sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn, bnuwangxun@gmail.com

Abstract
Model smoothing is of central importance for obtaining a reliable teacher model in
the student-teacher framework, where the teacher generates surrogate supervision
signals to train the student. A popular model smoothing method is the Temporal
Moving Average (TMA), which continuously averages the teacher parameters with
the up-to-date student parameters. In this paper, we propose “Spatial Ensemble”,
a novel model smoothing mechanism in parallel with TMA. Spatial Ensemble
randomly picks up a small fragment of the student model to directly replace the
corresponding fragment of the teacher model. Consequentially, it stitches different
fragments of historical student models into a unity, yielding the “Spatial Ensemble”
effect. Spatial Ensemble obtains comparable student-teacher learning performance
by itself and demonstrates valuable complementarity with temporal moving average.
Their integration, named Spatial-Temporal Smoothing, brings general (sometimes
significant) improvement to the student-teacher learning framework on a variety
of state-of-the-art methods. For example, based on the self-supervised method
BYOL, it yields +0.9% top-1 accuracy improvement on ImageNet, while based
on the semi-supervised approach FixMatch, it increases the top-1 accuracy by
around +6% on CIFAR-10 when only few training labels are available. Codes and
models are available at: https://github.com/tengteng95/Spatial_
Ensemble.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the success of the student-teacher framework in self-supervised [1–5]
and semi-supervised [6–8] learning tasks. In this framework, the teacher is responsible for generating
surrogate supervision signals to guide the learning of the student on unlabeled data, for example,
category IDs for classification, feature patterns for contrastive learning, etc.
Many important works under this framework share a common model smoothing technique, i.e., the
Temporal Moving Average (TMA), to generate the teacher from the student model. For example,
Mean Teacher [6] for semi-supervision averages historical student weights as the teacher. MoCo [1]
for self-supervision employs a slowly progressing encoder (teacher), driven by a momentum update
with the query encoder (student). Another state-of-the-art method for self-supervision BYOL [2]
employs a similar strategy to update the target (teacher) network with a slow-moving average of the
online (student) network. We thus recognize that model smoothing with TMA is of central importance
for obtaining a reliable teacher for these works.
In this paper, we rethink the mechanism of TMA and summarize its importance as two-fold. First,
TMA enables the teacher to absorb parameters from different student editions and thus benefits from
∗

corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

