Rebounding Bandits for Modeling Satiation Effects

Liu Leqi
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
leqi@cs.cmu.edu

Fatma Kılınç-Karzan
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
fkilinc@andrew.cmu.edu

Zachary C. Lipton
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zlipton@cmu.edu

Alan L. Montgomery
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
alanmontgomery@cmu.edu

Abstract
Psychological research shows that enjoyment of many goods is subject to satiation,
with short-term satisfaction declining after repeated exposures to the same item.
Nevertheless, proposed algorithms for powering recommender systems seldom
model these dynamics, instead proceeding as though user preferences were fixed in
time. In this work, we introduce rebounding bandits, a multi-armed bandit setup,
where satiation dynamics are modeled as time-invariant linear dynamical systems.
Expected rewards for each arm decline monotonically with consecutive exposures
and rebound towards the initial reward whenever that arm is not pulled. Unlike
classical bandit algorithms, methods for tackling rebounding bandits must plan
ahead and model-based methods rely on estimating the parameters of the satiation
dynamics. We characterize the planning problem, showing that the greedy policy
is optimal when the arms exhibit identical deterministic dynamics. To address
stochastic satiation dynamics with unknown parameters, we propose ExploreEstimate-Plan, an algorithm that pulls arms methodically, estimates the system
dynamics, and then plans accordingly.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems suggest such diverse items as music, news, restaurants, and even job candidates. Practitioners hope that by leveraging historical interactions, they might provide services better
aligned with their users’ preferences. However, despite their ubiquity in application, the dominant
learning framework suffers several conceptual gaps that can result in misalignment between machine
behavior and human preferences. For example, because human preferences are seldom directly observed, these systems are typically trained on the available observational data (e.g., purchases, ratings,
or clicks) with the objective of predicting customer behavior [4, 27]. Problematically, such observations tend to be confounded (reflecting exposure bias due to the current recommender system) and
subject to censoring (e.g., users with strong opinions are more likely to write reviews) [41, 16].
Even if we could directly observe the utility experienced by each user, we might expect it to depend,
in part, on the history of past items consumed. For example, consider the task of automated (music)
playlisting. As a user is made to listen to the same song over and over again, we might expect that
the utility derived from each consecutive listen would decline [35]. However, after listening to other
music for some time, we might expect the utility associated with that song to bounce back towards its
baseline level. Similarly, a diner served pizza for lunch might feel diminished pleasure upon eating
pizza again for dinner.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

