Mixture weights optimisation for Alpha-Divergence
Variational Inference
Kamélia Daudel1,2∗, Randal Douc3
1: LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2: Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
3: SAMOVAR, Télécom SudParis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France

Abstract
This paper focuses on α-divergence minimisation methods for Variational Inference.
We consider the case where the posterior density is approximated by a mixture
model and we investigate algorithms optimising the mixture weights of this mixture
model by α-divergence minimisation, without any information on the underlying
distribution of its mixture components parameters. The Power Descent, defined
for all α ̸= 1, is one such algorithm and we establish in our work the full proof
of its convergence towards the optimal mixture weights when α < 1. Since the
α-divergence recovers the widely-used exclusive Kullback-Leibler when α → 1,
we then extend the Power Descent to the case α = 1 and show that we obtain
an Entropic Mirror Descent. This leads us to investigate the link between Power
Descent and Entropic Mirror Descent: first-order approximations allow us to
introduce the Rényi Descent, a novel algorithm for which we prove an O(1/N )
convergence rate. Lastly, we compare numerically the behavior of the unbiased
Power Descent and of the biased Rényi Descent and we discuss the potential
advantages of one algorithm over the other.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Inference involves being able to compute or sample from the posterior density. For many
useful models, the posterior density can only be evaluated up to a normalisation constant and we
must resort to approximation methods.
One major category of approximation methods is Variational Inference, a wide class of optimisation
methods which introduce a simpler variational family Q and use it to approximate the posterior
density (see for example Variational Bayes [1, 2] and Stochastic Variational Inference [3]). The crux
of these methods consists in finding the best approximation of the posterior density among the family
Q in the sense of a certain measure of dissimilarity, most typically the exclusive Kullback-Leibler
divergence.
However, the exclusive Kullback-Leibler divergence is known to have some undesirable properties,
e.g. posterior variance underestimation, difficulty to capture multimodal posterior densities [4, 5, 6].
As a consequence, the α-divergence [7, 8] and Rényi’s α-divergence [9, 10] have gained a lot of
attention recently and are presented as more general alternatives that permit to bypass the issues of
the exclusive Kullback-Leibler when α < 1 [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22].
Noticeably, [19] introduced the (α, Γ)-descent, a general family of gradient-based algorithms that
approximate the posterior density by a mixture model and that are able to optimise the mixture
weights of this mixture model by α-divergence minimisation. The benefit of these types of algorithms
is that (i) they expand the traditional parametric variational family to better capture complex (e.g.
∗

Corresponding author: kamelia.daudel@stats.ox.ac.uk

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

