Distributionally Robust Imitation Learning

Mohammad Ali Bashiri
Brian D. Ziebart
Xinhua Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{mbashi4, zhangx, bziebart}@uic.edu

Abstract
We consider the imitation learning problem of learning a policy in a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) setting where the reward function is not given, but demonstrations from experts are available. Although the goal of imitation learning is
to learn a policy that produces behaviors nearly as good as the experts’ for a desired task, assumptions of consistent optimality for demonstrated behaviors are
often violated in practice. Finding a policy that is distributionally robust against
noisy demonstrations based on an adversarial construction potentially solves this
problem by avoiding optimistic generalizations of the demonstrated data. This
paper studies Distributionally Robust Imitation Learning (DRO IL) and establishes
a close connection between DRO IL and Maximum Entropy Inverse Reinforcement
Learning. We show that DRO IL can be seen as a framework that maximizes a
generalized concept of entropy. We develop a novel approach to transform the
objective function into a convex optimization problem over a polynomial number
of variables for a class of loss functions that are additive over state and action
spaces. Our approach lets us optimize both stationary and non-stationary policies
and, unlike prevalent previous methods, it does not require repeatedly solving an
inner reinforcement learning problem. We experimentally show the significant
benefits of DRO IL’s new optimization method on synthetic data and a highway
driving environment.

1

Introduction

We consider the imitation learning setting of learning to perform a task based only on demonstrations
that are provided by experts. There are two main approaches often considered for this learning
problem: Behavioral Cloning [19] and Inverse Reinforcement Learning [18, 1, 24, 14]. In behavioral
cloning, the learner attempts to learn a policy in a supervised learning manner, in which a direct
mapping from states to actions is estimated from the demonstrated trajectories. Behavioral cloning,
while simple, often generalize poorly when attempting to predict goal-directed sequential decisions
due to compounding errors caused by covariate shift and only tends to succeed when given large
amounts of data [22, 23]. Alternatively, inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) rationalizes demonstrated trajectories by estimating a reward function that makes the expert’s policy optimal. The
problem of determining the reward function is inherently ill-posed, since a single policy can be
optimal for multiple reward functions.
To obtain a unique solution in IRL, many methods have been proposed, with the maximum entropy
principle [31, 32] and margin maximization [20] being two widely employed methods among
researchers. Maximum (causal) entropy IRL [32], in particular, seeks an entropy-maximizing
distribution over sequences that matches expected feature counts [1] with those observed from
demonstrations. For imitation learning in very high dimensional and continuous spaces, where
function approximations such as deep neural networks are often used, IRL methods have generally
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

