On Effective Scheduling of Model-based
Reinforcement Learning

Hang Lai∗ 1 , Jian Shen∗1 , Weinan Zhang†1 , Yimin Huang2 ,
Xing Zhang2 , Ruiming Tang2 , Yong Yu1 , Zhenguo Li2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{laihang, wnzhang}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning has attracted wide attention due to its superior sample efficiency. Despite its impressive success so far, it is still unclear
how to appropriately schedule the important hyperparameters to achieve adequate
performance, such as the real data ratio for policy optimization in Dyna-style
model-based algorithms. In this paper, we first theoretically analyze the role of real
data in policy training, which suggests that gradually increasing the ratio of real
data yields better performance. Inspired by the analysis, we propose a framework
named AutoMBPO to automatically schedule the real data ratio as well as other
hyperparameters in training model-based policy optimization (MBPO) algorithm, a
representative running case of model-based methods. On several continuous control
tasks, the MBPO instance trained with hyperparameters scheduled by AutoMBPO
can significantly surpass the original one, and the real data ratio schedule found by
AutoMBPO shows consistency with our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Deep model-free reinforcement learning (MFRL) has achieved great successes in complex decisionmaking problems such as Go [26] and robotic control [10], to name a few. Although MFRL can
achieve high asymptotic performance, a tremendous number of samples collected in interactions
with the environment are required. In contrast, model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), which
alternately learns a model of the environment and derives an agent with the help of current model
estimation, is considered to be more sample efficient than MFRL [27].
MBRL methods generally fall into different categories according to the specific usage of the learned
model [25, 33]. Among them, Dyna-style algorithms [28] adopt some off-the-shelf MFRL methods
to train a policy with both real data from environment and imaginary data generated by the model.
Since Dyna-style algorithms can seamlessly take advantage of innovations in MFRL literature and
have recently shown impressive performance [12, 30], this paper mainly focuses on Dyna-style
algorithms. Although some theoretical analysis [17, 12, 22] and thorough empirical evaluation [30]
have been conducted in the previous literature, it remains unclear how to appropriately schedule the
hyperparameters to achieve optimum performance when training a Dyna-style MBRL algorithm. In
practice, many important hyperparameters may primarily affect performance.
Firstly, since Dyna-style MBRL algorithms consist of model learning and policy optimization, how to
balance the alternate optimization of these two parts is a crucial problem [22]. Intuitively, insufficient
model training may lead to inaccurate estimation while excessive model training will cause overfitting,
and a small amount of policy training may not utilize the model adequately while exhaustive policy
training will exploit the model’s deficiencies. Moreover, the rollout length of the imaginary trajectory
∗

equal contribution. † Weinan Zhang is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

