CAFE: Catastrophic Data Leakage in
Vertical Federated Learning
Xiao Jin
Pin-Yu Chen
Chia-Yi Hsu
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
IBM Research
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
jinx2@rpi.edu
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com
chiayihsu8315@gmail.com
Chia-Mu Yu
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
chiamuyu@gmail.com

Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
chent18@rpi.edu

Abstract
Recent studies show that private training data can be leaked through the gradients
sharing mechanism deployed in distributed machine learning systems, such as
federated learning (FL). Increasing batch size to complicate data recovery is often
viewed as a promising defense strategy against data leakage. In this paper, we
revisit this defense premise and propose an advanced data leakage attack with
theoretical justification to efficiently recover batch data from the shared aggregated
gradients. We name our proposed method as catastrophic data leakage in vertical
federated learning (CAFE). Comparing to existing data leakage attacks, our extensive experimental results on vertical FL settings demonstrate the effectiveness
of CAFE to perform large-batch data leakage attack with improved data recovery
quality. We also propose a practical countermeasure to mitigate CAFE. Our results
suggest that private data participated in standard FL, especially the vertical case,
have a high risk of being leaked from the training gradients. Our analysis implies
unprecedented and practical data leakage risks in those learning settings. The code
of our work is available at https://github.com/DeRafael/CAFE.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [8, 24] is an emerging machine learning framework where a central server
and multiple workers collaboratively train a machine learning model. Some existing FL methods
consider the setting where each worker has data of a different set of subjects but sharing common
features. This setting is also referred to data partitioned or horizontal FL (HFL). Unlike the HFL
setting, in many learning scenarios, multiple workers handle data about the same set of subjects, but
each has a different set of features. This case is common in finance and healthcare applications [6].
In these examples, data owners (e.g., financial institutions and hospitals) have different records of
those users in their joint user base, and so, by combining their features through FL, they can establish
a more accurate model. We refer to this setting as feature-partitioned or vertical FL (VFL).
Compared with existing distributed learning paradigms, FL raises new challenges including data
heterogeneity and privacy [20]. To protect data privacy, only model parameters and the change of
parameters (e.g., gradients) are exchanged between server and workers [19, 15]. Recent works have
studied how a malicious worker can embed backdoors or replace the global model in FL [2, 3, 27].
Furthermore, as exchanging gradients is often viewed as privacy-preserving protocols, little attention
has been paid to information leakage from public shared gradients and batch identities.
In the context of data security and AI ethics, the possibility of inferring private user data from the
gradients in FL has received growing interests [10, 14, 21], known as the data leakage problems.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

