A Biased Graph Neural Network Sampler
with Near-Optimal Regret

Qingru Zhang1∗
David Wipf2
Quan Gan2
Le Song1,3
1
2
Georgia Institute of Technology
Amazon Shanghai AI Lab
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
qingru.zhang@gatech.edu, daviwipf@amazon.com
quagan@amazon.com, le.song@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNN) have recently emerged as a vehicle for applying
deep network architectures to graph and relational data. However, given the
increasing size of industrial datasets, in many practical situations the message
passing computations required for sharing information across GNN layers are
no longer scalable. Although various sampling methods have been introduced to
approximate full-graph training within a tractable budget, there remain unresolved
complications such as high variances and limited theoretical guarantees. To address
these issues, we build upon existing work and treat GNN neighbor sampling as
a multi-armed bandit problem but with a newly-designed reward function that
introduces some degree of bias designed to reduce variance and avoid unstable,
possibly-unbounded pay outs. And unlike prior bandit-GNN use cases, the resulting
policy leads to near-optimal regret while accounting for the GNN training dynamics
introduced by SGD. From a practical standpoint, this translates into lower variance
estimates and competitive or superior test accuracy across several benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Graph convolution networks (GCN) and Graph neural networks (GNN) in general [21, 17] have
recently become a powerful tool for representation learning for graph structured data [6, 2, 33]. These
neural networks iteratively update the representation of a node using a graph convolution operator or
message passing operator which aggregate the embeddings of the neighbors of the node, followed by
a non-linear transformation. After stacking multiple graph convolution layers, these models can learn
node representations which can capture information from both immediate and distant neighbors.
GCNs and variants [32] have demonstrated the start-of-art performance in a diverse range of graph
learning prolems [21, 17, 3, 30, 13, 15, 23]. However, they face significant computational challenges
given the increasing sizes of modern industrial datasets. The multilayers of graph convolutions is
equivalent to recursively unfold the neighbor aggregation in a top-down manner which will lead to an
exponentially growing neighborhood size with respect to the number of layers. If the graph is dense
and scale-free, the computation of embeddings will involve a large portion of the graph even with a
few layers, which is intractable for large-scale graph [21, 34].
Several sampling methods have been proposed to alleviate the exponentially growing neighborhood
sizes, including node-wise sampling [17, 9, 24], layer-wise sampling [8, 37, 20] and subgraph
sampling [10, 35, 19]. However, the optimal sampler with minimum variance is a function of the
neighbors’ embeddings unknown apriori before the sampling and only partially observable for those
sampled neighbors. Most previous methods approximate the optimal sampler with a static distribution
which cannot reduce variance properly. And most of existing approaches [8, 37, 20, 10, 35, 19]
∗

Corresponding author. Work done during the internship at Amazon Shanghai AI Lab.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

