Subgoal Search For Complex Reasoning Tasks

Konrad Czechowski∗
University of Warsaw
k.czechowski@mimuw.edu.pl

Tomasz Odrzygóźdź∗
University of Warsaw
tomaszo@impan.pl

Marek Zbysiński
University of Warsaw
m.zbysinski@
students.mimuw.edu.pl

Michał Zawalski
University of Warsaw
m.zawalski@uw.edu.pl

Krzysztof Olejnik
University of Warsaw
k.olejnik3@
student.uw.edu.pl

Yuhuai Wu
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute
ywu@cs.toronto.edu

Łukasz Kuciński
Polish Academy of Sciences
lkucinski@impan.pl

Piotr Miłoś
Polish Academy of Sciences,
University of Oxford,
deepsense.ai
pmilos@impan.pl

Abstract
Humans excel in solving complex reasoning tasks through a mental process of
moving from one idea to a related one. Inspired by this, we propose Subgoal Search
(kSubS) method. Its key component is a learned subgoal generator that produces
a diversity of subgoals that are both achievable and closer to the solution. Using
subgoals reduces the search space and induces a high-level search graph suitable
for efficient planning. In this paper, we implement kSubS using a transformerbased subgoal module coupled with the classical best-first search framework. We
show that a simple approach of generating k-th step ahead subgoals is surprisingly
efficient on three challenging domains: two popular puzzle games, Sokoban and the
Rubik’s Cube, and an inequality proving benchmark INT. kSubS achieves strong
results including state-of-the-art on INT within a modest computational budget.

1

Introduction

Reasoning is often regarded as a defining property of advanced intelligence [40, 18]. When confronted
with a complicated task, humans’ thinking process often moves from one idea to a related idea, and
the progress is made through milestones, or subgoals, rather than through atomic actions that are
necessary to transition between subgoals [15]. During this process, thinking about one subgoal can
lead to a possibly diverse set of subsequent subgoals that are conceptually reachable and make a
promising step towards the problem’s solution. This intuitive introspection is backed by neuroscience
evidence [20], and in this work, we present an algorithm that mimics this process. Our approach
couples a deep learning generative subgoal modeling with classical search algorithms to allow for
successful planning with subgoals. We showcase the efficiency of our method on the following
complex reasoning tasks: two popular puzzle games Sokoban and the Rubik’s Cube, and an inequality
theorem proving benchmark INT [55], achieving the state-of-the-art results in INT and competitive
results for the remaining two.
The deep learning revolution has brought spectacular advancements in pattern recognition techniques
and models. Given the hard nature of reasoning problems, these are natural candidates to provide
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

