Designing Counterfactual Generators using Deep
Model Inversion
Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
jjayaram@llnl.gov
Jason Liang
Stanford University
jialiang@stanford.edu

Vivek Narayanaswamy
Arizona State University
vnaray29@asu.edu

Akshay Chaudhari
Stanford University
akshaysc@stanford.edu

Deepta Rajan
IBM Research AI
r.deepta@gmail.com

Andreas Spanias
Arizona State University
spanias@asu.edu

Abstract
Explanation techniques that synthesize small, interpretable changes to a given image while producing desired changes in the model prediction have become popular
for introspecting black-box models. Commonly referred to as counterfactuals,
the synthesized explanations are required to contain discernible changes (for easy
interpretability) while also being realistic (consistency to the data manifold). In
this paper, we focus on the case where we have access only to the trained deep
classifier and not the actual training data. While the problem of inverting deep
models to synthesize images from the training distribution has been explored, our
goal is to develop a deep inversion approach to generate counterfactual explanations
for a given query image. Despite their effectiveness in conditional image synthesis, we show that existing deep inversion methods are insufficient for producing
meaningful counterfactuals. We propose DISC (Deep Inversion for Synthesizing
Counterfactuals) that improves upon deep inversion by utilizing (a) stronger image
priors, (b) incorporating a novel manifold consistency objective and (c) adopting a
progressive optimization strategy. We find that, in addition to producing visually
meaningful explanations, the counterfactuals from DISC are effective at learning
classifier decision boundaries and are robust to unknown test-time corruptions.

1

Introduction

With the growing need for deploying deep black-box models into critical decision-making, there
is an increased emphasis on explainability methods that can reveal intricate relationships between
data signatures (e.g., image features) and predictions. In this context, the so-called counterfactual
(CF) explanations [1] that synthesize small, interpretable changes to a given image while producing
desired changes in model predictions to support user-specified hypotheses (e.g., progressive change in
predictions) have become popular. Though counterfactual explanations provide more flexibility over
conventional techniques, such as feature importance estimation [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], by exploring the vicinity
of a query image, an important requirement to produce meaningful counterfactuals is to produce
discernible local perturbations (for easy interpretability) while being realistic (close to the underlying
data manifold). Consequently, existing approaches rely extensively on pre-trained generative models
to synthesize plausible counterfactuals [1, 7, 8, 9, 10]. By design, this ultimately restricts their utility
to scenarios where one cannot access the training data or pre-trained generative models, for example,
due to privacy requirements commonly encountered in many practical applications.
In this paper, we focus on the problem where we have access only to trained deep classifiers and not the
actual training data or generative models. Synthesizing images from the underlying data distribution
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

