Locally private online change point detection

Thomas Berrett
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, U.K.
tom.berrett@warwick.ac.uk

Yi Yu
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, U.K.
yi.yu.2@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We study online change point detection problems under the constraint of local
differential privacy (LDP) where, in particular, the statistician does not have access
to the raw data. As a concrete problem, we study a multivariate nonparametric
regression problem. At each time point t, the raw data are assumed to be of the
form (Xt , Yt ), where Xt is a d-dimensional feature vector and Yt is a response
variable. Our primary aim is to detect changes in the regression function mt (x) =
E(Yt |Xt = x) as soon as the change occurs. We provide algorithms which respect
the LDP constraint, which control the false alarm probability, and which detect
changes with a minimal (minimax rate-optimal) delay. To quantify the cost of
privacy, we also present the optimal rate in the benchmark, non-private setting.
These non-private results are also new to the literature and thus are interesting
per se. In addition, we study the univariate mean online change point detection
problem, under privacy constraints. This serves as the blueprint of studying more
complicated private change point detection problems.

1

Introduction

Online change point detection has been an active statistical research area for decades, originated from
the demand of a reliable quality control mechanism under time and resources constraints [e.g. 34]. In
recent years, due to the advance of technology, the applications of online change point detection are
well beyond quality control and include climatology, speech recognition, imaging processing, among
many others. While collecting the data as they are generated, one wishes to detect the underlying
distributional changes as soon as the changes occur.
As the ability of collecting and storing data improves exponentially, protecting users’ privacy has
become one of the central concerns of data science. In practice, many of the systems that we monitor
contain sensitive information. For instance, change point algorithms are used in cyber security to
detect attacks, with the ultimate aim often being to protect private information [24, 30, 1]. Other
common application areas include public health [21, 17] and finance [18], in which many of the data
involved are highly personal. Given the prevalence of such problems, we address two questions in
this paper:
• whether we can detect changes without the need for direct access to the sensitive raw data;
• and what the cost of protecting privacy is in terms of the detection delay and accuracy.
Traditional anonymisation of data has been shown to be an outdated method of privacy protection,
particularly in multivariate settings [28, 26]. Even when direct identifiers such as names and locations
are removed, data sets often contain enough information for researchers to identify individual subjects,
and hence there is a need to quantify and control the release of privileged information. Formal privacy
constraints provide us with a rigorous framework in which we may tackle such problems and explore
the fundamental limits of private methods. Constraints of this type have been imposed in analyses
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

