OctField: Hierarchical Implicit Functions
for 3D Modeling
Jia-Heng Tang∗1,2 , Weikai Chen∗3 , Jie Yang1,2 ,
Bo Wang3 , Songrun Liu3 , Bo Yang3 , and Lin Gao (B)†1,2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tencent Games Digital Content Technology Center
tangjiaheng19s@ict.ac.cn
chenwk891@gmail.com
yangjie01@ict.ac.cn
{bohawkwang,songrunliu,brandonyang}@tencent.com
gaolin@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in localized implicit functions have enabled neural implicit representation to be scalable to large scenes. However, the regular subdivision of
3D space employed by these approaches fails to take into account the sparsity of
the surface occupancy and the varying granularities of geometric details. As a
result, its memory footprint grows cubically with the input volume, leading to a
prohibitive computational cost even at a moderately dense decomposition. In this
work, we present a learnable hierarchical implicit representation for 3D surfaces,
coded OctField, that allows high-precision encoding of intricate surfaces with low
memory and computational budget. The key to our approach is an adaptive decomposition of 3D scenes that only distributes local implicit functions around the
surface of interest. We achieve this goal by introducing a hierarchical octree structure to adaptively subdivide the 3D space according to the surface occupancy and
the richness of part geometry. As octree is discrete and non-differentiable, we
further propose a novel hierarchical network that models the subdivision of octree
cells as a probabilistic process and recursively encodes and decodes both octree
structure and surface geometry in a differentiable manner. We demonstrate the
value of OctField for a range of shape modeling and reconstruction tasks, showing superiority over alternative approaches.

1

Introduction

Geometric 3D representation has been central to the tasks in computer vision and computer graphics,
ranging from high-level applications, such as scene understanding, object recognition and classification, etc, to low-level tasks, including 3D shape reconstruction, interpolation and manipulation. To
accommodate with various application scenarios, a universal and effective 3D representation for 3D
deep learning should have the following properties: (1) compatibility with arbitrary topologies, (2)
capacity of modeling fine geometric details, (3) scalability to intricate shapes, (4) support efficient
encoding of shape priors, (5) compact memory footprint, and (6) high computational efficiency.
While explicit 3D representations have been widely used in recent 3D learning approaches, none
of these representations can fulfill all the desirable properties. In particular, point cloud and voxel
representations struggle to capture the fine-scale shape details – often at the cost of high memory
∗
†

Contributed equally.
Corresponding author is Lin Gao (gaolin@ict.ac.cn).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

