A Geometric Perspective towards Neural Calibration
via Sensitivity Decomposition

Junjiao Tian
Georgia Institute of Technology
jtian73@gatech.edu

Dylan Yung
Georgia Institute of Technology
dyung6@gatech.edu

Yen-Chang Hsu
Samsung Research America
yenchang.hsu@samsung.com

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Institute of Technology
zkira@gatech.edu

Abstract
It is well known that vision classification models suffer from poor calibration in
the face of data distribution shifts. In this paper, we take a geometric approach
to this problem. We propose Geometric Sensitivity Decomposition (GSD) which
decomposes the norm of a sample feature embedding and the angular similarity
to a target classifier into an instance-dependent and an instance-independent component. The instance-dependent component captures the sensitive information
about changes in the input while the instance-independent component represents
the insensitive information serving solely to minimize the loss on the training
dataset. Inspired by the decomposition, we analytically derive a simple extension
to current softmax-linear models, which learns to disentangle the two components
during training. On several common vision models, the disentangled model outperforms other calibration methods on standard calibration metrics in the face of
out-of-distribution (OOD) data and corruption with significantly less complexity.
Specifically, we surpass the current state of the art by 30.8% relative improvement
on corrupted CIFAR100 in Expected Calibration Error. Code available at https:
//github.com/GT-RIPL/Geometric-Sensitivity-Decomposition.git.

1

Introduction

During development, deep learning models are trained and validated on data from the same distribution. However, in the real world sensors degrade and weather conditions change. Similarly, subtle
changes in image acquisition and processing can also lead to distribution shift of the input data. This
is often known as covariate shift, and will typically decrease the performance (e.g. classification accuracy). However, it has been empirically found that the model’s confidence remains high even when
accuracy has degraded [1]. The process of aligning confidence to empirical accuracy is called model
calibration. Calibrated probability provides valuable uncertainty information for decision making.
For example, knowing when a decision cannot be trusted and more data is needed is important for
safety and efficiency in real world applications such as self-driving [2] and active learning [3].
A comprehensive comparison of calibration methods has been studied for in-distribution (IND)
data [4], However, these methods lead to unsatisfactory performance under distribution shift [5]. To
resolve the problem, high-quality uncertainty estimation [6, 5] is required. Principled Bayesian methods [7] model uncertainty directly but are computationally heavy. Recent deterministic methods [8, 9]
propose to improve a model’s sensitivity to input changes by regularizing the model’s intermediate
layers. In this context, sensitivity is defined as preserving distance between two different input
samples through layers of the model. We would like to utlize the improved sensitivity to better detect
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

