FastCorrect: Fast Error Correction with Edit
Alignment for Automatic Speech Recognition

Yichong Leng1∗, Xu Tan2 , Linchen Zhu3 , Jin Xu4 , Renqian Luo1 , Linquan Liu3
Tao Qin2 , Xiang-Yang Li1 , Edward Lin3 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Microsoft Azure Speech,4 Tsinghua University
1
{lyc123go,lrq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn
2
{xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com
3
{linczhu,linqul,edlin}@microsoft.com
4
j-xu18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Error correction techniques have been used to refine the output sentences from
automatic speech recognition (ASR) models and achieve a lower word error rate
(WER) than original ASR outputs. Previous works usually use a sequence-tosequence model to correct an ASR output sentence autoregressively, which causes
large latency and cannot be deployed in online ASR services. A straightforward
solution to reduce latency, inspired by non-autoregressive (NAR) neural machine
translation, is to use an NAR sequence generation model for ASR error correction,
which, however, comes at the cost of significantly increased ASR error rate. In
this paper, observing distinctive error patterns and correction operations (i.e.,
insertion, deletion, and substitution) in ASR, we propose FastCorrect, a novel NAR
error correction model based on edit alignment. In training, FastCorrect aligns
each source token from an ASR output sentence to the target tokens from the
corresponding ground-truth sentence based on the edit distance between the source
and target sentences, and extracts the number of target tokens corresponding to each
source token during edition/correction, which is then used to train a length predictor
and to adjust the source tokens to match the length of the target sentence for parallel
generation. In inference, the token number predicted by the length predictor is
used to adjust the source tokens for target sequence generation. Experiments on the
public AISHELL-1 dataset and an internal industrial-scale ASR dataset show the
effectiveness of FastCorrect for ASR error correction: 1) it speeds up the inference
by 6-9 times and maintains the accuracy (8-14% WER reduction) compared with
the autoregressive correction model; and 2) it outperforms the popular NAR models
adopted in neural machine translation and text edition by a large margin.

1

Introduction

In recent years, error correction techniques [1, 5, 22, 26, 33] have been widely adopted to refine
the output sentences from an ASR model for further WER reduction. Error correction, a typical
sequence to sequence task, takes the sentence generated by an ASR model as the source sequence
and the ground-truth sentence as the target sequence, and aims to correct the errors in the source
sequence. Previous works on ASR error correction [22, 26] usually adopt an encoder-decoder based
autoregressive generation model. While achieving good WER reduction, autoregressive models suffer
from slow inference speed, and do not satisfy the latency requirements for online ASR services. For
∗

This work was conducted at Microsoft. Corresponding author: Xu Tan, xuta@microsoft.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

