Mean-based Best Arm Identification in Stochastic
Bandits under Reward Contamination
Arpan Mukherjee
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
mukhea5@rpi.edu

Ali Tajer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
tajera@rpi.edu

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
Pin-Yu.Chen@ibm.com

Payel Das
IBM Research
daspa@us.ibm.com

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of best arm identification in contaminated
stochastic multi-arm bandits. In this setting, the rewards obtained from any arm
are replaced by samples from an adversarial model with probability ε. A fixed
confidence (infinite-horizon) setting is considered, where the goal of the learner is
to identify the arm with the largest mean. Owing to the adversarial contamination
of the rewards, each arm’s mean is only partially identifiable. This paper proposes
two algorithms, a gap-based algorithm and one based on the successive elimination,
for best arm identification in sub-Gaussian bandits. These algorithms involve mean
estimates that achieve the optimal error guarantee on the deviation of the true mean
from the estimate asymptotically. Furthermore, these algorithms asymptotically
achieve the optimal sample complexity. Specifically, for the gap-based algorithm,
the sample complexity is asymptotically optimal up to constant factors, while for
the successive elimination-based algorithm, it is optimal up to logarithmic factors.
Finally, numerical experiments are provided to illustrate the gains of the algorithms
compared to the existing baselines.

1

Introduction

Overview. This paper investigates the problem of best arm identification (BAI) in stochastic multiarmed bandits (MABs), under the key assumption that the reward samples are vulnerable to adversarial
corruptions. Specifically, consider a K-armed stochastic MAB, where the reward from arm i ∈
[K] , {1, · · · , K} is drawn from a sub-Gaussian distribution Pi . At each round t, the observed
reward may be corrupted with probability ε. When a reward sample is corrupted at time t, it is
replaced by a sample drawn from a contamination model with distribution Qi (t), which is distinct
from Pi . Such a setup is a non-trivial generalization of the canonical BAI problem due to the arbitrary
corruption that may be introduced by the corruption model. This setup has far superior practical
implications. For instance, consider the example of measuring drug responses, in which several
compounds are evaluated in order to determine which one of them renders the maximal efficacy. It is
natural to assume that a fraction of the test results are reported incorrectly, or a fraction of the samples
may be contaminated [1]. Both possibilities affect the measurements (or rewards) that are used to
identify the most effective drug. In a different example, consider a recommendation system in which
the goal is to recommend the most “interesting” articles to users based on their feedback on previous
recommendations. In this case, likewise, user feedbacks are prone to be imprecise or even malicious
in a fraction of the recommendations. Such examples motivate investigating the BAI problem under
the additional consideration that there exists the possibility that a fraction of the reward samples are
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

