Bridging Offline Reinforcement Learning and
Imitation Learning: A Tale of Pessimism

Paria Rashidinejad
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
paria.rashidinejad@berkeley.edu
Cong Ma
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
congm@uchicago.edu

Jiantao Jiao
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Banghua Zhu
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
banghua@berkeley.edu
Stuart Russell
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
russell@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Offline (or batch) reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms seek to learn an optimal
policy from a fixed dataset without active data collection. Based on the composition
of the offline dataset, two main methods are used: imitation learning which is
suitable for expert datasets, and vanilla offline RL which often requires uniform
coverage datasets. From a practical standpoint, datasets often deviate from these
two extremes and the exact data composition is usually unknown. To bridge this
gap, we present a new offline RL framework that smoothly interpolates between
the two extremes of data composition, hence unifying imitation learning and
vanilla offline RL. The new framework is centered around a weak version of the
concentrability coefficient that measures the deviation of the behavior policy from
the expert policy alone. Under this new framework, we ask: can one develop
an algorithm that achieves a minimax optimal rate adaptive to unknown data
composition? To address this question, we consider a lower confidence bound
(LCB) algorithm developed based on pessimism in the face of uncertainty in offline
RL. We study finite-sample properties of LCB as well as information-theoretic
limits in multi-armed bandits, contextual bandits, and Markov decision processes
(MDPs). Our analysis reveals surprising facts about optimality rates. In particular,
in both contextual bandits and RL, LCB achieves
√ a faster rate of 1/N for nearlyexpert datasets compared to the usual rate of 1/ N in offline RL, where N is the
batch dataset sample size. In contextual bandits, we prove that LCB is adaptively
optimal for the entire data composition range, achieving a smooth transition from
imitation learning to offline RL. We further show that LCB is almost adaptively
optimal in tabular MDPs.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have recently achieved tremendous empirical success
including beating Go champions [45, 46] and surpassing professionals in Atari games [30, 31], to
name a few. Most success stories, however, are in the realm of online RL in which active data
collection is necessary. This online paradigm falls short of leveraging previously-collected datasets
and dealing with scenarios where online exploration is not possible [10]. To tackle these issues, offline
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

