Adversarial Robustness of Streaming Algorithms
through Importance Sampling

Vladimir Braverman
Google
vbraverman@google.com

Avinatan Hassidim
Google
avinatan@google.com

Mariano Schain
Google
marianos@google.com

Sandeep Silwal
MIT
silwal@mit.edu

Yossi Matias
Google
yossi@google.com

Samson Zhou
Carnegie Mellon University
samsonzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Robustness against adversarial attacks has recently been at the forefront of algorithmic design for machine learning tasks. In the adversarial streaming model, an
adversary gives an algorithm a sequence of adaptively chosen updates u1 , . . . , un
as a data stream. The goal of the algorithm is to compute or approximate some
predetermined function for every prefix of the adversarial stream, but the adversary
may generate future updates based on previous outputs of the algorithm. In particular, the adversary may gradually learn the random bits internally used by an
algorithm to manipulate dependencies in the input. This is especially problematic
as many important problems in the streaming model require randomized algorithms,
as they are known to not admit any deterministic algorithms that use sublinear
space. In this paper, we introduce adversarially robust streaming algorithms for
central machine learning and algorithmic tasks, such as regression and clustering, as well as their more general counterparts, subspace embedding, low-rank
approximation, and coreset construction. For regression and other numerical linear
algebra related tasks, we consider the row arrival streaming model. Our results are
based on a simple, but powerful, observation that many importance sampling-based
algorithms give rise to adversarial robustness which is in contrast to sketching
based algorithms, which are very prevalent in the streaming literature but suffer
from adversarial attacks. In addition, we show that the well-known merge and
reduce paradigm in streaming is adversarially robust. Since the merge and reduce
paradigm allows coreset constructions in the streaming setting, we thus obtain
robust algorithms for k-means, k-median, k-center, Bregman clustering, projective
clustering, principal component analysis (PCA) and non-negative matrix factorization. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first adversarially robust results
for these problems yet require no new algorithmic implementations. Finally, we
empirically confirm the robustness of our algorithms on various adversarial attacks
and demonstrate that by contrast, some common existing algorithms are not robust.

1

Introduction

Robustness against adversarial attacks have recently been at the forefront of algorithmic design for
machine learning tasks [GSS15, CW17, AEIK18, MMS+ 18, TSE+ 19]. We extend this line of work
by studying adversarially robust streaming algorithms.
In the streaming model, data points are generated one at a time in a stream and the goal is to compute
some meaningful function of the input points while using a limited amount of memory, typically
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

