Novel Upper Bounds for the Constrained Most
Probable Explanation Task

Tahrima Rahman
Sara Rouhani
Vibhav Gogate
The University of Texas at Dallas
{tahrima.rahman, sara.rouhani, vibhav.gogate@utdallas.edu}

Abstract
We propose several schemes for upper bounding the optimal value of the constrained most probable explanation (CMPE) problem. Given a set of discrete
random variables, two probabilistic graphical models defined over them and a real
number q, this problem involves finding an assignment of values to all the variables
such that the probability of the assignment is maximized according to the first
model and is bounded by q w.r.t. the second model. In prior work, it was shown that
CMPE is a unifying problem with several applications and special cases including
the nearest assignment problem, the decision preserving most probable explanation
task and robust estimation. It was also shown that CMPE is NP-hard even on
tractable models such as bounded treewidth networks and is hard for integer linear
programming methods because it includes a dense global constraint. The main
idea in our approach is to simplify the problem via Lagrange relaxation and decomposition to yield either a knapsack problem or the unconstrained most probable
explanation (MPE) problem, and then solving the two problems, respectively using
specialized knapsack algorithms and mini-buckets based upper bounding schemes.
We evaluate our proposed scheme along several dimensions including quality of the
bounds and computation time required on various benchmark graphical models and
how it can be used to find heuristic, near-optimal feasible solutions in an example
application pertaining to robust estimation and adversarial attacks on classifiers.

1

Introduction

We develop upper bounding algorithms for the constrained most probable explanation (CMPE) task
[32], a recently defined unifying (discrete) optimization task over probabilistic graphical models
(PGMs) [9, 20, 25] or log-linear models. At a high level, the CMPE task adds a global capacity
constraint to the classic optimization problem in PGMs called most probable explanation (MPE).
Given a set of log-potentials F, namely a log-linear model, the MPE task seeks to find an assignment
of values to all variables (i.e., an explanation) such that the sum over the projection of the assignment
on the log-potentials is maximized, namely it has the maximum probability. The CMPE task adds
a global constraint to MPE using a possibly different set of log-potentials G and a real number q.
Specifically, it seeks to find the most probable assignment w.r.t. F under the constraint that the sum
over the projection of the assignment on the log-potentials in G is smaller than or equal to q.
Our interest in CMPE stems from the fact that several tasks in Explainable AI [16] can be reduced to
CMPE. For example, the nearest assignment problem [31] and the decision preserving explanation
problem [7, 32] are instances of CMPE; the former seeks to find an assignment whose probability is
as close as possible to a given assignment, namely, its nearest neighbor while the latter seeks to find
the most probable extension of a given partial assignment according to a generative model such that
the same (classification) decision is made according to a discriminative model. Other applications of
CMPE include various queries in robust estimation [10] and detecting adversarial attacks.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

