Breaking the Moments Condition Barrier: No-Regret
Algorithm for Bandits with Super Heavy-Tailed
Payoffs

Han Zhong
Center for Data Science, Peking University
hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn

Jiayi Huang
Center for Data Science, Peking University
Pazhou Lab
jyhuang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Lin F. Yang ∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Los Angles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Liwei Wang ∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite a large amount of effort in dealing with heavy-tailed error in machine
learning, little is known when moments of the error can become non-existential:
the random noise η satisfies Pr[|η| > |y|] ≤ 1/|y|α for some α > 0. We make the
first attempt to actively handle such super heavy-tailed noise in bandit learning
problems: We propose a novel robust statistical estimator, mean of medians, which
estimates a random variable by computing the empirical mean of a sequence of
empirical medians. We then present a generic reductionist algorithmic framework
for solving bandit learning problems (including multi-armed and linear bandit
problem): the mean of medians estimator can be applied to nearly any bandit
learning algorithm as a black-box filtering for its reward signals and obtain similar
regret bound as if the reward is sub-Gaussian. We show that the regret bound is nearoptimal even with very heavy-tailed noise. We also empirically demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, which further corroborates our theoretical
results.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems have been introduced by Robbins (Robbins, 1952), and have
since become a standard model for modeling sequential decision-making problems. In an MAB
instance, there are finite number of arms, pulling each of which an agent receives a random reward
(payoff) with unknown distribution. An agent then aims to maximize the received rewards by pulling
the arms strategically for a number of times. The MAB problems frequently arise in practice: e.g.,
clinical trials and online advertising. When the number of arms becomes infinite in practice, the
stochastic linear bandit (Abe and Long, 1999; Auer, 2002; Dani et al., 2008) generalizes the classical
MAB by assuming the underlying reward distribution possesses a linear structure. Linear bandits
achieve tremendous success such as online advertisement and recommendation systems (Li et al.,
2010; Chu et al., 2011; Li et al., 2016).
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

