Adversarial Examples for k-Nearest Neighbor
Classifiers Based on Higher-Order Voronoi Diagrams

Chawin Sitawarin
UC Berkeley
chawins@eecs.berkeley.edu

Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos
George Mason University
evgenios@gmu.edu

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

David Wagner
UC Berkeley
daw@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Adversarial examples are a widely studied phenomenon in machine learning models.
While most of the attention has been focused on neural networks, other practical
models also suffer from this issue. In this work, we propose an algorithm for
evaluating the adversarial robustness of k-nearest neighbor classification, i.e.,
finding a minimum-norm adversarial example. Diverging from previous proposals,
we propose the first geometric approach by performing a search that expands
outwards from a given input point. On a high level, the search radius expands to the
nearby higher-order Voronoi cells until we find a cell that classifies differently from
the input point. To scale the algorithm to a large k, we introduce approximation
steps that find perturbation with smaller norm, compared to the baselines, in a
variety of datasets. Furthermore, we analyze the structural properties of a dataset
where our approach outperforms the competition.

1

Introduction

It is well-known that machine learning models can easily be misled by maliciously crafted inputs,
called adversarial examples, which are generated by adding a tiny perturbation to test samples [Biggio
et al., 2013, Szegedy et al., 2013, Goodfellow et al., 2015]. Adversarial examples are often studied in
the context of neural networks, leaving the problem largely unexplored for other classifiers. The knearest neighbor, or simply k-NN, classifier is a simple yet widely used model in various applications
such as data mining, recommendation, and anomaly detection systems where interpretability and
simplicity are preferred [Wu et al., 2008]. This non-parametric classifier does not require a training
phase and has a well-understood and elegant geometric foundation [Okabe et al., 1992]. k-NN is also
an active area of research with lots of developments in popular libraries like Google’s ScaNN [Guo
et al., 2020] and Facebook’s FAISS [Johnson et al., 2017]. In recent works [Papernot and McDaniel,
2018, Dubey et al., 2019, Sitawarin and Wagner, 2019b], k-NN is combined with neural networks to
enhance the robustness and the interpretability. Despite the importance of k-NN, there are only a
handful of works that study its robustness [Wang et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2019,
Sitawarin and Wagner, 2019a, 2020].
The first step towards evaluating the robustness of a classifier is to generate an adversarial example
that is close to a given test point, under some definition of closeness. In the case of k-NN where
k > 1, this problem is challenging as the computation involves high-dimensional polytopes that
satisfy a set of geometric properties, the so-called Voronoi cells.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

