Rethinking the Pruning Criteria for Convolutional
Neural Network
Zhongzhan Huang1 Wenqi Shao2,3‡ Xinjiang Wang3 Liang Lin1 Ping Luo4∗
1
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
SenseTime Research,4 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Channel pruning is a popular technique for compressing convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), where various pruning criteria have been proposed to remove
the redundant filters. From our comprehensive experiments, we found two blind
spots of pruning criteria: (1) Similarity: There are some strong similarities among
several primary pruning criteria that are widely cited and compared. According to
these criteria, the ranks of filters’ Importance Score are almost identical, resulting in
similar pruned structures. (2) Applicability: The filters’ Importance Score measured
by some pruning criteria are too close to distinguish the network redundancy well.
In this paper, we analyze the above blind spots on different types of pruning criteria
with layer-wise pruning or global pruning. We also break some stereotypes, such
as that the results of `1 and `2 pruning are not always similar. These analyses are
based on the empirical experiments and our assumption (Convolutional Weight
Distribution Assumption) that the well-trained convolutional filters in each layer
approximately follow a Gaussian-alike distribution. This assumption has been
verified through systematic and extensive statistical tests.

1

Introduction

Pruning [1, 2, 3, 4] a trained neural network is commonly seen in network compression. In particular,
for CNNs, channel pruning refers to the pruning of the filters in the convolutional layers. There are
several critical factors for channel pruning. Procedures. One-shot method [5]: Train a network from
scratch; Use a certain criterion to calculate filters’ Importance Score, and prune the filters which
have small Importance Score; After additional training, the pruned network can recover its accuracy
to some extent. Iterative method [1, 6, 7]: Unlike One-shot methods, they prune and fine-tune a
network alternately. Criteria. The filters’ Importance Score can be definded by a given criterion.
From different ideas, many types of pruning criteria have been proposed, such as Norm-based [5],
Activation-based [8, 9], Importance-based [10, 11], BN-based [12] and so on. Strategy. Layer-wise
pruning: In each layer, we can sort and prune the filters, which have small Importance Score measured
by a given criterion. Global pruning: Different from layer-wise pruning, global pruning [12, 13] sort
the filters from all the layers through their Importance Score and prune them.
In this work, we conduct our investigation on a variety of pruning criteria. As one of the simplest and
most effective channel pruning criteria, `1 pruning [5] is widely used in practice. The core idea of
this criterion is to sort the `1 norm of filters in one layer and then prune the filters with a small `1
norm. Similarly, there is `2 pruning which instead leverages the `2 norm [7, 6]. `1 and `2 can be seen
as the criteria which use absolute Importance Score of filters. Through the study of the distribution of
norm, [4] demonstrates that these criteria should satisfy two conditions: (1) the variance of the norm
of the filters cannot be too small; (2) the minimum norm of the filters should be small enough. Since
∗

Corresponding author: pluo.lhi@gmail.com;

‡

co-first author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

