Separation Results between Fixed-Kernel and
Feature-Learning Probability Metrics

Carles Domingo-Enrich
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences (NYU)
cd2754@nyu.edu

Youssef Mroueh
IBM Research AI
mroueh@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Several works in implicit and explicit generative modeling empirically observed that
feature-learning discriminators outperform fixed-kernel discriminators in terms of
the sample quality of the models. We provide separation results between probability
metrics with fixed-kernel and feature-learning discriminators using the function
classes F2 and F1 respectively, which were developed to study overparametrized
two-layer neural networks. In particular, we construct pairs of distributions over
hyper-spheres that can not be discriminated by fixed kernel (F2 ) integral probability
metric (IPM) and Stein discrepancy (SD) in high dimensions, but that can be
discriminated by their feature learning (F1 ) counterparts. To further study the
separation we provide links between the F1 and F2 IPMs with sliced Wasserstein
distances. Our work suggests that fixed-kernel discriminators perform worse than
their feature learning counterparts because their corresponding metrics are weaker.

1

Introduction

The field of generative modeling, whose aim is to generate artificial samples of some target distribution given some true samples of it, is broadly divided into two types of models (Mohamed and
Lakshminarayanan, 2017): explicit generative models, which involve learning an estimate of the
log-density of the target distribution which is then sampled (e.g. energy-based models), and implicit
generative models, where samples are generated directly by transforming some latent variable (e.g.
generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed,
2015)).
Several works have observed experimentally that both in implicit and in explicit generative models,
using ‘adaptive’ or ‘feature-learning’ function classes as discriminators yields better generative
performance than ‘lazy’ or ‘kernel’ function classes. Within implicit models, Li et al. (2017) show
that generative moment matching networks (GMMN) generate significantly better samples for the
CIFAR-10 and MNIST datasets when using maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) with learned instead
of fixed features. For a related method and in a similar spirit, Santos et al. (2019) show that for image
generation, fixed-feature discriminators are only successful when we take an amount of features
exponential in the intrinsic dimension of the dataset. Genevay et al. (2018) study implicit generative
models with the Sinkhorn divergence as discriminator, and they also show that other than for simple
datasets like MNIST, learning the Wasserstein cost is crucial for good performance.
As to explicit models, Grathwohl et al. (2020) train energy-based models with a Stein discrepancy
based on neural networks and show improved performance with respect to kernel classes. Chang et al.
(2020) show that Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) fails in high dimensions, and that learning
the kernel helps. Given the abundant experimental evidence, the aim of this work is to provide some
theoretical results that showcase the advantages of feature-learning over kernel discriminators. For
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

