Data Sharing and Compression for Cooperative
Networked Control
Jiangnan Cheng1 , Marco Pavone2 , Sachin Katti3 , Sandeep Chinchali4 , and Ao Tang1
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
{jc3377, atang}@cornell.edu, {pavone, skatti}@stanford.edu,
sandeepc@utexas.edu
2

Abstract
Sharing forecasts of network timeseries data, such as cellular or electricity load patterns, can improve independent control applications ranging from traffic scheduling
to power generation. Typically, forecasts are designed without knowledge of a
downstream controller’s task objective, and thus simply optimize for mean prediction error. However, such task-agnostic representations are often too large to
stream over a communication network and do not emphasize salient temporal
features for cooperative control. This paper presents a solution to learn succinct,
highly-compressed forecasts that are co-designed with a modular controller’s task
objective. Our simulations with real cellular, Internet-of-Things (IoT), and electricity load data show we can improve a model predictive controller’s performance by
at least 25% while transmitting 80% less data than the competing method. Further,
we present theoretical compression results for a networked variant of the classical
linear quadratic regulator (LQR) control problem.

1

Introduction

Cellular network and power grid operators measure rich timeseries data, such as city-wide mobility
and electricity demand patterns. Sharing such data with external entities, such as a taxi fleet operator,
can enhance a host of societal-scale control tasks, ranging from taxi routing to battery storage
optimization. However, how should timeseries owners represent their data to limit the scope and
volume of information shared across a data boundary, such as a congested wireless network?1
At a first glance, it might seem sufficient to simply share generic demand forecasts with any downstream controller. Each controller, however, often has a unique cost function and context-specific
sensitivity to prediction errors. For example, cell demand forecasts should emphasize accurate
peak-hour forecasts for taxi fleet routing. The same underlying cellular data should instead emphasize
fine-grained throughput forecasts when a video streaming controller starts a download. Despite the
benefits of customizing forecasts for control, today’s forecasts are mostly task-agnostic and simply
optimize for mean or median prediction error. As such, they often waste valuable network bandwidth
to transmit temporal features that are unnecessary for a downstream controller. Even worse, they
might not minimize errors when they matter most, such as peak-hour variability.
Given the limitations of today’s task-agnostic forecasts, this paper contributes a novel problem
formulation for learning task-driven forecasts for networked control. In our general problem (Fig.
1

Uber processes petabytes of data per day [1] and a mobile operator can process 60 TB of daily cell metrics
[2]. Even a fraction of such data is hard to send.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

