Predicting Deep Neural Network Generalization
with Perturbation Response Curves
Yair Schiff1 , Brian Quanz2 , Payel Das2 , Pin-Yu Chen2
1
IBM Watson, 2 IBM Research
{yair.schiff@,blquanz@us.,daspa@us.,pin-yu.chen@}ibm.com

Abstract
The field of Deep Learning is rich with empirical evidence of human-like performance on a variety of prediction tasks. However, despite these successes, the recent
Predicting Generalization in Deep Learning (PGDL) NeurIPS 2020 competition
[1] suggests that there is a need for more robust and efficient measures of network
generalization. In this work, we propose a new framework for evaluating the
generalization capabilities of trained networks. We use perturbation response (PR)
curves that capture the accuracy change of a given network as a function of varying
levels of training sample perturbation. From these PR curves, we derive novel
statistics that capture generalization capability. Specifically, we introduce two new
measures for accurately predicting generalization gaps: the Gi-score and Pal-score,
which are inspired by the Gini coefficient and Palma ratio (measures of income inequality), that accurately predict generalization gaps. Using our framework applied
to intra and inter-class sample mixup, we attain better predictive scores than the
current state-of-the-art measures on a majority of tasks in the PGDL competition.
In addition, we show that our framework and the proposed statistics can be used to
capture to what extent a trained network is invariant to a given parametric input
transformation, such as rotation or translation. Therefore, these generalization
gap prediction statistics also provide a useful means for selecting optimal network
architectures and hyperparameters that are invariant to a certain perturbation.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have produced state-of-the-art and human-like performance across a variety of tasks.
This rapid progress has led to wider-spread adoption and deployment. Given their prevalence and
increasing applications, it is important to estimate how well a trained net will generalize. Additionally,
specific tasks often require models to be invariant to certain transformations or perturbations of the
data. This can be achieved either through data augmentation that changes the underlying statistics
of the training sets or through inductive architectural biases, such as translation invariance that is
inherent in convolutional neural networks. It is important as well to understand how and when a
network has been able to learn task-dependent invariances.
Various attempts at bounding and predicting neural network generalization are well summarized and
analyzed in the recent survey [2]. While both theoretical and empirical progress has been made, there
remains a gap in the literature for an efficient and intuitive measure that can predict generalization
given a trained network and its corresponding data post hoc. Aiming to fill this gap, the recent
Predicting Generalization in Deep Learning (PGDL) NeurIPS 2020 competition [1] encouraged
participants to provide complexity measures that would take into account network weights and
training data to predict generalization gaps, i.e., the difference between training and test set accuracy.
In this work, we propose a new framework that presents progress towards this goal. Our methodology
consists of first building an estimate of how the accuracy of a network changes as a function of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

