Training Feedback Spiking Neural Networks by
Implicit Differentiation on the Equilibrium State
∗

Mingqing Xiao1 , Qingyan Meng2,3 , Zongpeng Zhang4 , Yisen Wang1,5 , Zhouchen Lin1,5,6
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MoE), School of AI, Peking University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
{mingqing_xiao, yisen.wang, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, qingyanmeng@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
zongpeng.zhang98@gmail.com

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are brain-inspired models that enable energyefficient implementation on neuromorphic hardware. However, the supervised
training of SNNs remains a hard problem due to the discontinuity of the spiking
neuron model. Most existing methods imitate the backpropagation framework
and feedforward architectures for artificial neural networks, and use surrogate
derivatives or compute gradients with respect to the spiking time to deal with the
problem. These approaches either accumulate approximation errors or only propagate information limitedly through existing spikes, and usually require information
propagation along time steps with large memory costs and biological implausibility.
In this work, we consider feedback spiking neural networks, which are more brainlike, and propose a novel training method that does not rely on the exact reverse of
the forward computation. First, we show that the average firing rates of SNNs with
feedback connections would gradually evolve to an equilibrium state along time,
which follows a fixed-point equation. Then by viewing the forward computation of
feedback SNNs as a black-box solver for this equation, and leveraging the implicit
differentiation on the equation, we can compute the gradient for parameters without
considering the exact forward procedure. In this way, the forward and backward
procedures are decoupled and therefore the problem of non-differentiable spiking
functions is avoided. We also briefly discuss the biological plausibility of implicit
differentiation, which only requires computing another equilibrium. Extensive
experiments on MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, N-MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100
demonstrate the superior performance of our method for feedback models with
fewer neurons and parameters in a small number of time steps. Our code is available
at https://github.com/pkuxmq/IDE-FSNN.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have gained increasing attention recently due to their inherent energyefficient computation [21, 38, 41, 33, 8]. Inspired by the neurons in the human brain, biologically
plausible SNNs transmit spikes between neurons, enabling event-based computation which can be
carried out on neuromorphic chips with less energy consumption [1, 7, 30, 33]. Meanwhile, SNNs are
computationally more powerful than artificial neural networks (ANNs) theoretically and are therefore
regarded as the third generation of neural network models [24].
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

