The Complexity of Sparse Tensor PCA

Davin Choo∗
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
davin@u.nus.edu

Tommaso d’Orsi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
tommaso.dorsi@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We study the problem of sparse tensor principal component analysis: given a tensor
Y = W + λx⊗p with W ∈ ⊗p Rn having i.i.d. Gaussian entries, the goal is to
recover the k-sparse unit vector x ∈ Rn . The model captures both sparse PCA
√
(in its Wigner form) and tensor PCA. For the highly sparse regime of k ≤ n,
we present a family of algorithms that smoothly interpolates between a simple
polynomial-time algorithm and the exponential-time exhaustive search algorithm.
For any 1 ≤ t ≤√k, our algorithms recovers the sparse vector for signal-toe t · (k/t)p/2 ) in time O(n
e p+t ), capturing the state-of-the-art
noise ratio λ ≥ O(
guarantees for the matrix settings (in both the polynomial-time and sub-exponential
time regimes). Our results naturally extend to the case of r distinct k-sparse signals
with disjoint supports, with guarantees that are independent of the number of
spikes. Even in the restricted case of sparse PCA, known algorithms only recover
e · r) while our algorithms require λ ≥ O(k).
e
the sparse vectors for λ ≥ O(k
Finally,
by analyzing the low-degree likelihood ratio, we complement these algorithmic
results with rigorous evidence illustrating the trade-offs between signal-to-noise
ratio and running time. This lower bound captures the known lower bounds for both
sparse PCA and tensor PCA. In this general model, we observe a more intricate
three-way trade-off between the number of samples n, the sparsity k, and the tensor
power p.

1

Introduction

Sparse tensor principal component analysis is a statistical primitive generalizing both sparse PCA2
and tensor PCA3 . We are given multi-linear measurements in the form of a tensor
Y = W + λx⊗p ∈ ⊗p Rn
p

n

(SSTM)
4

for a Gaussian noise tensor W ∈ ⊗ R containing i.i.d. N (0, 1) entries and signal-to-noise ratio
λ > 0. Our goal is to estimate the “structured” unit vector x ∈ Rn . The structure we enforce on
x is sparsity: |supp(x)| ≤ k. The model can be extended to include multiple spikes in a natural
Pr
Pr
way: Y = W + q=1 λq x⊗p
q=1 λq X(q) for
(q) , and even general order-p tensors: Y = W +
X(q) = x(q,1) ⊗ · · · ⊗ x(q,p) ∈ ⊗p Rn . In this introduction, we focus on the simplest single spike
setting of SSTM.
It is easy to see that sparse PCA corresponds to the setting with tensor order p = 2. On the other
hand, tensor PCA is captured by effectively removing the sparsity constraint: |supp(x)| ≤ n. In
∗

Part of the work was done while the author was in ETH Zürich.
Often in the literature, the terms sparse PCA and spiked covariance model refer to the sparse spiked Wishart
model. However, here we consider the sparse spiked Wigner matrix model.
3
Tensor PCA is also known as the spiked Wigner tensor model, or simply the spiked tensor model.
4
Throughout the paper, we will write random variables in boldface.
2

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

