On Contrastive Representations
of Stochastic Processes
Emile Mathieu†∗, Adam Foster†∗, Yee Whye Teh†,‡
{emile.mathieu, adam.foster, y.w.teh}@stats.ox.ac.uk,
† Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
‡ DeepMind, United Kingdom

Abstract
Learning representations of stochastic processes is an emerging problem in machine learning with applications from meta-learning to physical object models
to time series. Typical methods rely on exact reconstruction of observations, but
this approach breaks down as observations become high-dimensional or noise
distributions become complex. To address this, we propose a unifying framework
for learning contrastive representations of stochastic processes (CR E SP) that does
away with exact reconstruction. We dissect potential use cases for stochastic
process representations, and propose methods that accommodate each. Empirically, we show that our methods are effective for learning representations of
periodic functions, 3D objects and dynamical processes. Our methods tolerate
noisy high-dimensional observations better than traditional approaches, and the
learned representations transfer to a range of downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Video

3D object

Image in-fill

1D function

The stochastic process (Doob, 1953; Parzen, 1999) is Table 1: Example stochastic processes with
a powerful mathematical abstraction used in biology covariate space X and observation space Y.
(Bressloff, 2014), chemistry (van Kampen, 1992),
X
Y
Illustration
physics (Jacobs, 2010), finance (Steele, 2012) and
other fields. The simplest incarnation of a stochastic process is a random function R → R, such as a
R
R
Gaussian Process (MacKay, 2003), that can be used
to describe a real-valued signal indexed by time or
space. Extending to random functions from R to
another space, stochastic processes can model timeZ2
R3
dependent phenomena like queuing (Grimmett and
Stirzaker, 2020) and diffusion (Itô et al., 2012). In
meta-learning, the stochastic process can be used to
describe few-shot learning tasks—mappings from imSE(3) Images
ages to class labels (Vinyals et al., 2016)—and image
completion tasks—mappings from pixel locations to
RGB values (Garnelo et al., 2018a). In computer
vision, 2D views of 3D objects can be seen as obserR
Images
vations of a stochastic process indexed by the space
of possible viewpoints (Eslami et al., 2018; Mildenhall et al., 2020). Videos can be seen as samples from
a time-indexed stochastic process with 2D image observations (Zelnik-Manor and Irani, 2001).
∗

Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

