Linear-Time Probabilistic Solutions
of Boundary Value Problems

Nicholas Krämer
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
nicholas.kraemer@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen and
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
We propose a fast algorithm for the probabilistic solution of boundary value
problems (BVPs), which are ordinary differential equations subject to boundary
conditions. In contrast to previous work, we introduce a Gauss–Markov prior
and tailor it specifically to BVPs, which allows computing a posterior distribution
over the solution in linear time, at a quality and cost comparable to that of wellestablished, non-probabilistic methods. Our model further delivers uncertainty
quantification, mesh refinement, and hyperparameter adaptation. We demonstrate
how these practical considerations positively impact the efficiency of the scheme.
Altogether, this results in a practically usable probabilistic BVP solver that is (in
contrast to non-probabilistic algorithms) natively compatible with other parts of
the statistical modelling tool-chain.

1

Boundary value problems in computational pipelines

This work develops a class of algorithms for solving ODE boundary value problems; that is, ordinary
differential equations (ODEs)
ẏ(t) = f (y(t), t)

(1)

subject to left- and right-hand side boundary conditions Ly(t0 ) = y0 and Ry(tmax ) = ymax . The
vector field f : Rd → Rd , as well as L ∈ RdL ×d , R ∈ RdR ×d , t0 ∈ R, tmax ∈ R, y0 ∈ RdL , and
ymax ∈ RdR are given. It is no loss of generality to consider a first-order boundary value problem
because higher-order problems can be transformed into first-order problems [1].
Loosely speaking, solving BVPs amounts to following the law of a dynamical system when “connecting two points”. This setting is relevant to several scientific applications of machine learning. As
motivation, we consider three examples, all of which are depicted in Figure 1. First, recovering the
trajectory of a pendulum between two positions amounts to solving the ODE ÿ(t) = −9.81 sin(y(t))
subject to the positions as boundary conditions. If the positions were interpolated without the ODE
knowledge, the output would be physically meaningless. Second, BVPs arise when inferring the
evolution of the case counts of people that fall victim to an infectious disease. A lack of counts of (a
specific subset of) non-infected people at the initial time-point can be made up for by available counts
of infected people at the final time-point of the integration domain. Third, efficient manifold learning
necessitates repeated computation of (geodesic) distances between two points, which amounts to
solving BVPs [2, 3]. Depending on application details, the ability to produce structured output
uncertainty or to enhance the algorithm by including additional sources of information can be crucial.
Probabilistic numerical algorithms respond to these challenges by solving problems of numerical
simulation with probabilistic inference. For initial value problems, probabilistic solvers share lineartime complexity, adaptive step-size selection, and high polynomial convergence rates with their
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

