Drop, Swap, and Generate: A Self-Supervised
Approach for Generating Neural Activity

Ran Liu∗
Georgia Tech

Mehdi Azabou
Georgia Tech

Max Dabagia
Georgia Tech

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar
DeepMind

Chi-Heng Lin
Georgia Tech

Keith B. Hengen
Washington Univ. in St. Louis
Eva L. Dyer∗
Georgia Tech

Michal Valko
DeepMind

Abstract
Meaningful and simplified representations of neural activity can yield insights into
how and what information is being processed within a neural circuit. However,
without labels, finding representations that reveal the link between the brain and
behavior can be challenging. Here, we introduce a novel unsupervised approach
for learning disentangled representations of neural activity called Swap-VAE. Our
approach combines a generative modeling framework with an instance-specific
alignment loss that tries to maximize the representational similarity between transformed views of the input (brain state). These transformed (or augmented) views
are created by dropping out neurons and jittering samples in time, which intuitively should lead the network to a representation that maintains both temporal
consistency and invariance to the specific neurons used to represent the neural
state. Through evaluations on both synthetic data and neural recordings from
hundreds of neurons in different primate brains, we show that it is possible to build
representations that disentangle neural datasets along relevant latent dimensions
linked to behavior.

1

Introduction

In the brain, the coordinated actions of groups of neurons are responsible for encoding sensory inputs
and movements, as well as all processing and manipulation in between (1; 2; 3; 4; 5). Understanding
what different populations of neurons are doing and how they work together to encode their inputs is
a primary goal of neuroscience (6).
When successful, representations learned from populations of neurons can provide insights into how
neural circuits work to encode their inputs and produce behavior, and allow for robust and stable
decoding of these correlates. Over the last decade, a number of unsupervised learning approaches
have been introduced to build representations of neural population activity without knowledge of
specific labels or downstream decoding objectives (7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12; 13). Such methods have
provided exciting new insights into the stability of neural responses (14), individual differences (10),
and remapping of neural responses through learning (15). However, without labels or additional
inputs to guide the network, learning representations that allow different sources of variability to be
distinguished is still a major challenge (16; 17).
∗

Contact: rliu361@gatech.edu, evadyer@gatech.edu. Project page: https://nerdslab.github.io/SwapVAE/.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

