Targeted Neural Dynamical Modeling

Cole Hurwitz
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland, EH8 9AB
colehurwitz@gmail.com

Akash Srivastava
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Cambridge, MA 02142,
Akash.Srivastava@ibm.com

Kai Xu
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland, EH8 9AB
xukai921110@gmail.com

Justin Jude
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland, EH8 9AB
justin.jude@ed.ac.uk

Matthew G. Perich
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY 10029
mperich@gmail.com

Lee E. Miller
Feinberg School of Medicine
Northwestern
Chicago, IL 60611
lm@northwestern.edu

Matthias H. Hennig
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland, EH8 9AB
m.hennig@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Latent dynamics models have emerged as powerful tools for modeling and interpreting neural population activity. Recently, there has been a focus on incorporating
simultaneously measured behaviour into these models to further disentangle sources
of neural variability in their latent space. These approaches, however, are limited
in their ability to capture the underlying neural dynamics (e.g. linear) and in their
ability to relate the learned dynamics back to the observed behaviour (e.g. no time
lag). To this end, we introduce Targeted Neural Dynamical Modeling (TNDM),
a nonlinear state-space model that jointly models the neural activity and external
behavioural variables. TNDM decomposes neural dynamics into behaviourally
relevant and behaviourally irrelevant dynamics; the relevant dynamics are used
to reconstruct the behaviour through a flexible linear decoder and both sets of
dynamics are used to reconstruct the neural activity through a linear decoder with
no time lag. We implement TNDM as a sequential variational autoencoder and
validate it on simulated recordings and recordings taken from the premotor and
motor cortex of a monkey performing a center-out reaching task. We show that
TNDM is able to learn low-dimensional latent dynamics that are highly predictive
of behaviour without sacrificing its fit to the neural data.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

