Conformal Bayesian Computation

Edwin Fong
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute
edwin.fong@stats.ox.ac.uk

Chris Holmes
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute
cholmes@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We develop scalable methods for producing conformal Bayesian predictive intervals with finite sample calibration guarantees. Bayesian posterior predictive
distributions, p(y | x), characterize subjective beliefs on outcomes of interest, y,
conditional on predictors, x. Bayesian prediction is well-calibrated when the model
is true, but the predictive intervals may exhibit poor empirical coverage when
the model is misspecified, under the so called M-open perspective. In contrast,
conformal inference provides finite sample frequentist guarantees on predictive
confidence intervals without the requirement of model fidelity. Using ‘add-one-in’
importance sampling, we show that conformal Bayesian predictive intervals are
efficiently obtained from re-weighted posterior samples of model parameters. Our
approach contrasts with existing conformal methods that require expensive refitting
of models or data-splitting to achieve computational efficiency. We demonstrate
the utility on a range of examples including extensions to partially exchangeable
settings such as hierarchical models.

1

Introduction

We consider Bayesian prediction using training data Z1:n = {Yi , Xi }i=1:n for an outcome of interest
Yi and covariates Xi ∈ Rd . Given a model likelihood fθ (y | x) and prior on parameters, π(θ) for
θ ∈ Rp , the posterior predictive distribution for the response at a new Xn+1 = xn+1 takes on the
form
Z
p(y | xn+1 , Z1:n ) = fθ (y | xn+1 ) π(θ | Z1:n ) dθ ,
(1)
where π(θ | Z1:n ) is the Bayesian posterior. Asymptotically exact samples from the posterior can
be obtained through Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and the above density can be computed
through Monte Carlo (MC), or by direct sampling from an approximate model. Given a Bayesian
predictive distribution, one can then construct the highest density 100 × (1 − α)% posterior predictive
credible intervals, which are the shortest intervals to contain (1 − α) of the predictive probability.
Alternatively, the central 100 × (1 − α)% credible interval can be computed using the α/2 and
1 − α/2 quantiles. Posterior predictive distributions condition on the observed Z1:n and represent
subjective and coherent beliefs. However, it is well known that model misspecification can lead
Bayesian intervals to be poorly calibrated in the frequentist sense (Dawid, 1982; Fraser et al., 2011),
that is the long run proportion of the observed data lying in the (1 − α) Bayes predictive interval is
not necessarily equal to (1 − α). This has consequences for the robustness of such approaches and
trust in using Bayesian models to aid decisions.
Alternatively, one can seek intervals around a point prediction from the model, yb = µ
b(x), that have
the correct frequentist coverage of (1 − α) . This is precisely what is offered by the conformal
prediction framework of Vovk et al. (2005), which allows the construction of prediction bands with
finite sample validity without assumptions on the generative model beyond exchangeability of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

