Realistic Evaluation of Transductive
Few-Shot Learning

Olivier Veilleux ∗
ÉTS Montreal

Malik Boudiaf *
ÉTS Montreal

Pablo Piantanida
L2S, CentraleSupélec CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Abstract
Transductive inference is widely used in few-shot learning, as it leverages the statistics of the unlabeled query set of a few-shot task, typically yielding substantially better performances than its inductive counterpart. The current few-shot benchmarks
use perfectly class-balanced tasks at inference. We argue that such an artificial regularity is unrealistic, as it assumes that the marginal label probability of the testing
samples is known and fixed to the uniform distribution. In fact, in realistic scenarios, the unlabeled query sets come with arbitrary and unknown label marginals. We
introduce and study the effect of arbitrary class distributions within the query sets
of few-shot tasks at inference, removing the class-balance artefact. Specifically,
we model the marginal probabilities of the classes as Dirichlet-distributed random
variables, which yields a principled and realistic sampling within the simplex. This
leverages the current few-shot benchmarks, building testing tasks with arbitrary
class distributions. We evaluate experimentally state-of-the-art transductive methods over 3 widely used data sets, and observe, surprisingly, substantial performance
drops, even below inductive methods in some cases. Furthermore, we propose
a generalization of the mutual-information loss, based on α-divergences, which
can handle effectively class-distribution variations. Empirically, we show that our
transductive α-divergence optimization outperforms state-of-the-art methods across
several data sets, models and few-shot settings. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/oveilleux/Realistic_Transductive_Few_Shot.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are widely dominating the field. However, their outstanding performances are
often built upon training on large-scale labeled data sets, and the models are seriously challenged
when dealing with novel classes that were not seen during training. Few-shot learning [1, 2, 3] tackles
this challenge, and has recently triggered substantial interest within the community. In standard
few-shot settings, a model is initially trained on large-scale data containing labeled examples from a
set of base classes. Then, supervision for a new set of classes, which are different from those seen in
the base training, is restricted to just one or a few labeled samples per class. Model generalization
is evaluated over few-shot tasks. Each task includes a query set containing unlabeled samples for
evaluation, and is supervised by a support set containing a few labeled samples per new class.
The recent few-shot classification literature is abundant and widely dominated by convoluted metalearning and episodic-training strategies. To simulate generalization challenges at test times, such
strategies build sequences of artificially balanced few-shot tasks (or episodes) during base training,
each containing both query and support samples. Widely adopted methods within this paradigm
include: Prototypical networks [4], which optimizes the log-posteriors of the query points within
each base-training episode; Matching networks [3], which expresses the predictions of query points
∗

Equal contributions, corresponding authors: {olivier.veilleux.2, malik.boudiaf.1}@ens.etsmtl.ca

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

