Machine learning structure preserving brackets for
forecasting irreversible processes

Kookjin Lee
School of Computing
and Augmented Intelligence
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281

Nathaniel Trask
Center for Computing Research
Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, NM 87123
natrask@sandia.gov

Panos Stinis
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99354

Abstract
Forecasting of time-series data requires imposition of inductive biases to obtain
predictive extrapolation, and recent works have imposed Hamiltonian/Lagrangian
form to preserve structure for systems with reversible dynamics. In this work we
present a novel parameterization of dissipative brackets from metriplectic dynamical systems appropriate for learning irreversible dynamics with unknown a priori
model form. The process learns generalized Casimirs for energy and entropy guaranteed to be conserved and nondecreasing, respectively. Furthermore, for the case
of added thermal noise, we guarantee exact preservation of a fluctuation-dissipation
theorem, ensuring thermodynamic consistency. We provide benchmarks for dissipative systems demonstrating learned dynamics are more robust and generalize
better than either "black-box" or penalty-based approaches.

1

Background and previous work

Modeling time-series data as a solution to a dynamical system with learnable dynamics has been
shown to be effective in both data-driven modeling for physical systems and traditional machine
learning (ML) tasks. Broadly, it has been observed that imposition of physics-based structure leads to
more robust architectures which generalize well [1]. On one end of the spectrum of inductive biases,
universal differential equations (UDE) [2] assume an a priori known model form, thus imposing the
strongest bias. On the other, neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) [3] assume a completely
black-box model form with minimal bias.
Many recent approaches have turned to structure preserving models of reversible dynamics to obtain
an inductive bias that lies in between [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. One may use black-box deep neural networks
(DNNs) to learn an energy of a system with unknown model form, while the algebraic structure
of Hamiltonian/Lagrangian dynamics provides a flow map which conserves energy. Typically, the
learned flow map has symplectic structure so that phase space trajectories are conserved. In classification problems, this mitigates the vanishing/exploding gradient problem and improves accuracy [9];
in physics, this guarantees that extrapolated states are physically realizable [10].
Such approaches are only appropriate for reversible systems lacking friction or dissipation. In the
physics literature, the theory of metriplectic dynamical systems provides a generalization of the
Poisson brackets of Hamiltonian/Lagrangian mechanics which model not just a conserved energy, but
generalized Casimirs such as entropy [11, 12]. Physical systems which can be cast in this framework
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

