The Image Local Autoregressive Transformer

Chenjie Cao, Yuxin Hong, Xiang Li, Chengrong Wang, Chengming Xu, Yanwei Fu∗, Xiangyang Xue

School of Data Science
Fudan University
{20110980001,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, AutoRegressive (AR) models for the whole image generation empowered
by transformers have achieved comparable or even better performance compared
to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). Unfortunately, directly applying
such AR models to edit/change local image regions, may suffer from the problems
of missing global information, slow inference speed, and information leakage of
local guidance. To address these limitations, we propose a novel model – image
Local Autoregressive Transformer (iLAT), to better facilitate the locally guided
image synthesis. Our iLAT learns the novel local discrete representations, by the
newly proposed local autoregressive (LA) transformer of the attention mask and
convolution mechanism. Thus iLAT can efficiently synthesize the local image
regions by key guidance information. Our iLAT is evaluated on various locally
guided image syntheses, such as pose-guided person image synthesis and face
editing. Both quantitative and qualitative results show the efficacy of our model.

1

Introduction

Generating realistic images has been attracting ubiquitous research attention of the community for
a long time. In particular, those image synthesis tasks involving persons or portrait [6, 28, 29]
can be applied in a wide variety of scenarios, such as advertising, games, and motion capture, etc.
Most real-world image synthesis tasks only involve the local generation, which means generating
pixels in certain regions, while maintaining the semantic consistency, e.g., face editing [19, 1, 40],
pose guiding [36, 55, 47], and image inpainting [51, 30, 49, 53]. Unfortunately, most works can
only handle the well aligned images of ‘icon-view’ foregrounds, rather than the image synthesis of
‘non-iconic view’ foregrounds [47, 24], i.e., person instances with arbitrary poses in cluttered scenes,
which is concerned in this paper. Even worse, the global semantics tend to be distorted during the
generation of previous methods, even if subtle modifications are applied to a local image region.
Critically, given the local editing/guidance such as sketches of faces, or skeleton of bodies in the first
column of Fig. 1(A), it is imperative to design our new algorithm for locally guided image synthesis.
Generally, several inherent problems exist in previous works for such a task. For example, despite
impressive quality of images are generated, GANs/Autoencoder(AE)-based methods [51, 47, 19, 30,
18] are inclined to synthesize blurry local regions, as in Fig. 1(A)-row(c). Furthermore, some inspiring
autoregressive (AR) methods, such as PixelCNN [32, 41, 23] and recent transformers [8, 14], should
efficiently model the joint image distribution (even in very complex background [32]) for whole
image generation as Fig. 1(B)-row(b). These AR models, however, are still not ready for locally
guided image synthesis, as several reasons. (1) Missing global information. As in Fig. 1(B)-row(b),
vanilla AR models take the top-to-down and left-to-right sequential generation with limited receptive
fields for the initial generating (top left corner), which are incapable of directly modeling global
information. Additionally, the sequential AR models suffer from exposure bias [2], which may
∗

Corresponding author. Dr. Fu is also with Fudan ISTBI—ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

