Deconditional Downscaling with Gaussian Processes

Siu Lun Chau∗†
University of Oxford

Shahine Bouabid∗†
University of Oxford

Dino Sejdinovic†
University of Oxford

Abstract
Refining low-resolution (LR) spatial fields with high-resolution (HR) information,
often known as statistical downscaling, is challenging as the diversity of spatial
datasets often prevents direct matching of observations. Yet, when LR samples are
modeled as aggregate conditional means of HR samples with respect to a mediating
variable that is globally observed, the recovery of the underlying fine-grained
field can be framed as taking an “inverse” of the conditional expectation, namely
a deconditioning problem. In this work, we propose a Bayesian formulation of
deconditioning which naturally recovers the initial reproducing kernel Hilbert
space formulation from Hsu and Ramos [1]. We extend deconditioning to a
downscaling setup and devise efficient conditional mean embedding estimator
for multiresolution data. By treating conditional expectations as inter-domain
features of the underlying field, a posterior for the latent field can be established as
a solution to the deconditioning problem. Furthermore, we show that this solution
can be viewed as a two-staged vector-valued kernel ridge regressor and show
that it has a minimax optimal convergence rate under mild assumptions. Lastly,
we demonstrate its proficiency in a synthetic and a real-world atmospheric field
downscaling problem, showing substantial improvements over existing methods.

1

Introduction

Spatial observations often operate at limited resolution due to practical constraints. For example,
remote sensing atmosphere products [2, 3, 4, 5] provide measurement of atmospheric properties such
as cloud top temperatures and optical thickness, but only at a low resolution. Devising methods
to refine low-resolution (LR) variables for local-scale analysis thus plays a crucial part in our
understanding of the anthropogenic impact on climate
When high-resolution (HR) observations of different covariates are available, details can be instilled
into the LR field for refinement. This task is referred to as statistical downscaling or spatial
disaggregation and models LR observations as the aggregation of an unobserved underlying HR field.
For example, multispectral optical satellite imagery [6, 7] typically comes at higher resolution than
atmospheric products and can be used to refine the latter.
Statistical downscaling has been studied in various forms, notably giving it a probabilistic treatment [8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13], in which Gaussian processes (GP) [14] are typically used in conjunction with a
sparse variational formulation [15] to recover the underlying unobserved HR field. Our approach
follows this line of research where we do not observe data from the underlying HR groundtruth field.
On the other hand, deep neural network (DNN) based approaches [16, 17, 18] study this problem
from a different setting, where they often assume that both HR and LR matched observations are
available for training. Then, their approaches follow a standard supervised learning setting in learning
a mapping between different resolutions.
∗

Indicates equal contribution
Department of Statistics, Oxford, UK, OX1 3LB. <siu.chau@stats.ox.ac.uk, shahine.bouabid@stats.ox.ac.uk,
dino.sejdinovic@stats.ox.ac.uk>
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

