Revisiting Deep Learning Models for Tabular Data

Yury Gorishniy∗†‡

Ivan Rubachev†♣

Valentin Khrulkov†

Artem Babenko†♣

† Yandex, Russia
‡ Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
♣ National Research University Higher School of Economics, Russia

Abstract
The existing literature on deep learning for tabular data proposes a wide range of
novel architectures and reports competitive results on various datasets. However,
the proposed models are usually not properly compared to each other and existing
works often use different benchmarks and experiment protocols. As a result,
it is unclear for both researchers and practitioners what models perform best.
Additionally, the field still lacks effective baselines, that is, the easy-to-use models
that provide competitive performance across different problems.
In this work, we perform an overview of the main families of DL architectures for
tabular data and raise the bar of baselines in tabular DL by identifying two simple
and powerful deep architectures. The first one is a ResNet-like architecture which
turns out to be a strong baseline that is often missing in prior works. The second
model is our simple adaptation of the Transformer architecture for tabular data,
which outperforms other solutions on most tasks. Both models are compared to
many existing architectures on a diverse set of tasks under the same training and
tuning protocols. We also compare the best DL models with Gradient Boosted
Decision Trees and conclude that there is still no universally superior solution. The
source code is available at https://github.com/yandex-research/rtdl.

1

Introduction

Due to the tremendous success of deep learning on such data domains as images, audio and texts
(Goodfellow et al., 2016), there has been a lot of research interest to extend this success to problems
with data stored in tabular format. In these problems, data points are represented as vectors of
heterogeneous features, which is typical for industrial applications and ML competitions, where
neural networks have a strong non-deep competitor in the form of GBDT (Chen and Guestrin, 2016;
Ke et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018). Along with potentially higher performance, using
deep learning for tabular data is appealing as it would allow constructing multi-modal pipelines for
problems, where only one part of the input is tabular, and other parts include images, audio and
other DL-friendly data. Such pipelines can then be trained end-to-end by gradient optimization for
all modalities. For these reasons, a large number of DL solutions were recently proposed, and new
models continue to emerge (Arik and Pfister, 2020; Badirli et al., 2020; Hazimeh et al., 2020; Huang
et al., 2020; Klambauer et al., 2017; Popov et al., 2020; Song et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017, 2020).
Unfortunately, due to the lack of established benchmarks (such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) for
computer vision or GLUE (Wang et al., 2019a) for NLP), existing papers use different datasets for
evaluation and proposed DL models are often not adequately compared to each other. Therefore, from
the current literature, it is unclear what DL model generally performs better than others and whether
GBDT is surpassed by DL models. Additionally, despite the large number of novel architectures,
the field still lacks simple and reliable solutions that allow achieving competitive performance
with moderate effort and provide stable performance across many tasks. In that regard, Multilayer
∗

Correspondence to: yura.gorishniy@phystech.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

