Multi-View Representation Learning
via Total Correlation Objective

HyeongJoo Hwang, Geon-Hyeong Kim, Seunghoon Hong, Kee-Eung Kim
KAIST
{hjhwang, ghkim}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, {seunghoon.hong, kekim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-View Representation Learning (MVRL) aims to discover a shared representation of observations from different views with the complex underlying correlation.
In this paper, we propose a variational approach which casts MVRL as maximizing
the amount of total correlation reduced by the representation, aiming to learn a
shared latent representation that is informative yet succinct to capture the correlation among multiple views. To this end, we introduce a tractable surrogate objective
function under the proposed framework, which allows our method to fuse and calibrate the observations in the representation space. From the information theoretic
perspective, we show that our framework subsumes existing multi-view generative
models. Lastly, we show that our approach straightforwardly extends to the Partial
MVRL (PMVRL) setting, where the observations are missing without any regular pattern. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the multi-view
translation and classification tasks, outperforming strong baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-View Representation Learning (MVRL) aims to learn a shared representation of multiple
observations from different types of views. In MVRL, it is important to encourage the shared
representation to be complete enough to capture the correlation across views without losing viewspecific information so that the learned representation can be readily applied to rich set of downstream
tasks. For example, in sensor fusion for the multi-sensor system [51] and in clinical diagnosis
based on patients’ various types of medical records [47, 49], one would like to aggregate all the
information from various observations in order to uncover the true underlying factors under the
correlation. Although using views as many as possible seems to be always beneficial for the task of
learning a good representation, it can make the problem itself harder depending on the complexity of
correlations across all views and the scalability of handling a number of views.
MVRL becomes even more challenging when the model does not always have access to complete
observations from all views for every data instance during training, which we call Partial Multi-View
Representation Learning (PMVRL). PMVRL is closer to the practical setting since it is unrealistic
to expect that observations from all different kinds of views are always available. For example, it
is unlikely for all the sensors in a sensor-based system to have the same frequency to update their
measurements or for all kinds of medical records to be available for any patient.
Considering those difficulties, any desirable MVRL methods are encouraged to satisfy three desiderata.
The first one is scalability to the number of input views. The method should handle multiple
observations in a way computationally scalable to arbitrary many views in both training and testing
time. In addition, the method needs to be robust to partial observability. The method should be
able to combine any combination of available observations in the representation space in test time.
This is important for PMVRL because we have to handle observations arbitrarily missing not only
in testing data but also in training data. Lastly, the method should discover cross-view association,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

