Random Shuffling Beats SGD Only After Many
Epochs on Ill-Conditioned Problems

Itay Safran
Princeton University
isafran@princeton.edu

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Recently, there has been much interest in studying the convergence rates of withoutreplacement SGD, and proving that it is faster than with-replacement SGD in
the worst case. However, known lower bounds ignore the problem’s geometry, including its condition number, whereas the upper bounds explicitly depend
on it. Perhaps surprisingly, we prove that when the condition number is taken
into account, without-replacement SGD does not significantly improve on withreplacement SGD in terms of worst-case bounds, unless the number of epochs
(passes over the data) is larger than the condition number. Since many problems
in machine learning and other areas are both ill-conditioned and involve large
datasets, this indicates that without-replacement does not necessarily improve over
with-replacement sampling for realistic iteration budgets. We show this by providing new lower and upper bounds which are tight (up to log factors), for quadratic
problems with commuting quadratic terms, precisely quantifying the dependence
on the problem parameters.

1

Introduction

We consider solving finite-sum optimization problems of the form
n

F (x) =

1X
fi (x)
n i=1

using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Such problems are extremely common in modern machine
learning (e.g., for empirical risk minimization), and stochastic gradient methods are the most popular
approach for large-scale problems, where both n and the dimension are large. The classical approach
to apply SGD to such problems is to repeatedly sample indices i ∈ {1, . . . , n} uniformly at random,
and perform updates of the form xt+1 = xt − ηt ∇fi (xt ), where ηt is a step-size parameter. With
this sampling scheme, each ∇fi (xt ) is a random unbiased estimate of ∇F (xt ) (conditioned on xt ).
Thus, the algorithm can be seen as a “cheap” noisy version of plain gradient descent on F (·), where
each iteration requires computing the gradient of just a single function fi (·), rather than the gradient
of F (·) (which would require computing and averaging n individual gradients). This key observation
facilitates the analysis of SGD, while simultaneously explaining why SGD is much more efficient
than gradient descent on large-scale problems.
However, the practice of SGD differs somewhat from this idealized description: In practice, it is much
more common to perform without-replacement sampling of the indices, by randomly shuffling the
indices {1, . . . , n} and processing the individual functions in that order – that is, choosing a random
permutation σ on {1, . . . , n}, and performing updates of the form xt+1 = xt − ηt ∇fσ(t) (xt ). After
a full pass over the n functions, further passes are made either with the same permutation σ (known
as single shuffling), or with a new random permutation σ chosen before each pass (known as random
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

