Look at What I’m Doing: Self-Supervised Spatial
Grounding of Narrations in Instructional Videos

Reuben Tan1 Bryan A. Plummer1 Kate Saenko1,2 Hailin Jin3 Bryan Russell3
1
Boston University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, 3 Adobe Research
{rxtan, bplum, saenko}@bu.edu, {hljin, brussell}@adobe.com
https://cs-people.bu.edu/rxtan/projects/grounding_narrations

Abstract
We introduce the task of spatially localizing narrated interactions in videos. Key
to our approach is the ability to learn to spatially localize interactions with selfsupervision on a large corpus of videos with accompanying transcribed narrations.
To achieve this goal, we propose a multilayer cross-modal attention network that
enables effective optimization of a contrastive loss during training. We introduce a
divided strategy that alternates between computing inter- and intra-modal attention
across the visual and natural language modalities, which allows effective training
via directly contrasting the two modalities’ representations. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach by self-training on the HowTo100M instructional
video dataset and evaluating on a newly collected dataset of localized described
interactions in the YouCook2 dataset. We show that our approach outperforms
alternative baselines, including shallow co-attention and full cross-modal attention.
We also apply our approach to grounding phrases in images with weak supervision
on Flickr30K and show that stacking multiple attention layers is effective and, when
combined with a word-to-region loss, achieves state of the art on recall-at-one and
pointing hand accuracies.

1

Introduction

Content creators often add a voice-over narration to their videos to point out important moments and
guide the viewer on where to look. While the timing of the narration in the audio track in the video
gives the viewer a rough idea of when the described moment occurs, there is not explicit information
on where to look. We, as viewers, naturally infer this information from the narration and often direct
our attention to the spatial location of the described moment.
Inspired by this capability, we seek to have a recognition system learn to spatially localize narrated
moments without strong supervision. We see a large opportunity for self-supervision as there is an
abundance of online narrated video content. In this work, we primarily focus on spatially localizing
transcribed narrated interactions in a video, illustrated in Figure 1 (right). Unlike prior phrase
grounding work (Figure 1 left), which primarily focuses on matching a noun phrase to an object, our
task involves matching entire sentences to regions containing multiple objects and actions.
Not only is this task integral to advancing machine perception of our world where information often
comes in different modalities, it also has important implications in fundamental vision-and-language
research such as robotics, visual question answering, video captioning, and retrieval. Our task is
challenging as we do not know the correspondence between spatial regions in a video and words
in the transcribed narration. Moreover, there is a loose temporal alignment of the narration with
the described moment and not all words refer to spatial regions (and vice versa). Finally, narrated
interactions may be complex with long-range dependencies and multiple actions. In Figure 1 (right),
notice how “them” refers to the onions and that there are two actions – “cut” and “add”.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

