Differentiable Spike: Rethinking Gradient-Descent
for Training Spiking Neural Networks

Yuhang Li1∗, Yufei Guo2∗, Shanghang Zhang3 , Shikuang Deng1 , Yongqing Hai2 , Shi Gu1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
2
Peking University, 3 University of California Berkeley
liyuhang699@gmail.com, yfguo@pku.edu.cn, gus@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have emerged as a biology-inspired method
mimicking the spiking nature of brain neurons. This biomimicry derives SNNs’
energy efficiency of inference on neuromorphic hardware. However, it also causes
an intrinsic disadvantage in training high-performing SNNs from scratch since
the discrete spike prohibits the gradient calculation. To overcome this issue, the
surrogate gradient (SG) approach has been proposed as a continuous relaxation.
Yet the heuristic choice of SG leaves it vacant how the SG benefits the SNN
training. In this work, we first theoretically study the gradient descent problem
in SNN training and introduce finite difference gradient to quantitatively analyze
the training behavior of SNN. Based on the introduced finite difference gradient,
we propose a new family of Differentiable Spike (Dspike) functions that can
adaptively evolve during training to find the optimal shape and smoothness for
gradient estimation. Extensive experiments over several popular network structures
show that training SNN with Dspike consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art
training methods. For example, on the CIFAR10-DVS classification task, we can
train a spiking ResNet-18 and achieve 75.4% top-1 accuracy with 10 time steps.

1

Introduction

Recently, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have received increasing attention due to their biologyinspired neural behavior and efficient computation. SNNs deal with binary spike information and
therefore enjoy the advantage of multiplication-free inference. Neuromorphic hardware such as
TrueNorth [1] and Loihi [2] demonstrates that SNNs can save energy by orders of magnitude. Hybrid
architecture like Tianjic [3] suggests its potential power for general intelligence when integrated with
traditional artificial infrastructure. However, the bio-mimicry also causes an intrinsic disadvantage
in training high-performing SNNs from scratch due to the discrete spike. As a result, obtaining a
high-performing SNN has long been a critical problem limiting SNN’s deployment in practice.
To be more specific, the appealing advantage of the multiplication-free computation in SNN is
not recognized in its training [4]. Modern ML frameworks such as Pytorch [5], JAX [6], and
Tensorflow [7] do not provide efficient and general instructions or high-level functions to accelerate
the convolution with 0/1 spike activation. Moreover, the binary activation in SNN produces allor-nothing gradients [8] that are incompatible with typical gradient-based optimization methods
for efficient neural network training. To circumvent this problem, many works adopt surrogate
gradients [8] (typically the derivative of a soft-relaxed function) to replace the spike non-linear
gradient. Although the heuristic choice of SG is beneficial to enable the gradient descent in SNN
training, the theoretical soundness of SG has not been justified so far. What’s more, the gradient
descent in SNN training may follow different updating rules from ANN. In fact, since the true gradient
∗

Equal Contributions.

Corresponding author. Primarily supported by NSF-61876032.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

