Hyperbolic Procrustes Analysis Using
Riemannian Geometry
Ya-Wei Eileen Lin†

Yuval Kluger‡§¶

Ronen Talmon†

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
‡
Program in Applied Mathematics, Yale University
§
Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University
¶
Department of Pathology, Yale University
{lin.ya-wei@campus, ronen@ee}.technion.ac.il, yuval.kluger@yale.edu
†

Abstract
Label-free alignment between datasets collected at different times, locations, or
by different instruments is a fundamental scientific task. Hyperbolic spaces have
recently provided a fruitful foundation for the development of informative representations of hierarchical data. Here, we take a purely geometric approach for
label-free alignment of hierarchical datasets and introduce hyperbolic Procrustes
analysis (HPA). HPA consists of new implementations of the three prototypical
Procrustes analysis components: translation, scaling, and rotation, based on the
Riemannian geometry of the Lorentz model of hyperbolic space. We analyze
the proposed components, highlighting their useful properties for alignment. The
efficacy of HPA, its theoretical properties, stability and computational efficiency
are demonstrated in simulations. In addition, we showcase its performance on
three batch correction tasks involving gene expression and mass cytometry data.
Specifically, we demonstrate high-quality unsupervised batch effect removal from
data acquired at different sites and with different technologies that outperforms
recent methods for label-free alignment in hyperbolic spaces.

1

Introduction

A key scientific task in modern data analysis is the alignment of data. The need for alignment often
arises since data are acquired in multiple domains, under different environmental conditions, using
various acquisition equipment, and at different sites. This paper focuses on the problem of label-free
alignment of data embedded in hyperbolic spaces. Recently, hyperbolic spaces have accentuated
in geometric representation learning. These non-Euclidean spaces have become popular since they
provide a natural embedding of hierarchical data thanks to the exponential growth of the lengths of
their geodesic paths [41, 42, 30, 15, 14, 6, 32].
The problem of alignment of data embedded in hyperbolic spaces has been extensively studied,
e.g., in the context of natural language processing [49], ontology matching [10], matching two data
modalities [40], and improving the embedding in hyperbolic spaces [2]. A few of these studies are
based on optimal transport (OT) [2, 22], a classical problem in mathematics [38] that has recently
reemerged in modern data analysis, e.g., for domain adaptation [7]. Despite its increasing usage,
OT for unsupervised alignment is fundamentally limited [54], since OT (as any density matching
approach) cannot recover volume-preserving maps [3, 4, 36].
In this paper, we resort to Procrustes analysis (PA) [17, 18] that is based on purely geometric
considerations. PA has been widely used for aligning datasets by eliminating the shift, scaling,
and rotational factors. Over the years, it has been successfully applied to various applications, e.g.,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

