Information Directed Sampling for Sparse Linear
Bandits
Botao Hao
Deepmind
haobotao000@gmail.com

Tor Lattimore
Deepmind
lattimore@google.com

Wei Deng
Department of Mathematics
Purdue University
weideng056@gmail.com

Abstract
Stochastic sparse linear bandits offer a practical model for high-dimensional online
decision-making problems and have a rich information-regret structure. In this
work we explore the use of information-directed sampling (IDS), which naturally
balances the information-regret trade-off. We develop a class of informationtheoretic Bayesian regret bounds that nearly match existing lower bounds on a
variety of problem instances, demonstrating the adaptivity of IDS. To efficiently
implement sparse IDS, we propose an empirical Bayesian approach for sparse
posterior sampling using a spike-and-slab Gaussian-Laplace prior. Numerical
results demonstrate significant regret reductions by sparse IDS relative to several
baselines.

1

Introduction

Standard linear bandits associate each action with a feature vector and assume the mean reward is
the inner product between the feature vector and an unknown parameter vector [Auer, 2002, Dani
et al., 2008, Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis, 2010, Chu et al., 2011, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011].
Sparse linear bandits generalize linear bandits by assuming the unknown parameter vector is sparse
[Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012, Carpentier and Munos, 2012, Hao et al., 2020b] and is of great practical
significance for modeling high-dimensional online decision-making problems [Bastani and Bayati,
2020].
√
Lattimore and Szepesvári [2020, §24.3] established a Ω( sdn) regret lower bound for the data-rich
regime, where n is the horizon, d is the feature dimension, s is the sparsity and data-rich regime
refers to the horizon n ≥ dα for some α > 0. This means polynomial dependence on d is generally
not avoidable without additional assumptions. However, this bound hides much of the rich structure
of sparse linear bandits by a crude maximisation over all environments.
When the action set admits a well-conditioned exploration distribution, Hao et al. [2020b] discovered
the information-regret trade-off phenomenon by establishing an Θ(poly(s)n2/3 ) minimax rate for
the data-poor regime. An interpretation for this optimal rate is that the agent needs to acquire
enough information for fast sparse learning by pulling informative actions that even have high regret.
Explore-then-commit algorithm can achieve this rate for the data-poor regime but is sub-optimal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

