Observation-Free Attacks on Stochastic Bandits
Yinglun Xu
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yinglun6@illinois.edu

Kumar Bhuvesh
Georgia Institute of Technology
bhuvesh@gatech.edu

Jacob Abernethy
Georgia Institute of Technology
prof@gatech.edu

Abstract
We study data corruption attacks on stochastic multi arm bandit algorithms. Existing attack methodologies assume that the attacker can observe the multi arm bandit
algorithm’s realized behavior which is in contrast to the adversaries modeled in the
robust multi arm bandit algorithms literature. To the best of our knowledge, we
develop the first data corruption attack on stochastic multi arm bandit algorithms
which works without observing the algorithm’s realized behavior. Through this
attack, we also discover a sufficient condition for a stochastic multi arm bandit
algorithm to be susceptible to adversarial data corruptions. We show that any
bandit algorithm that makes decisions just using the empirical mean reward, and
the number of times that arm has been pulled in the past can suffer from linear
regret under data corruption attacks. We further show that various popular stochastic multi arm bandit algorithms such UCB, -greedy and Thompson Sampling
satisfy this sufficient condition and are thus prone to data corruption attacks. We
further analyse the behaviour of our attack for these algorithms and show that using
only o(T ) corruptions, our attack can force these algorithms to select a potentially
non-optimal target arm preferred by the attacker for all but o(T ) rounds.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit problems provide a foundational framework for understanding sequential decision
making. In the classical setting, on each round of the decision process a learner selects an action (arm)
from various alternatives and, upon making this choice, receives some scalar-valued feedback/reward
for the chosen action but no additional information. Algorithms for such multi-armed bandits have
been widely adopted in various applications, including recommender systems Bouneffouf et al.
[2012], Li et al. [2011a], Kawale et al. [2015], Li et al. [2011b] and in numerous modern industry
and business applications Villar et al. [2015], Schwartz et al. [2017].
A frequent model assumption for bandit problems is that the reward associated with an arm is a
stochastic quantity drawn from fixed distribution associated with each arm, and that this random
variable is independent of the learner’s previous actions. An alternative assumption, which takes a
worst-case perspective and has also been widely studied, is that on every round the reward released
by each arm is instead chosen by an adversary which may aim to hurt the learner’s learning objective.
The stochastic model is often criticized for being unrealistic: data collected in a sequence rarely
satisfy the IID assumption, and it would be naïve to think that corruptions never occur. The adversarial
model, on the other hand, is considered highly pessimistic in contexts where we expect learning to be
reasonably possible. Researchers have begun to consider intermediate model assumptions, where the
input data is generally assumed to be stochastic for the most part, yet a small fraction of malicious
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

