Automatic Symmetry Discovery with Lie Algebra
Convolutional Network
Nima Dehmamy
Northwestern University
nimadt@bu.edu
Yanchen Liu
Northeastern University
liu.yanc@northeastern.edu

Robin Walters
Northeastern University
rwalters@northeastern.edu
Dashun Wang
Northwestern University
dashun.wang@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Rose Yu
University of California San Diego
roseyu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Existing equivariant neural networks require prior knowledge of the symmetry
group and discretization for continuous groups. We propose to work with Lie
algebras (infinitesimal generators) instead of Lie groups. Our model, the Lie algebra
convolutional network (L-conv) can automatically discover symmetries and does
not require discretization of the group. We show that L-conv can serve as a building
block to construct any group equivariant feedforward architecture. Both CNNs
and Graph Convolutional Networks can be expressed as L-conv with appropriate
groups. We discover direct connections between L-conv and physics: (1) group
invariant loss generalizes field theory (2) Euler-Lagrange equation measures the
robustness, and (3) equivariance leads to conservation laws and Noether current.
These connections open up new avenues for designing more general equivariant
networks and applying them to important problems in physical sciences.1

1

Introduction

Incorporating symmetries into a deep learning architecture can reduce sample complexity, improve
generalization, while significantly decreasing the number of model parameters (Cohen et al., 2019b;
Cohen & Welling, 2016b; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017; Ravanbakhsh, 2020; Wang et al., 2020). For
instance, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (LeCun et al., 1989, 1998) implement translation
symmetry through weight sharing. General principles for constructing symmetry-aware group
equivariant neural networks were introduced in Cohen & Welling (2016b), Kondor & Trivedi (2018),
and Cohen et al. (2019b).
However, most work on equivariant networks requires knowing the symmetry group a priori. A
different equivariant model needs to be re-designed for each symmetry group. In practice, we may not
have a good inductive bias and such knowledge of the symmetries may not be available. Constructing
and selecting the equivariant network with the appropriate symmetry group becomes quite tedious.
Furthermore, many existing works are limited to finite groups such as permutations Hartford et al.
(2018); Ravanbakhsh et al. (2017); Zaheer et al. (2017), 90 degree rotations Cohen et al. (2018) or
dihedral groups DN and E(2) Weiler & Cesa (2019).
1

Code: github.com/nimadehmamy/L-conv-code

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

