A Faster Decentralized Algorithm for Nonconvex
Minimax Problems
Wenhan Xian, Feihu Huang, Yanfu Zhang, Heng Huang
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
wex37@pitt.edu, huangfeihu2018@gmail.com, yaz91@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax optimization
problem on decentralized setting. The minimax problems are attracting increasing
attentions because of their popular practical applications such as policy evaluation
and adversarial training. As training data become larger, distributed training has
been broadly adopted in machine learning tasks. Recent research works show
that the decentralized distributed data-parallel training techniques are specially
promising, because they can achieve the efficient communications and avoid the
bottleneck problem on the central node or the latency of low bandwidth network.
However, the decentralized minimax problems were seldom studied in literature
and the existing methods suffer from very high gradient complexity. To address
this challenge, we propose a new faster decentralized algorithm, named as DMHSGD, for nonconvex minimax problems by using the variance reduced technique
of hybrid stochastic gradient descent. We prove that our DM-HSGD algorithm
achieves stochastic first-order oracle (SFO) complexity of O(κ3 −3 ) for decentralized stochastic nonconvex-strongly-concave problem to search an -stationary
point, which improves the exiting best theoretical results. Moreover, we also prove
that our algorithm achieves linear speedup with respect to the number of workers.
Our experiments on decentralized settings show the superior performance of our
new algorithm.

1

Introduction

Minimax optimization has enormous applications in machine learning tasks such as Generative
Adversarial Net (GAN) [8], adversarial training [26] and multi-agent reinforcement learning [43].
Specifically, in minimax optimization, variable x aims to minimize a payoff loss function f (x, y) :
Rd1 × Rd2 → R while variable y tries to maximize the loss, which can be formulated as
min max f (x, y),
(1)
x∈X y∈Y

d1

d2

where X ⊆ R and Y ⊆ R . In the past a few decades, there are plenty of works to study minimax
optimization problem in a variety of research fields and many methods have been developed. The
most intuitive solution is Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) algorithm [6, 29] with equal stepsize
ηx = ηy . Asymptotic and nonasymptotic convergence analysis has been provided when f is convex
in x and concave in y. Recently, many deterministic and stochastic gradient algorithms for nonconvexstrongly-concave and nonconvex-concave problems were proposed. Some algorithms improve the
performance of vanilla GDA method by adopting different stepsize on x and y, such as [10, 19],
where the stepsize of y is typically larger than the stepsize of x. Some algorithms update x and y
at different frequency, such as [14, 25, 32]. These kind of algorithms usually involve a nested loop
structure that updates y more frequently than x to make f (x, y) close to function Φ(x), which is
defined by
Φ(x) = max f (x, y).
(2)
y∈Y

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

