ImageBART: Bidirectional Context with Multinomial
Diffusion for Autoregressive Image Synthesis

Patrick Esser∗
Robin Rombach∗
Andreas Blattmann∗
Björn Ommer
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich & IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
https://compvis.github.io/imagebart/

Abstract
Autoregressive models and their sequential factorization of the data likelihood
have recently demonstrated great potential for image representation and synthesis.
Nevertheless, they incorporate image context in a linear 1D order by attending
only to previously synthesized image patches above or to the left. Not only is this
unidirectional, sequential bias of attention unnatural for images as it disregards
large parts of a scene until synthesis is almost complete. It also processes the entire
image on a single scale, thus ignoring more global contextual information up to the
gist of the entire scene. As a remedy we incorporate a coarse-to-fine hierarchy of
context by combining the autoregressive formulation with a multinomial diffusion
process: Whereas a multistage diffusion process successively removes information
to coarsen an image, we train a (short) Markov chain to invert this process. In
each stage, the resulting autoregressive ImageBART model progressively incorporates context from previous stages in a coarse-to-fine manner. Experiments
show greatly improved image modification capabilities over autoregressive models
while also providing high-fidelity image generation, both of which are enabled
through efficient training in a compressed latent space. Specifically, our approach
can take unrestricted, user-provided masks into account to perform local image
editing. Thus, in contrast to pure autoregressive models, it can solve free-form
image inpainting and, in the case of conditional models, local, text-guided image
modification without requiring mask-specific training.

1

Introduction

Spurred by the increasingly popular attention mechanism, a remarkably simple principle has driven
progress in deep generative modeling over the past few years: Factorizing the likelihood of the data
in an autoregressive (AR) fashion
Y
p(x) =
pθ (xi |x<i )
(1)
i

and subsequently learning the conditional transition probabilities with an expressive neural network
such as a transformer [75]. The success of this approach is evident in domains as diverse as language
modeling [7], music generation [16], neural machine translation [46, 76], and (conditional) image
synthesis [54, 8]. However, especially for the latter task of image synthesis, which is also the
focus of this work, the high dimensionality and redundancy present in the data challenges the direct
applicability of this approach.
Missing Bidirectional Context Autoregressive models which represent images as a sequence from
the top-left to the bottom-right have demonstrated impressive performance in sampling novel images
and completing the lower half of a given image [8, 21]. However, the unidirectional, fixed ordering
∗

The first three authors contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

