A Stochastic Newton Algorithm for Distributed
Convex Optimization

Brian Bullins
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
bbullins@ttic.edu

Kumar Kshitij Patel
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
kkpatel@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Blake Woodworth
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
blake@ttic.edu

Abstract
We propose and analyze a stochastic Newton algorithm for homogeneous distributed stochastic convex optimization, where each machine can calculate stochastic gradients of the same population objective, as well as stochastic Hessian-vector
products (products of an independent unbiased estimator of the Hessian of the
population objective with arbitrary vectors), with many such stochastic computations performed between rounds of communication. We show that our method can
reduce the number, and frequency, of required communication rounds compared to
existing methods without hurting performance, by proving convergence guarantees
for quasi-self-concordant objectives (e.g., logistic regression), alongside empirical
evidence.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization methods that leverage parallelism have proven immensely useful in modern
optimization problems. Recent advances in machine learning have highlighted their importance as
these techniques now rely on millions of parameters and increasingly large training sets.
While there are many possible ways of parallelizing optimization algorithms, we consider the
intermittent communication setting (Zinkevich et al., 2010; Cotter et al., 2011; Dekel et al., 2012;
Shamir et al., 2014; Woodworth et al., 2018, 2021), where M parallel machines work together to
optimize an objective during R rounds of communication, and where during each round each machine
may perform some basic operation (e.g., access the objective by invoking some oracle) K times,
and then communicate with all other machines. An important example of this setting is when this
basic operation gives independent, unbiased stochastic estimates of the gradient, in which case this
setting includes algorithms like Local SGD (Zinkevich et al., 2010; Coppola, 2015; Zhou and Cong,
2018; Stich, 2019; Woodworth et al., 2020a), Minibatch SGD (Dekel et al., 2012), Minibatch AC-SA
(Ghadimi and Lan, 2012), and many others.
We are motivated by the observation of Woodworth et al. (2020a) that for quadratic objectives,
first-order methods such as one-shot averaging (Zinkevich et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2013)—a special
case of Local SGD with a single round of communication—can optimize the objective to a very high
degree of accuracy. This prompts trying to reduce the task of optimizing general convex objectives to
a short sequence of quadratic problems. Indeed, this is precisely the idea behind many second-order
algorithms including Newton’s method (Nesterov and Nemirovskii, 1994), trust-region methods
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

