Better Algorithms for Individually Fair k-Clustering

Deeparnab Chakrabarty∗
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
deepc@cs.dartmouth.edu

Maryam Negahbani
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
maryam@cs.dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We study data clustering problems with ℓp -norm objectives (e.g. k-M EDIAN and
k-M EANS) in the context of individual fairness. The dataset consists of n points,
and we want to find k centers such that (a) the objective is minimized, while (b)
respecting the individual fairness constraint that every point v has a center within
a distance at most r(v), where r(v) is v’s distance to its (n/k)th nearest point.
Jung, Kannan, and Lutz [FORC 2020] introduced this concept and designed a
clustering algorithm with provable (approximate) fairness and objective guarantees
for the ℓ∞ or k-C ENTER objective. Mahabadi and Vakilian [ICML 2020] revisited
this problem to give a local-search algorithm for all ℓp -norms. Empirically, their
algorithms outperform Jung et. al.’s by a large margin in terms of cost (for kM EDIAN and k-M EANS), but they incur a reasonable loss in fairness. In this paper,
our main contribution is to use Linear Programming (LP) techniques to obtain
better algorithms for this problem, both in theory and in practice. We prove that
by modifying known LP rounding techniques, one gets a worst-case guarantee on
the objective which is much better than in MV20, and empirically, this objective is
extremely close to the optimal. Furthermore, our theoretical fairness guarantees
are comparable with MV20 in theory, and empirically, we obtain noticeably fairer
solutions. Although solving the LP exactly might be prohibitive, we demonstrate
that in practice, a simple sparsification technique drastically improves the run-time
of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms are widely used in practice for making high-stakes decisions affecting
human lives, there has been a huge body of work on FAIR -ML trying to ensure ‘fairness’ in the
solutions returned by these algorithms. There are two large intersecting bodies of work : one body’s
main focus in to understand what ‘fairness’ means (e.g. [26, 39, 38, 36, 14, 25]) in various different
contexts, and the second body’s focus has been on addressing the algorithmic challenges brought
forth by these considerations (e.g., [24, 9, 33, 6, 29, 5]).
This paper falls in the second class. In particular, we consider an individual fairness model proposed
by Jung, Kannan, and Lutz [25] for a k-clustering problem. Given points (clients) X in a space

P
p 1/p
with metric distance d, find k points (facilities) S ⊆ X, minimizing
where
v∈X d(v, S)
d(v, S) is v’s distance to the closest point in S. This includes k-C ENTER, k-M EDIAN and the popular
k-M EANS objective for p = ∞, p = 1 and p = 2 respectively, problems which have been extensively
studied [12, 23, 27, 4, 2] in the algorithms literature. Jung et. al. [25] proposed that in this context a
solution would be deemed individually fair, if for every client v ∈ X there is an open facility not
too far from it. More precisely, if there is a facility within distance r(v) which is the smallest radius
∗

Supported by NSF grant #2041920

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

