Retiring Adult:
New Datasets for Fair Machine Learning

Frances Ding∗
UC Berkeley

Moritz Hardt∗
UC Berkeley

John Miller∗
UC Berkeley

Ludwig Schmidt∗
Toyota Research Institute

Abstract
Although the fairness community has recognized the importance of data, researchers in the area primarily rely on UCI Adult when it comes to tabular data.
Derived from a 1994 US Census survey, this dataset has appeared in hundreds of
research papers where it served as the basis for the development and comparison
of many algorithmic fairness interventions. We reconstruct a superset of the UCI
Adult data from available US Census sources and reveal idiosyncrasies of the
UCI Adult dataset that limit its external validity. Our primary contribution is a
suite of new datasets derived from US Census surveys that extend the existing
data ecosystem for research on fair machine learning. We create prediction tasks
relating to income, employment, health, transportation, and housing. The data span
multiple years and all states of the United States, allowing researchers to study
temporal shift and geographic variation. We highlight a broad initial sweep of
new empirical insights relating to trade-offs between fairness criteria, performance
of algorithmic interventions, and the role of distribution shift based on our new
datasets. Our findings inform ongoing debates, challenge some existing narratives,
and point to future research directions.

1

Introduction

Datasets are central to the machine learning ecosystem. Besides providing training and testing data for
model builders, datasets formulate problems, organize communities, and interface between academia
and industry. Influential works relating to the ethics and fairness of machine learning recognize
the centrality of datasets, pointing to significant harms associated with data, as well as better data
practices [11, 17, 21, 25, 27]. While the discourse about data has prioritized cognitive domains such
as vision, speech, or language, numerous consequential applications of predictive modeling and
risk assessment involve bureaucratic, organizational, and administrative records best represented as
tabular data [8, 15, 26].
When it comes to tabular data, surprisingly, most research papers on algorithmic fairness continue to
involve a fairly limited collection of datasets, chief among them the UCI Adult dataset [22]. Derived
from the 1994 Current Population Survey conducted by the US Census Bureau, this dataset has made
an appearance in more than three hundred research papers related to fairness where it served as the
basis for the development and comparison of many algorithmic fairness interventions.
Our work begins with a critical examination of the UCI Adult dataset—its origin, impact, and
limitations. To guide this investigation we identify the previously undocumented exact source of the
UCI Adult dataset, allowing us to reconstruct a superset of the data from available US Census records.
∗
Authors ordered alphabetically
Email: {frances, hardt, miller_john}@berkeley.edu
Email: ludwigschmidt2@gmail.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

