Group Equivariant Subsampling

Jin Xu1∗

Hyunjik Kim2
1

Tom Rainforth1

Yee Whye Teh1,2

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK.
2
DeepMind, UK.

Abstract
Subsampling is used in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the form of
pooling or strided convolutions, to reduce the spatial dimensions of feature maps
and to allow the receptive fields to grow exponentially with depth. However, it
is known that such subsampling operations are not translation equivariant, unlike
convolutions that are translation equivariant. Here, we first introduce translation
equivariant subsampling/upsampling layers that can be used to construct exact
translation equivariant CNNs. We then generalise these layers beyond translations
to general groups, thus proposing group equivariant subsampling/upsampling. We
use these layers to construct group equivariant autoencoders (GAEs) that allow
us to learn low-dimensional equivariant representations. We empirically verify
on images that the representations are indeed equivariant to input translations
and rotations, and thus generalise well to unseen positions and orientations. We
further use GAEs in models that learn object-centric representations on multiobject datasets, and show improved data efficiency and decomposition compared
to non-equivariant baselines.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are known to be more data efficient and show better
generalisation on perceptual tasks than fully-connected networks, due to translation equivariance
encoded in the convolutions: when the input image/feature map is translated, the output feature
map also translates by the same amount. In typical CNNs, convolutions are used in conjunction
with subsampling operations, in the form of pooling or strided convolutions, to reduce the
spatial dimensions of feature maps and to allow receptive field to grow exponentially with depth.
Subsampling/upsampling operations are especially necessary for convolutional autoencoders
(ConvAEs) (Masci et al., 2011) because they allow efficient dimensionality reduction. However,
it is known that subsampling operations implicit in strided convolutions or pooling layers are not
translation equivariant (Zhang, 2019), hence CNNs that use these components are also not translation
invariant. Therefore such CNNs and ConvAEs are not guaranteed to generalise to arbitrarily
translated inputs despite their convolutional layers being translation equivariant.
Previous work, such as Zhang (2019); Chaman and Dokmanić (2020), has investigated how to enforce
translation invariance on CNNs, but does not study equivariance with respect to symmetries beyond
translations, such as rotations or reflections. In this work, we first describe subsampling/upsampling
operations that preserve exact translation equivariance. The main idea is to sample feature maps on
an input-dependent grid rather than a fixed one as in pooling or strided convolutions, and the grid is
chosen according to a sampling index computed from the inputs (see Figure 1). Simply replacing the
subsampling/upsampling in standard CNNs with such translation equivariant subsampling/upsampling
operations leads to CNNs and transposed CNNs that can map between spatial inputs and lowdimensional representations in a translation equivariant manner.
∗

Corresponding author: <jin.xu@stats.ox.ac.uk>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

