Unsupervised Object-Level Representation Learning
from Scene Images

Jiahao Xie1

Xiaohang Zhan2 Ziwei Liu1 Yew Soon Ong1,3
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
A*STAR, Singapore

Chen Change Loy1

{jiahao003, ziwei.liu, asysong, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
xiaohangzhan@outlook.com

Abstract
Contrastive self-supervised learning has largely narrowed the gap to supervised
pre-training on ImageNet. However, its success highly relies on the object-centric
priors of ImageNet, i.e., different augmented views of the same image correspond to
the same object. Such a heavily curated constraint becomes immediately infeasible
when pre-trained on more complex scene images with many objects. To overcome this limitation, we introduce Object-level Representation Learning (ORL), a
new self-supervised learning framework towards scene images. Our key insight
is to leverage image-level self-supervised pre-training as the prior to discover
object-level semantic correspondence, thus realizing object-level representation
learning from scene images. Extensive experiments on COCO show that ORL
significantly improves the performance of self-supervised learning on scene images,
even surpassing supervised ImageNet pre-training on several downstream tasks.
Furthermore, ORL improves the downstream performance when more unlabeled
scene images are available, demonstrating its great potential of harnessing unlabeled data in the wild. We hope our approach can motivate future research on more
general-purpose unsupervised representation learning from scene data.1

1

Introduction

Unsupervised visual representation learning aims at obtaining transferable features with abundant
unlabeled data. Recent self-supervised learning (SSL) methods based on contrastive learning [60,
22, 37, 5, 19, 4, 7] have largely narrowed the gap and even surpassed the supervised counterpart
on a number of downstream tasks [30, 49, 15, 47, 35, 23]. These methods build upon the instance
discrimination task that maximizes the agreement between different data-augmented views of the
same image. Despite their success, current SSL methods are primarily pre-trained on the unlabeled
ImageNet [8] dataset that contains iconic images with single object as shown in Figure 1(a). The
underlying object-centric constraint of ImageNet makes it hard to be applied in real world scenarios
where more complex scene images with multiple objects are available. Meanwhile, naïvely adopting
the off-the-shelf contrastive learning methods on scene images introduces inconsistent learning
signals since random crops of the same image may correspond to different objects as shown in
Figure 1(b). Indeed, it has been shown that current contrastive learning methods tend to struggle
on more complex scene datasets [19, 50, 34, 58] like COCO [33] or Places365 [72]. Therefore, it
is imperative to design an effective object-level representation learning paradigm as illustrated in
Figure 1(c) to harness massive unlabeled scene images in the wild.
1

Project page: https://www.mmlab-ntu.com/project/orl/.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

