TöRF: Time-of-Flight Radiance Fields
for Dynamic Scene View Synthesis

Benjamin Attal∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Eliot Laidlaw
Brown University

Christian Richardt
University of Bath

James Tompkin
Brown University

Aaron Gokaslan
Cornell University

Changil Kim
Facebook

Matthew O’Toole
Carnegie Mellon University

imaging.cs.cmu.edu/torf

Abstract
Neural networks can represent and accurately reconstruct radiance fields for static
3D scenes (e.g., NeRF). Several works extend these to dynamic scenes captured
with monocular video, with promising performance. However, the monocular
setting is known to be an under-constrained problem, and so methods rely on
data-driven priors for reconstructing dynamic content. We replace these priors with
measurements from a time-of-flight (ToF) camera, and introduce a neural representation based on an image formation model for continuous-wave ToF cameras.
Instead of working with processed depth maps, we model the raw ToF sensor measurements to improve reconstruction quality and avoid issues with low reflectance
regions, multi-path interference, and a sensor’s limited unambiguous depth range.
We show that this approach improves robustness of dynamic scene reconstruction
to erroneous calibration and large motions, and discuss the benefits and limitations
of integrating RGB+ToF sensors that are now available on modern smartphones.

1

Introduction

Novel-view synthesis (NVS) is a long-standing problem in computer graphics and computer vision,
where the objective is to photorealistically render images of a scene from novel viewpoints. Given
a number of images taken from different viewpoints, it is possible to infer both the geometry and
appearance of a scene, and then use this information to synthesize images at novel camera poses.
One of the challenges associated with NVS is that it requires a diverse set of images from different
perspectives to accurately represent the scene. This might involve moving a single camera around a
static environment [4, 16, 31, 32, 36], or using a large multi-camera system to capture dynamic events
from different perspectives [2, 7, 24, 38, 44, 56]. Techniques for dynamic NVS from a monocular
video sequence have also demonstrated compelling results, though they suffer from various visual
artifacts due to the ill-posed nature of this problem [26, 37, 42, 50, 52]. This requires introducing
priors, often deep learned, on the dynamic scene’s depth and motion.
In parallel, mobile devices now have camera systems with both color and depth sensors, including
Microsoft’s Kinect and HoloLens devices, and the front and rear RGBD camera systems in the iPhone
and iPad Pro. Depth sensors can use stereo or structured light, or increasingly the more accurate
time-of-flight principle for measurements. Although depth sensing technology is more common than
ever, many NVS techniques currently do not exploit this additional source of visual information.
To improve NVS performance, we propose TöRF1 , an implicit neural representation for scene
appearance that leverages both color and time-of-flight (ToF) images, as depicted in Figure 1. This
∗
1

Correspondence should be addressed to Benjamin Attal: battal@andrew.cmu.edu.
TöRF = ToF + NeRF. Pronounced just like ‘NeRF’ but starts with a ‘T’.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

