Learning Interpretable Decision Rule Sets: A
Submodular Optimization Approach

Fan Yang, Kai He, Linxiao Yang, Hongxia Du, Jingbang Yang, Bo Yang, Liang Sun
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{fanyang.yf,kai.he,linxiao.ylx,hongxia.dhx,jingbang.yjb,muhai.yb,liang.sun}
@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Rule sets are highly interpretable logical models in which the predicates for decision
are expressed in disjunctive normal form (DNF, OR-of-ANDs), or, equivalently,
the overall model comprises an unordered collection of if-then decision rules. In
this paper, we consider a submodular optimization based approach for learning rule
sets. The learning problem is framed as a subset selection task in which a subset of
all possible rules needs to be selected to form an accurate and interpretable rule set.
We employ an objective function that exhibits submodularity and thus is amenable
to submodular optimization techniques. To overcome the difficulty arose from
dealing with the exponential-sized ground set of rules, the subproblem of searching
a rule is casted as another subset selection task that asks for a subset of features.
We show it is possible to write the induced objective function for the subproblem as
a difference of two submodular (DS) functions to make it approximately solvable
by DS optimization algorithms. Overall, the proposed approach is simple, scalable, and likely to be benefited from further research on submodular optimization.
Experiments on real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Interpretability is becoming one of the key considerations when deploying machine learning models
to high-stake decision-making scenarios. Black box models, such as random forests and deep neural
networks, may achieve impressive prediction accuracy in practice, but it is often difficult to understand
the mechanisms about how their predictions are made. Moreover, it has been widely known that
machine learning models are susceptible to spurious correlations, which makes them not robust to
distribution shifts or adversarial attacks and leads to misleading predictions. Black box models are
particularly problematic here because they are hard to audit and to diagnose.
The development of inherently interpretable models is a longstanding attempt towards interpretable
and trustable machine learning [42, 43]. In this paper, we consider decision rule sets for binary
classification, in which if an example is tested true for a Boolean condition expressed in disjunctive
normal form (DNF), then a predefined label is predicted for it. For instance, a rule set for determining
whether a patient with community-acquired pneumonia should be hospitalized may be "IF (IsChild =
True AND OxygenSaturation < 0.9) OR (IsChild = True AND SOB = True) OR (IsAdult = True AND
CURB65 > 2) THEN Yes". Rule sets are particularly suited for tabular data that contain mixed-type
features and exhibit complex high-order feature interactions. When compared to other rule-based
models such as decision trees and decision lists, the simpler combinatorial structure of rule sets makes
them easier to interpret and to learn from data.
The learning of rule sets has attracted interest from various research communities over the past few
decades. Two interplaying subset selection tasks constitute the major challenges in rule set learning.
First, the construction of a rule requires choosing a subset of all features. Then a subset of all possible
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

