Generalized and Discriminative Few-Shot Object
Detection via SVD-Dictionary Enhancement

1

Aming Wu1 Suqi Zhao1 Cheng Deng1∗ Wei Liu2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
Tencent Data Platform

amwu@xidian.edu.cn, sqzhao@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to detect new objects based on few annotated samples. To alleviate the impact of few samples, enhancing the generalization
and discrimination abilities of detectors on new objects plays an important role.
In this paper, we explore employing Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to
boost both the generalization and discrimination abilities. In specific, we propose
a novel method, namely, SVD-Dictionary enhancement, to build two separated
spaces based on the sorted singular values. Concretely, the eigenvectors corresponding to larger singular values are used to build the generalization space in
which localization is performed, as these eigenvectors generally suppress certain
variations (e.g., the variation of styles) and contain intrinsical characteristics of
objects. Meanwhile, since the eigenvectors corresponding to relatively smaller singular values may contain richer category-related information, we can utilize them
to build the discrimination space in which classification is performed. Dictionary
learning is further leveraged to capture high-level discriminative information from
the discrimination space, which is beneficial for improving detection accuracy. In
the experiments, we separately verify the effectiveness of our method on PASCAL
VOC and COCO benchmarks. Particularly, for the 2-shot case in VOC split1, our
method significantly outperforms the baseline by 6.2%. Moreover, visualization
analysis shows that our method is instrumental in doing FSOD.

1

Introduction

With the rejuvenation of deep neural networks, for object detection, many progresses [11, 12, 1, 26,
22] have been achieved. Though these methods obtain outstanding detection performances, they
usually require a large number of labeled samples for training, which are labored yet expensive to
collect and annotate. On the contrary, human beings are born with the ability to learn a new visual
concept with only few samples. To imitate such an ability of human beings, the task of few-shot object
detection (FSOD) [2, 17, 36] has been proposed, which aims to improve the detection performance
for new objects that contain few annotated training samples.
The main challenge of FSOD lies in how to learn generalized and discriminative object features from
both abundant samples in base object categories and few samples in new object categories, which
can improve the representation ability of object features and alleviate overfitting on new objects.
Following the popular methods for few-shot image classification, earlier attempts [38, 37, 33, 8] in
FSOD utilize the meta-learning strategy [29, 31, 10], whose goal is to learn detectors across tasks and
then transfer to the few-shot detection task. However, compared with traditional two-stage fine-tuning
based approaches [34, 35, 30], the meta-learning strategy fails to effectively improve generalization
∗

Corresponding Author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

