Be Confident! Towards Trustworthy Graph Neural
Networks via Confidence Calibration
Xiao Wang, Hongrui Liu, Chuan Shi∗, Cheng Yang
School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering School)
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China
{xiaowang, liuhongrui, shichuan, yangcheng}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable accuracy,
whether the results are trustworthy is still unexplored. Previous studies suggest
that many modern neural networks are over-confident on the predictions, however,
surprisingly, we discover that GNNs are primarily in the opposite direction, i.e.,
GNNs are under-confident. Therefore, the confidence calibration for GNNs is
highly desired. In this paper, we propose a novel trustworthy GNN model by
designing a topology-aware post-hoc calibration function. Specifically, we first
verify that the confidence distribution in a graph has homophily property, and
this finding inspires us to design a calibration GNN model (CaGCN) to learn
the calibration function. CaGCN is able to obtain a unique transformation from
logits of GNNs to the calibrated confidence for each node, meanwhile, such
transformation is able to preserve the order between classes, satisfying the accuracypreserving property. Moreover, we apply the calibration GNN to self-training
framework, showing that more trustworthy pseudo labels can be obtained with the
calibrated confidence and further improve the performance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model in terms of both calibration
and accuracy.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous in the real world, including social networks, e-commerce networks, traffic
networks, and so on. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which are able to effectively learn
the node representations based on the message-passing manner, have attracted considerable attention
in dealing with graph data [16, 33, 39, 44, 15, 2, 34]. To date, GNNs have been applied to various
applications and achieved remarkable accuracy, e.g., node classification [16, 33], link prediction [41]
and graph classification [9].
However, it is well established that a model with good accuracy is not the only goal, but a trustworthy
model is highly desired in many applications, especially in safety-critical fields [1]. Usually, a
trustworthy model implies that it should know when it is likely to be incorrect, in other words, the
probability, i.e., the confidence, associated with the predicted class label should reflect its ground
truth correctness likelihood [12]. For example, in the scene of autonomous driving, the system will
adopt the prediction given by the model only when the model has high confidence for its prediction.
Otherwise, the decision-making power will be returned to the driver or the system adopts other safer
strategies. Recently, the confidence calibration has attracted considerable attention in deep learning
[12, 40, 19], which reveals that many modern neural network models are over-confident on the
predictions, i.e., the prediction accuracy is lower than its confidence. However, it has not been studied
∗ Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

