Reducing Information Bottleneck for Weakly
Supervised Semantic Segmentation

Jungbeom Lee1
Jooyoung Choi1
Jisoo Mok1
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University

1

{jbeom.lee93, jy_choi, magicshop1118, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation produces pixel-level localization from
class labels; however, a classifier trained on such labels is likely to focus on a
small discriminative region of the target object. We interpret this phenomenon
using the information bottleneck principle: the final layer of a deep neural network,
activated by the sigmoid or softmax activation functions, causes an information
bottleneck, and as a result, only a subset of the task-relevant information is passed
on to the output. We first support this argument through a simulated toy experiment
and then propose a method to reduce the information bottleneck by removing
the last activation function. In addition, we introduce a new pooling method that
further encourages the transmission of information from non-discriminative regions
to the classification. Our experimental evaluations demonstrate that this simple
modification significantly improves the quality of localization maps on both the
PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 datasets, exhibiting a new state-ofthe-art performance for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. The code is
available at: https://github.com/jbeomlee93/RIB.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is the task of recognizing objects in an image using pixel-level allocation of a
semantic label. The development of deep neural networks (DNNs) has led to significant advances
in semantic segmentation [9, 24]. Training a DNN for semantic segmentation requires a dataset
containing a large number of images annotated with pixel-level labels. However, preparing such
a dataset requires considerable effort; for example, producing a pixel-level annotation for a single
image in the Cityscapes dataset [12] takes more than 90 minutes. This high dependence on pixel-level
labels can be alleviated by weakly supervised learning [62, 31, 34, 2].
The objective of weakly supervised semantic segmentation is to train a segmentation network with
weak annotations, which provide less information about the location of a target object than pixellevel labels, but are cheaper to obtain. Weak supervision takes the form of scribbles [52], bounding
boxes [50, 29, 34], or image-level class labels [31, 3, 2]. In this study, we focus on image-level class
labels, because they are the cheapest and most popular option of weak supervision. Most methods
that use class labels [31, 32, 55, 2, 7] generate pseudo ground truths for training a segmentation
network using localization (attribution) maps obtained from a trained classifier, such as a CAM [66]
or a Grad-CAM [48]. However, these maps identify only small regions of a target object that are
discriminative for the classification [31, 2, 5] and do not identify the entire region occupied by the
object, making the attribution maps unsuitable for training a semantic segmentation network. We
interpret this phenomenon using the information bottleneck principle [54, 49, 46, 53].
∗

Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

