Reusing Combinatorial Structure: Faster Iterative
Projections over Submodular Base Polytopes

Jai Moondra
Georgia Institute of Technology
jmoondra3@gatech.edu

Hassan Mortagy
Georgia Institute of Technology
hmortagy@gatech.edu

Swati Gupta
Georgia Institute of Technology
swatig@gatech.edu

Abstract
Optimization algorithms such as projected Newton’s method, FISTA, mirror descent and its variants enjoy near-optimal regret bounds and convergence rates, but
suffer from a computational bottleneck of computing “projections" in potentially
each iteration (e.g., O(T 1/2 ) regret of online mirror descent) [1, 2, 3, 4]. On the
other hand, conditional gradient variants solve a linear optimization in each iteration, but result in suboptimal rates (e.g., O(T 2/3 ) regret of online Frank-Wolfe)
[5, 6, 7]. Motivated by this trade-off in runtime v/s convergence rates, we consider
iterative projections of close-by points over widely-prevalent submodular base
polytopes B(f ). We develop a toolkit to speed up the computation of projections
using both discrete and continuous perspectives (e.g., [8, 9, 10]). We subsequently
adapt the away-step Frank-Wolfe algorithm to use this information and enable
early termination. For the special case of cardinality based submodular polytopes,
we improve the runtime of computing certain Bregman projections by a factor
of Ω(n/ log(n)). Our theoretical results show orders of magnitude reduction in
runtime in preliminary computational experiments.

1

Introduction

Though the theory of discrete and continuous optimization methods has evolved independently over
the last many years, machine learning applications have often brought the two regimes together to
solve structured problems such as combinatorial online learning over rankings and permutations
[11, 12, 13, 14], shortest-paths [15] and trees [16, 17], regularized structured regression [5], MAP
inference, document summarization [18] (and references therein). One of the most prevalent forms of
constrained optimization in machine learning is the use of iterative optimization methods such as
online stochastic gradient descent, mirror descent variants, projected Newton’s method, conditional
gradient descent variants, fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm (FISTA). These methods
repeatedly compute two main subproblems: either a projection (i.e., a convex minimization) or a
linear optimization in each iteration. The former class of algorithms is known as projection-based
optimization methods (e.g., projected Newton’s method, see Table 1), and they enjoy near-optimal
regret bounds in online optimization and near-optimal convergence rates in convex optimization
compared to projection-free methods. These projection-based methods however suffer form high
computational complexity per iteration due to the projection subproblem
[1, 2, 19, 20, 4, 21]. E.g.,
√
online mirror descent is near-optimal in terms of regret (i.e., O( T )) for most online learning
problems, however it is computationally restrictive for large scale problems [3]. On the other hand,
online Frank-Wolfe is computationally efficient, but has a suboptimal regret of O(T 2/3 ) [7].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

