Entropy-based adaptive Hamiltonian Monte Carlo

Marcel Hirt
Department of Statistical Science
University College London, UK
marcel.hirt.16@ucl.ac.uk

Michalis K. Titsias
DeepMind
London, UK
mtitsias@google.com

Petros Dellaportas
Department of Statistical Science
University College London, UK
Department of Statistics
Athens Univ. of Economics and Business, Greece
and The Alan Turing Institute, UK

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a popular Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithm to sample from an unnormalized probability distribution. A
leapfrog integrator is commonly used to implement HMC in practice, but its performance can be sensitive to the choice of mass matrix used therein. We develop
a gradient-based algorithm that allows for the adaptation of the mass matrix by
encouraging the leapfrog integrator to have high acceptance rates while also exploring all dimensions jointly. In contrast to previous work that adapt the hyperparameters of HMC using some form of expected squared jumping distance, the
adaptation strategy suggested here aims to increase sampling efficiency by maximizing an approximation of the proposal entropy. We illustrate that using multiple
gradients in the HMC proposal can be beneficial compared to a single gradientstep in Metropolis-adjusted Langevin proposals. Empirical evidence suggests that
the adaptation method can outperform different versions of HMC schemes by adjusting the mass matrix to the geometry of the target distribution and by providing
some control on the integration time.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of sampling from a target density π on Rd of the form π(q) ∝ e−U (q) , with
a potential energy U : Rd → R being twice continuously differentiable. HMC methods [20, 46, 9]
sample from a Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution µ(q, p) ∝ e−H(q,p) on the phase-space R2d based on
the (separable) Hamiltonian function
1 > −1
p M p.
2
The Hamiltonian represents the total energy that is split into a potential energy term U and a kinetic energy K which we assume is Gaussian for some symmetric positive definite mass matrix M .
Suppose that (q(t), p(t))t∈R evolve according to the differential equations
H(q, p) = U (q) + K(p) with K(p) =

dq(t)
∂H(q(t), p(t))
=
= M −1 p(t) and
dt
∂p

dp(t)
∂H(q(t), p(t))
=−
= −∇U (q(t)).
dt
∂q

(1)

Let (ϕt )t⩾0 denote the flow of the Hamiltonian system, that is for fixed t, ϕt maps each (q, p)
to the solution of (1) that takes value (q, p) at time t = 0. The exact HMC flow ϕ preserves
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

