Shape As Points: A Differentiable Poisson Solver

Songyou Peng1,2

Chiyu “Max” Jiang∗ †
Marc Pollefeys1,4

1

ETH Zurich
3

Yiyi Liao2,3†

Michael Niemeyer2,3

Andreas Geiger2,3

2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
4
University of Tübingen
Microsoft

Abstract
In recent years, neural implicit representations gained popularity in 3D reconstruction due to their expressiveness and flexibility. However, the implicit nature of
neural implicit representations results in slow inference time and requires careful initialization. In this paper, we revisit the classic yet ubiquitous point cloud
representation and introduce a differentiable point-to-mesh layer using a differentiable formulation of Poisson Surface Reconstruction (PSR) that allows for a GPUaccelerated fast solution of the indicator function given an oriented point cloud.
The differentiable PSR layer allows us to efficiently and differentiably bridge the
explicit 3D point representation with the 3D mesh via the implicit indicator field,
enabling end-to-end optimization of surface reconstruction metrics such as Chamfer distance. This duality between points and meshes hence allows us to represent
shapes as oriented point clouds, which are explicit, lightweight and expressive.
Compared to neural implicit representations, our Shape-As-Points (SAP) model
is more interpretable, lightweight, and accelerates inference time by one order of
magnitude. Compared to other explicit representations such as points, patches,
and meshes, SAP produces topology-agnostic, watertight manifold surfaces. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of SAP on the task of surface reconstruction from
unoriented point clouds and learning-based reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Shape representations are central to many of the recent advancements in 3D computer vision and
computer graphics, ranging from neural rendering [41,45,48,55,58] to shape reconstruction [10,26,40,
47, 50, 52, 70]. While conventional representations such as point clouds and meshes are efficient and
well-studied, they also suffer from several limitations: Point clouds are lightweight and easy to obtain,
but do not directly encode surface information. Meshes, on the other hand, are usually restricted to
fixed topologies. More recently, neural implicit representations [10, 40, 50] have shown promising
results for representing geometry due to their flexibility in encoding varied topologies, and their
easy integration with differentiable frameworks. However, as such representations implicitly encode
surface information, extracting the underlying surface is typically slow as they require numerous
network evaluations in 3D space for extracting complete surfaces using marching cubes [10, 40, 50],
or along rays for intersection detection in the context of volumetric rendering [45, 47, 49, 70].
In this work, we introduce a novel Poisson solver which performs fast GPU-accelerated Differentiable
Poisson Surface Reconstruction (DPSR) and solves for an indicator function from an oriented point
cloud in a few milliseconds. Thanks to the differentiablility of our Poisson solver, gradients from a
loss on the output mesh or a loss on the intermediate indicator grid can be efficiently backpropagated
to update the oriented point cloud representation. This differential bridge between points, indicator
∗
†

Work done while at UC Berkeley.
Corresponding authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

