Online false discovery rate control for anomaly
detection in time series
Quentin Rebjock⇤
EPFL

Barış Kurt
Amazon Research

Tim Januschowski
Amazon Research

Laurent Callot
Amazon Research

Abstract
This article proposes novel rules for false discovery rate control (FDRC) geared
towards online anomaly detection in time series. Online FDRC rules allow to
control the properties of a sequence of statistical tests. In the context of anomaly
detection, the null hypothesis is that an observation is normal and the alternative is that it is anomalous. FDRC rules allow users to target a lower bound on
precision in unsupervised settings. The methods proposed in this article overcome
short-comings of previous FDRC rules in the context of anomaly detection, in particular ensuring that power remains high even when the alternative is exceedingly
rare (typical in anomaly detection) and the test statistics are serially dependent
(typical in time series). We show the soundness of these rules in both theory and
experiments.

1

Introduction

Online anomaly detection is critical for many monitoring applications in health care, IT operations,
manufacturing, or retail (e.g., [11, 4, 20]). In such settings, observations of one or several metrics
of interest (naturally represented as time series) are sent sequentially to a detector. It is tasked with
deciding whether a given observation is anomalous or not. Accordingly, anomaly detection in timeseries data is a rich field that has been surveyed in several articles [7, 6], Foorthuis [9] proposes a
typology of anomalies, and Sadik and Gruenwald [21] discusses open research questions in the field.
Arguably one of the most common approaches in addressing anomaly detection is via employing an
unsupervised probabilistic anomaly scorer that assigns a probability to each point. This translates
the problem of anomaly detection into one of online multiple hypotheses testing. Specifically, at
each time step t, we observe a new data point zt and emit the null hypothesis Ht that zt is not
anomalous. This hypothesis is tested with a p-value provided by the scorer and may be rejected
(detection of an anomaly) if there is enough evidence against it.
As in any statistical testing problem, a decision threshold determines whether the null hypothesis is
rejected or not. In the case of a single test, the most common convention is to report a discovery
(a point is anomalous) if the associated p-value is smaller than some preselected threshold ↵. The
effect is said to be statistically significant at level ↵ and the probability to falsely declare the point
anomalous is less than ↵. Importantly, in the case of multiple hypotheses tests, the threshold ↵
does not provide similar guarantees and the fraction of false positives may be arbitrarily close to
1. This particularly applies to anomaly detection because the proportion of alternative hypotheses
tends to be very low. Hence, multiple hypotheses testing requires other mechanisms to set decision
thresholds. In the case where all p-values are known in advance (offline setting), classical methods
typically shrink the threshold ↵ conservatively [2, 3, 27].
In the setting of anomaly detection, a natural quantity to control is the false discovery rate (FDR)
as introduced by [2], that is, the ratio of falsely labeled anomalies to total anomalies. Methods for
⇤

Correspondence: quentin.rebjock@epfl.ch.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

