Are Transformers More Robust Than CNNs?
Yutong Bai1 Jieru Mei1 Alan Yuille1 Cihang Xie2
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
University of California, Santa Cruz
{ytongbai, meijieru, alan.l.yuille, cihangxie306}@gmail.com

Abstract
Transformer emerges as a powerful tool for visual recognition. In addition to
demonstrating competitive performance on a broad range of visual benchmarks,
recent works also argue that Transformers are much more robust than Convolutions
Neural Networks (CNNs). Nonetheless, surprisingly, we find these conclusions
are drawn from unfair experimental settings, where Transformers and CNNs are
compared at different scales and are applied with distinct training frameworks.
In this paper, we aim to provide the first fair & in-depth comparisons between
Transformers and CNNs, focusing on robustness evaluations.
With our unified training setup, we first challenge the previous belief that
Transformers outshine CNNs when measuring adversarial robustness. More
surprisingly, we find CNNs can easily be as robust as Transformers on defending
against adversarial attacks, if they properly adopt Transformers’ training recipes.
While regarding generalization on out-of-distribution samples, we show pretraining on (external) large-scale datasets is not a fundamental request for enabling
Transformers to achieve better performance than CNNs. Moreover, our ablations
suggest such stronger generalization is largely benefited by the Transformer’s
self-attention-like architectures per se, rather than by other training setups. We
hope this work can help the community better understand and benchmark the
robustness of Transformers and CNNs. The code and models are publicly available
at https://github.com/ytongbai/ViTs-vs-CNNs.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been the widely-used architecture for visual recognition
in recent years [22, 38, 40, 16, 21]. It is commonly believed the key to such success is the usage of the
convolutional operation, as it introduces several useful inductive biases (e.g., translation equivalence)
to models for benefiting object recognition. Interestingly, recent works alternatively suggest that
it is also possible to build successful recognition models without convolutions [34, 60, 3]. The
most representative work in this direction is Vision Transformer (ViT) [12], which applies the pure
self-attention-based architecture to sequences of images patches and attains competitive performance
on the challenging ImageNet classification task [35] compared to CNNs. Later works [26, 47] further
expand Transformers with compelling performance on other visual benchmarks, including COCO
detection and instance segmentation [23], ADE20K semantic segmentation [61].
The dominion of CNNs on visual recognition is further challenged by the recent findings that
Transformers appear to be much more robust than CNNs. For example, Shao et al. [37] observe
that the usage of convolutions may introduce a negative effect on models’ adversarial robustness,
while migrating to Transformer-like architectures (e.g., the Conv-Transformer hybrid model or the
pure Transformer) can help secure models’ adversarial robustness. Similarly, Bhojanapalli et al. [4]
report that, if pre-trained on sufficiently large datasets, Transformers exhibit considerably stronger
robustness than CNNs on a spectrum of out-of-distribution tests (e.g., common image corruptions
[17], texture-shape cue conflicting stimuli [13]).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

