The Pareto Frontier of model selection
for general Contextual Bandits
Teodor Marinov⇤
Google Research
tvmarinov@google.com

Julian Zimmert
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
Recent progress in model selection raises the question of the fundamental limits
of these techniques. Under specific scrutiny has been model selection for general
contextual bandits with nested policy classes, resulting in a COLT2020 open
problem. It asks whether it is possible to obtain simultaneously the optimal single
algorithm guarantees over all policies in a nested sequence of policy classes, or
if otherwise this is possible for a trade-off ↵ 2 [ 12 , 1) between complexity term
and time: ln(|⇧m |)1 ↵ T ↵ . We give a disappointing answer to this question. Even
in the purely stochastic regime, the desired results are unobtainable. We present
a Pareto frontier of up to logarithmic factors matching upper and lower bounds,
thereby proving that an increase in the complexity term ln(|⇧m |) independent
of T is unavoidable for general policy classes. As a side result, we also resolve
a COLT2016 open problem concerning second-order bounds in full-information
games.

1

Introduction

Contextual multi-armed bandits are a fundamental problem in online learning [Auer et al., 2002,
Langford and Zhang, 2007, Chu et al., 2011, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011]. The contextual bandit
problem proceeds as a repeated game between a learner and an adversary. At every round of the game
the adversary prepares a pair of a context and a loss over an action space, the learner observes the
context and selects an action from the action space and then observes only the loss of the selected
action. The goal of the learner is to minimize their cumulative loss. The performance measure,
known as regret, is the difference between the learner’s cumulative loss and the smallest loss of a
fixed policy, belonging to an apriori determined policy class, mapping contexts to actions. Given a
single contextual bandit instance with finite sized policy
p class, the well-known Exp4 algorithm [Auer
et al., 2002] achieves the optimal regret bound of O( KT ln(|⇧|). Regret guarantees degrade with
the complexity of the policy class, therefore a a learner might want to leverage “guesses” about the
optimal policy. Given policy classes ⇧1 ⇢ · · · ⇢ ⇧M , a learner would ideally suffer regret scaling
only with the complexity of ⇧m⇤ , the smallest policy class containing the optimal policy ⇡ ⇤ . While
these kind of results are obtainable in full-information games, in which the learner gets to observe the
loss for all actions, they are impossible for multi-armed bandits [Lattimore, 2015]. In some aspects,
contextual bandits are an intermediate setting between full-information and multi-armed bandits
and it is unknown if model selection is possible. Foster et al. [2020b] stated model selection in
contextual bandits as a relevant open problem in COLT2020. Any positive result for model selection
in contextual bandits would imply a general way to treat multi-armed bandits with a switching
baseline. Furthermore any negative result is conjectured to implicate negative results on another
unresolved open problem on second order bounds for full-information games [Freund, 2016].
In this paper, we give a fairly complete answer to the questions above.
⇤

Author was at Johns Hopkins University during part of this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

