Provably Efficient Black-Box Action Poisoning
Attacks Against Reinforcement Learning

Guanlin Liu, Lifeng Lai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Davis
{glnliu,lflai}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Due to the broad range of applications of reinforcement learning (RL), understanding the effects of adversarial attacks against RL model is essential for the safe
applications of this model. Prior works on adversarial attacks against RL mainly
focus on either observation poisoning attacks or environment poisoning attacks.
In this paper, we introduce a new class of attacks named action poisoning attacks,
where an adversary can change the action signal selected by the agent. Compared
with existing attack models, the attacker’s ability in the proposed action poisoning
attack model is more restricted, and hence the attack model is more practical. We
study the action poisoning attack in both white-box and black-box settings. We
introduce an adaptive attack scheme called LCB-H, which works for most RL
agents in the black-box setting. We prove that the LCB-H attack can force any
efficient RL agent, whose dynamic regret scales sublinearly with the total number
of steps taken, to choose actions according to a policy selected by the attacker very
frequently, with only sublinear cost. In addition, we apply LCB-H attack against a
popular model-free RL algorithm: UCB-H. We show that, even in the black-box
setting, by spending only logarithm cost, the proposed LCB-H attack scheme can
force the UCB-H agent to choose actions according to the policy selected by the
attacker very frequently.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL), a framework of control-theoretic problem that makes decisions over
time under uncertain environment, has many applications in a variety of scenarios such as recommendation systems [Zhao et al., 2018], autonomous driving [O' Kelly et al., 2018], finance [Liu
et al., 2020] and business management [Nazari et al., 2018], to name a few. As RL models are
being increasingly used in safety critical and security related applications, it is critical to developing
trustworthy RL systems. Understanding the effects of adversarial attacks on RL systems is the first
step towards the goal of safe applications of RL models.
While there is much existing work addressing adversarial attacks on supervised learning models
[Szegedy et al., 2014, Goodfellow et al., 2015, Kurakin et al., 2017, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017,
Wang et al., 2018, Cohen et al., 2019, Dohmatob, 2019, Wang et al., 2019, Zhang and Zhu, 2019,
Carmon et al., 2019, Pinot et al., 2019, Alayrac et al., 2019, Dasgupta et al., 2019, Cicalese et al.,
2020], the understanding of adversarial attacks on RL models is less complete. Among the limited
existing works on adversarial attacks against RL, they formally or experimentally considers different
types of poisoning attack [Behzadan and Munir, 2017, Huang and Zhu, 2019, Ma et al., 2019, Zhang
et al., 2020, Sun et al., 2021, Rakhsha et al., 2020, 2021]. [Sun et al., 2021] discusses the differences
between the poisoning attacks. In the observation poisoning attack setting, the attacker is able to
manipulate the observations of the agent. Before the agent receives the reward signal or the state
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

