ErrorCompensatedX: error compensation for
variance reduced algorithms

Hanlin Tang
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
tanghl1994@gmail.com
Ji Liu
Kuaishou Technology
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Yao Li
Department of Mathematics
Michigan State University
liyao6@msu.edu

Ming Yan
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science
and Technology; Department of Mathematics
Michigan State University
myan@msu.edu

Abstract
Communication cost is one major bottleneck for the scalability for distributed
learning. One approach to reduce the communication cost is to compress the
gradient during communication. However, directly compressing the gradient decelerates the convergence speed, and the resulting algorithm may diverge for biased
compression. Recent work addressed this problem for stochastic gradient descent
by adding back the compression error from the previous step. This idea was further
extended to one class of variance reduced algorithms, where the variance of the
stochastic gradient is reduced by taking a moving average over all history gradients.
However, our analysis shows that just adding the previous step’s compression error,
as done in existing work, does not fully compensate the compression error. So, we
propose ErrorCompensatedX, which uses the compression error from the previous
two steps. We show that ErrorCompensatedX can achieve the same asymptotic
convergence rate with the training without compression. Moreover, we provide a
unified theoretical analysis framework for this class of variance reduced algorithms,
with or without error compensation.

1

Introduction

Data compression reduces the communication volume and alleviates the communication overhead
in distributed learning. E.g., Alistarh et al. (2017) compress the gradient being communicated
using quantization and find that reducing half of the communication size does not degrade the
convergence speed. However, the convergence speed would be slower if we further reduce the
communication size, and it requires the compression to be unbiased (Alistarh et al., 2017; Tang
et al., 2019). Alternatively, recent work (Stich et al., 2018a) shows that compression with error
compensation, which adds back the compression error to the next round of compression, using only
3% of the original communication volume does not degrade the convergence speed, and it works for
both biased and unbiased compression operators.
Despite the promising performance of error compensation on stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
SGD admits a slow convergence speed if the stochastic gradient has a large variance. Variance
reduction techniques, such as Momentum SGD (Zhang et al., 2015), ROOT-SGD (Li et al., 2020),
STORM (Cutkosky & Mehta, 2020), and IGT (Arnold et al., 2019), are developed, and they admit
increased convergence speeds either theoretically or empirically. We found that directly applying
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

