Learning Hard Optimization Problems:
A Data Generation Perspective

James Kotary
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
jkotary@syr.edu

Ferdinando Fioretto
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
ffiorett@syr.edu

Pascal Van Hentenryck
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
pvh@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
Optimization problems are ubiquitous in our societies and are present in almost
every segment of the economy. Many of these optimization problems are NP-hard
and computationally demanding, often requiring approximate solutions for largescale instances. Machine learning frameworks that learn to approximate solutions
to such hard optimization problems are a potentially promising avenue to address
these difficulties, particularly when many closely related problem instances must
be solved repeatedly. Supervised learning frameworks can train a model using
the outputs of pre-solved instances. However, when the outputs are themselves
approximations, when the optimization problem has symmetric solutions, and/or
when the solver uses randomization, solutions to closely related instances may
exhibit large differences and the learning task can become inherently more difficult.
This paper demonstrates this critical challenge, connects the variation of the training
data to the ability of a model to approximate it, and proposes a method for producing
(exact or approximate) solutions to optimization problems that are more amenable
to supervised learning tasks. The effectiveness of the method is tested on hard
non-linear nonconvex and discrete combinatorial problems.

1

Introduction

Constrained optimization (CO) is in daily use in our society, with applications ranging from supply
chains and logistics, to electricity grids, organ exchanges, marketing campaigns, and manufacturing
to name only a few. Two classes of hard optimization problems of particular interest in many fields
are (1) combinatorial optimization problems and (2) nonlinear constrained problems. Combinatorial optimization problems are characterized by discrete search spaces and have solutions that are
combinatorial in nature, involving for instance, the selection of subsets or permutations, and the
sequencing or scheduling of tasks. Nonlinear constrained problems may have continuous search
spaces but are often characterized by highly nonlinear constraints, such as those arising in electrical
power systems whose applications must capture physical laws such as Ohm’s law and Kirchhoff’s
law in addition to engineering operational constraints. Such CO problems are often NP-Hard and
may be computationally challenging in practice, especially for large-scale instances.
While the AI and Operational Research communities have contributed fundamental advances in
optimization in the last decades, the complexity of some problems often prevents them from being
adopted in contexts where many instances must be solved over a long-term horizon (e.g., multiyear planning studies) or when solutions must be produced under time constraints. Fortunately, in
many practical cases, including the scheduling and energy problems motivating this work, one is
interested in solving many problem instances sharing similar patterns. Therefore, the application of
deep learning methods to aid the solving of computationally challenging constrained optimization
problems appears to be a natural approach and has gained traction in the nascent area at the intersection
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

