Compressed Video Contrastive Learning

Yuqi Huo2,3,• Mingyu Ding4,• Haoyu Lu1,2 Nanyi Fei2,3
Zhiwu Lu1,2,∗ Ji-Rong Wen1,2 Ping Luo4
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
4
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China
{bnhony, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn
•
∗
Equal contribution
Corresponding author

Abstract
This work concerns self-supervised video representation learning (SSVRL), one
topic that has received much attention recently. Since videos are storage-intensive
and contain a rich source of visual content, models designed for SSVRL are
expected to be storage- and computation-efficient, as well as effective. However,
most existing methods only focus on one of the two objectives, failing to consider
both at the same time. In this work, for the first time, the seemingly contradictory
goals are simultaneously achieved by exploiting compressed videos and capturing
mutual information between two input streams. Specifically, a novel Motion Vector
based Cross Guidance Contrastive learning approach (MVCGC) is proposed. For
storage and computation efficiency, we choose to directly decode RGB frames
and motion vectors (that resemble low-resolution optical flows) from compressed
videos on-the-fly. To enhance the representation ability of the motion vectors, hence
the effectiveness of our method, we design a cross guidance contrastive learning
algorithm based on multi-instance InfoNCE loss, where motion vectors can take
supervision signals from RGB frames and vice versa. Comprehensive experiments
on two downstream tasks show that our MVCGC yields new state-of-the-art while
being significantly more efficient than its competitors.

1

Introduction

Recent self-supervised image representation learning approaches [He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020]
have been reported to outperform supervised ones on a wide range of downstream tasks by (1)
leveraging a large amount of unlabeled data available online for pre-training, and (2) designing a
powerful algorithm to discriminate unlabeled samples with different semantic meanings. However,
the situation for self-supervised video representation learning (SSVRL) is somewhat different:
self-supervised methods still perform worse than supervised ones, since videos are extremely storageintensive (scalability thus becomes a serious issue) and have a richer source of visual content (SSVRL
thus becomes very difficult). Therefore, designing storage-and-computation-efficient as well as
effective models for SSVRL remains a challenging problem that has not been well studied.
Existing state-of-the-art methods [Han et al., 2020b; Tao et al., 2020; Huo et al., 2021] mainly focus
on designing effective algorithms without considering the storage and computation costs during
large-scale video self-supervised training. Particularly, in order to leverage both appearance and
temporal information in the video, they exploit the optical flow as an extra view to complement the
RGB stream. However, this procedure is both storage- and computation-intensive because of storing
the decoded frames and computing optical flows, respectively (e.g., it costs more than 100GB for
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

