DRIVE: One-bit Distributed Mean Estimation
Shay Vargaftik ˚
VMware Research
shayv@vmware.com

Ran Ben Basat ˚
University College London
r.benbasat@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Amit Portnoy ˚
Ben-Gurion University
amitport@post.bgu.ac.il

Gal Mendelson
Stanford University
galmen@stanford.edu

Yaniv Ben-Itzhak
VMware Research
ybenitzhak@vmware.com

Michael Mitzenmacher
Harvard University
michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem where n clients transmit d-dimensional real-valued vectors using dp1 ` op1qq bits each, in a manner that allows the receiver to approximately reconstruct their mean. Such compression problems naturally arise in
distributed and federated learning. We provide novel mathematical results and
derive computationally efficient algorithms that are more accurate than previous
compression techniques. We evaluate our methods on a collection of distributed
and federated learning tasks, using a variety of datasets, and show a consistent
improvement over the state of the art.

1

Introduction

In many computational settings, one wishes to transmit a d-dimensional real-valued vector. For
example, in distributed and federated learning scenarios, multiple participants (a.k.a. clients) in
distributed SGD send gradients to a parameter server that averages them and updates the model
parameters accordingly [1]. In these applications and others (e.g., traditional machine learning
methods such K-Means and power iteration [2] or other methods such as geometric monitoring [3]),
sending approximations of vectors may suffice. Moreover, the vectors’ dimension d is often large
(e.g., in neural networks, d can exceed a billion [4, 5, 6]), so sending compressed vectors is appealing.
Indeed, recent works have studied how to send vector approximations using representations that use
a small number of bits per entry (e.g., [2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]). Further, recent work has shown direct
training time reduction from compressing the vectors to one bit per coordinate [12]. Most relevant to
our work are solutions that address the distributed mean estimation problem. For example, [2] uses the
randomized Hadamard transform followed by stochastic quantization (a.k.a. randomized rounding).
When each of `the n ˘clients transmits Opdq bits, their Normalized Mean Squared Error (NMSE) is
bounded by O logn d . They also show a Op n1 q bound with Opdq bits via variable-length encoding,
` ˘
albeit at a higher computational cost. The sampling method of [10] yields an O r¨R
NMSE bound
n
using dp1 ` op1qq bits in expectation, where r is each coordinate’s representation length and R is
the normalized average variance of the sent vectors. Recently, researchers proposed to use Kashin’s
representation [11, 13, 14]. Broadly speaking, it allows representing a d-dimensional´ vector in (a
¯
λ2
higher) dimension λ ¨ d for some λ ą 1 using small coefficients. This results in an O p?λ´1q
4 ¨n
NMSE bound, where each client transmits λ ¨ dp1 ` op1qq bits [14]. A recent work [15] suggested an
algorithm where if all clients’ vectors have pairwise distances of at most y P R (i.e., for any client pair
c1 , c2 , it holds that xpc1 q ´ xpc2 q 2 ď y), the resulting MSE is Opy 2 q (which is tight with respect to
˚

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

