Zero Time Waste: Recycling Predictions
in Early Exit Neural Networks

Maciej Wołczyk∗ †
Jagiellonian University
Klaudia Bałazy
Jagiellonian University
Marek Śmieja
Jagiellonian University

Bartosz Wójcik∗
Jagiellonian University

Igor Podolak
Jagiellonian University

Jacek Tabor
Jagiellonian University

Tomasz Trzciński
Jagiellonian University,
Warsaw University of Technology,
Tooploox

Abstract
The problem of reducing processing time of large deep learning models is a fundamental challenge in many real-world applications. Early exit methods strive
towards this goal by attaching additional Internal Classifiers (ICs) to intermediate
layers of a neural network. ICs can quickly return predictions for easy examples
and, as a result, reduce the average inference time of the whole model. However,
if a particular IC does not decide to return an answer early, its predictions are
discarded, with its computations effectively being wasted. To solve this issue, we
introduce Zero Time Waste (ZTW), a novel approach in which each IC reuses
predictions returned by its predecessors by (1) adding direct connections between
ICs and (2) combining previous outputs in an ensemble-like manner. We conduct
extensive experiments across various datasets and architectures to demonstrate that
ZTW achieves a significantly better accuracy vs. inference time trade-off than
other recently proposed early exit methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models achieve tremendous successes across a multitude of tasks, yet their training
and inference often yield high computational costs and long processing times [11, 22]. For some
applications, however, efficiency remains a critical challenge, e.g. to deploy a reinforcement learning
(RL) system in production the policy inference must be done in real-time [7], while the robot
performances suffer from the delay between measuring a system state and acting upon it [34].
Similarly, long inference latency in autonomous cars could impact its ability to control the speed [13]
and lead to accidents [10, 17].
Typical approaches to reducing the processing complexity of neural networks in latency-critical
applications include compressing the model [24, 26, 46] or approximating its responses [21]. For
instance, Livne & Cohen [26] propose to compress a RL model by policy pruning, while Kouris
et al. [21] approximate the responses of LSTM-based modules in self-driving cars to accelerate their
inference time. While those methods improve processing efficiency, they still require samples to pass
∗
†

equal contribution
Corresponding author: maciej.wolczyk@doctoral.uj.edu.pl

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

