Towards Sample-Optimal Compressive Phase
Retrieval with Sparse and Generative Priors

Zhaoqiang Liu
National University of Singapore
dcslizha@nus.edu.sg

Subhroshekhar Ghosh
National University of Singapore
subhrowork@gmail.com

Jonathan Scarlett
National University of Singapore
scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Compressive phase retrieval is a popular variant of the standard compressive
sensing problem in which the measurements only contain magnitude information.
In this paper, motivated by recent advances in deep generative models, we provide
recovery guarantees with near-optimal sample complexity for phase retrieval with
generative priors. We first show that when using i.i.d. Gaussian measurements and
an L-Lipschitz continuous generative model with bounded k-dimensional inputs,
roughly O(k log L) samples suffice to guarantee that any signal minimizing an
amplitude-based empirical loss function is close to the true signal. Attaining this
sample complexity with a practical algorithm remains a difficult challenge, and
finding a good initialization for gradient-based methods has been observed to pose a
major bottleneck. To partially address this, we further show that roughly O(k log L)
samples ensure sufficient closeness between the underlying signal and any globally
optimal solution to an optimization problem designed for spectral initialization
(though finding such a solution may still be challenging). We also adapt this result to
sparse phase retrieval, and show that O(s log n) samples are sufficient for a similar
guarantee when the underlying signal is s-sparse and n-dimensional, matching
an information-theoretic lower bound. While these guarantees do not directly
correspond to a practical algorithm, we propose a practical spectral initialization
method motivated by our findings, and experimentally observe performance gains
over various existing spectral initialization methods for sparse phase retrieval.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the (real-valued) phase retrieval problem, which aims to recover a signal
x ∈ Rn from noisy magnitude-only measurements:
yi = |hai , xi| + ηi ,

i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(1)

n

where ai ∈ R is the i-th sensing vector, and ηi represents additive noise. This problem arises
naturally in areas such as diffraction imaging, X-ray crystallography, microscopy, optics and astronomy [8], where it is often difficult or even impossible to observe the linear measurements directly,
and one can only record the magnitudes or intensities (squared magnitudes).
In many real applications, to reduce the required number of measurements, it is of interest to exploit
structure in the signal being estimated. In particular, for applications related to signal processing and
imaging, it is well-known that the underlying signal typically admits a sparse or approximately sparse
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

