Online Convex Optimization
with Continuous Switching Constraint

1

Guanghui Wang1 , Yuanyu Wan1,2 , Tianbao Yang3 , Lijun Zhang1,2,⇤
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
{wanggh,wanyy,zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
In many sequential decision making applications, the change of decision would
bring an additional cost, such as the wear-and-tear cost associated with changing server status. To control the switching cost, we introduce the problem of
online convex optimization with continuous switching constraint, where the goal
is to achieve a small regret given a budget on the overall switching cost. We
first investigate
the hardness of the problem, and provide
a lower bound of orp
p
der ⌦( T ) when
the
switching
cost
budget
S
=
⌦(
T
),
and
⌦(min{T /S, T })
p
when S = O( T ), where T is the time horizon. The essential idea is to carefully design an adaptive adversary, who can adjust the loss function according to
the cumulative switching cost of the player incurred so far based on the orthogonal technique. We then develop a simple gradient-based algorithm which enjoys
the minimax optimal regret bound. Finally, we show that, for strongly convex
functions, the regret bound can be improved to O(log T ) for S = ⌦(log T ), and
O(min{T / exp(S) + S, T }) for S = O(log T ).

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) is a fundamental framework for studying sequential decision
making problems (Shalev-Shwartz, 2011). Its protocol can be seen as a game between a player and
an adversary: In each round t, firstly, the player selects an action wt from a convex set D ✓ Rd .
After submitting the answer, a loss function ft : D 7! R is revealed, and the player suffers a loss
ft (wt ). The goal is to minimize the regret:
R=

T
X
t=1

ft (wt )

min

w2D

T
X

ft (w),

(1)

t=1

which is the difference between the cumulative loss of the player and that of the best action in
hindsight.
Over the past decades, the problem of OCO has been extensively studied, yielding various algorithms and theoretical guarantees (Hazan, 2016; Orabona, 2019). However, most of the existing approaches allow the player to switch her action freely during the learning process. As a result, these
methods become unsuitable for many real-life scenarios, such as the online shortest paths problem
(Koolen et al., 2010), and portfolio management (Dekel et al., 2014; Vittori et al., 2020), where
the switching of actions brings extra cost, and the budget for the overall switching cost is strictly
⇤

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

