Learned Robust PCA: A Scalable Deep Unfolding
Approach for High-Dimensional Outlier Detection

HanQin Cai∗
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
hqcai@math.ucla.edu
Jialin Liu
Decision Intelligence Lab
Damo Academy, Alibaba US
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
jialin.liu@alibaba-inc.com

Wotao Yin
Decision Intelligence Lab
Damo Academy, Alibaba US
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
wotao.yin@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Robust principal component analysis (RPCA) is a critical tool in modern machine
learning, which detects outliers in the task of low-rank matrix reconstruction. In
this paper, we propose a scalable and learnable non-convex approach for highdimensional RPCA problems, which we call Learned Robust PCA (LRPCA).
LRPCA is highly efficient, and its free parameters can be effectively learned to
optimize via deep unfolding. Moreover, we extend deep unfolding from finite iterations to infinite iterations via a novel feedforward-recurrent-mixed neural network
model. We establish the recovery guarantee of LRPCA under mild assumptions for
RPCA. Numerical experiments show that LRPCA outperforms the state-of-the-art
RPCA algorithms, such as ScaledGD and AltProj, on both synthetic datasets and
real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, robust principal component analysis (RPCA), one of the fundamental dimension
reduction techniques, has received intensive investigations from theoretical and empirical perspectives
[1–13]. RPCA also plays a key role in a wide range of machine learning tasks, such as video
background subtraction [14], singing-voice separation [15], face modeling [16], image alignment
[17] , feature identification [18], community detection [19], fault detection [20], and NMR spectrum
recovery [21]. While the standard principal component analysis (PCA) is known for its high sensitivity
to outliers, RPCA is designed to enhance the robustness of PCA when outliers are present. In this
paper, we consider the following RPCA setting: given an observed corrupted data matrix
Y = X? + S? ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ,

(1)

where X? is a rank-r data matrix and S? is a sparse outlier matrix, reconstruct X? and S? simultaneously from Y .
One of the main challenges of designing an RPCA algorithm is to avoid high computational costs.
Inspired by deep unfolded sparse coding [22], some recent works [23–25] have successfully extended
deep unfolding techniques to RPCA and achieved noticeable accelerations in certain applications.
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetic order. Correspondence shall be addressed to H.Q. Cai.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

