Width-based Lookaheads with Learnt Base Policies
and Heuristics Over the Atari-2600 Benchmark
Stefan O’Toole
Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
stefan@student.unimelb.edu.au

Nir Lipovetzky
Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
nir.lipovetzky@unimelb.edu.au

Miquel Ramirez
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Melbourne, Australia
miquel.ramirez@unimelb.edu.au

Adrian R. Pearce
Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
adrianrp@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
We propose new width-based planning and learning algorithms inspired from a
careful analysis of the design decisions made by previous width-based planners.
The algorithms are applied over the Atari-2600 games and our best performing
algorithm, Novelty guided Critical Path Learning (N-CPL), outperforms the
previously introduced width-based planning and learning algorithms 𝜋-IW(1),
𝜋-IW(1)+ and 𝜋-HIW(n, 1). Furthermore, we present a taxonomy of the Atari-2600
games according to some of their defining characteristics. This analysis of the
games provides further insight into the behaviour and performance of the algorithms
introduced. Namely, for games with large branching factors, and games with sparse
meaningful rewards, N-CPL outperforms 𝜋-IW, 𝜋-IW(1)+ and 𝜋-HIW(n, 1).

1

Introduction

The Atari-2600 games provide useful environments for benchmarking autonomous agents due to the
diversity of behaviour required across the different games. The Atari-2600 games can be accessed
through the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [1] which provides a typical Reinforcement Learning
(RL) environment interface where given a state, the agent selects an action and receives a resulting
state and reward. The two main approaches that have been used by autonomous agents applied to the
Atari-2600 games have been RL methods [2, 3, 4] and Planning methods [5, 6]. The RL approaches
have had great success surpassing the performance of human players for many of the Atari-2600
games. However, RL approaches require long training times in order to train the Neural Networks
(NN) used for policy and value functions. Planning agents do not require training time and instead use
a bounded, fixed computational budget to decide which action to take at each time step of the game.
The budget allowed for planning for each action is set as part of the experimental setting and can be set
in such a way that the agent can play a game in real-time. Through the ALE interface, the agent is not
provided a description of the transition or reward functions as is the case of models described through
languages such as the Planning Domain Description Language (PDDL) [7]. Instead, planning agents
applied to the Atari-2600 games are required to work with a simulator, treating the environment’s
transition and reward functions as a black-box [5].
Width-based planning agents have been shown to be particularly successful on the Atari-2600 games
when compared to other planning agents [5, 6]. Width-based planners prioritise search effort on states
deemed to be novel. The novelty of a state can be defined in a number of ways. Previously, novelty
tests have been obtained from the RAM of the game [5], handcrafted features computed from screen
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

