Joint Modeling of Visual Objects and Relations
for Scene Graph Generation

Minghao Xu1 Meng Qu2,3 Bingbing Ni1 Jian Tang2,4,5
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 2 Mila - Québec AI Institute
3
University of Montréal 4 HEC Montréal 5 CIFAR AI Research Chair
{xuminghao118, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn meng.qu@umontreal.ca jian.tang@hec.ca
1

Abstract
An in-depth scene understanding usually requires recognizing all the objects and
their relations in an image, encoded as a scene graph. Most existing approaches for
scene graph generation first independently recognize each object and then predict
their relations independently. Though these approaches are very efficient, they
ignore the dependency between different objects as well as between their relations.
In this paper, we propose a principled approach to jointly predict the entire scene
graph by fully capturing the dependency between different objects and between
their relations. Specifically, we establish a unified conditional random field (CRF)
to model the joint distribution of all the objects and their relations in a scene
graph. We carefully design the potential functions to enable relational reasoning
among different objects according to knowledge graph embedding methods. We
further propose an efficient and effective algorithm for inference based on meanfield variational inference, in which we first provide a warm initialization by
independently predicting the objects and their relations according to the current
model, followed by a few iterations of relational reasoning. Experimental results
on both the relationship retrieval and zero-shot relationship retrieval tasks prove
the efficiency and efficacy of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Modern object recognition [32, 10, 35] and detection [28, 27, 57] systems excel at the perception
of visual objects, which has significantly boosted many industrial applications such as intelligent
surveillance [18, 49] and autonomous driving [23, 38]. To have a deeper understanding of a visual
scene, detecting and recognizing the objects in the scene is however insufficient. Instead, a comprehensive cognition of visual objects and their relationships is more desirable. Scene Graph Generation
(SGG) [13] is a natural way to achieve this goal, in which a graph incorporating all objects and their
relations within a scene image is derived to represent its semantic structure.
Most previous works for SGG [48, 55, 53, 36, 4, 37] usually first independently predict different
objects in a scene and then predict their relations independently. In practice, though such methods
are very efficient, they ignore the dependency between different objects and between the relations of
different object pairs. For example, a car could frequently co-occur with a street, and the relation
eating could always appear along with the relation sitting on. Modeling such dependency could
be very important for accurate scene graph prediction, especially for rare objects and relations. There
are indeed some recent works [6, 5] along this direction. For example, Dai et al. [6] explored the
triplet-level label dependency among a head object, a tail object and their relation. These methods
have shown very promising results, while they only explored the limited dependency within a triplet.
How to capture the full dependency between different objects and between their relations within a
whole scene graph remains very challenging and unexplored.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

