Fast Routing under Uncertainty: Adaptive Learning
in Congestion Games with Exponential Weights

Dong Quan Vu
Kimon Antonakopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG 38000, Grenoble, France
dong-quan.vu@inria.fr kimon.antonakopoulos@inria.fr
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG 38000, Grenoble, France
Criteo AI Lab
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
We examine an adaptive learning framework for nonatomic congestion games
where the players’ cost functions may be subject to exogenous fluctuations (e.g.,
due to disturbances in the network, variations in the traffic going through a link,
etc.). In this setting,
the popular multiplicative / exponential weights algorithm en√
joys an O(1/ T ) equilibrium convergence rate; however, this rate is suboptimal
in static environments – i.e., when the network is not subject to randomness. In
this static regime, accelerated algorithms achieve an O(1/T 2 ) convergence speed,
but they fail to converge altogether in stochastic problems. To fill this gap, we
propose a novel, adaptive exponential weights method – dubbed
√ A DAW EIGHT –
that seamlessly interpolates between the O(1/T 2 ) and O(1/ T ) rates in static
and stochastic environments respectively. Importantly, this “best-of-both-worlds”
guarantee does not require any prior knowledge of the problem’s parameters or
any tuning by the optimizer; in addition, the method’s convergence speed depends
subquadratically on the size of the network (number of vertices and edges), so it
scales gracefully to large, real-life urban networks.

1

Introduction

Navigation apps like Google Maps and Waze have user bases numbering in the hundreds of millions,
and they may receive upwards of 104 routing requests per second; in fact, Google Maps alone
exceeded one billion monthly active users in 2019, and its interface routinely receives up to 105
requests during rush hour in major metropolitan centers [10]. This vast number of users must be
routed efficiently, in real-time, and without causing any “ex-post” regret at the user end; otherwise,
if a user could have experienced better travel times along a non-recommended route, they would
have no incentive to follow the app recommendation in the first place.
In the language of congestion games [40], this requirement is known as a “Wardrop equilibrium”,
and it is typically represented as a high-dimensional vector describing the traffic flow along each path
in the network [49]. Ideally, this equilibrium should be computed before making a recommendation,
so as to minimize the number of disgruntled users. In practice however, this is rarely possible:
the state of the network typically depends on random factors that vary from one epoch to the next
(weather conditions, traffic accidents, fluctuations in the total number of commuters in the system,
etc.), so it is generally unrealistic to expect that such a recommendation can be made in advance.
Our paper takes a learning approach to this problem: routing recommendations are provided in an
online manner, and they are subsequently updated “on the fly” once the state of the network has
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

