Variational Multi-Task Learning with
Gumbel-Softmax Priors
Jiayi Shen1 , Xiantong Zhen1,2 , Marcel Worring1 , Ling Shao2
1
AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract
Multi-task learning aims to explore task relatedness to improve individual tasks,
which is of particular significance in the challenging scenario that only limited data
is available for each task. To tackle this challenge, we propose variational multi-task
learning (VMTL), a general probabilistic inference framework for learning multiple
related tasks. We cast multi-task learning as a variational Bayesian inference
problem, in which task relatedness is explored in a unified manner by specifying
priors. To incorporate shared knowledge into each task, we design the prior of a task
to be a learnable mixture of the variational posteriors of other related tasks, which
is learned by the Gumbel-Softmax technique. In contrast to previous methods, our
VMTL can exploit task relatedness for both representations and classifiers in a
principled way by jointly inferring their posteriors. This enables individual tasks
to fully leverage inductive biases provided by related tasks, therefore improving
the overall performance of all tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed VMTL is able to effectively tackle a variety of challenging multi-task
learning settings with limited training data for both classification and regression.
Our method consistently surpasses previous methods, including strong Bayesian
approaches, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on five benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning [8] exploits knowledge shared among related tasks to improve their overall
performance. This is especially significant when only limited data is available for each task. The
central goal in multi-task learning is to explore task relatedness to improve each individual task [2, 54],
which is non-trivial since the underlying relationships among tasks can be complicated and highly
nonlinear [52]. Early works deal with this by learning shared features, designing regularizers imposed
on parameters [37, 24, 23, 21] or exploring priors over parameters [20, 3, 48, 53, 54]. Recently,
multi-task deep neural networks have been developed, learning shared representations in the feature
layers while keeping classifier layers independent [33, 38, 55, 31]. Some methods [32, 25, 9, 14]
learn a small number of related tasks based on one shared input. However, lots of training data is
usually available. Few-shot learning [12] addresses multi-task learning with limited data, but usually
relies on a large number of related tasks. Further, in general, most existing works explore either
representations or classifiers for shared knowledge, leaving exploring them jointly an open problem.
In this work, we tackle the following challenging multi-task learning setting [33]: each task contains
very limited training data and only a handful of related tasks are available to gain shared knowledge
from. In addition, instead of sharing the same input, each of the multiple tasks has its own input space
from a different domain and these tasks are related by sharing the same target space, e.g., the same
class labels in classification tasks. In this setting, it is difficult to learn a proper model for each task
independently without overfitting [33, 52]. It is therefore crucial to leverage the inductive bias [4]
provided by related tasks learned simultaneously.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

