Fast Approximate Dynamic Programming for
Infinite-Horizon Markov Decision Processes
M. A. S. Kolarijani
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
M.A.SharifiKolarijani@tudelft.nl

G. F. Max
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
G.F.Max@tudelft.nl

P. Mohajerin Esfahani
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
P.MohajerinEsfahani@tudelft.nl

Abstract
In this study, we consider the infinite-horizon, discounted cost, optimal control
of stochastic nonlinear systems with separable cost and constraints in the state
and input variables. Using the linear-time Legendre transform, we propose a
novel numerical scheme for implementation of the corresponding value iteration
(VI) algorithm in the conjugate domain. Detailed analyses of the convergence,
time complexity, and error of the proposed algorithm are provided. In particular,
with a discretization of size X and U for the state and input spaces, respectively,
the proposed approach reduces the time complexity of each iteration in the VI
algorithm from O(XU ) to O(X + U ), by replacing the minimization operation in
the primal domain with a simple addition in the conjugate domain.

1

Introduction

Value iteration (VI) is one of the most basic and wide-spread algorithms employed for tackling
problems in reinforcement learning (RL) and optimal control [9, 28] formulated as Markov decision
processes (MDPs). The VI algorithm simply involves the consecutive applications of the dynamic
programming (DP) operator

T J(xt ) = min C(xt , ut ) + γEJ(xt+1 ) ,
ut

where C(xt , ut ) is the cost of taking the control action ut at the state xt . This fixed point iteration
is known to converge to the optimal value function for discount factors γ ∈ (0, 1). However, this
algorithm suffers from a high computational cost for large-scale finite state spaces. For problems with
a continuous state space, the DP operation becomes an infinite-dimensional optimization problem,
rendering the exact implementation of VI impossible in most cases. A common solution is to
incorporate function approximation techniques and compute the output of the DP operator for a
finite sample (i.e., a discretization) of the underlying continuous state space. This approximation
again suffers from a high computational cost for fine discretizations of the state space, particularly in
high-dimensional problems. We refer the reader to [9, 26] for various approximations of VI.
For some problems, however, it is possible to partially address this issue by using duality theory,
i.e., approaching the minimization problem in the conjugate domain. In particular, as we will see
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

