Unsupervised Object-Based Transition Models for 3D
Partially Observable Environments
Antonia Creswell
DeepMind
London
tonicreswell@deepmind.com
Christopher Burgess
DeepMind
London
cpburgess@deepmind.com

Rishabh Kabra
DeepMind
London
rkabra@deepmind.com
Murray Shanahan
DeepMind
London
mshanahan@deepmind.com

Abstract
We present a slot-wise, object-based transition model that decomposes a scene
into objects, aligns them (with respect to a slot-wise object memory) to maintain a
consistent order across time, and predicts how those objects evolve over successive
frames. The model is trained end-to-end without supervision using transition losses
at the level of the object-structured representation rather than pixels. Thanks to
the introduction of our novel alignment module, the model deals properly with
two issues that are not handled satisfactorily by other transition models, namely
object persistence and object identity. We show that the combination of an objectlevel loss and correct object alignment over time enables the model to outperform
a state-of-the-art baseline, and allows it to deal well with object occlusion and
re-appearance in partially observable environments.

1

Introduction

In spite of their well-documented ability to learn complex tasks, today’s deep reinforcement learning
agents are still far from matching humans at out-of-distribution generalisation or few-shot transfer
[6, 21, 23]. Two architectural features commonly proposed to remedy this are (1) transition models
that enable the agent to internally explore paths through state space that it has never experienced
[29, 25, 12], and (2) compositionally structured representations that enable the agent to represent
meaningful states that it has never encountered [7]. These two features are not exclusive; transition
models that operate on compositionally structured representations are a potent combination, and these
are the subject of the present paper. Specifically, our focus is on transition models that operate at the
level of objects, which are the most obvious candidates for the structural elements of representations
likely to be useful for artificial agents inhabiting 3D worlds such as our own [28].
While there has been progress in object-based transition models [34, 32, 35, 20], current models do
not deal satisfactorily with object persistence (the concept that objects typically continue to exist
when they are no longer perceptible [24]) or with object identity (the concept that a token object at
one time-step is the same token object at a later time-step [1]). As we show, transition models that
neglect object persistence tend to perform badly in complex, partially observable environments, while
models that neglect object identity are unable to integrate information about a single object (and its
interactions) over time in a way that generalises to future time-steps. By proposing and incorporating
a novel module for aligning objects across time using a slot-based memory, our model handles both
these concepts, and exhibits better performance as a result.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

