AutoGEL: An Automated Graph Neural Network
with Explicit Link Information
Zhili WANG, Shimin DI⇤, Lei CHEN
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zwangeo,sdiaa,leichen}@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained popularity in a variety
of real-world scenarios. Despite the great success, the architecture design of
GNNs heavily relies on manual labor. Thus, automated graph neural network
(AutoGNN) has attracted interest and attention from the research community,
which makes significant performance improvements in recent years. However,
existing AutoGNN works mainly adopt an implicit way to model and leverage the
link information in the graphs, which is not well regularized to the link prediction
task on graphs, and limits the performance of AutoGNN for other graph tasks.
In this paper, we present a novel AutoGNN work that explicitly models the link
information, abbreviated to AutoGEL. In such a way, AutoGEL can handle the
link prediction task and improve the performance of AutoGNNs on the node
classification and graph classification task. Specifically, AutoGEL proposes a
novel search space containing various design dimensions at both intra-layer and
inter-layer designs and adopts a more robust differentiable search algorithm to
further improve efficiency and effectiveness. Experimental results on benchmark
data sets demonstrate the superiority of AutoGEL on several tasks.

1

Introduction

As one of ubiquitous data structures, graph G(E, V ) contains the node-set V = {v1 , · · · , vn } and
edge-set E = {e(vi , vj ) : vi , vj 2 V }, which can represent a lot of real-world data sets, such as
social networks [Bu et al., 2018], physical systems [Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018], protein-protein
interaction networks [Yue et al., 2020]. In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been
introduced for various graph tasks and achieve unprecedented success, such as node classification
[Kipf and Welling, 2016a, Hamilton et al., 2017], link prediction [Vashishth et al., 2019, Li et al.,
2020], and graph classification [Niepert et al., 2016, Zhang et al., 2018]. Generally, GNNs encode
G(V, E) into the d-dimensional vector space (e.g., V 2 R|V |⇥d ) that preserves similarity in the
original graph. Despite the great success, those GNNs are restricted to specific instances within GNN
design space [You et al., 2020]. Different graph tasks usually require different GNN architectures
[Gilmer et al., 2017]. For example, compared with the node classification task, GNNs for graph
classification introduces an extra readout phase to obtain graph embeddings. However, architecture
design for these GNNs remains a challenging problem due to the diversity of graph data sets. Given a
graph task, a GNN architecture performs well on one data set does not necessarily imply that it is
also suitable for other data sets [You et al., 2020].
Some pioneer works have been proposed to alleviate the above issue in GNN models. They introduce
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [Elsken et al., 2019] approaches to automatically design suitable
⇤

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

