Improve Agents without Retraining: Parallel Tree
Search with Off-Policy Correction

Assaf Hallak ∗
NVIDIA Research
ahallak@nvidia.com
Steven Dalton
NVIDIA Research
sdalton@nvidia.com

Gal Dalal ∗
NVIDIA Research
gdalal@nvidia.com

Iuri Frosio
NVIDIA Research
ifrosio@nvidia.com

Shie Mannor
NVIDIA Research
smannor@nvidia.com

Gal Chechik
NVIDIA Research
gchechik@nvidia.com

Abstract
Tree Search (TS) is crucial to some of the most influential successes in reinforcement learning. Here, we tackle two major challenges with TS that limit its usability:
distribution shift and scalability. We first discover and analyze a counter-intuitive
phenomenon: action selection through TS and a pre-trained value function often
leads to lower performance compared to the original pre-trained agent, even when
having access to the exact state and reward in future steps. We show this is due to a
distribution shift to areas where value estimates are highly inaccurate and analyze
this effect using Extreme Value theory. To overcome this problem, we introduce
a novel off-policy correction term that accounts for the mismatch between the
pre-trained value and its corresponding TS policy by penalizing under-sampled
trajectories. We prove that our correction eliminates the above mismatch and
bound the probability of sub-optimal action selection. Our correction significantly
improves pre-trained Rainbow agents without any further training, often more than
doubling their scores on Atari games. Next, we address the scalability issue given
by the computational complexity of exhaustive TS that scales exponentially with
the tree depth. We introduce Batch-BFS: a GPU breadth-first search that advances
all nodes in each depth of the tree simultaneously. Batch-BFS reduces runtime by
two orders of magnitude and, beyond inference, enables also training with TS of
depths that were not feasible before. We train DQN agents from scratch using TS
and show improvement in several Atari games compared to both the original DQN
and the more advanced Rainbow.

1

Introduction

Tree search (TS) is a fundamental component of Reinforcement Learning (RL) [46] used in some
of the most successful RL systems [42, 44]. For instance, Monte-Carlo TS (MCTS) [10] achieved
superhuman performance in board games like Go [44], Chess [45], and Bridge [5]. MCTS gradually
unfolds the tree by adding nodes and visitation counts online and storing them in memory for future
traversals. This paradigm is suitable for discrete state-spaces where counts are aggregated across
∗

Equal contribution (random order)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

