Stochastic Optimization of Areas Under
Precision-Recall Curves with Provable Convergence

Qi Qi †∗, Youzhi Luo‡∗, Zhao Xu‡∗, Shuiwang Ji‡ , Tianbao Yang†
†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa
‡
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University
{qi-qi,tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, {yzluo,zhaoxu,sji}@tamu.edu

Abstract
Areas under ROC (AUROC) and precision-recall curves (AUPRC) are common
metrics for evaluating classification performance for imbalanced problems. Compared with AUROC, AUPRC is a more appropriate metric for highly imbalanced
datasets. While stochastic optimization of AUROC has been studied extensively,
principled stochastic optimization of AUPRC has been rarely explored. In this
work, we propose a principled technical method to optimize AUPRC for deep
learning. Our approach is based on maximizing the averaged precision (AP), which
is an unbiased point estimator of AUPRC. We cast the objective into a sum of
coupled compositional functions with inner functions dependent on random variables of the outer level. We propose efficient adaptive and non-adaptive stochastic
algorithms named SOAP with provable convergence guarantee under mild conditions by leveraging recent advances in stochastic compositional optimization.
Extensive experimental results on image and graph datasets demonstrate that our
proposed method outperforms prior methods on imbalanced problems in terms of
AUPRC. To the best of our knowledge, our work represents the first attempt to
optimize AUPRC with provable convergence. The SOAP has been implemented in
the libAUC library at https://libauc.org/.

1

Introduction

Although deep learning (DL) has achieved tremendous success in various domains, the standard DL
methods have reached a plateau as the traditional objective functions in DL are no longer sufficient
to model all requirements in new applications, which slows down the democratization of AI. For
instance, in healthcare applications, data is often highly imbalanced, e.g., patients suffering from rare
diseases are much less than those suffering from common diseases. In these applications, accuracy
(the proportion of correctly predicted examples) is deemed as an inappropriate metric for evaluating
the performance of a classifier. Instead, area under the curve (AUC), including area under ROC
curve (AUROC) and area under the Precision-Recall curve (AUPRC), is widely used for assessing
the performance of a model. However, optimizing accuracy on training data does not necessarily lead
to a satisfactory solution to maximizing AUC [12].
To break the bottleneck for further advancement, DL must be empowered with the capability of
efficiently handling novel objectives such as AUC. Recent studies have demonstrated great success
along this direction by maximizing AUROC [60]. For example, Yuan et al. [60] proposed a robust
deep AUROC maximization method with provable convergence and achieved great success for
classification of medical image data. However, to the best of our knowledge, novel DL by maximizing
AUPRC has not yet been studied thoroughly. Previous studies [14, 20] have found that when dealing
∗

Contribute Equally. Correspondence to qi-qi@uiowa.edu, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

