TOHAN: A One-step Approach towards Few-shot
Hypothesis Adaptation
Haoang Chi1,2,6˚, Feng Liu3˚ , Wenjing Yang1:, Long Lan1,6:, Tongliang Liu4 ,
Bo Han2 , William K. Cheung2 , James T. Kwok5
1
State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, College of CS, NUDT
2
CS Department, HKBU
3
DeSI Lab, AAII, Faculty of Engineering and IT, UTS
4
TML Lab, School of CS, Faculty of Engineering, USYD
5
CSE Department, HKUST
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
haoangchi618@gmail.com, feng.liu@uts.edu.au, {wenjing.yang,
long.lan}@nudt.edu.cn, {bhanml, william}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
jamesk@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
In few-shot domain adaptation (FDA), classifiers for the target domain are trained
with accessible labeled data in the source domain (SD) and few labeled data in
the target domain (TD). However, data usually contain private information in the
current era, e.g., data distributed on personal phones. Thus, the private data will be
leaked if we directly access data in SD to train a target-domain classifier (required
by FDA methods). In this paper, to prevent privacy leakage in SD, we consider a
very challenging problem setting, where the classifier for the TD has to be trained
using few labeled target data and a well-trained SD classifier, named few-shot
hypothesis adaptation (FHA). In FHA, we cannot access data in SD, as a result, the
private information in SD will be protected well. To this end, we propose a targetoriented hypothesis adaptation network (TOHAN) to solve the FHA problem,
where we generate highly-compatible unlabeled data (i.e., an intermediate domain)
to help train a target-domain classifier. TOHAN maintains two deep networks
simultaneously, in which one focuses on learning an intermediate domain and
the other takes care of the intermediate-to-target distributional adaptation and the
target-risk minimization. Experimental results show that TOHAN outperforms
competitive baselines significantly.

1

Introduction

In domain adaptation (DA) [7, 21, 41, 42, 50], we aim to train a target-domain classifier with data in
source and target domains. Based on the availability of data in the target domain (e.g., fully-labeled
data, partially-labeled data and unlabeled data), DA is divided into three categories: supervised
DA (SDA) [43], semi-supervised DA [20] and unsupervised DA (UDA) [56]. Since SDA methods
outperform UDA methods for the same quantity of target data [33], it becomes attractive if we can
train a good target-domain classifier using labeled source data and few labeled target data [46].
Hence, few-shot domain adaptation (FDA) methods [33] are proposed to train a target-domain
classifier with accessible labeled data from the source domain and few labeled data from the target
˚
:

Equal contribution. Work done when Haoang Chi remotely visited HKBU.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

