Understanding Negative Samples
in Instance Discriminative Self-supervised
Representation Learning
Kento Nozawa
The University of Tokyo & RIKEN AIP
nzw@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Issei Sato
The University of Tokyo
sato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Instance discriminative self-supervised representation learning has been attracted
attention thanks to its unsupervised nature and informative feature representation
for downstream tasks. In practice, it commonly uses a larger number of negative
samples than the number of supervised classes. However, there is an inconsistency
in the existing analysis; theoretically, a large number of negative samples degrade
classification performance on a downstream supervised task, while empirically,
they improve the performance. We provide a novel framework to analyze this
empirical result regarding negative samples using the coupon collector’s problem.
Our bound can implicitly incorporate the supervised loss of the downstream task in
the self-supervised loss by increasing the number of negative samples. We confirm
that our proposed analysis holds on real-world benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised representation learning is a popular class of unsupervised representation learning
algorithms in the domains of vision [Bachman et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2020a, He et al., 2020, Caron
et al., 2020, Grill et al., 2020, Chen and He, 2021] and language [Mikolov et al., 2013, Devlin et al.,
2019, Brown et al., 2020]. Generally, it trains a feature extractor by solving a pretext task constructed
on a large unlabeled dataset. The learned feature extractor yields generic feature representations for
other machine learning tasks such as classification. Recent self-supervised representation learning
algorithms help a linear classifier to attain classification accuracy comparable to a supervised method
from scratch, especially in a few amount of labeled data regime [Newell and Deng, 2020, Hénaff
et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020b]. For example, SwAV [Caron et al., 2020] with ResNet-50 has a top-1
validation accuracy of 75.3% on the ImageNet-1K classification [Deng et al., 2009] compared with
76.5% by using the fully supervised method.
InfoNCE [van den Oord et al., 2018, Eq. 4] or its modification is a de facto standard loss function
used in many state-of-the-art self-supervised methods [Logeswaran and Lee, 2018, Bachman et al.,
2019, He et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020a, Hénaff et al., 2020, Caron et al., 2020]. Intuitively, the
minimization of InfoNCE can be viewed as the minimization of cross-entropy loss on K + 1 instancewise classification, where K is the number of negative samples. Despite the empirical success of
self-supervised learning, we still do not understand why the self-supervised learning algorithms with
InfoNCE perform well for downstream tasks.
Arora et al. [2019] propose the first theoretical framework for contrastive unsupervised representation learning (CURL). However, there exists a gap between the theoretical analysis and empirical
observation as in Figure 1. Precisely, we expect that a large number of negative samples degrade a
supervised loss on a downstream task from the analysis by Arora et al. [2019]. In practice, however,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

