A Critical Look at the Consistency of Causal
Estimation with Deep Latent Variable Models

Severi Rissanen
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
severi.rissanen@aalto.fi

Pekka Marttinen
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
pekka.marttinen@aalto.fi

Abstract
Using deep latent variable models in causal inference has attracted considerable
interest recently, but an essential open question is their ability to yield consistent
causal estimates. While they have demonstrated promising results and theory exists
on some simple model formulations, we also know that causal effects are not even
identifiable in general with latent variables. We investigate this gap between theory
and empirical results with analytical considerations and extensive experiments
under multiple synthetic and real-world data sets, using the causal effect variational
autoencoder (CEVAE) as a case study. While CEVAE seems to work reliably
under some simple scenarios, it does not estimate the causal effect correctly with
a misspecified latent variable or a complex data distribution, as opposed to its
original motivation. Hence, our results show that more attention should be paid to
ensuring the correctness of causal estimates with deep latent variable models.

1

Introduction

Causal inference, dealing with the questions of when and how we
can make causal statements based on observational data, has been
a topic of growing interest in the deep learning community recently.
On the one hand, causal inference promises to provide traditional
machine learning and AI with methods for explainability, domain
adaptation, and causal reasoning capabilities in general [Pearl, 2019].
On the other hand, many deep learning methods for improving causal
inference have been proposed. Some of the models have been designed under the assumption of no unobserved confounding [Shalit Figure 1: (a) The direct conet al., 2017, Yoon et al., 2018, Shi et al., 2019], while others utilize founding causal graph. (b)
latent variables in one way or the other to account for unobserved The causal graph with an unconfounders [Louizos et al., 2017, Rakesh et al., 2018, Pfohl et al., observed confounder z, and
2019, Madras et al., 2019, Mayer et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020, proxy variables x.
Pawlowski et al., 2020, Jesson et al., 2020]. Although some simple models with unobserved confounders are known to produce correct results [Angrist et al., 1996, Pearl et al., 2016, Miao et al.,
2018], the consistency, i.e., whether in the limit of large data the correct causal effect is retrieved, is
usually left largely open with deep latent variable models.
In particular, Louizos et al. [2017] proposed the causal effect variational autoencoder (CEVAE) for
performing causal inference in the setting where we have an unobserved confounder, of which only
noisy proxy variables are available. The causal graph is shown in Fig.1b, which contrasts to the
standard "no unobserved confounding", or direct confounding, graph in Fig.1a. The proxy variable
setting has been studied rigorously elsewhere by [Pearl et al., 2016], where the authors provided
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

