Rethinking gradient sparsification
as total error minimization
Atal Narayan Sahu
KAUST
Trambak Banerjee
University of Kansas

Aritra Dutta
KAUST

Ahmed M. Abdelmoniem
KAUST

Marco Canini
KAUST

Panos Kalnis
KAUST

Abstract
Gradient compression is a widely-established remedy to tackle the communication
bottleneck in distributed training of large deep neural networks (DNNs). Under
the error-feedback framework, Top-k sparsification, sometimes with k as little
as 0.1% of the gradient size, enables training to the same model quality as the
uncompressed case for a similar iteration count. From the optimization perspective,
we find that Top-k is the communication-optimal sparsifier given a per-iteration
k element budget. We argue that to further the benefits of gradient sparsification,
especially for DNNs, a different perspective is necessary — one that moves from
per-iteration optimality to consider optimality for the entire training.
We identify that the total error — the sum of the compression errors for all iterations — encapsulates sparsification throughout training. Then, we propose a
communication complexity model that minimizes the total error under a communication budget for the entire training. We find that the hard-threshold sparsifier,
a variant of the Top-k sparsifier with k determined by a constant hard-threshold,
is the optimal sparsifier for this model. Motivated by this, we provide convex
and non-convex convergence analyses for the hard-threshold sparsifier with errorfeedback. We show that hard-threshold has the same asymptotic convergence
and linear speedup property as SGD in both the case, and unlike with Top-k
sparsifier, has no impact due to data-heterogeneity. Our diverse experiments
on various DNNs and a logistic regression model demonstrate that the hardthreshold sparsifier is more communication-efficient than Top-k. Code is available
at https://github.com/sands-lab/rethinking-sparsification.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of huge DNNs consisting of hundreds of millions to billions of parameters [12,
50], distributed data-parallel training [66] is an increasingly important workload. As the training
process typically spans several compute nodes (or workers) that periodically exchange the local
gradient vectors at each iteration of the optimizer (e.g., SGD), communication among nodes remains
in many cases the main performance bottleneck [32, 40, 46].
Lossy gradient compression techniques are becoming a common approach to rein in communication
efficiency [62]. In particular, sparsification, which sends only a subset of gradient coordinates (e.g.,
Top-k [4, 8] sends the k largest gradient coordinates by magnitude in each iteration), may significantly
reduce data volumes and thus speed up training. However, due to its lossy nature, compression raises
a complex trade-off between training performance and accuracy. For instance, Agarwal et al. [3] note
that training ResNet-18 on CIFAR-100 using sparsification speeds up training significantly (3.6×),
but it also degrades final accuracy by 1.5%. On the other hand, Lin et al. [37] reports a 500× data
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

