A flow-based latent state generative model of
neural population responses to natural images

Mohammad Bashiri,1,* Edgar Y. Walker,1,* Konstantin-Klemens Lurz,1
Akshay Kumar Jagadish,1,2 , Taliah Muhammad,3-4 Zhiwei Ding,3-4 Zhuokun Ding,3-4
Andreas S. Tolias,3-4 Fabian H. Sinz5,1,†
1
Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
3
Department for Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
4
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
5
Department of Computer Science, University Göttingen, Germany
*

equal contribution, † sinz@cs.uni-goettingen.de

Abstract
We present a joint deep neural system identification model for two major sources
of neural variability: stimulus-driven and stimulus-conditioned fluctuations. To
this end, we combine (1) state-of-the-art deep networks for stimulus-driven activity
and (2) a flexible, normalizing flow-based generative model to capture the stimulusconditioned variability including noise correlations. This allows us to train the
model end-to-end without the need for sophisticated probabilistic approximations
associated with many latent state models for stimulus-conditioned fluctuations. We
train the model on the responses of thousands of neurons from multiple areas of
the mouse visual cortex to natural images. We show that our model outperforms
previous state-of-the-art models in predicting the distribution of neural population
responses to novel stimuli, including shared stimulus-conditioned variability. Furthermore, it successfully learns known latent factors of the population responses
that are related to behavioral variables such as pupil dilation, and other factors
that vary systematically with brain area or retinotopic location. Overall, our model
accurately accounts for two critical sources of neural variability while avoiding
several complexities associated with many existing latent state models. It thus
provides a useful tool for uncovering the interplay between different factors that
contribute to variability in neural activity.

1

Introduction

Characterizing the activity of sensory neurons is a major goal of neural system identification. While
neural responses in the visual cortex vary with visual stimuli, they also exhibit variability to the
repeated presentations of identical stimuli [1–4]. This stimulus-conditioned variability has significant
and sophisticated correlations among neurons commonly referred to as noise correlations [4–6]
and exhibits dependency on various factors such as the stimulus [7–9], the behavioral task [10, 11],
attention [12–14], and the general brain state [15, 16]. Understanding the nature of this correlated
variability and its functional implication in the processing of sensory stimuli requires models that
account for both stimulus-driven and shared stimulus-conditioned variability. The goal is thus to
model the stimulus-conditioned response distribution p(r|x) of population activity r ∈ Rn over n
neurons responding to an arbitrary sensory stimulus x. However, models that account for stimulusdriven and stimulus-conditioned correlated variability have been developed largely independently.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

