DROID-SLAM: Deep Visual SLAM for Monocular,
Stereo, and RGB-D Cameras

Zachary Teed
Jia Deng
Princeton University
{zteed,jiadeng}@princeton.edu

Abstract
We introduce DROID-SLAM, a new deep learning based SLAM system. DROIDSLAM consists of recurrent iterative updates of camera pose and pixelwise depth
through a Dense Bundle Adjustment layer. DROID-SLAM is accurate, achieving
large improvements over prior work, and robust, suffering from substantially fewer
catastrophic failures. Despite training on monocular video, it can leverage stereo
or RGB-D video to achieve improved performance at test time. The URL to our
open source code is https://github.com/princeton-vl/DROID-SLAM.

1

Introduction

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) aims to (1) build a map of the environment and
(2) localize the agent within the environment. It is a special form of Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
focused on accurate tracking of long-term trajectories. It is a critical capability for robotics, especially
autonomous vehicles. In this work, we address visual SLAM, where sensor recordings come in the
form of images captured from a monocular, stereo, or RGB-D camera.
The SLAM problem has been approached from a number of different angles. Early work was built
using probabilistic and filtering based approaches [12, 30], and alternating optimization of the map
and camera poses [34, 16]. More recently, modern SLAM systems have leveraged least-squares
optimization. A key element for accuracy has been full Bundle Adjustment (BA), which jointly
optimizes the camera poses and the 3D map in a single optimization problem. One advantage of the
optimization-based formulation is that a SLAM system can be easily modified to leverage different
sensors. For example, ORB-SLAM3 [5] supports monocular, stereo, RGB-D, and IMU sensors, and
modern systems can support a variety of camera models [5, 27, 42, 6]. Despite significant progress,
current SLAM systems lack the robustness demanded for many real-world applications. Failures
come in many forms, such as lost feature tracks, divergence in the optimization algorithm, and
accumulation of drift.
Deep learning has been proposed as a solution to many of these failure cases. Previous work
has investigated replacing hand-crafted with learned features[13, 7, 29, 26, 35], using neural 3D
representations[46, 1, 9, 45, 44, 25, 22], and combining learned energy terms with classical optimization backends[58, 57]. Other work has tried to learn SLAM or VO systems end-to-end
[59, 47, 53, 52, 46]. While these systems are sometimes more robust, they fall far short of the
accuracy of their classical counterparts on common benchmarks.
In this work we introduce DROID-SLAM, a new SLAM system based on deep learning. It has
state-of-the-art performance, outperforming existing SLAM systems, classical or learning-based, on
challenging benchmarks with very large margins. In particular, it has the following advantages:
• High Accuracy: We achieve large improvements over prior work across multiple datasets
and modalities. On the TartanAir SLAM competition [54], we reduce error by 62% over the
best prior result on the monocular track and 60% on the stereo track. We rank 1st on the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

