Neural Production Systems

Aniket Didolkar*, 1 , Anirudh Goyal *, 1 , Nan Rosemary Ke 2 , Charles Blundell 2 ,
Philippe Beaudoin 3 Nicolas Heess 2 , Michael Mozer 4, ** , Yoshua Bengio 1, **

Abstract
Visual environments are structured, consisting of distinct objects or entities. These
entities have properties—visible or latent—that determine the manner in which
they interact with one another. To partition images into entities, deep-learning researchers have proposed structural inductive biases such as slot-based architectures.
To model interactions among entities, equivariant graph neural nets (GNNs) are
used, but these are not particularly well suited to the task for two reasons. First,
GNNs do not predispose interactions to be sparse, as relationships among independent entities are likely to be. Second, GNNs do not factorize knowledge about
interactions in an entity-conditional manner. As an alternative, we take inspiration
from cognitive science and resurrect a classic approach, production systems, which
consist of a set of rule templates that are applied by binding placeholder variables in
the rules to specific entities. Rules are scored on their match to entities, and the best
fitting rules are applied to update entity properties. In a series of experiments, we
demonstrate that this architecture achieves a flexible, dynamic flow of control and
serves to factorize entity-specific and rule-based information. This disentangling of
knowledge achieves robust future-state prediction in rich visual environments, outperforming state-of-the-art methods using GNNs, and allows for the extrapolation
from simple (few object) environments to more complex environments.

1

Introduction

Despite never having taken a physics course, every child beyond a young age appreciates that pushing
a plate off the dining table will cause the plate to break. The laws of physics accurately characterize
the dynamics of our natural world, and although explicit knowledge of these laws is not necessary to
reason, we can reason explicitly about objects interacting through these laws. Humans can verbalize
knowledge in propositional expressions such as “If a plate drops from table height, it will break,” and
“If a video-game opponent approaches from behind and they are carrying a weapon, they are likely to
attack you.” Expressing propositional knowledge is not a strength of current deep learning methods
for several reasons. First, propositions are discrete and independent from one another. Second,
propositions must be quantified in the manner of first-order logic; for example, the video-game
proposition applies to any X for which X is an opponent and has a weapon. Incorporating the ability
to express and reason about propositions should improve generalization in deep learning methods
because this knowledge is modular— propositions can be formulated independently of each other—
and can therefore be acquired incrementally. Propositions can also be composed with each other and
applied consistently to all entities that match, yielding a powerful form of systematic generalization.
The classical AI literature from the 1980s can offer deep learning researchers a valuable perspective.
In this era, reasoning, planning, and prediction were handled by architectures that performed propositional inference on symbolic knowledge representations. A simple example of such an architecture is
*

Equal Contribution, ** Equal Advising 1 Mila, University of Montreal, 2 Google Deepmind, 3
Waverly, 4 Google Research, Brain Team. Corresponding authors: anirudhgoyal9119@gmail.com,
adidolkar123@gmail.com
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

