Adversarial Attacks on Black Box Video Classifiers:
Leveraging the Power of Geometric Transformations

Shasha Li∗, Abhishek Aich∗ , Shitong Zhu, M. Salman Asif, Chengyu Song,
Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy, Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
University of California, Riverside, CA, USA

Abstract
When compared to the image classification models, black-box adversarial attacks
against video classification models have been largely understudied. This could be
possible because, with video, the temporal dimension poses significant additional
challenges in gradient estimation. Query-efficient black-box attacks rely on effectively estimated gradients towards maximizing the probability of misclassifying
the target video. In this work, we demonstrate that such effective gradients can
be searched for by parameterizing the temporal structure of the search space with
geometric transformations. Specifically, we design a novel iterative algorithm Geometric TRAnsformed Perturbations (G EO -T RAP), for attacking video classification
models. G EO -T RAP employs standard geometric transformation operations to
reduce the search space for effective gradients by searching for a small group of
parameters that define these operations. This group of parameters describes the geometric progression of gradients, resulting in a reduced and structured search space.
Our algorithm inherently leads to successful perturbations with surprisingly few
queries. For example, adversarial examples generated from G EO -T RAP have better
attack success rates with ∼ 73.55% fewer queries compared to the state-of-the-art
method for video adversarial attacks on the widely used Jester dataset. Overall,
our algorithm exposes vulnerabilities of diverse video classification models and
achieves new state-of-the-art results under black-box settings on two large datasets.
Code is available here: https://github.com/sli057/Geo-TRAP

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks are designed to expose vulnerabilities of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). With
real-world applications of video classification based on DNNs emerging [1–3], a key question that
arises is “what type of adversarial inputs can mislead, and thus render video classification networks
vulnerable?” Designing such adversarial attacks not only helps expose security flaws of DNNs, but
can also potentially stimulate the design of more robust video classification models.
Adversarial attacks against image classification models have been studied in both white-box [4–8]
and black-box [9–13] settings. In the white-box setting, an adversary has full access to the model
under attack, including its parameters and training settings (hyper-parameters, training data, etc.) In
the black-box setting, an adversary only has partial information about the victim model, such as the
predicted labels of the model. In the case of video classification models, adversarial attacks in both
white-box and black-box settings have garnered some interest [14–22], although the body of work
here is more limited than the case of image classification models.
A common black-box attack paradigm is query-based, wherein the attacker can send queries to the
victim model to collect the corresponding predicted labels, and thereby estimate the gradients needed
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Shasha Li (sli057@ucr.edu)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

