Revisiting Hilbert-Schmidt Information Bottleneck
for Adversarial Robustness
Zifeng Wang∗
Northeastern University
zifengwang@ece.neu.edu
Aria Masoomi
Northeastern University
masoomi.a@northeastern.edu

Tong Jian∗
Northeastern University
jian@ece.neu.edu

Stratis Ioannidis
Northeastern University
ioannidis@ece.neu.edu

Jennifer Dy
Northeastern University
jdy@ece.neu.edu

a

Abstract
We investigate the HSIC (Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion) bottleneck as
a regularizer for learning an adversarially robust deep neural network classifier.
In addition to the usual cross-entropy loss, we add regularization terms for every
intermediate layer to ensure that the latent representations retain useful information for output prediction while reducing redundant information. We show that
the HSIC bottleneck enhances robustness to adversarial attacks both theoretically
and experimentally. In particular, we prove that the HSIC bottleneck regularizer
reduces the sensitivity of the classifier to adversarial examples. Our experiments
on multiple benchmark datasets and architectures demonstrate that incorporating
an HSIC bottleneck regularizer attains competitive natural accuracy and improves
adversarial robustness, both with and without adversarial examples during training. Our code and adversarially robust models are publicly available.2

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks [8, 17, 18, 3, 5] to deep neural networks (DNNs) have received considerable
attention recently. Such attacks are intentionally crafted to change prediction outcomes, e.g, by
adding visually imperceptible perturbations to the original, natural examples [25]. Adversarial robustness, i.e., the ability of a trained model to maintain its predictive power under such attacks, is an
important property for many safety-critical applications [4, 6, 26]. The most common approach to
construct adversarially robust models is via adversarial training [34, 36, 30], i.e., training the model
over adversarially constructed samples.
Alemi et al. [1] propose using the so-called Information Bottleneck (IB) [27, 28] to ehnance adversarial robustness. Proposed by Tishby and Zaslavsky [28], the information bottleneck expresses
a tradeoff between (a) the mutual information of the input and latent layers vs. (b) the mutual information between latent layers and the output. Alemi et al. show empirically that using IB as a
learning objective for DNNs indeed leads to better adversarial robustness. Intuitively, the IB objective increases the entropy between input and latent layers; in turn, this also increases the model’s
robustness, as it makes latent layers less sensitive to input perturbations.
Nevertheless, mutual information is notoriously expensive to compute. The Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC) has been used as a tractable, efficient substitute in a variety of machine
∗
2

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/neu-spiral/HBaR

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

