Variational Model Inversion Attacks
Kuan-Chieh Wang1,2,†
Yan Fu1
Ke Li3
Ashish Khisti1
1,2
1,2,§
Richard Zemel
Alireza Makhzani
University of Toronto1 , Vector Institute2 , Simon Fraser University3
†
§
wangkua1@cs.toronto.edu,
makhzani@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Given the ubiquity of deep neural networks, it is important that these models do not
reveal information about sensitive data that they have been trained on. In model
inversion attacks, a malicious user attempts to recover the private dataset used to
train a supervised neural network. A successful model inversion attack should
generate realistic and diverse samples that accurately describe each of the classes
in the private dataset. In this work, we provide a probabilistic interpretation of
model inversion attacks, and formulate a variational objective that accounts for
both diversity and accuracy. In order to optimize this variational objective, we
choose a variational family defined in the code space of a deep generative model,
trained on a public auxiliary dataset that shares some structural similarity with
the target dataset. Empirically, our method substantially improves performance in
terms of target attack accuracy, sample realism, and diversity on datasets of faces
and chest X-ray images.

1

Introduction

Thanks to recent advances, deep neural networks are now widely used in applications including facial
recognition [Parkhi et al., 2015], intelligent automated assistants, and personalized medicine [Consortium, 2009; Sconce et al., 2005]. Powerful deep neural networks are trained on large datasets that
could contain sensitive information about individuals. Publishers release only the trained models (e.g.,
on TensorFlow Hub [TensorFlow]), but not the original dataset to protect the privacy of individuals
whose information is in the training set. Regrettably, the published model can leak information about
the original training set [Geiping et al., 2020; Nasr et al., 2019; Shokri et al., 2017]. Attacks that
exploit such properties of machine learning models are privacy attacks [Rigaki and Garcia, 2020].
Other real-world scenarios where an attacker can access models trained on private datasets include
interaction with APIs (e.g., Amazon Rekognition [AWS]), or in the growing paradigm of federated
learning [Bonawitz et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019a], where a malicious insider can try to steal data
from other data centers [Hitaj et al., 2017]. Kaissis et al. [2020] provides an overview of how these
privacy concerns are hindering the widespread application of deep learning in the medical domain.
This paper focuses on the model inversion (MI) attack, a type of privacy attack that tries to recover the
training set given access only to a trained classifier [Chen et al., 2020; Fredrikson et al., 2015, 2014;
Hidano et al., 2017; Khosravy et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019b; Zhang et al., 2020]. The classifier
under attack is referred to as the “target classifier” (see Figure 1). An important relevant application
concerns identity recognition from face images, since facial recognition is a common approach to
biometric identification [Galbally et al., 2014; Rathgeb and Uhl, 2011]. Once an attacker successfully
reconstructs images of the faces of individuals in the private training set, they can use the stolen
identity to break into otherwise secure systems.
Early studies of MI attacks focused on attacking classifiers whose inputs are tabular data [Fredrikson
et al., 2015, 2014; Hidano et al., 2017] by directly performing inference in the input space. However,
the same methods fail when the target classifier processes high-dimensional inputs, e.g., in the above
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), held virtually.

