The best of both worlds: stochastic and adversarial
episodic MDPs with unknown transition

Tiancheng Jin
University of Southern California
tiancheng.jin@usc.edu

Longbo Huang
Tsinghua University
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
We consider the best-of-both-worlds problem for learning an episodic
√ Markov
Decision Process through T episodes, with the goal of achieving e
O( T ) regret
when the losses are adversarial and simultaneously O(polylog(T )) regret when
the losses are (almost) stochastic. Recent work by [Jin and Luo, 2020] achieves this
goal when the fixed transition is known, and leaves the case of unknown transition
as a major open question. In this work, we resolve this open problem by using the
same Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) framework together with a set of
new techniques. Specifically, we first propose a loss-shifting trick in the FTRL
analysis, which greatly simplifies the approach of [Jin and Luo, 2020] and already
improves their results for the known transition case. Then, we extend this idea
to the unknown transition case and develop a novel analysis which upper bounds
the transition estimation error by (a fraction of) the regret itself in the stochastic
setting, a key property to ensure O(polylog(T )) regret.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of learning finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with unknown
transition through T episodes. In each episode, the learner starts from a fixed initial state and repeats
the following for a fixed number of steps: select an available action, incur some loss, and transit
to the next state according to a fixed but unknown transition function. The goal of the learner is to
minimize her regret, which is the difference between her total loss and that of the optimal stationary
policy in hindsight.
When the losses are stochastically generated, [Simchowitz and Jamieson, 2019, Yang et al., 2021]
show that O(log T ) regret is achievable (ignoring dependence on some gap-dependent quantities for
simplicity). On the other hand, even when the losses
are adversarially generated, [Rosenberg and
√
Mansour, 2019a, Jin et al., 2020] show that e
O( T ) regret is achievable.1 Given that the existing
algorithms for these two worlds are substantially different, Jin and Luo [2020] asked the natural
question of whether one can achieve the best of both worlds, that is, enjoying (poly)logarithmic regret
in the stochastic world while simultaneously ensuring some worst-case robustness in the adversarial
world. Taking inspiration from the bandit literature and using the classic Follow-the-regularizedLeader (FTRL) framework with a novel regularizer, they successfully achieved this goal, albeit under
a strong restriction that the transition has to be known ahead of time. Since it is highly unclear how
1

e to hide polylogarithmic terms.
Throughout the paper, we use O(·)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

