Fast Approximation of the Sliced-Wasserstein
Distance Using Concentration of Random Projections

Kimia Nadjahi1∗, Alain Durmus2 , Pierre E. Jacob3 ,
Roland Badeau1 , Umut Şimşekli4
1: LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2: Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS,
Centre Borelli, F-91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
3: Department of Information Systems, Decision Sciences and Statistics,
ESSEC Business School, Cergy, France
4: INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale Supérieure,
PSL Research University, Paris, France

Abstract
The Sliced-Wasserstein distance (SW) is being increasingly used in machine learning applications as an alternative to the Wasserstein distance and offers significant
computational and statistical benefits. Since it is defined as an expectation over
random projections, SW is commonly approximated by Monte Carlo. We adopt a
new perspective to approximate SW by making use of the concentration of measure
phenomenon: under mild assumptions, one-dimensional projections of a highdimensional random vector are approximately Gaussian. Based on this observation,
we develop a simple deterministic approximation for SW. Our method does not
require sampling a number of random projections, and is therefore both accurate
and easy to use compared to the usual Monte Carlo approximation. We derive
nonasymptotical guarantees for our approach, and show that the approximation
error goes to zero as the dimension increases, under a weak dependence condition
on the data distribution. We validate our theoretical findings on synthetic datasets,
and illustrate the proposed approximation on a generative modeling problem.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the emergence of numerical methods inspired by optimal transport (OT)
to solve machine learning problems. In particular, Wasserstein distances are a core ingredient of OT
and define metrics between probability measures. Despite their nice theoretical properties, they are in
general computationally expensive in large-scale settings. Several workarounds that scale better to
large problems have been developed, and include the Sliced-Wasserstein distance (SW, [1, 2]).
The SW metric is a computationally cheaper alternative to Wasserstein as it exploits the analytical
form of the Wasserstein distance between univariate distributions. More precisely, consider two
random variables X and Y in Rd with respective distributions µ and ν, and denote by θ]? µ, θ]? ν the
univariate distributions of the projections of X, Y along θ ∈ Rd . SW then compares µ and ν by
computing E[W(θ]? µ, θ]? ν)], where the expectation E is taken with respect to θ uniformly distributed
on the unit sphere, and W is the Wasserstein distance.
In practice, the expectation is typically estimated by Monte Carlo: one uniformly
draws L projection

PL
−1
?
?
directions {θl }L
,
and
approximates
SW
with
L
W
(θ
)
µ,
(θ
)
ν
.
Since
the Wasserstein
l
l
l=1
]
]
i=1
∗

Corresponding author: kimia.nadjahi@telecom-paris.fr

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

