Self-Interpretable Model with Transformation
Equivariant Interpretation

Yipei Wang, Xiaoqian Wang ∗
Elmore School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wang4865@purdue.edu, joywang@purdue.edu

Abstract
With the proliferation of machine learning applications in the real world, the demand for explaining machine learning predictions continues to grow especially
in high-stakes fields. Recent studies have found that interpretation methods can
be sensitive and unreliable, where the interpretations can be disturbed by perturbations or transformations of input data. To address this issue, we propose
to learn robust interpretations through transformation equivariant regularization
in a self-interpretable model. The resulting model is capable of capturing valid
interpretations that are equivariant to geometric transformations. Moreover, since
our model is self-interpretable, it enables faithful interpretations that reflect the
true predictive mechanism. Unlike existing self-interpretable models, which usually sacrifice expressive power for the sake of interpretation quality, our model
preserves the high expressive capability comparable to the state-of-the-art deep
learning models in complex tasks, while providing visualizable and faithful highquality interpretation. We compare with various related methods and validate the
interpretation quality and consistency of our model.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) models have been a great success in various domains of applications, including
object detection, image classification, etc. However, many applications suffer from the overfitting
problem, which is usually due to the lack of various training data. For scenarios with limited data
access, data augmentation is usually applied to alleviate the overfitting problem. As one of the most
simple but effective data augmentation methods, geometric transformation plays an important role in
exploring the intrinsic visual structures of image data [44, 34]. Transformation equivariance refers
to the property that data representations learned from the model capture the intrinsic coordinates
of the entities [15], i.e., transformations on the data will result in the same transformations to the
model representations. Building transformation-equivariant DL models is desired in many kinds of
applications, such as medical image analysis [11], reinforcement learning [27], etc.
Although DL models can exert excellent performance in various tasks, DL models are usually
expressed as black boxes. Therefore, DL models can have great performance in complex tasks but
lack an explanation of the results [12]. In low-risk tasks such as adaptive email filtering, the direct
deployment of black-box models without reasoning might be acceptable. However, for high-risk
decision-making tasks such as disease diagnosis and autonomous vehicles [18], the applied model
needs to be more convincing than a black box. On the one hand, by faithfully explaining the model
behavior, it can ensure the end user intuitively understands and trusts the DL model. On the other
hand, the explanation of black-box models can provide insights into the relationship between input
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

