Model-Free Learning for
Two-Player Zero-Sum Partially Observable
Markov Games with Perfect Recall
Tadashi Kozuno∗
University of Alberta
tadashi.kozuno@gmail.com

Pierre Ménard∗
Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg
pierre.menard@ovgu.de

Rémi Munos
DeepMind Paris
munos@deepmind.com

Michal Valko
DeepMind Paris
valkom@deepmind.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a Nash equilibrium (NE) in an imperfect information game (IIG) through self-play. Precisely, we focus on two-player, zero-sum,
episodic, tabular IIG under the perfect-recall assumption where the only feedback
is realizations of the game (bandit feedback). In particular, the dynamics of the IIG
is not known—we can only access it by sampling or interacting with a game simulator. For this learning setting, we provide the Implicit Exploration Online Mirror
Descent (IXOMD) algorithm. It is a model-free algorithm
with a high-probability
√
bound on the convergence rate to the NE of order 1/ T where T is the number of
played games. Moreover, IXOMD is computationally efficient as it needs to perform
the updates only along the sampled trajectory.

1

Introduction

We study the setting of learning a Nash equilibrium (NE, Nash Jr, 1950) in an imperfect information
game (IIG, Osborne and Rubinstein, 1994). Precisely, we focus on two-player zero-sum IIG under
the perfect-recall assumption (Kuhn, 1953). Perfect recall means that the players do not forget
observations encountered or actions taken during the game. We model the game as a tabular, episodic
of horizon H, partially observable Markov game (POMG) with a state space of size S, action spaces
of size A and B for the max- and min-player respectively, and observation spaces (i.e., information
set spaces, which are partitions of the state space) of size X and Y for the max- and min-player. In
learning by self play, we control both the max and min-player. After T episodes of the game we are
asked to return a profile that is close to a NE in terms of exploitability gap (Ponsen et al., 2011).
Full feedback In case when we have perfect knowledge of the game (i.e., the transition probabilities
and rewards) there already exist several methods approximating the NE. The first line of work casts the
setting through the sequence-form representation as a linear program which can be solved efficiently
for games with moderate sizes of observation spaces X and Y (Romanovsky, 1962; von Stengel,
1996; Koller et al., 1996). The sequence-from representation allows also to cast the setting as finding
a saddle point (Hoda et al., 2010). It is then possible to adapt first-order methods such as Nesterov’s
smoothing (Nesterov, 2005) and MirrorProx (Nemirovski, 2004) to IIG, as done respectively by
Hoda et al. (2010); Kroer et al. (2018) and Kroer et al. (2015, 2020). These methods have a rate of
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

