SADGA: Structure-Aware Dual Graph Aggregation
Network for Text-to-SQL

1

Ruichu Cai1,2 , Jinjie Yuan1 , Boyan Xu1∗, Zhifeng Hao1,3
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn, yuanjinjie0320@gmail.com
hpakyim@gmail.com, zfhao@gdut.edu.cn

Abstract
The Text-to-SQL task, aiming to translate the natural language of the questions
into SQL queries, has drawn much attention recently. One of the most challenging
problems of Text-to-SQL is how to generalize the trained model to the unseen
database schemas, also known as the cross-domain Text-to-SQL task. The key
lies in the generalizability of (i) the encoding method to model the question and
the database schema and (ii) the question-schema linking method to learn the
mapping between words in the question and tables/columns in the database schema.
Focusing on the above two key issues, we propose a Structure-Aware Dual Graph
Aggregation Network (SADGA) for cross-domain Text-to-SQL. In SADGA, we
adopt the graph structure to provide a unified encoding model for both the natural
language question and database schema. Based on the proposed unified modeling,
we further devise a structure-aware aggregation method to learn the mapping
between the question-graph and schema-graph. The structure-aware aggregation
method is featured with Global Graph Linking, Local Graph Linking and DualGraph Aggregation Mechanism. We not only study the performance of our proposal
empirically but also achieved 3rd place on the challenging Text-to-SQL benchmark
Spider at the time of writing.

1

Introduction

Structured Query Language (SQL) has become the standard database query language for a long time,
but the difficulty of writing still hinders the non-professional user from using SQL. The Text-toSQL task tries to alleviate the hinders by automatically generating the SQL query from the natural
language question. With the development of deep learning technologies, Text-to-SQL has achieved
great progress recently [5, 14, 33, 29].
Many existing Text-to-SQL approaches have been proposed for particular domains, which means
that both training and inference phases are under the same database schema. However, it is hard for
database developers to build the Text-to-SQL model for each specific database from scratch because
of the high annotation cost. Therefore, cross-domain Text-to-SQL, aiming to generalize the trained
model to the unseen database schema, is proposed as a more promising solution [11, 3, 4, 27, 7,
22, 19, 6]. The core issue of cross-domain Text-to-SQL lies in building the linking between the
natural language question and database schema, well-known as the question-schema linking problem
[11, 27, 19, 17, 35].
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

