Fast Algorithms for L∞-Constrained
S-Rectangular Robust MDPs

Bahram Behzadian
University of New Hampshire
bahram@cs.unh.edu

Marek Petrik
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Chin Pang Ho
City University of Hong Kong
clint.ho@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Robust Markov decision processes (RMDPs) are a useful building block of robust
reinforcement learning algorithms but can be hard to solve. This paper proposes
a fast, exact algorithm for computing the Bellman operator for S-rectangular robust Markov decision processes with L∞ -constrained rectangular ambiguity sets.
The algorithm combines a novel homotopy continuation method with a bisection
method to solve S-rectangular ambiguity in quasi-linear time in the number of
states and actions. The algorithm improves on the cubic time required by leading
general linear programming methods. Our experimental results conﬁrm the practical viability of our method and show that it outperforms a leading commercial
optimization package by several orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) are a powerful framework for dynamic decision-making problems and reinforcement learning (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996; Puterman, 2005; Sutton and Barto,
2018). The MDP model assumes that the exact transition probabilities and rewards are available.
However, these transition probabilities are typically unknown and must be estimated from sampled
data. Such estimations are prone to errors, and the MDP’s solution is sensitive to the introduced
statistical errors. In particular, the quality of the optimal policy degrades signiﬁcantly even with
small errors in the transition probabilities (Le Tallec, 2007).
Robust MDPs (RMDPs) mitigate MDPs’ sensitivity to estimation errors by computing an optimal
policy for the worst plausible realization of the transition probabilities. This set of plausible transition probabilities is known as the ambiguity set. In this paper, we study RMDPs with S-rectangular
ambiguity sets, which can be solved in polynomial time (Hansen, Miltersen, and Zwick, 2013).
However, computing the worst-case realization of transition probabilities often requires solving a
linear program (LP) or another convex optimization problem. Modern solvers are powerful and
efﬁcient, but as the problem size grows, solving an LP for every state becomes computationally
prohibitive (Ho, Petrik, and Wiesemann, 2018).
Most prior work has focused on RMDPs with L1 -constrained ambiguity sets because both convenient concentration inequalities (Weissman et al., 2003; Petrik, Ghavamzadeh, and Chow, 2016;
Russel, Gu, and Petrik, 2019) and fast algorithms (Iyengar, 2005; Petrik and Subramanian, 2014;
Ho, Petrik, and Wiesemann, 2020) exist for this scenario. The concentration inequalities play an
important role in the data-driven construction of high-conﬁdence RMDPs. However, ambiguity sets
deﬁned by the L∞ -norm are more natural and interpretable by human modelers (Givan, Leach, and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

