Hyperparameter Optimization Is Deceiving Us,
and How to Stop It
A. Feder Cooper∗
Cornell University
afc78@cornell.edu

Yucheng Lu
Cornell University
yl2967@cornell.edu

Jessica Zosa Forde
Brown University
jforde2@cs.brown.edu

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent empirical work shows that inconsistent results based on choice of hyperparameter optimization (HPO) conﬁguration are a widespread problem in ML
research. When comparing two algorithms J and K, searching one subspace can
yield the conclusion that J outperforms K, whereas searching another can entail
the opposite. In short, the way we choose hyperparameters can deceive us. We
provide a theoretical complement to this prior work, arguing that, to avoid such
deception, the process of drawing conclusions from HPO should be made more
rigorous. We call this process epistemic hyperparameter optimization (EHPO), and
put forth a logical framework to capture its semantics and how it can lead to inconsistent conclusions about performance. Our framework enables us to prove EHPO
methods that are guaranteed to be defended against deception, given bounded
compute time budget t. We demonstrate our framework’s utility by proving and
empirically validating a defended variant of random search.

1

Introduction

Machine learning can be informally thought of as a double-loop optimization problem. The inner
loop is what is typically called training: It learns the parameters of some model by running a training
algorithm on a training set. This is usually done to minimize some training loss function via an
algorithm such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Both the inner-loop training algorithm and the
model are parameterized by a vector of hyperparameters (HPs). Unlike the learned output parameters
of a ML model, HPs are inputs provided to the learning algorithm that guide the learning process, such
as learning rate and network size. The outer-loop optimization problem is to ﬁnd HPs (from a set of
allowable HPs) that result in a trained model that performs the best in expectation on “fresh” examples
drawn from the same source as the training set, as measured by some loss or loss approximation. An
algorithm that attempts this task is called a hyperparameter optimization (HPO) procedure [12, 20].
From this setup comes the natural question: How do we pick the subspace for the HPO procedure to
search over? The HPO search space is enormous, suffering from the curse of dimensionality; training,
which is also expensive, has to be run for each HP conﬁguration tested. Thus, we have to make hard
choices. With limited compute resources, we typically pick a small subspace of possible HPs and
perform grid search or random search over that subspace. This involves comparing the empirical
performance of the resulting trained models, and then reporting on the model that performs best in
∗

Corresponding author: https://cacioepe.pe

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

