The Semi-Random Satisfaction of Voting Axioms

Lirong Xia
RPI, Troy, NY 12180, USA
xialirong@gmail.com

Abstract
We initiate the work towards a comprehensive picture of the worst average-case
satisfaction of voting axioms in semi-random models, to provide a finer and more
realistic foundation for comparing voting rules. We adopt the semi-random model
and formulation in [54], where an adversary chooses arbitrarily correlated “ground
truth” preferences for the agents, on top of which random noises are added. We
focus on characterizing the semi-random satisfaction of two well-studied voting
axioms: Condorcet criterion and participation. We prove that for any fixed number of alternatives, when the number of voters n is sufficiently large, the semirandom satisfaction of the Condorcet criterion under a wide range of voting rules
is 1, 1 − exp(−Θ(n)), Θ(n−0.5 ), exp(−Θ(n)), or being Θ(1) and 1 − Θ(1) at the
same time; and the semi-random satisfaction of participation is 1−Θ(n−0.5 ). Our
results address open questions by Berg and Lepelley [3] in 1994, and also confirm
the following high-level message: the Condorcet criterion is a bigger concern than
participation under realistic models.

1

Introduction

The “widespread presence of impossibility results” [48] is one of the most fundamental and significant challenges in social choice theory. These impossibility results often assert that no “perfect”
voting rule exists for three or more alternatives [1, 28, 45]. Nevertheless, an (imperfect) voting rule
must be designed and used in practice for agents to make a collective decision. In the social choice
literature, the dominant paradigm of doing so has been the axiomatic approach, i.e., voting rules
are designed, evaluated, and compared to each other w.r.t. their satisfaction of desirable normative
properties, known as (voting) axioms.
Most definitions of dissatisfaction of voting axioms are based on worst-case analysis. For example,
a voting rule r does not satisfy C ONDORCET C RITERION (CC for short), if there exists a collection
of votes, called a profile, where the Condorcet winner exists but is not chosen by r as a winner. The
Condorcet winner is the alternative who beats all other alternatives in their head-to-head competitions. As another example, a voting rule r does not satisfy PARTICIPATION (PAR for short), if there
exists a profile and a voter who has incentive to abstain from voting. An instance of dissatisfaction
of PAR is also known as the no-show paradox [19]. Unfortunately, when the number of alternatives
m is at least four, no irresolute voting rule satisfies CC and PAR simultaneously [39].
While the classical worst-case analysis of (dis)satisfaction of axioms can be desirable in high-stakes
applications such as political elections, it is often too coarse to serve as practical criteria for comparing different voting rules in more frequent, low-stakes applications of social choice, such as business
decision-making [5], crowdsourcing [34], informational retrieval [33], meta-search engines [14],
recommender systems [51], etc. A decision maker who desires both axioms would find it hard to
choose between a voting rule that satisfies CC but not PAR, such as Copeland, and a voting rule that
satisfies PAR but not CC, such as plurality. A finer and more quantitative measure of satisfaction of
axioms is therefore called for.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

