Improving Conditional Coverage via Orthogonal
Quantile Regression

Shai Feldman
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
shai.feldman@cs.technion.ac.il

Stephen Bates
Departments of Statistics and of EECS
UC Berkeley
stephenbates@cs.berkeley.edu

Yaniv Romano
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
yromano@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We develop a method to generate prediction intervals that have a user-specified
coverage level across all regions of feature-space, a property called conditional
coverage. A typical approach to this task is to estimate the conditional quantiles
with quantile regression—it is well-known that this leads to correct coverage in the
large-sample limit, although it may not be accurate in finite samples. We find in
experiments that traditional quantile regression can have poor conditional coverage.
To remedy this, we modify the loss function to promote independence between
the size of the intervals and the indicator of a miscoverage event. For the true
conditional quantiles, these two quantities are independent (orthogonal), so the
modified loss function continues to be valid. Moreover, we empirically show that
the modified loss function leads to improved conditional coverage, as evaluated
by several metrics. We also introduce two new metrics that check conditional
coverage by looking at the strength of the dependence between the interval size
and the indicator of miscoverage.

1

Introduction

Learning algorithms are increasingly prevalent within consequential real-world systems, where
reliability is an essential consideration: confidently deploying learning algorithms requires more than
high prediction accuracy in controlled testbeds [1, 2]. Consider, for example, estimating the effects of
a drug for a specific person given their demographic information and medical measurements. In such
a high-stakes setting, giving a point prediction for the drug’s effect is insufficient; the decision-maker
must know what the plausible range of effects for this specific individual. Instance-wise uncertainty
quantification in such settings is critical [3–5]. One approach to this problem comes from the quantile
regression and prediction interval literature [6–8]; instead of a point prediction, we can return a
range of outcomes that represent the plausible response for a given input. We would like these
prediction intervals to achieve a pre-specified coverage level (e.g., 90%) for all inputs—that is, across
all regions of feature space. Training models to satisfy this validity guarantee is challenging, however,
particularly with complex models like neural networks [9, 10]. In this work, we show how to generate
prediction intervals that achieve coverage closer to the desired level evenly across all sub-populations.
Technically, we achieve this by augmenting the quantile regression loss function with an additional
term that promotes appropriately balanced coverage across the feature space.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

