What’s a good imputation to predict with missing
values?
Marine Le Morvan1,2 Julie Josse4

Erwan Scornet3 Gaël Varoquaux1

1

Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, 91120, France
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS/IN2P3, IJCLab, 91405 Orsay, France
3
CMAP, UMR7641, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris, 91128 Palaiseau, France
4
Inria Sophia-Antipolis, Montpellier, France
2

{marine.le-morvan, julie.josse, gael.varoquaux}@inria.fr
erwan.scornet@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
How to learn a good predictor on data with missing values? Most efforts focus
on first imputing as well as possible and second learning on the completed data to
predict the outcome. Yet, this widespread practice has no theoretical grounding.
Here we show that for almost all imputation functions, an impute-then-regress
procedure with a powerful learner is Bayes optimal. This result holds for all
missing-values mechanisms, in contrast with the classic statistical results that
require missing-at-random settings to use imputation in probabilistic modeling.
Moreover, it implies that perfect conditional imputation is not needed for good
prediction asymptotically. In fact, we show that on perfectly imputed data the
best regression function will generally be discontinuous, which makes it hard
to learn. Crafting instead the imputation so as to leave the regression function
unchanged simply shifts the problem to learning discontinuous imputations. Rather,
we suggest that it is easier to learn imputation and regression jointly. We propose
such a procedure, adapting NeuMiss, a neural network capturing the conditional
links across observed and unobserved variables whatever the missing-value pattern.
Experiments confirm that joint imputation and regression through NeuMiss is better
than various two step procedures in our experiments with finite number of samples.

1

Introduction

Data with missing values are ubiquitous in many applications, as in health or business: some
observations come with missing features. There is a rich statistical literature on imputation as well
as inference with missing values [Rubin, 1976, Little and Rubin, 1987, 2002, 2019]. Most of the
theory and practices build upon the Missing At Random (MAR) assumption that allows to maximize
the likelihood of observed data while ignoring the missing-values mechanism, for instance using
expectation maximization [Dempster et al., 1977]. On the contrary, Missing Not At Random settings,
where missingness depends on the unobserved values, may not be identifiable and require dedicated
methods with a model of the missing-values mechanism.
Learning predictive models with missing values poses distinct challenges compared to inference
tasks [Josse et al., 2019]. Indeed, when the input is an arbitrary subset of variables in dimension d,
there are 2d potential missing data patterns and as many sub-models to learn. Consequently, even
simple data-generating mechanisms lead to complex decision rules [Le Morvan et al., 2020b]. To
date, there are few supervised-learning models natively suited for partially-observed data. A notable
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

