Analysis of Sensing Spectral for Signal Recovery
Under a Generalized Linear Model
Junjie Ma
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science
Chinese Academy of Sciences
majunjie@lsec.cc.ac.cn

Ji Xu
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
jixu@cs.columbia.edu

Arian Maleki
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
arian@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider a nonlinear inverse problem y = f (Ax), where observations y ∈ Rm
are the componentwise nonlinear transformation of Ax ∈ Rm , x ∈ Rn is the
signal of interest and A is a known linear mapping. By properly specifying the
nonlinear processing function, this model can be particularized to many signal
processing problems, including compressed sensing and phase retrieval.
Our main goal in this paper is to understand the impact of sensing matrices, or more
specifically the spectrum of sensing matrices, on the difficulty of recovering x
from y. Towards this goal, we study the performance of one of the most successful
recovery methods, i.e. the expectation propagation algorithm (EP). We define a
notion for the spikiness of the spectrum of A and show the importance of this
measure in the performance of the EP. Whether the spikiness of the spectrum can
hurt or help the recovery performance of EP depends on f . We define certain
quantities based on the function f that enables us to describe the impact of the
spikiness of the spectrum on EP recovery. Based on our framework, we are able to
show that for instance, in phase-retrieval problems, matrices with spikier spectrums
are better for EP, while in 1-bit compressed sensing problems, less spiky (flatter)
spectrums offer better recoveries. Our results unify and substantially generalize the
existing results that compare sub-Gaussian and orthogonal matrices, and provide a
platform toward designing optimal sensing systems.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem statement and contributions

Consider the problem of estimating a signal x ∈ Rn from the nonlinear measurements:

y = f Ax ,

(1)

where A ∈ Rm×n is a measurement (or sensing) matrix and f : R 7→ Y is a function accounting
for possible nonlinear effect of the measuring process. Here, the function f (·) is applied to Ax
in a component-wise manner. The above model arises in many applications of signal processing
[13, 10, 41], communications [56, 9, 25], and machine learning [48, 40]. For instance, the phase
retrieval problem, which is a special case of (1) with f (z) = |z|, has received significant interest
in recent years [13, 12, 15, 54, 60, 24, 26, 4, 46, 32, 5]. In this paper, we assume that the signal is
generic and prior information such as sparsity is not explored.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

