The Inductive Bias of Quantum Kernels
Jonas M. Kübler∗
Simon Buchholz∗
Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
{jmkuebler, sbuchholz, bs}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
It has been hypothesized that quantum computers may lend themselves well to
applications in machine learning. In the present work, we analyze function classes
defined via quantum kernels. Quantum computers offer the possibility to efficiently
compute inner products of exponentially large density operators that are classically
hard to compute. However, having an exponentially large feature space renders
the problem of generalization hard. Furthermore, being able to evaluate inner
products in high dimensional spaces efficiently by itself does not guarantee a
quantum advantage, as already classically tractable kernels can correspond to highor infinite-dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS).
We analyze the spectral properties of quantum kernels and find that we can expect
an advantage if their RKHS is low dimensional and contains functions that are
hard to compute classically. If the target function is known to lie in this class, this
implies a quantum advantage, as the quantum computer can encode this inductive
bias, whereas there is no classically efficient way to constrain the function class in
the same way. However, we show that finding suitable quantum kernels is not easy
because the kernel evaluation might require exponentially many measurements.
In conclusion, our message is a somewhat sobering one: we conjecture that quantum machine learning models can offer speed-ups only if we manage to encode
knowledge about the problem at hand into quantum circuits, while encoding the
same bias into a classical model would be hard. These situations may plausibly
occur when learning on data generated by a quantum process, however, they appear
to be harder to come by for classical datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years, much attention has been dedicated to studies of how small and noisy quantum devices
[1] could be used for near term applications to showcase the power of quantum computers. Besides
fundamental demonstrations [2], potential applications that have been discussed are in quantum
chemistry [3], discrete optimization [4] and machine learning (ML) [5–12].
Initiated by the seminal HHL algorithm [13], early work in quantum machine learning (QML) was
focused on speeding up linear algebra subroutines, commonly used in ML, offering the perspective
of a runtime logarithmic in the problem size [14–17]. However, most of these works have an inverse
polynomial scaling of the runtime in the error and it was shown rigorously by Ciliberto
et al. [18]
√
that due to the quantum √
mechanical measurement process a runtime complexity O( n) is necessary
for convergence rate 1/ n.
Rather than speeding up linear algebra subroutines, we focus on more recent suggestions that use a
quantum device to define and implement the function class and do the optimization on a classical
computer. There are two ways to that: the first are so-called Quantum Neural Networks (QNN) or
∗

JMK and SB contributed equally and are ordered randomly.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

