Optimality and Stability in Federated Learning:
A Game-theoretic Approach
Kate Donahue
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
kdonahue@cs.cornell.edu

Jon Kleinberg
Departments of Computer Science
and Information Science
Cornell University
kleinber@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Federated learning is a distributed learning paradigm where multiple agents, each
only with access to local data, jointly learn a global model. There has recently been
an explosion of research aiming not only to improve the accuracy rates of federated
learning, but also provide certain guarantees around social good properties such as
total error. One branch of this research has taken a game-theoretic approach, and
in particular, prior work has viewed federated learning as a hedonic game, where
error-minimizing players arrange themselves into federating coalitions. This past
work proves the existence of stable coalition partitions, but leaves open a wide
range of questions, including how far from optimal these stable solutions are. In
this work, we motivate and define a notion of optimality given by the average error
rates among federating agents (players). First, we provide and prove the correctness
of an efficient algorithm to calculate an optimal (error minimizing) arrangement
of players. Next, we analyze the relationship between the stability and optimality
of an arrangement. First, we show that for some regions of parameter space, all
stable arrangements are optimal (Price of Anarchy equal to 1). However, we show
this is not true for all settings: there exist examples of stable arrangements with
higher cost than optimal (Price of Anarchy greater than 1). Finally, we give the first
constant-factor bound on the performance gap between stability and optimality,
proving that the total error of the worst stable solution can be no higher than 9
times the total error of an optimal solution (Price of Anarchy bound of 9).

1

Introduction

Recent advances of machine learning techniques has made it possible to apply powerful prediction
algorithms to a variety of domains. However, in real-world situations, data is often distributed across
multiple locations and cannot be combined to a central repository for training. For example, consider
patient medical data located at hospitals or student educational data at different schools. In each case,
the individual agents (hospitals or schools) who hold the data wish to find a model that minimizes
their error. However, the data at each location may be insufficient to train a robust model. Instead, the
agents may prefer to build a model using data from multiple agents: multiple hospitals or schools.
Collectively, the combined data may be able to produce a model with much higher accuracy, providing
more powerful predictions to each agent and increasing overall welfare. However, it may be infeasible
to transfer the data to some coordinating entity to build a global model: privacy, data size, and data
format are all possible reasons that would make transferring data not a reasonable solution.
Federated learning is a novel distributed learning paradigm that aims to solve this problem (McMahan
et al. [2016]). Data remains at separate local sites, which individual agents use to learn local model
parameters or parameter updates. Then, only the parameters are transferred to the coordinating entity
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

