Improving Anytime Prediction
with Parallel Cascaded Networks
and a Temporal-Difference Loss
Michael L. Iuzzolino
Google Research, Brain Team
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado
Michael C. Mozer
Google Research, Brain Team
Samy Bengio
Google Research, Brain Teamú

Abstract
Although deep feedforward neural networks share some characteristics with
the primate visual system, a key distinction is their dynamics. Deep nets
typically operate in serial stages wherein each layer completes its computation before processing begins in subsequent layers. In contrast, biological
systems have cascaded dynamics: information propagates from neurons at
all layers in parallel but transmission occurs gradually over time, leading
to speed-accuracy trade offs even in feedforward architectures. We explore
the consequences of biologically inspired parallel hardware by constructing
cascaded ResNets in which each residual block has propagation delays but
all blocks update in parallel in a stateful manner. Because information transmitted through skip connections avoids delays, the functional depth of the
architecture increases over time, yielding anytime predictions that improve
with internal-processing time. We introduce a temporal-difference training
loss that achieves a strictly superior speed-accuracy profile over standard
losses and enables the cascaded architecture to outperform state-of-the-art
anytime-prediction methods. The cascaded architecture has intriguing properties, including: it classifies typical instances more rapidly than atypical
instances; it is more robust to both persistent and transient noise than is a
conventional ResNet; and its time-varying output trace provides a signal
that can be exploited to improve information processing and inference.
Since the earliest investigations of artificial neural nets, their design has been informed by
biological neural nets [37]. Perhaps the most compelling example is the convolutional net for
machine vision, which has adopted properties of primate cortical neuroanatomy including
a hierarchical layered organization, local receptive fields, and spatial equivariance [12]. In
this article, we investigate computational consequences of two fundamental properties of
biological information processing systems that have not been considered in the design of
deep neural nets. First, the brain consists of massively parallel, dedicated hardware with
neurons throughout the cortex updating continuously and simultaneously. Second, information
transmission between neurons introduces time delays [1]. As a result, unrefined and possibly
ú

Currently at Apple.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

