Deceive D: Adaptive Pseudo Augmentation for
GAN Training with Limited Data

Liming Jiang1
Bo Dai1
Wayne Wu2
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{liming002, bo.dai, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

2

Chen Change Loy1∗
SenseTime Research

wuwenyan@sensetime.com

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) typically require ample data for training in order to synthesize high-fidelity images. Recent studies have shown that
training GANs with limited data remains formidable due to discriminator overfitting, the underlying cause that impedes the generator’s convergence. This paper
introduces a novel strategy called Adaptive Pseudo Augmentation (APA) to encourage healthy competition between the generator and the discriminator. As an
alternative method to existing approaches that rely on standard data augmentations
or model regularization, APA alleviates overfitting by employing the generator
itself to augment the real data distribution with generated images, which deceives
the discriminator adaptively. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of APA in improving synthesis quality in the low-data regime. We provide a
theoretical analysis to examine the convergence and rationality of our new training
strategy. APA is simple and effective. It can be added seamlessly to powerful
contemporary GANs, such as StyleGAN2, with negligible computational cost.
Code: https://github.com/EndlessSora/DeceiveD.

1

Introduction

While state-of-the-art GANs like StyleGAN2 [20] are constantly pushing forward the fidelity and
resolution of synthesized images, they usually require a large amount of training data to fully unleash
their power. Training GANs with insufficient data tend to generate poor-quality images, as shown in
Figure 1. Collecting sufficient data samples for these GANs is sometimes infeasible, especially in
domains where data are sparse and privacy-sensitive. To ease the practical deployment of powerful
GANs, it is necessary to devise new strategies for training GANs with limited data while preserving
the quality of synthesis.
Recent studies have shown that the overfitting of the discriminator is the critical reason that impedes
effective GAN training on limited data [2, 18, 50, 42], rendering severe instability of training
dynamics. Specifically, when the discriminator starts to overfit, the distributions of its outputs for real
and generated samples gradually diverge from each other [18, 42], and its feedback to the generator
becomes less informative. Consequently, the generator converges to an inferior point, compromising
the quality of synthesized images. Recent solutions to this problem include the use of standard data
augmentations, either conventional or differentiable, to real and generated images [18, 50, 52, 41] or
applying an additional model regularization term [42]. Addressing the discriminator overfitting is still
an open problem. We are interested in finding an alternative way to the aforementioned approaches.
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective way to regularize a discriminator without introducing
any external augmentations or regularization terms. We call our method Adaptive Pseudo Augmentation (APA). In contrast to previous standard data augmentations [18, 50, 52, 41], we exploit the
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

