Improved Analysis and Rates for Variance Reduction
under Without-replacement Sampling Orders

Xinmeng Huang∗
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
xinmengh@sas.upenn.edu

Kun Yuan∗
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Bellevue, WA 98004
kun.yuan@alibaba-inc.com

Xianghui Mao
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
xianghui.xh.mao@gmail.com

Wotao Yin
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Bellevue, WA 98004
wotao.yin@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
When applying a stochastic algorithm, one must choose an order to draw samples.
The practical choices are without-replacement sampling orders, which are empirically faster and more cache-friendly than uniform-iid-sampling but often have
inferior theoretical guarantees. Without-replacement sampling is well understood
only for SGD without variance reduction. In this paper, we will improve the
convergence analysis and rates of variance reduction under without-replacement
sampling orders for composite finite-sum minimization.
Our results are in two-folds. First, we develop a damped variant of Finito called
Prox-DFinito and establish its convergence rates with random reshuffling, cyclic
sampling, and shuffling-once, under both convex and strongly convex scenarios.
These rates match full-batch gradient descent and are state-of-the-art compared
to the existing results for without-replacement sampling with variance-reduction.
Second, our analysis can gauge how the cyclic order will influence the rate of cyclic
sampling and, thus, allows us to derive the optimal fixed ordering. In the highly
data-heterogeneous scenario, Prox-DFinito with optimal cyclic sampling can attain
a sample-size-independent convergence rate, which, to our knowledge, is the first
result that can match with uniform-iid-sampling with variance reduction. We also
propose a practical method to discover the optimal cyclic ordering numerically.

1

Introduction

We study the finite-sum composite optimization problem
n

min F (x) + r(x) and F (x) =

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x).
n i=1

(1)

where each fi (x) is differentiable and convex, and the regularization function r(x) is convex but not
necessarily differentiable. This formulation arises in many problems in machine learning [34, 39, 14],
distributed optimization [20, 3, 19], and signal processing [4, 9].
The leading methods to solve (1) are first-order algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
[28, 2] and stochastic variance-reduced methods [14, 6, 7, 17, 10, 32]. In the implementation of
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: Kun Yuan

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

