Disentangling the Roles of Curation,
Data-Augmentation and the Prior in the
Cold Posterior Effect
Lorenzo Noci∗
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Kevin Roth∗
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Gregor Bachmann∗
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

lorenzo.noci@inf.ethz.ch

kevin.roth@inf.ethz.ch

gregor.bachmann@inf.ethz.ch

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Thomas Hofmann
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Sebastian.Nowozin@microsoft.com

thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The “cold posterior effect” (CPE) in Bayesian deep learning describes the uncomforting observation that the predictive performance of Bayesian neural networks
can be significantly improved if the Bayes posterior is artificially sharpened using
a temperature parameter T < 1. The CPE is problematic in theory and practice
and since the effect was identified many researchers have proposed hypotheses
to explain the phenomenon. However, despite this intensive research effort the
effect remains poorly understood. In this work we provide novel and nuanced
evidence relevant to existing explanations for the cold posterior effect, disentangling three hypotheses: 1. The dataset curation hypothesis of Aitchison (2020):
we show empirically that the CPE does not arise in a real curated data set but can
be produced in a controlled experiment with varying curation strength. 2. The
data augmentation hypothesis of Izmailov et al. (2021) and Fortuin et al. (2021):
we show empirically that data augmentation is sufficient but not necessary for
the CPE to be present. 3. The bad prior hypothesis of Wenzel et al. (2020): we
use a simple experiment evaluating the relative importance of the prior and the
likelihood, strongly linking the CPE to the prior. Our results demonstrate how the
CPE can arise in isolation from synthetic curation, data augmentation, and bad
priors. Cold posteriors observed “in the wild” are therefore unlikely to arise from a
single simple cause; as a result, we do not expect a simple “fix” for cold posteriors.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved great success in predictive accuracy for supervised learning tasks.
Unfortunately, however, they still fall short in giving useful estimates of their predictive uncertainty,
i.e. meaningful confidence values for how certain the model is about its predictions (Ovadia et al.,
2019). Quantifying uncertainty is especially crucial in real-world settings, which often involve data
distributions that are shifted from the one seen during training (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009).
Bayesian deep learning combines deep learning with Bayesian probability theory. Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) learn a distribution over model parameters or equivalently sample an ensemble of
likely models given the data, promising better generalization performance and principled uncertainty
quantification (robust predictions) (Neal, 1995; MacKay, 1992; Dayan et al., 1995).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

