Imitation with Neural Density Models
Kuno Kim1 , Akshat Jindal1 , Yang Song1 , Jiaming Song1 , Yanan Sui2 , Stefano Ermon1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
NELN, School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University
Contact: khkim@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a new framework for Imitation Learning (IL) via density estimation of
the expert’s occupancy measure followed by Maximum Occupancy Entropy Reinforcement Learning (RL) using the density as a reward. Our approach maximizes a
non-adversarial model-free RL objective that provably lower bounds reverse Kullback–Leibler divergence between occupancy measures of the expert and imitator.
We present a practical IL algorithm, Neural Density Imitation (NDI), which obtains
state-of-the-art demonstration efficiency on benchmark control tasks.

1

Introduction

Imitation Learning (IL) algorithms aim to learn optimal behavior by mimicking expert demonstrations.
Perhaps the simplest IL method is Behavioral Cloning (BC) (Pomerleau, 1991) which ignores the
dynamics of the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP) that generated the demonstrations, and
treats IL as a supervised learning problem of predicting optimal actions given states. Prior work
showed that if the learned policy incurs a small BC loss, the worst case performance gap between the
expert and imitator grows quadratically with the number of decision steps (Ross & Bagnell, 2010;
Ross et al., 2011a). The crux of their argument is that policies that are "close" as measured by BC loss
can induce disastrously different distributions over states when deployed in the environment. One
family of solutions to mitigating such compounding errors is Interactive IL (Guo et al., 2014; Ross
et al., 2011b, 2013), which involves running the imitator’s policy and collecting corrective actions
from an interactive expert. However, interactive expert queries are expensive and seldom available.
Another family of approaches (Fu et al., 2017; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Ke et al., 2020; Kim & Park,
2018; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2017) that have gained much traction is to directly minimize
a statistical distance between state-action distributions induced by policies of the expert and imitator,
i.e the occupancy measures ⇢⇡E and ⇢⇡✓ . As ⇢⇡✓ is an implicit distribution induced by the policy and
environment1 , distribution matching with ⇢⇡✓ typically requires likelihood-free methods involving
sampling. Sampling from ⇢⇡✓ entails running the imitator policy in the environment, which was
not required by BC. While distribution matching IL requires additional access to an environment
simulator, it has been shown to drastically improve demonstration efficiency, i.e the number of
demonstrations needed to succeed at IL (Ho & Ermon, 2016). A wide suite of distribution matching
IL algorithms use adversarial methods to match ⇢⇡✓ and ⇢⇡E , which requires alternating between
reward (discriminator) and policy (generator) updates (Fu et al., 2017; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Ke et al.,
2020; Kim et al., 2019; Kostrikov et al., 2020). A key drawback to such Adversarial Imitation
Learning (AIL) methods is that they inherit the instability of alternating min-max optimization
(Miyato et al., 2018; Salimans et al., 2016) which is generally not guaranteed to converge (Jin et al.,
2019). Furthermore, this instability is exacerbated in the IL setting where generator updates involve
high-variance policy optimization and leads to sub-optimal demonstration efficiency. To alleviate this
instability, (Brantley et al., 2020; Reddy et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019) have proposed to do RL with
fixed heuristic rewards. Wang et al. (2019), for example, uses a heuristic reward that estimates the
1

we assume only samples can be taken from the environment dynamics and its density is unknown

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

