Accumulative Poisoning Attacks on Real-time Data

Tianyu Pang∗1 , Xiao Yang∗1 , Yinpeng Dong1,2 , Hang Su1,3 , Jun Zhu†1,2,3
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University 2 RealAI
3
Tsinghua University-China Mobile Communications Group Co., Ltd. Joint Institute
1

{pty17,yangxiao19,dyp17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {suhangss,dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Collecting training data from untrusted sources exposes machine learning services
to poisoning adversaries, who maliciously manipulate training data to degrade the
model accuracy. When trained on offline datasets, poisoning adversaries have to
inject the poisoned data in advance before training, and the order of feeding these
poisoned batches into the model is stochastic. In contrast, practical systems are
more usually trained/fine-tuned on sequentially captured real-time data, in which
case poisoning adversaries could dynamically poison each data batch according to
the current model state. In this paper, we focus on the real-time settings and propose
a new attacking strategy, which affiliates an accumulative phase with poisoning
attacks to secretly (i.e., without affecting accuracy) magnify the destructive effect of
a (poisoned) trigger batch. By mimicking online learning and federated learning on
MNIST and CIFAR-10, we show that model accuracy significantly drops by a single
update step on the trigger batch after the accumulative phase. Our work validates
that a well-designed but straightforward attacking strategy can dramatically amplify
the poisoning effects, with no need to explore complex techniques.

1

Introduction

In practice, machine learning services usually collect their training data from the outside world, and
automate the training processes. However, untrusted data sources leave the services vulnerable to
poisoning attacks [5, 28], where adversaries can inject malicious training data to degrade model
accuracy. To this end, early studies mainly focus on poisoning offline datasets [36, 45, 46, 65],
where the poisoned training batches are fed into models in an unordered manner, due to the usage of
stochastic algorithms (e.g., SGD). In this setting, poisoning operations are executed before training,
and adversaries are not allowed to intervene anymore after training begins.
On the other hand, recent work studies a more practical scene of poisoning real-time data streaming [63, 66], where the model is updated on user feedback or newly captured images. In this case, the
adversaries can interact with the training process, and dynamically poison the data batches according
to the model states. What’s more, collaborative paradigms like federated learning [30] share the model
with distributed clients, which facilitates white-box accessibility to model parameters. To alleviate
the threat of poisoning attacks, several defenses have been proposed, which aim to detect and filter
out poisoned data via influence functions or feature statistics [6, 11, 17, 53, 57]. However, to timely
update the model on real-time data streaming, on-device applications like facial recognition [62]
and automatic driving [68], large-scale services like recommendation systems [24] may use some
heuristic detection strategies (e.g., monitoring the accuracy or recall) to save computation [32].
In this paper, we show that in real-time data streaming, the negative effect of a poisoned or even clean
data batch can be amplified by an accumulative phase, where a single update step can break down the
model from 82.09% accuracy to 27.66%, as shown in our simulation experiments on CIFAR-10 [31]
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

