Self-Supervised Learning Disentangled Group
Representation as Feature

Tan Wang1
1

Zhongqi Yue1,3

Jianqiang Huang1,3

Qianru Sun2

Hanwang Zhang1

Nanyang Technological University 2 Singapore Management University 3 Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
{tan317,yuez0003,hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com
qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
A good visual representation is an inference map from observations (images) to
features (vectors) that faithfully reflects the hidden modularized generative factors
(semantics). In this paper, we formulate the notion of “good” representation from a
group-theoretic view using Higgins’ definition of disentangled representation [40],
and show that existing Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) only disentangles simple
augmentation features such as rotation and colorization, thus unable to modularize
the remaining semantics. To break the limitation, we propose an iterative SSL
algorithm: Iterative Partition-based Invariant Risk Minimization (IP-IRM), which
successfully grounds the abstract semantics and the group acting on them into
concrete contrastive learning. At each iteration, IP-IRM first partitions the training
samples into two subsets that correspond to an entangled group element. Then,
it minimizes a subset-invariant contrastive loss, where the invariance guarantees
to disentangle the group element. We prove that IP-IRM converges to a fully
disentangled representation and show its effectiveness on various benchmarks.
Codes are available at https://github.com/Wangt-CN/IP-IRM.

1

Introduction
𝒖𝒖 =“red”

𝒈𝒈 ⋅ 𝒖𝒖 =“green”

Deep learning is all about learning feature representa𝒈𝒈 𝒖𝒖
U
U
tions [5]. Compared to the conventional end-to-end supercolor × digit
color × digit
vised learning, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) first learns
𝝋𝝋
𝝋𝝋
a generic feature representation (e.g., a network backbone)
by training with unsupervised pretext tasks such as the preI
I
vailing contrastive objective [36, 16], and then the above
𝒇𝒇
𝒇𝒇
stage-1 feature is expected to serve various stage-2 applications with proper fine-tuning. SSL for visual represen𝝓𝝓
𝝓𝝓
tation is so fascinating that it is the first time that we can
X
X
obtain “good” visual features for free, just like the trending
color × digit
𝒈𝒈 𝒙𝒙 color × digit
pre-training in NLP community [26, 8]. However, most
green digit 0
red
digit 0
SSL works only care how much stage-2 performance an
SSL feature can improve, but overlook what feature SSL
is learning, why it can be learned, what cannot be learned,
Figure 1: Disentangled representation is an
what the gap between SSL and Supervised Learning (SL) equivariant map between the semantic space
is, and when SSL can surpass SL?
U and the vector space X , which is decomThe crux of answering those questions is to formally un- posed into “color” and “digit”.
derstand what a feature representation is and what a good
one is. We postulate the classic world model of visual generation and feature representation [1, 69]
as in Figure 1. Let U be a set of (unseen) semantics, e.g., attributes such as “digit” and “color”. There
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

