Representing Hyperbolic Space Accurately using
Multi-Component Floats

Tao Yu
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
tyu@cs.cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Hyperbolic space is particularly useful for embedding data with hierarchical structure; however, representing hyperbolic space with ordinary floating-point numbers
greatly affects the performance due to its ineluctable numerical errors. Simply
increasing the precision of floats fails to solve the problem and incurs a high computation cost for simulating greater-than-double-precision floats on hardware such
as GPUs, which does not support them. In this paper, we propose a simple, feasibleon-GPUs, and easy-to-understand solution for numerically accurate learning on
hyperbolic space. We do this with a new approach to represent hyperbolic space
using multi-component floating-point (MCF) in the Poincaré upper-half space
model. Theoretically and experimentally we show our model has small numerical
error, and on embedding tasks across various datasets, models represented by
multi-component floating-points gain more capacity and run significantly faster on
GPUs than prior work.

1

Introduction

Representation learning is of particular interest nowadays in machine learning. Real-world data is
often discrete—such as natural language sentences in the form of syntax trees and graphs [7, 22]—
which makes it critical to do a good job of representing and storing them as numbers which we
can better understand and deal with. Perhaps the most common way of doing this representation
is with embedding, in which discrete objects are assigned points in some continuous (typically
high-dimensional Euclidean) space. Standard embeddings in NLP include Word2Vec [24] and GloVe
[30]. However, many kinds of real-world data are hierarchical or graph-like [25], in which case
embedding into non-Euclidean space can outperform the standard Euclidean embedding. Hyperbolic
space is such an embedding target of particular interest, showing impressive performance on many
tasks such as taxonomies, link prediction and inferring concept hierarchies [27, 28, 15].
Hyperbolic space [9] is helpful for many types of embeddings because of its constant negative
curvature, as distinguished from Euclidean space with zero curvature. This negative-curvature
geometry endows hyperbolic space with many useful properties not present in Euclidean space. For
example, the volume of a ball in even two-dimensional hyperbolic space increases exponentially with
respect to the radius, as shown in [9], as a contrast to the polynomial rate at which balls grow in
Euclidean space. This makes it possible to embed more instances in the hyperbolic ball than Euclidean
ball with the same radius, making it ideal for structures like trees where the number of objects at
a distance d from any given object can grow exponentially with d. Reasoning from this intuition,
the hyperbolic space “looks like” a finite-degree tree and can be regarded as a continuous version of
trees [6]. The combination of low dimension (which facilitates learning) with high volume (which
increases representational capacity) makes hyperbolic space inherently well-suited for embedding
hierarchical structures data like trees and graphs.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

