Training Neural Networks is ∃R-complete

Mikkel Abrahamsen
University of Copenhagen
miab@di.ku.dk

Linda Kleist
Technische Universtität Braunschweig
kleist@ibr.cs.tu-bs.de

Tillmann Miltzow
Utrecht University
t.miltzow@uu.nl

Abstract
Given a neural network, training data, and a threshold, finding weights for the
neural network such that the total error is below the threshold is known to be
NP-hard. We determine the algorithmic complexity of this fundamental problem
precisely, by showing that it is ∃R-complete. This means that the problem is
equivalent, up to polynomial time reductions, to deciding whether a system of
polynomial equations and inequalities with integer coefficients and real unknowns
has a solution. If, as widely expected, ∃R is strictly larger than NP, our work
implies that the problem of training neural networks is not even in NP.
Neural networks are usually trained using some variation of backpropagation.
The result of this paper offers an explanation why techniques commonly used to
solve big instances of NP-complete problems seem not to be of use for this task.
Examples of such techniques are SAT solvers, IP solvers, local search, dynamic
programming, to name a few general ones.

1

Introduction

Training neural networks is a fundamental problem in machine learning. An (artificial) neural
network is a brain-inspired computing system. Neural networks are modelled by directed acyclic
graphs where the vertices are called neurons; for an example consider Figure 1.
In this paper, we show that it is ∃R-complete to decide if there exists weights and biases that will
result in a cost below a given threshold. Loosely speaking, the complexity class ∃R is defined as
problems that are equivalent to deciding whether a system of polynomial equations and inequalities
and many real unknowns has a solution, and it is known that NP ⊆ ∃R ⊆ PSPACE, although none of
these inclusions are known to be strict.
w1
w5 b3
w2 b1 w7
b4
w3 b w6
2
w4
w8 b5

1
x
y
−1

2
z
1
2

Figure 1: (left) The architecture of a neural network with one layer of hidden neurons. As an
example of a training problem, we are given the data points D = {(1, 2, 3; 1, 2, 3), (3, 2, 1; 2, 4, 6)},
the identity as the activation function ϕ for every neuron, the threshold δ = 10, and the mean of
squared errors as cost function. Are there weights and biases such that the total cost is below δ? (right)
The architecture of an example instance of R ESTRICTED T RAINING. Further, the input consists of
the data points d1 = (0, 1, 1; 1, 1, ?) and d2 = (2, 1, 0; ?, ?, 0), the activation function ϕ(x) = x,
the threshold δ = 7, and the Manhattan norm (k · k1 ) as the cost function. If we set the weights to
(x, y, z) = (1, 0, −1), we easily compute a total error of 4 + 2 = 6, which is below the threshold of
7. Thus (x, y, z) = (1, 0, −1) is a valid solution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

