Explicit loss asymptotics in the gradient descent
training of neural networks

Maksim Velikanov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
maksim.velikanov@skoltech.ru

Dmitry Yarotsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
d.yarotsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Current theoretical results on optimization trajectories of neural networks trained
by gradient descent typically have the form of rigorous but potentially loose bounds
on the loss values. In the present work we take a different approach and show
that the learning trajectory of a wide network in a lazy training regime can be
characterized by an explicit asymptotic at large training times. Specifically, the
leading term in the asymptotic expansion of the loss behaves as a power law
L(t) ∼ Ct−ξ with exponent ξ expressed only through the data dimension, the
smoothness of the activation function, and the class of function being approximated.
Our results are based on spectral analysis of the integral operator representing the
linearized evolution of a large network trained on the expected loss. Importantly,
the techniques we employ do not require a specific form of the data distribution,
for example Gaussian, thus making our findings sufficiently universal.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in the research of neural networks is the quantitative theoretical description of their
optimization by gradient descent. At present, many aspects of network training seem to be understood
rather well on a qualitative level, or admit convincing heuristic explanations, but we seem to lack
tools for making reasonably accurate quantitative predictions, even for relatively simple models and
data. In this sense, the theory of neural networks compares unfavorably to physics, which is also
an application-driven field but with an apparently much more successful penetration of theoretical
methods. The main difficulty here is probably the complex structure of the data and models, which
are hard to describe in terms of convenient and simple mathematical abstractions.
In recent years, a significant progress in the theoretical analysis of gradient descent of neural networks
has been associated with the limit of large networks, which can be studied using various methods
from partial differential equations [26, 31], kernel methods [20, 21], spin glass theory [12], random
matrix theory [29], dynamical systems [30], and other mathematical fields.
In the present work, we consider a setting of large networks and large, smoothly distributed data sets
that allows us to obtain explicit leading terms in the long-term evolution of the loss under gradient
descent. We are inspired by the spectral theory of singular integral operators [5], which we apply
to the linearized evolution of the network. While this linearized evolution has been widely studied
recently, most related research seems to focus on theoretical convergence guarantees and upper
bounds for the loss values [3, 27], or on a highly symmetric problems admitting explicit solution
[35, 38]. In contrast, we focus on explicit loss evolution formulas, which we find as power laws
L(t) ∼ Ct−ξ .

(1)

We argue that the exponents ξ here exhibit some form of universality, in that they are essentially
determined by the input dimension d and by the smoothness classes of the activation function and the
target function. In particular, we find that in the case of ReLU networks approximating an indicator
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

