MLP-Mixer: An all-MLP Architecture for Vision
Ilya Tolstikhin∗ , Neil Houlsby∗ , Alexander Kolesnikov∗ , Lucas Beyer∗ ,
Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner,
Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, Mario Lucic, Alexey Dosovitskiy
∗

equal contribution

Google Research, Brain Team
{tolstikhin, neilhoulsby, akolesnikov, lbeyer,
xzhai, unterthiner, jessicayung† , andstein,
keysers, usz, lucic, adosovitskiy}@google.com
†

work done during Google AI Residency

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are the go-to model for computer vision.
Recently, attention-based networks, such as the Vision Transformer, have also
become popular. In this paper we show that while convolutions and attention are
both sufficient for good performance, neither of them are necessary. We present
MLP-Mixer, an architecture based exclusively on multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs).
MLP-Mixer contains two types of layers: one with MLPs applied independently to
image patches (i.e. “mixing” the per-location features), and one with MLPs applied
across patches (i.e. “mixing” spatial information). When trained on large datasets,
or with modern regularization schemes, MLP-Mixer attains competitive scores on
image classification benchmarks, with pre-training and inference cost comparable
to state-of-the-art models. We hope that these results spark further research beyond
the realms of well established CNNs and Transformers.1

1

Introduction

As the history of computer vision demonstrates, the availability of larger datasets coupled with increased computational capacity often leads to a paradigm shift. While Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have been the de-facto standard for computer vision, recently Vision Transformers [14] (ViT),
an alternative based on self-attention layers, attained state-of-the-art performance. ViT continues the
long-lasting trend of removing hand-crafted visual features and inductive biases from models and
relies further on learning from raw data.
We propose the MLP-Mixer architecture (or “Mixer” for short), a competitive but conceptually and
technically simple alternative, that does not use convolutions or self-attention. Instead, Mixer’s
architecture is based entirely on multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) that are repeatedly applied across
either spatial locations or feature channels. Mixer relies only on basic matrix multiplication routines,
changes to data layout (reshapes and transpositions), and scalar nonlinearities.
Figure 1 depicts the macro-structure of Mixer. It accepts a sequence of linearly projected image
patches (also referred to as tokens) shaped as a “patches × channels” table as an input, and maintains
this dimensionality. Mixer makes use of two types of MLP layers: channel-mixing MLPs and
token-mixing MLPs. The channel-mixing MLPs allow communication between different channels;
1

MLP-Mixer code is available at https://github.com/google-research/vision_transformer

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

