Reliable Post hoc Explanations:
Modeling Uncertainty in Explainability

Dylan Slack
UC Irvine
dslack@uci.edu

Sophie Hilgard
Harvard University
ash798@g.harvard.edu

Sameer Singh
UC Irvine
sameer@uci.edu

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Abstract
As black box explanations are increasingly being employed to establish model
credibility in high stakes settings, it is important to ensure that these explanations
are accurate and reliable. However, prior work demonstrates that explanations
generated by state-of-the-art techniques are inconsistent, unstable, and provide
very little insight into their correctness and reliability. In addition, these methods
are also computationally inefficient, and require significant hyper-parameter tuning.
In this paper, we address the aforementioned challenges by developing a novel
Bayesian framework for generating local explanations along with their associated
uncertainty. We instantiate this framework to obtain Bayesian versions of LIME and
KernelSHAP which output credible intervals for the feature importances, capturing
the associated uncertainty. The resulting explanations not only enable us to make
concrete inferences about their quality (e.g., there is a 95% chance that the feature
importance lies within the given range), but are also highly consistent and stable.
We carry out a detailed theoretical analysis that leverages the aforementioned
uncertainty to estimate how many perturbations to sample, and how to sample for
faster convergence. This work makes the first attempt at addressing several critical
issues with popular explanation methods in one shot, thereby generating consistent,
stable, and reliable explanations with guarantees in a computationally efficient
manner. Experimental evaluation with multiple real world datasets and user studies
demonstrate that the efficacy of the proposed framework.1

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) models get increasingly deployed in domains such as healthcare and
criminal justice, it is important to ensure that decision makers have a clear understanding of the
behavior of these models. However, ML models that achieve state-of-the-art accuracy are typically
complex black boxes that are hard to understand. As a consequence, there has been a surge in post
hoc techniques for explaining black box models [1–10]. Most popular among these techniques are
local explanation methods which explain complex black box models by constructing interpretable
local approximations (e.g., LIME [2], SHAP [4], MAPLE [11], Anchors [1]). Due to their generality,
these methods are being leveraged to explain a number of classifiers including deep neural networks
and ensemble models in a variety of domains such as law, medicine, and finance [12, 13].
Existing local explanation methods, however, suffer from several drawbacks. Explanations generated
using these methods may be unstable [14–18], i.e., negligibly small perturbations to an instance
can result in substantially different explanations. These methods are also inconsistent [19] i.e.,
multiple runs on the same input instance with the same parameter settings may result in vastly
different explanations. There are also no reliable metrics to ascertain the quality of the explanations
1

Project Page: https://dylanslacks.website/reliable/index.html

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

