Faster Directional Convergence of Linear Neural
Networks under Spherically Symmetric Data

Dachao Lin1
Ruoyu Sun2
Zhihua Zhang3
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
2
Department of Industrial and Enterprise Engineering, Coordinate Science Lab (affiliated)
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
1

lindachao@pku.edu.cn

ruoyus@illinois.edu

zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study gradient methods for training deep linear neural networks
with binary cross-entropy loss. In particular, we show global directional convergence guarantees from a polynomial rate to a linear rate for (deep) linear networks
with spherically symmetric data distribution, which can be viewed as a specific
zero-margin dataset. Our results do not require the assumptions in other works
such as small initial loss, presumed convergence of weight direction, or overparameterization. We also characterize our findings in experiments.

1

Introduction

Local v.s. non-local analysis. Deep neural networks have been successfully trained with simple
gradient-based methods, despite the inherent non-convexity of the objective function. Recently, a
number of works proved the convergence of gradient methods to global minima for ultra-wide neural
networks [1, 4, 12, 13, 20, 31]. These works essentially performed “local analysis” because in their
proofs the parameters stay close to initialization during training. In the large width setting, there
exists a global minimum near a random initial point, thus staying in the local region can still result
in convergence to global minima. Despite the technical convenience of handling a local region, in
practical training, the parameters often travel far from initialization (see, e.g., [15]). To understand
the practical optimization trajectory, it is important to develop a non-local convergence analysis.
Deep linear nets with quadratic loss: “local analysis”. To understand the behavior of gradient
descent (GD) for general neural nets, we need to understand GD for deep linear nets. A number of
works analyzed linear networks with the square loss. Bartlett et al. [7] provided that gradient descent
converges to the target matrix at a linear rate from identity initialization, while assuming the target
matrix is either close to identity or positive definite. Arora et al. [2] proved linear convergence of deep
linear networks if the initialization has a positive “deficiency margin" and is nearly balanced. Later,
a few works followed a similar idea to neural tangent kernel (NTK) [20] to establish convergence
analysis. Du and Hu [11] showed GD with Gaussian random initialization converges to a global
minimum at a linear rate if the width of every hidden layer is large enough. Hu et al. [19] improved
the width requirement to be independent of depth, by utilizing orthogonal weight initialization, but
they assume each layer to have the same width. All the above works are not non-local analysis.
Deep linear nets with quadratic loss: non-local analysis. Eftekhari [14] provided non-local
convergence analysis for deep linear nets with quadratic loss. When one layer has only one neuron
(including scalar output case) and assumming that the input data are whitened, they proved that
gradient flow converges to global minimizers starting from balanced initialization.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

