Implicit Transformer Network for Screen Content
Image Continuous Super-Resolution

1

Jingyu Yang1
Sheng Shen1
Huanjing Yue1∗ Kun Li2
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{yjy, codyshen, huanjing.yue, lik}@tju.edu.cn
https://github.com/codyshen0000/ITSRN

Abstract
Nowadays, there is an explosive growth of screen contents due to the wide application of screen sharing, remote cooperation, and online education. To match
the limited terminal bandwidth, high-resolution (HR) screen contents may be
downsampled and compressed. At the receiver side, the super-resolution (SR)
of low-resolution (LR) screen content images (SCIs) is highly demanded by the
HR display or by the users to zoom in for detail observation. However, image
SR methods mostly designed for natural images do not generalize well for SCIs
due to the very different image characteristics as well as the requirement of SCI
browsing at arbitrary scales. To this end, we propose a novel Implicit Transformer
Super-Resolution Network (ITSRN) for SCISR. For high-quality continuous SR at
arbitrary ratios, pixel values at query coordinates are inferred from image features
at key coordinates by the proposed implicit transformer and an implicit position
encoding scheme is proposed to aggregate similar neighboring pixel values to the
query one. We construct benchmark SCI1K and SCI1K-compression datasets with
LR and HR SCI pairs. Extensive experiments show that the proposed ITSRN
significantly outperforms several competitive continuous and discrete SR methods
for both compressed and uncompressed SCIs.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, screen content images are becoming ubiquitous due to the wide application of screen
sharing and wireless display. Meanwhile, due to the limited bandwidth, screen content images
received by users may be in low-resolution (LR) and users may need to zoom in the content for detail
inspection. Therefore, screen content image super-resolution (SCI SR) is to improve the quality of
LR SCIs.
However, different from natural scene images, SCIs are dominated by the contents generated or
rendered by computers, such as texts and graphics. Such contents highly demanded are characterized
by thin and sharp edges, little color variance, and high contrast. In contrast, the natural scene images
are relatively smooth, and contain rich colors and textures. Conventional image SR methods designed
for nature images are good at modeling the local smoothness of natural images other than the thin
and sharp edges in SCIs. Very recently, Wang et al. [1] proposed a SR method for compressed screen
content videos, which addressed the compression artifacts of screen content videos by introducing a
distortion differential guided reconstruction module. However, their network is still composed of
fully convolution layers without designing specific structures for the thin and sharp edges in screen
contents. In addition, they utilize previous frames to help reconstruct the current frame, which makes
it unsuitable for frame-wise SCI SR.
∗

Corresponding author: Huanjing Yue

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

