Derivative-Free Policy Optimization for Linear
Risk-Sensitive and Robust Control Design:
Implicit Regularization and Sample Complexity

Kaiqing Zhang\

Xiangyuan Zhang\

Bin Hu

Tamer Başar

Abstract
Direct policy search serves as one of the workhorses in modern reinforcement
learning (RL), and its applications in continuous control tasks have recently attracted increasing attention. In this work, we investigate the convergence theory
of policy gradient (PG) methods for learning the linear risk-sensitive and robust
controller. In particular, we develop PG methods that can be implemented in a
derivative-free fashion by sampling system trajectories, and establish both global
convergence and sample complexity results in the solutions of two fundamental
settings in risk-sensitive and robust control: the finite-horizon linear exponential
quadratic Gaussian, and the finite-horizon linear-quadratic disturbance attenuation
problems. As a by-product, our results also provide the first sample complexity
for the global convergence of PG methods on solving zero-sum linear-quadratic
dynamic games, a nonconvex-nonconcave minimax optimization problem that
serves as a baseline setting in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) with
continuous spaces. One feature of our algorithms is that during the learning phase,
a certain level of robustness/risk-sensitivity of the controller is preserved, which
we termed as the implicit regularization property, and is an essential requirement
in safety-critical control systems.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of reinforcement learning (RL) methods in
handling continuous control tasks [1, 2, 3]. Central to the success of RL are policy optimization
(PO) methods, including policy gradient (PG) [4, 5, 6], actor-critic [7, 8], and other variants [9, 10].
Progress reported in the literature has clearly shown an increasing interest in understanding theoretical
properties of PO methods for relatively simple baselines such as linear control problems [11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. However, the theory of model-free PO methods on risk-sensitive/robust
control remains underdeveloped in the literature. Since risk-sensitivity and robustness are important
issues for designing safety-critical systems, it is natural to bring up the questions of whether and how
model-free PO methods would converge for these continuous control tasks.
Our work in this paper is motivated by the above concern, and studies the sample complexity
of model-free PG methods on two important baseline problems in risk-sensitive/robust control,
namely the linear exponential quadratic Gaussian (LEQG), and the linear quadratic (LQ) disturbance
attenuation problems. The former covers a fundamental setting in risk-sensitive control, and the
latter is an important baseline for robust control. Based on the well-known equivalence between
these problems and LQ dynamic games [22, 23, 24, 25, 26], we develop a unified PO perspective
\ Equal contribution. K. Zhang is with the LIDS and the CSAIL at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Email: kaiqing@mit.edu. X. Zhang, B. Hu, and T. Başar are with the Department of ECE and the CSL at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Emails: {xz7, binhu7, basar1}@illinois.edu.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

