Canonical Capsules:
Self-Supervised Capsules in Canonical Pose
Weiwei Sun1,4,⇤

Andrea Tagliasacchi2,3,⇤

Soroosh Yazdani3

Boyang Deng3

Geoffrey Hinton2,3

Sara Sabour2,3

Kwang Moo Yi1,4

University of British Columbia, 2 University of Toronto,
Google Research, 4 University of Victoria, ⇤ equal contributions
1

3

https://canonical-capsules.github.io

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised capsule architecture for 3D point clouds. We compute
capsule decompositions of objects through permutation-equivariant attention, and
self-supervise the process by training with pairs of randomly rotated objects. Our
key idea is to aggregate the attention masks into semantic keypoints, and use these
to supervise a decomposition that satisfies the capsule invariance/equivariance properties. This not only enables the training of a semantically consistent decomposition,
but also allows us to learn a canonicalization operation that enables object-centric
reasoning. To train our neural network we require neither classification labels nor
manually-aligned training datasets. Yet, by learning an object-centric representation in a self-supervised manner, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on
3D point cloud reconstruction, canonicalization, and unsupervised classification.

1

Introduction

Understanding objects is one of the core problems of computer vision [32, 14, 38]. While this
task has traditionally relied on large annotated datasets [42, 22], unsupervised approaches that
utilize self-supervision [5] have emerged to remove the need for labels. Recently, researchers have
attempted to extend these methods to work on 3D point clouds [59], but the field of unsupervised 3D
learning remains relatively uncharted. Conversely, researchers have been extensively investigating
3D deep representations for shape auto-encoding1 [61, 19, 33, 16], making one wonder whether these
discoveries can now benefit from unsupervised learning for tasks other than auto-encoding.
Importantly, these recent methods for 3D deep representation learning are not entirely unsupervised.
Whether using point clouds [61], meshes [19], or implicits [33], they owe much of their success
to the bias within the dataset that was used for training. Specifically, all 3D models in the popular
ShapeNet [3] dataset are “object-centric” – they are pre-canonicalized to a unit bounding box, and,
even more importantly, with an orientation that synchronizes object semantics to Euclidean frame
axes (e.g. airplane cockpit is always along +y, car wheels always touch z = 0). Differentiable
3D decoders are heavily affected by the consistent alignment of their output with an Euclidean
frame [8, 16] as local-to-global transformations cannot be easily learnt by fully connected layers.
As we will show in Section 4.2, these methods fail in the absence of pre-alignment, even when data
1

Auto-encoding is also at times referred to as “reconstruction” or “shape-space” learning.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

