How Well do Feature Visualizations Support Causal
Understanding of CNN Activations?

Roland S. Zimmermann* 1
Robert Geirhos1

Matthias Bethge† 1

Judy Borowski* 1
Thomas S. A. Wallis† 2

Wieland Brendel† 1

1

2

Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen, Germany.
Institute of Psychology and Centre for Cognitive Science, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany.
*
Shared first authorship, determined by coin flip. firstname.lastname@uni-tuebingen.de
†
Joint supervision.

Abstract
A precise understanding of why units in an artificial network respond to certain
stimuli would constitute a big step towards explainable artificial intelligence. One
widely used approach towards this goal is to visualize unit responses via activation
maximization. These synthetic feature visualizations are purported to provide
humans with precise information about the image features that cause a unit to be
activated — an advantage over other alternatives like strongly activating natural
dataset samples. If humans indeed gain causal insight from visualizations, this
should enable them to predict the effect of an intervention, such as how occluding
a certain patch of the image (say, a dog’s head) changes a unit’s activation. Here,
we test this hypothesis by asking humans to decide which of two square occlusions
causes a larger change to a unit’s activation. Both a large-scale crowdsourced
experiment and measurements with experts show that on average the extremely
activating feature visualizations by Olah et al. [40] indeed help humans on this task
(68 ± 4 % accuracy; baseline performance without any visualizations is 60 ± 3 %).
However, they do not provide any substantial advantage over other visualizations
(such as e.g. dataset samples), which yield similar performance (66±3 % to 67±3 %
accuracy). Taken together, we propose an objective psychophysical task to quantify
the benefit of unit-level interpretability methods for humans, and find no evidence
that a widely-used feature visualization method provides humans with better “causal
understanding” of unit activations than simple alternative visualizations.

1

Introduction

It is hard to trust a black-box algorithm, and it is hard to deploy an algorithm if one does not trust
its output. Many of today’s best-performing machine learning models, deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), are also among the most mysterious ones with regards to their internal information
processing. CNNs typically consist of dozens of layers with hundreds or thousands of units that
distributively process and aggregate information until they reach their final decision at the topmost
layer. Shedding light onto the inner workings of deep convolutional neural networks has been a
long-standing quest that has so far produced more questions than answers.
One of the most popular tools for explaining the behavior of individual network units is to visualize
unit responses via activation maximization [16, 33, 38, 35, 39, 36, 54, 15]. The idea is to start with
an image (typically random noise) and iteratively change pixel values to maximize the activation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

