Gradient Inversion with Generative Image Prior

Jinwoo Jeon1∗ , Jaechang Kim2∗ , Kangwook Lee3 , Sewoong Oh4 , Jungseul Ok1,2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Pohang University of Science and Technology
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison
4
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
1

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning framework, in which the local
data never leaves clients’ devices to preserve privacy, and the server trains models
on the data via accessing only the gradients of those local data. Without further
privacy mechanisms such as differential privacy, this leaves the system vulnerable
against an attacker who inverts those gradients to reveal clients’ sensitive data.
However, a gradient is often insufficient to reconstruct the user data without
any prior knowledge. By exploiting a generative model pretrained on the data
distribution, we demonstrate that data privacy can be easily breached. Further,
when such prior knowledge is unavailable, we investigate the possibility of learning
the prior from a sequence of gradients seen in the process of FL training. We
experimentally show that the prior in a form of generative model is learnable
from iterative interactions in FL. Our findings strongly suggest that additional
mechanisms are necessary to prevent privacy leakage in FL.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging framework for distributed learning, where central server
aggregates model updates, rather than user data, from end users [5, 17]. The main premise of
federated learning is that this particular way of distributed learning can protect users’ data privacy as
there is no explicit data shared by the end users with the central server.
However, a recent line of work [34, 31, 9, 29] demonstrates that one may recover the private user
data used for training by observing the gradients. This process of recovering the training data from
gradients, so-called gradient inversion, poses a huge threat to the federated learning community, as it
may imply the fundamental flaw of its main premise.
Even more worryingly, recent works suggest that such gradient inversion attacks can be made even
stronger if certain side-information is available. For instance, Geiping et al. [9] show that if the
attacker knows a prior that user data consists of natural images, then the gradient inversion attack
can leverage such prior, achieving a more accurate recovery of the user data. Another instance is
when batch norm statistics are available at the attacker in addition to gradients. This can actually
happen if the end users share their local batch norm statistics as in [17]. Yin et al. [29] show that such
batch normalization statistics can significantly improve the strength of the gradient inversion attack,
enabling precise recovery of high-resolution images.
In this paper, we systematically study how one can maximally utilize and even obtain the prior
information when inverting gradients. We first consider the case that the attacker has a generative
model pretrained on the exact or approximate distribution of the user data as a prior. For this,
we propose an efficient gradient inversion algorithm that utilizes the generative model prior. In
∗

equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

