Subquadratic Overparameterization for
Shallow Neural Networks
Chaehwan Song1∗
Thomas Pethick1
1

Ali Ramezani-Kebrya1∗
Armin Eftekhari2†

Volkan Cevher1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS), EPFL

2

Umea University

ali.ramezani@epfl.ch

Abstract
Overparameterization refers to the important phenomenon where the width of a
neural network is chosen such that learning algorithms can provably attain zero loss
in nonconvex training. The existing theory establishes such global convergence
using various initialization strategies, training modifications, and width scalings. In
particular, the state-of-the-art results require the width to scale quadratically with
the number of training data under standard initialization strategies used in practice
for best generalization performance. In contrast, the most recent results obtain
linear scaling either with requiring initializations that lead to the “lazy-training”, or
training only a single layer. In this work, we provide an analytical framework that
allows us to adopt standard initialization strategies, possibly avoid lazy training,
and train all layers simultaneously in basic shallow neural networks while attaining
a desirable subquadratic scaling on the network width. We achieve the desiderata
via Polyak-Łojasiewicz condition, smoothness, and standard assumptions on data,
and use tools from random matrix theory.

1

Introduction

Training a neural network involves solving a nonconvex optimization problem, which, in theory, might
trap first-order methods such as gradient descent to fall in bad local minima or saddle points. However,
empirical evidence suggests that first-order methods with random initialization can consistently find
a global minimum, even with randomized labels [43]. Demystifying this observation is of central
interest to deep learning.
Recently, a line of research [45, 4, 11, 29, 39, 12, 38] suggests that such an empirical success can
possibly be explained by the overparameterization of neural networks, whose number of parameters
exceeds the number of training data n. In particular, gradient descent converges linearly fast to a
global optimum in a number of problems with models that have wide hidden layers [45, 12, 39].
Despite of these remarkable results, the natural key question “How much should we overparameterize
a neural network?” remains open even for the toy example of two-layer neural networks. On one
hand, it is widely accepted that, for two-layer neural networks, the number of parameters should
grow linearly with n (e.g., [21, 38]). On the other hand, theoretical results either require much more
parameters, or they are established under restrictive settings. Specifically,
∗
†

Equal contributions.
This work was done while Armin Eftekhari was at EPFL.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

