Logarithmic Regret from Sublinear Hints
Aditya Bhaskara
Department of Computer Science
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT
bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com

Ashok Cutkosky
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA
ashok@cutkosky.com

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Manish Purohit
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
mpurohit@google.com

Abstract
We consider the online linear optimization problem, where at every step the algorithm plays a point xt in the unit ball, and suffers loss hct , xt i for some cost vector
ct that is then revealed to the algorithm. Recent work showed that if an algorithm
receives a hint ht that has non-trivial correlation with ct before it plays xt ,pthen it
can achieve a regret guarantee of O(log T ), improving on the bound of ⇥( T ) in
the standard setting. In this work, we study the question of whether an algorithm
really requires a hint at every time step. Somewhat
p surprisingly, we show that an
algorithm can obtain O(log T ) regret withpjust O( T ) hints under a natural query
model;
p in contrast, we also show that o( T ) hints cannot guarantee better than
⌦( T ) regret. We give two applications of our result, to the well-studied setting
of optimistic regret bounds and to the problem of online learning with abstention.

1

Introduction

There has been a spate of work on improving the performance of online algorithms with the help of
externally available hints. The goal of these works is to circumvent worst-case bounds and exploit
the capability of machine-learned models that can potentially provide these hints. There have been
two main lines of study. The first is for combinatorial problems, where the goal has been to be
improve the competitive ratio of online algorithms; problems considered here include ski-rental [9,
17], caching [13, 19, 26], scheduling [1, 12, 17, 22], matching [16, 18], etc. The second is in the
learning theory setting, where the goal has to been to improve the regret of online optimization
algorithms. A series of recent papers showed how to achieve better regret guarantees, assuming that
we have a hint about the cost function before the algorithm makes a choice. For many variants of
the online convex optimization problem, works such as [25, 8, 2, 3] studied the power of having
prior information about a cost function. Works such as [29] have also studied improved regret
bounds in partial information or bandit settings. In all these works, a desirable property is to ensure
consistency, which demands better performance with better quality hints, and robustness, which
guarantees a certain level of performance with poor quality or even adversarially bad hints.
Recall the standard online optimization model [30], which is a game between an algorithm and an
adversary. In each round, the algorithm plays a point and the adversary responds with a cost function
that is visible to the algorithm, and the cost in this round is measured by evaluating the cost function
on the played point. In online linear optimization, the cost function is linear. The regret of an
algorithm is the worst-case difference between the cost of the algorithm and the cost of an algorithm
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

