Differentiable Multiple Shooting Layers

Stefano Massaroli∗
The University of Tokyo, DiffEqML

Michael Poli∗
KAIST, DiffEqML

massaroli@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

poli_m@kaist.ac.kr

Sho Sonoda
RIKEN
Jinkyoo Park
KAIST

Taiji Suzuki
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN
Atsushi Yamashita
The University of Tokyo

Hajime Asama
The University of Tokyo

Abstract
We detail a novel class of implicit neural models. Leveraging time–parallel methods
for differential equations, Multiple Shooting Layers (MSLs) seek solutions of initial
value problems via parallelizable root-finding algorithms. MSLs broadly serve as
drop–in replacements for neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs)
with improved efficiency in number of function evaluations (NFEs) and wall–
clock inference time. We develop the algorithmic framework of MSLs, analyzing
the different choices of solution methods from a theoretical and computational
perspective. MSLs are showcased in long horizon optimal control of ODEs and
PDEs and as latent models for sequence generation. Finally, we investigate the
speedups obtained through application of MSL inference in neural controlled
differential equations (Neural CDEs) for time series classification of medical data.

1

Introduction
For the last twenty years, one has tried to speed up numerical computation mainly by providing ever faster
computers. Today, as it appears that one is getting closer to the maximal speed of electronic components,
emphasis is put on allowing operations to be performed in parallel. In the near future, much of numerical
analysis will have to be recast in a more “parallel” form. Nievergelt, 1964

Discovering and exploiting parallelization opportunities has allowed deep learning methods to succeed
across application areas, reducing iteration times for
architecture search and allowing scaling to larger
data sizes (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Diamos et al.,
2016; Vaswani et al., 2017). Inspired by multiple
shooting, time–parallel methods for ODEs (Bock
and Plitt, 1984; Diehl et al., 2006; Gander, 2015;
Staff and Rønquist, 2005) and recent advances on
the intersection of differential equations, implicit Figure 1: MSLs apply parallelizable root finding
methods to obtain differential equation solutions.
problems and deep learning, we present a novel class
of neural models designed to maximize parallelization across time: differentiable Multiple Shooting Layers (MSLs). MSLs seek solutions of initial
value problems (IVPs) as roots of a function designed to ensure satisfaction of boundary constraints.
Figure 1 provides visual intuition of the parallel nature of MSL inference.
∗

Equal contribution. Author order was decided by flipping a coin.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

