Online Learning in MDPs with
Linear Function Approximation and Bandit Feedback

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Julia Olkhovskaya
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
julia.olkhovskaya@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of online learning in an episodic Markov decision process,
where the reward function is allowed to change between episodes in an adversarial
manner and the learner only observes the rewards associated with its actions.
We assume that rewards and the transition function can be represented as linear
functions in terms of a known low-dimensional feature map, which allows us to
consider the setting where the state space is arbitrarily large. We also assume that
the learner has a perfect knowledge of the MDP dynamics. Our main contribution
is developing
√
an algorithm whose expected regret after T episodes is bounded
e
by O dHT , where H is the number of steps in each episode and d is the
dimensionality of the feature map.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of online learning in episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDP), modelling
a sequential decision making problem where the interaction between a learner and its environment
is divided into T episodes of fixed length H. At each time step of the episode, the learner observes
the current state of the environment, chooses one of the K available actions, and earns a reward.
Consequently, the state of the environment changes according to the transition function of the
underlying MDP, as a function of the previous state and the action taken by the learner. A key
distinguishing feature of our setting is that we assume that the reward function can change arbitrarily
between episodes, and the learner only has access to bandit feedback: instead of being able to observe
the reward function at the end of the episode, the learner only gets to observe the rewards that it
actually received. As traditional in this line of work, we aim to design algorithms for the learner with
theoretical guarantees on her regret, which is the difference between the total reward accumulated by
the learner and the total reward of the best stationary policy fixed in hindsight.
Unlike most previous work on this problem, we allow the state space to be very large and aim to
prove performance guarantees that do not depend on the size of the state space, bringing theory one
step closer to practical scenarios where assuming finite state spaces is unrealistic. To address the
challenge of learning in large state spaces, we adopt the classic RL technique of using linear function
approximation and suppose that we have access to a relatively low-dimensional feature map that can
be used to represent policies and value functions. We will assume that the feature map is expressive
enough so that all action-value functions can be expressed as linear functions of the features, and that
the learner has full knowledge of the transition function of the MDP.
Our main contribution is designing a computationally efficient algorithm
p called O NLINE
 Q-REPS,
and prove that in the setting described above, its regret is at most O dHT D (µ∗ kµ0 ) , where d is
the dimensionality of the feature map and D (µ∗ kµ0 ) is the relative entropy between the state-action
distribution µ∗ induced by the optimal policy and an initial distribution µ0 given as input to the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

