A self-consistent theory of Gaussian Processes
captures feature learning effects in finite CNNs

Gadi Naveh
Racah Institute of Physics
Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel 91904
gad.mintz@mail.huji.ac.il

Zohar Ringel
Racah Institute of Physics
Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel 91904
zohar.ringel@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) in the infinite width/channel limit have received
much attention recently, as they provide a clear analytical window to deep learning
via mappings to Gaussian Processes (GPs). Despite its theoretical appeal, this
viewpoint lacks a crucial ingredient of deep learning in finite DNNs, laying at
the heart of their success — feature learning. Here we consider DNNs trained
with noisy gradient descent on a large training set and derive a self-consistent
Gaussian Process theory accounting for strong finite-DNN and feature learning
effects. Applying this to a toy model of a two-layer linear convolutional neural
network (CNN) shows good agreement with experiments. We further identify, both
analytically and numerically, a sharp transition between a feature learning regime
and a lazy learning regime in this model. Strong finite-DNN effects are also derived
for a non-linear two-layer fully connected network. We have numerical evidence
demonstrating that the assumptions required for our theory hold true in more
realistic settings (Myrtle5 CNN trained on CIFAR-10). Our self-consistent theory
provides a rich and versatile analytical framework for studying strong finite-DNN
effects, most notably - feature learning.

1

Introduction

The correspondence between Gaussian Processes (GPs) and deep neural networks (DNNs) has
been instrumental in advancing our understanding of these complex algorithms. Early results
related randomly initialized strongly over-parameterized DNNs with GP priors [33, 24, 30]. More
recent results considered training using gradient flow (or noisy gradients), where DNNs, potentially
following some ensembling, map to Bayesian inference on GPs governed by the neural tangent
kernel [21, 25, 18] (or the NNGP kernel [32]). These correspondences carry over to a wide variety
of architectures, going beyond fully connected networks (FCNs) to convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [4, 36], recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [2] and even attention networks [20]. They provide
us with closed analytical expressions for the outputs of strongly over-parameterized trained DNNs,
which have been used to make accurate predictions for DNN learning curves [11, 9, 8].
Despite their theoretical appeal, GPs are unable to capture feature learning [47, 46], which is a
well-observed key property of trained DNNs. Indeed, it was noticed [21] that as the width tends
to infinity, the neural tangent kernel (NTK) tends to a constant kernel that does not evolve during
training and the weights in hidden layers change infinitesimally from their initialization values. This
regime of training was thus dubbed lazy training [10]. Other studies showed that for CNNs trained on
image classification tasks, the feature learning regime generally tends to outperform the lazy regime
[15, 14, 23]. Clearly, working in the feature learning regime is also crucial for performing transfer
learning [45, 46].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), .

