The Role of Global Labels in Few-Shot Classification
and How to Infer Them
Ruohan Wang
University College London
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
wang_ruohan@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Massimiliano Pontil
Isitituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Carlo Ciliberto
University College London
c.ciliberto@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Few-shot learning is a central problem in meta-learning, where learners must
quickly adapt to new tasks given limited training data. Recently, feature pretraining has become a ubiquitous component in state-of-the-art meta-learning
methods and is shown to provide significant performance improvement. However,
there is limited theoretical understanding of the connection between pre-training
and meta-learning. Further, pre-training requires global labels shared across tasks,
which may be unavailable in practice. In this paper, we show why exploiting
pre-training is theoretically advantageous for meta-learning, and in particular the
critical role of global labels. This motivates us to propose Meta Label Learning
(MeLa), a novel meta-learning framework that automatically infers global labels
to obtains robust few-shot models. Empirically, we demonstrate that MeLa is
competitive with existing methods and provide extensive ablation experiments to
highlight its key properties.

1

Introduction

A central problem in meta-learning is few-shot learning (FSL), where new tasks must be learned
quickly given limited amount of training data. FSL has drawn increasing attention recently due
to the high cost of collecting and annotating large datasets. To tackle the challenge of model
generalization in FSL, meta-learning leverages past experiences of solving related tasks by directly
learning transferable knowledge over a collection of FSL tasks. A diverse range of meta-learning
methods tailored for FSL have been proposed, including optimization-based [e.g. 1, 5, 27], metric
learning [e.g. 20, 21, 25], and model-based methods [e.g. 7, 14, 19]. The diversity of the existing
strategies raises a natural question: do these methods share any common lessons for improving model
generalization and for designing future methods?
Several papers addressed the above question. Chen et al. [2] identified that data augmentation
and deeper network architecture significantly improve generalization performance across several
meta-learning methods. On the other hand, Tian et al. [23] investigated a simple yet competitive
approach: a linear model on top of input embeddings learned via feature pre-training. This approach
ignores task structures from meta-learning and merges all tasks into a “flat” dataset of labeled samples.
The desired input embedding is then learned by classifying all classes of the flat dataset.
Extensive empirical evidences supports the efficacy of feature pre-training in FSL. Pre-training alone
already outperforms various meta-learning algorithms [23]. Recently, it is used as a ubiquitous
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

