Forster Decomposition and Learning Halfspaces with
Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Christos Tzamos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
A Forster transform is an operation that turns a distribution into one with good anticoncentration properties. While a Forster transform does not always exist, we show
that any distribution can be efficiently decomposed as a disjoint mixture of few
distributions for which a Forster transform exists and can be computed efficiently.
As the main application of this result, we obtain the first polynomial-time algorithm
for distribution-independent PAC learning of halfspaces in the Massart noise model
with strongly polynomial sample complexity, i.e., independent of the bit complexity
of the examples. Previous algorithms for this learning problem incurred sample
complexity scaling polynomially with the bit complexity, even though such a
dependence is not information-theoretically necessary.

1

Introduction

The motivating application for this paper is the problem of (distribution-independent) PAC learning
of halfspaces in the presence of label noise, and more specifically in the Massart (or bounded noise)
model. Recent work [DGT19] obtained the first computationally efficient learning algorithm with
non-trivial error guarantee for this problem. Interestingly, the sample complexity of the [DGT19]
algorithm scales polynomially with the bit complexity of the examples (in addition, of course, to
the dimension and the inverse of desired accuracy). This bit-complexity dependence in the sample
complexity is an artifact of the algorithmic approach in [DGT19]. Information-theoretically, no such
dependence is needed — alas, the standard VC-dimension-based sample upper bound [MN06] is nonconstructive. Motivated by this qualitative gap in our understanding, here we develop a methodology
that leads to a computationally efficient learning algorithm for Massart halfspaces (matching the
error guarantee of [DGT19]) with “strongly polynomial” sample complexity, i.e., sample complexity
completely independent of the bit complexity of the examples.
Halfspaces and Efficient Learnability We study the binary classification setting, where the goal
is to learn a Boolean function from random labeled examples with noisy labels. Our focus is on the
problem of learning halfspaces in Valiant’s PAC learning model [Val84] when the labels have been
corrupted by Massart noise [MN06].
A halfspace is any function h : Rd → {±1} of the form h(x) = sign(w ·x−θ), where the vector
w ∈ Rd is called the weight vector, θ ∈ R is called the threshold, and sign : R → {±1} is defined by
sign(t) = 1 if t ≥ 0 and sign(t) = −1 otherwise. Halfspaces (or Linear Threshold Functions) are a
central concept class in learning theory, starting with early work in the 1950s [Ros58, Nov62, MP68]
and leading to fundamental and practically important techniques [Vap98, FS97]. Learning halfspaces
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

