How Tight Can PAC-Bayes be in the
Small Data Regime?

Andrew Y. K. Foong∗
University of Cambridge
ykf21@cam.ac.uk

Wessel P. Bruinsma∗
University of Cambridge
Invenia Labs
wpb23@cam.ac.uk

David R. Burt
University of Cambridge
drb62@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the question: Given a small number of datapoints, for
example N = 30, how tight can PAC-Bayes and test set bounds be made? For
such small datasets, test set bounds adversely affect generalisation performance by
withholding data from the training procedure. In this setting, PAC-Bayes bounds
are especially attractive, due to their ability to use all the data to simultaneously
learn a posterior and bound its generalisation risk. We focus on the case of i.i.d.
data with a bounded loss and consider the generic PAC-Bayes theorem of Germain
et al. While their theorem is known to recover many existing PAC-Bayes bounds,
it is unclear what the tightest bound derivable from their framework is. For a
ﬁxed learning algorithm and dataset, we show that the tightest possible bound
coincides with a bound considered by Catoni; and, in the more natural case of
distributions over datasets, we establish a lower bound on the best bound achievable
in expectation. Interestingly, this lower bound recovers the Chernoff test set bound
if the posterior is equal to the prior. Moreover, to illustrate how tight these bounds
can be, we study synthetic one-dimensional classiﬁcation tasks in which it is
feasible to meta-learn both the prior and the form of the bound to numerically
optimise for the tightest bounds possible. We ﬁnd that in this simple, controlled
scenario, PAC-Bayes bounds are competitive with comparable, commonly used
Chernoff test set bounds. However, the sharpest test set bounds still lead to better
guarantees on the generalisation error than the PAC-Bayes bounds we consider.

1

Introduction

Generalisation bounds are of both practical and theoretical importance. Practically, tight bounds
provide certiﬁcates that algorithms will perform well on unseen data. Theoretically, the bounds
and underlying proof techniques can help explain the phenomenon of learning. Among the tightest
known bounds are PAC-Bayes (McAllester, 1999) and test set bounds (Langford, 2002). In this paper,
we investigate their numerical tightness when applied to small datasets (N ≈ 30–60 datapoints).
The comparison between PAC-Bayes and test set bounds is particularly interesting in this setting
as one cannot discard data to compute a test set bound without signiﬁcantly harming post-training
performance due to a reduced training set size. PAC-Bayes on the other hand provides valid bounds
while using all of the data for learning, since it provides bounds that hold uniformly. The small
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

