Doubly Robust Thompson Sampling
with Linear Payoffs

Wonyoung Kim
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
eraser347@snu.ac.kr

Gi-Soo Kim
Department of Industrial Engineering &
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
UNIST
gisookim@unist.ac.kr

Myunghee Cho Paik
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
Shepherd23 Inc.
myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
A challenging aspect of the bandit problem is that a stochastic reward is observed
only for the chosen arm and the rewards of other arms remain missing. The
dependence of the arm choice on the past context and reward pairs compounds
the complexity of regret analysis. We propose a novel multi-armed contextual
bandit algorithm called Doubly Robust (DR) Thompson Sampling employing the
doubly-robust estimator used in missing data literature to Thompson Sampling
with contexts (LinTS). Different from previous works relying on missing data
techniques (Dimakopoulou et al. [2019], Kim and Paik [2019]), the proposed
algorithm is designed to allow a novel additive regret
√ decomposition leading to an
improved regret bound with the order of Õ(φ−2 T ), where φ2 is the minimum
eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of contexts. This is the first regret bound of
LinTS using φ2 without the dimension of the context, d. Applying the relationship
√
between φ2 and d, the regret bound of the proposed algorithm is Õ(d √T ) in
many practical scenarios, improving the bound of LinTS by a factor of d. A
benefit of the proposed method is that it utilizes all the context data, chosen or not
chosen, thus allowing to circumvent the technical definition of unsaturated arms
used in theoretical analysis of LinTS. Empirical studies show the advantage of the
proposed algorithm over LinTS.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandit has been popular in sequential decision tasks such as news article recommendation
systems. In bandit problems, the learner sequentially pulls one arm among multiple arms and receives
random rewards on each round of time. While not knowing the compensation mechanisms of rewards,
the learner should make his/her decision to maximize the cumulative sum of rewards. In the course
of gaining information about the compensation mechanisms through feedback, the learner should
carefully balance between exploitation, pulling the best arm based on information accumulated so far,
and exploration, pulling the arm that will assist in future choices, although it does not seem to be the
best option at the moment. Therefore in the bandit problem, estimation or learning is an important
element besides decision making.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

