On The Existence of The Adversarial Bayes Classifier

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
New York, NY 10011, USA
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Natalie S. Frank
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
nf1066@nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & Courant Institute
New York, NY 10011, USA
mohri@google.com

Abstract
Adversarial robustness is a critical property in a variety of modern machine learning
applications. While it has been the subject of several recent theoretical studies,
many important questions related to adversarial robustness are still open. In this
work, we study a fundamental question regarding Bayes optimality for adversarial
robustness. We provide general sufficient conditions under which the existence of
a Bayes optimal classifier can be guaranteed for adversarial robustness. Our results
can provide a useful tool for a subsequent study of surrogate losses in adversarial
robustness and their consistency properties.

1

Introduction

A key problem with using neural networks is their susceptibility to small perturbations: imperceptible
changes to the input at test time may result in an incorrect classification by the network (Szegedy
et al., 2013). A slightly perturbed picture of a dog could be misclassified as a hand-blower. The same
phenomenon appears with other types of data such as biosequences, text, or speech. This problem
has motivated a series of research publications studying the design of adversarially robust algorithms,
both from an empirical and a theoretical perspective (Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2013; Madry
et al., 2017; Schmidt et al., 2018; Athalye et al., 2018; Bubeck et al., 2018b; Montasser et al., 2019).
In the context of classification problems, instead of the standard zero-one loss, an adversarial zero-one
loss has been adopted which penalizes a classifier not only if it misclassifies an input x but also if it
does not maintain the correct x-label in a ϵ-neighborhood around x (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry
et al., 2017; Tsipras et al., 2018; Carlini and Wagner, 2017). Since optimizing the adversarial zero-one
loss is computationally intractable, a common approach for adversarial learning is to use a surrogate
loss instead. However, optimizing a surrogate loss over a class of functions may not always lead
to a minimizer of the true underlying loss over that class. In the case of the standard zero-one loss,
there is a large body of literature identifying conditions under which surrogate losses are consistent,
that is, minimizing them over the family of all measurable functions leads to minimizers of the true
loss (Zhang, 2004; Bartlett et al., 2006; Steinwart, 2005; Lin, 2004). More precisely, as argued by
Long and Servedio (2013), it is in fact H-consistency that is needed, which is consistency restricted
to the hypothesis set under consideration. A surrogate loss may be consistent for the family of all
measurable functions but not for the specific family of functions H, and a surrogate loss can be
H-consistent for a particular family H, without being consistent for all measurable functions.
When are adversarial surrogate losses H-consistent? This problem is already non-trivial for the
standard zero-one loss: while there are well-known results for the consistency of losses for the zero35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

