Controlled Text Generation as Continuous
Optimization with Multiple Constraints

Sachin Kumar♣ Eric Malmi♦ Aliaksei Severyn♦ Yulia Tsvetkov♠
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
♦
Google Research
♠
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
♣

sachink@cs.cmu.edu, {emalmi, severyn}@google.com, yuliats@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
As large-scale language model pretraining pushes the state-of-the-art in text generation, recent work has turned to controlling attributes of the text such models
generate. While modifying the pretrained models via fine-tuning remains the popular approach, it incurs a significant computational cost and can be infeasible due to
lack of appropriate data. As an alternative, we propose M U C O CO—a flexible and
modular algorithm for controllable inference from pretrained models. We formulate the decoding process as an optimization problem which allows for multiple
attributes we aim to control to be easily incorporated as differentiable constraints
to the optimization. By relaxing this discrete optimization to a continuous one,
we make use of Lagrangian multipliers and gradient-descent based techniques
to generate the desired text. We evaluate our approach on controllable machine
translation and style transfer with multiple sentence-level attributes and observe
significant improvements over baselines.1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in language models [11, 51, 52] trained on large-scale web text corpora have led to
great improvements in state-of-the-art on many natural language processing (NLP) tasks including
the ability to generate increasingly coherent text [3]. However, once such models are trained, they
are prone to degeneration [66] and biased, non-factual outputs [16, 45] as it is difficult to control the
characteristics or attributes of the generated text without architectural modifications [26, 28, 35] and
fine-tuning the models on attribute-specific corpora [29, 7]. This can be even more challenging if
multiple attributes are involved as labeled data for each combination of attributes can be difficult to
obtain.
We focus on controlled text generation where the goal is to decode from a text generation model
such that the outputs satisfy certain constraints, which the model was not necessarily trained on. For
example, given a dialogue generation model, additionally constraining the generated responses to be
polite, although the model was not optimized for politeness during training. Recent works address this
problem with left-to-right autoregressive decoding, and modify the vocabulary distribution at every
step directly using classifiers or language models trained on attribute specific corpora [72, 40, 39], or
indirectly via backpropagating gradients through model activations [8]. While exhibiting high level
of attribute control, by design these methods can only work with categorical attributes (typically only
one attribute) and condition only on the left context while decoding. Additionally, they often require
several heuristics to work and are prone to adversarial outputs [64].
1

The code is available at https://github.com/Sachin19/mucoco

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

