What Matters for Adversarial Imitation Learning?

Manu Orsini∗, Anton Raichuk∗, Léonard Hussenot∗,†
Damien Vincent, Robert Dadashi, Sertan Girgin,
Matthieu Geist, Olivier Bachem, Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Andrychowicz‡
Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
Adversarial imitation learning has become a popular framework for imitation in
continuous control. Over the years, several variations of its components were
proposed to enhance the performance of the learned policies as well as the sample
complexity of the algorithm. In practice, these choices are rarely tested all together
in rigorous empirical studies. It is therefore difficult to discuss and understand
what choices, among the high-level algorithmic options as well as low-level implementation details, matter. To tackle this issue, we implement more than 50 of
these choices in a generic adversarial imitation learning framework and investigate
their impacts in a large-scale study (>500k trained agents) with both synthetic and
human-generated demonstrations. We analyze the key results and highlight the
most surprising findings.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown its ability to perform complex tasks in contexts where clear
reward functions can be set-up (e.g. +1 for winning a chess game) [15, 37, 40, 43] but for many
real-world applications, designing a correct reward function is either tedious or impossible [20], while
demonstrating a correct behavior is often easy and cheap. Therefore, imitation learning (IL, [4, 7])
might be the key to unlock the resolution of more complex tasks, such as autonomous driving, for
which reward functions are much harder to design.
The simplest approach to IL is Behavioral Cloning (BC, [2]) which uses supervised learning to predict
the expert’s action for any given state. However, BC is often unreliable as prediction errors compound
in the course of an episode. Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL, [14]) aims to remedy this using
inspiration from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs, [9]) and Inverse RL [3, 5, 6]: the policy is
trained to generate trajectories that are indistinguishable from the expert’s ones. As in GANs, this
is formalized as a two-player game where a discriminator is co-trained to distinguish between the
policy and expert trajectories (or states). See App. C for a brief introduction to AIL.
A myriad of improvements over the original AIL algorithm were proposed over the years [17, 31,
41, 44, 46], from changing the discriminator’s loss function [17] to switching from on-policy to
off-policy agents [31]. However, their relative performance is rarely studied in a controlled setting,
and never these changes have never been compared simultaneously. The performance of these
high-level choices may also depend on low-level implementation details which might be silenced in
the original publications [19, 29, 36, 42], as well as the hyperparameters (HPs) used. Thus, assessing
whether the proposed changes are the reason for the presented improvements becomes extremely
∗

Equal contribution.
Univ. de Lille, CNRS, Inria Scool, UMR 9189 CRIStAL.
‡
Corresponding author. E-mail: marcina@google.com.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

