PiRank: Scalable Learning To Rank via
Differentiable Sorting
Robin Swezey1⇤

Aditya Grover2,3

Bruno Charron1⇤
Stefano Ermon4
Amazon
2
University of California, Los Angeles
3
Facebook AI Research
4
Stanford University
{rswezey, bcharron}@acm.org, adityag@cs.ucla.edu, ermon@cs.stanford.edu
1

Abstract
A key challenge with machine learning approaches for ranking is the gap between
the performance metrics of interest and the surrogate loss functions that can be
optimized with gradient-based methods. This gap arises because ranking metrics
typically involve a sorting operation which is not differentiable w.r.t. the model
parameters. Prior works have proposed surrogates that are loosely related to ranking
metrics or simple smoothed versions thereof, and often fail to scale to real-world
applications. We propose PiRank, a new class of differentiable surrogates for
ranking, which employ a continuous, temperature-controlled relaxation to the
sorting operator based on NeuralSort [1]. We show that PiRank exactly recovers
the desired metrics in the limit of zero temperature and further propose a divideand-conquer extension that scales favorably to large list sizes, both in theory and
practice. Empirically, we demonstrate the role of larger list sizes during training and
show that PiRank significantly improves over comparable approaches on publicly
available internet-scale learning-to-rank benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The goal of Learning-To-Rank (LTR) models is to rank a set of candidate items for any given search
query according to a preference criterion [2]. The preference over items is specified via relevance
labels for each candidate. The fundamental difficulty in LTR is that the downstream metrics of
interest such as normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) and average relevance position
(ARP) depend on the ranks induced by the model. These ranks are not differentiable with respect to
the model parameters, so the metrics cannot be optimized directly via gradient-based methods.
To resolve the above challenge, a popular class of LTR approaches map items to real-valued scores
and then define surrogate loss functions that operate directly on these scores. Surrogate loss functions,
in turn, can belong to one of three types. LTR models optimized via pointwise surrogates [3–6] cast
ranking as a regression/classification problem, wherein the labels of items are given by their individual
relevance labels. Such approaches do not directly account for any inter-dependencies across item
rankings. Pairwise surrogate losses [7–14] can be decomposed into terms that involve scores of pairs
of items in a list and their relative ordering. Finally, listwise surrogate losses [15–19] are defined with
respect to scores for an entire ranked list. For many prior surrogate losses, especially those used for
listwise approaches, the functional form is inspired via downstream ranking metrics, such as NDCG.
However, the connection is loose or heuristically driven. For instance, SoftRank [14, 19] introduces a
Gaussian distribution over scores, which in turn defines a distribution over ranks and the surrogate is
the expected NDCG w.r.t. this rank distribution.
⇤

This work was done prior to joining Amazon.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

