Hyperbolic Busemann Learning with Ideal Prototypes

Mina Ghadimi Atigh
University of Amsterdam

Martin Keller-Ressel
Technische Universität Dresden

Pascal Mettes
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Hyperbolic space has become a popular choice of manifold for representation learning of various datatypes from tree-like structures and text to graphs. Building on the
success of deep learning with prototypes in Euclidean and hyperspherical spaces,
a few recent works have proposed hyperbolic prototypes for classification. Such
approaches enable effective learning in low-dimensional output spaces and can
exploit hierarchical relations amongst classes, but require privileged information
about class labels to position the hyperbolic prototypes. In this work, we propose
Hyperbolic Busemann Learning. The main idea behind our approach is to position
prototypes on the ideal boundary of the Poincaré ball, which does not require
prior label knowledge. To be able to compute proximities to ideal prototypes, we
introduce the penalised Busemann loss. We provide theory supporting the use
of ideal prototypes and the proposed loss by proving its equivalence to logistic
regression in the one-dimensional case. Empirically, we show that our approach
provides a natural interpretation of classification confidence, while outperforming
recent hyperspherical and hyperbolic prototype approaches.

1

Introduction

Classification by prototypes has a long tradition in machine learning. Foundational solutions such as
the Nearest Mean Classifier [46] represent classes as the mean prototypes in a fixed feature space.
Following approaches that learning a metric space for class prototypes [28], deep learning with
prototypes as points in network output spaces has gained traction [14, 17, 26, 32, 36, 41, 49, 51]. In
line with foundational approaches, the prototypes are positioned by computing the mean over all
training examples for each class. Deep learning by mean prototypes has shown to be effective for
tasks such as few-shot learning [14, 32, 36, 41] and zero-shot recognition [41, 49, 51].
To avoid the need to re-learn prototypes or to enable the use of prior label knowledge, several recent
works have proposed deep networks with prototypes in non-Euclidean output spaces. Hyperspherical
prototype approaches initialize prototypes on the sphere or its higher-dimensional generalization,
based on pair-wise angular separation [29, 39] or with the help of word embeddings [4, 43] using
a cosine similarity loss between example outputs and class prototypes. Hyperspherical prototypes
alleviate the need to re-position prototypes continuously and allow to optionally include prior semantic
knowledge about the classes. Recently, a few works have extended prototype-based learning to the
hyperbolic domain, where prototypes are obtained by embedding label hierarchies [23, 24]. While
hyperbolic prototype approaches provide more hierarchically coherent classification results, prior
hierarchical knowledge is required to embed prototypes. This paper strives to combine the best of both
non-Euclidean worlds, namely efficient low-dimensional embeddings from hyperbolic prototypes
and the knowledge-free positioning from hyperspherical prototypes.
We make three contributions in this work. First, we introduce a hyperbolic prototype network with
class prototypes given as points on the ideal boundary of the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic
geometry. Second, we propose the penalized Busemann loss, which enables us to compute proximities
between example outputs in hyperbolic space and prototypes at the ideal boundary, an impossible
task for existing distance metrics, which put the ideal boundary at infinite distance from all other
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

