G-PATE: Scalable Differentially Private Data Generator via
Private Aggregation of Teacher Discriminators

Yunhui Long1⇤ Boxin Wang1⇤

Zhuolin Yang1

Carl A. Gunter1
1

Bhavya Kailkhura2

Aston Zhang1

Bo Li1

University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign 2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
{ylong4, boxinw2, zhuolin5, lzhang74, cgunter, lbo}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in machine learning have largely benefited from the massive
accessible training data. However, large-scale data sharing has raised great privacy
concerns. In this work, we propose a novel privacy-preserving data Generative
model based on the PATE framework (G-PATE), aiming to train a scalable differentially private data generator which preserves high generated data utility. Our
approach leverages generative adversarial nets to generate data, combined with
private aggregation among different discriminators to ensure strong privacy guarantees. Compared to existing approaches, G-PATE significantly improves the use of
privacy budgets. In particular, we train a student data generator with an ensemble of
teacher discriminators and propose a novel private gradient aggregation mechanism
to ensure differential privacy on all information that flows from teacher discriminators to the student generator. In addition, with random projection and gradient
discretization, the proposed gradient aggregation mechanism is able to effectively
deal with high-dimensional gradient vectors. Theoretically, we prove that G-PATE
ensures differential privacy for the data generator. Empirically, we demonstrate the
superiority of G-PATE over prior work through extensive experiments. We show
that G-PATE is the first work being able to generate high-dimensional image data
with high data utility under limited privacy budgets ("  1). Our code is available
at https://github.com/AI-secure/G-PATE.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has been applied to a wide range of applications such as face recognition [30, 39, 21,
22], autonomous driving [26], and medical diagnoses [8, 20]. However, most learning methods rely
on the availability of large-scale training datasets containing sensitive information such as personal
photos or medical records. Therefore, such sensitive datasets are often hard to be shared due to privacy
concerns [40]. To handle this challenge, data providers sometimes release synthetic datasets produced
by generative models learned on the original data. Though recent studies show that generative
models such as generative adversarial networks (GAN) [14] can generate synthetic records that are
indistinguishable from the original data distribution, there is no theoretical guarantee on the privacy
protection. While privacy definitions such as differential privacy [9] and Rényi differential privacy
[27] provide rigorous privacy guarantee, applying them to synthetic data generation is nontrivial.
Recently, two approaches have been proposed to combine differential privacy with synthetic data generation: DP-GAN [35] and PATE-GAN [37]. DP-GAN modifies GAN by training the discriminator
using differentially private stochastic gradient descent. Though it achieves privacy guarantee due to
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

