EF21: A New, Simpler, Theoretically Better,
and Practically Faster Error Feedback

Peter Richtárik
KAUST*

Igor Sokolov
KAUST

Ilyas Fatkhullin
KAUST† & TU Munich

Abstract
Error feedback (EF), also known as error compensation, is an immensely popular
convergence stabilization mechanism in the context of distributed training of supervised machine learning models enhanced by the use of contractive communication
compression mechanisms, such as Top-𝑘. First proposed by Seide et al. [2014] as
a heuristic, EF resisted any theoretical understanding until recently [Stich et al.,
2018, Alistarh et al., 2018]. While these early breakthroughs were followed by
a steady stream of works offering various improvements and generalizations, the
current theoretical understanding of EF is still very limited. Indeed, to the best of
our knowledge, all existing analyses either i) apply to the single node setting only,
ii) rely on very strong and often unreasonable assumptions, such as global boundedness of the gradients, or iterate-dependent assumptions that cannot be checked
a-priori and may not hold in practice, or iii) circumvent these issues via the introduction of additional unbiased compressors, which increase the communication
cost. In this work we fix all these deficiencies by proposing and analyzing a new EF
mechanism, which we call EF21, which consistently and substantially outperforms
EF in practice. Moreover, our theoretical analysis relies on standard assumptions
only, works in the distributed heterogeneous data setting, and leads to better and
more meaningful rates. In particular, we prove that EF21 enjoys a fast 𝒪(1/𝑇 )
convergence rate for smooth nonconvex problems, beating the previous bound of
𝒪(1/𝑇 2/3 ), which was shown under a strong bounded gradients assumption. We
further improve this to a fast linear rate for Polyak-Lojasiewicz functions, which
is the first linear convergence result for an error feedback method not relying on
unbiased compressors. Since EF has a large number of applications where it reigns
supreme, we believe that our 2021 variant, EF21, can have a large impact on the
practice of communication efficient distributed learning.

1

Introduction

In order to obtain state-of-the-art performance, modern machine learning models rely on elaborate
architectures, need to be trained on data sets of enormous sizes, and involve a very large number of
parameters. Some of the most successful models are heavily over-parameterized, which means that
they involve more parameters than the number of available training data points [Arora et al., 2018].
Naturally, these circumstances should inform the design of optimization methods that could be most
efficient to perform the training.
First, the reliance on sophisticated model architectures, as opposed to simple linear models, generally
leads to nonconvex optimization problems, which are more challenging than convex problems [Jain
and Kar, 2017]. Second, the need for very large training data sizes necessitates the use of distributed
*
†

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
This paper was written while Ilyas Fatkhullin was an intern at KAUST.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

