Tensor decomposition of higher-order correlations by
nonlinear Hebbian plasticity
Gabriel Koch Ocker
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Boston University
Boston, MA 02136
gkocker@bu.edu

Michael A. Buice
MindScope Program
Allen Institute
Seattle, WA 98109
michaelbu@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Biological synaptic plasticity exhibits nonlinearities that are not accounted for by
classic Hebbian learning rules. Here, we introduce a simple family of generalized
nonlinear Hebbian learning rules. We study the computations implemented by their
dynamics in the simple setting of a neuron receiving feedforward inputs. These
nonlinear Hebbian rules allow a neuron to learn tensor decompositions of its higherorder input correlations. The particular input correlation decomposed and the form
of the decomposition depend on the location of nonlinearities in the plasticity
rule. For simple, biologically motivated parameters, the neuron learns eigenvectors
of higher-order input correlation tensors. We prove that tensor eigenvectors are
attractors and determine their basins of attraction. We calculate the volume of those
basins, showing that the dominant eigenvector has the largest basin of attraction.
We then study arbitrary learning rules and find that any learning rule that admits a
finite Taylor expansion into the neural input and output also has stable equilibria at
generalized eigenvectors of higher-order input correlation tensors. Nonlinearities
in synaptic plasticity thus allow a neuron to encode higher-order input correlations
in a simple fashion.

1

Introduction

In Hebbian learning, potentiation of the net synaptic weight between two neurons is driven by the
correlation between pre- and postsynaptic activity [1]. That postulate is a cornerstone of the theory
of synaptic plasticity and learning [2, 3]. In its basic form, the Hebbian model leads to runaway
potentiation or depression of synapses, since the pre-post correlation increases with increasing
synaptic weight [4]. That runaway potentiation can be stabilized by supplemental homeostatic
plasticity dynamics [5], by weight dependence in the learning rule [6, 7], or by synaptic scaling
regulating a neuron’s total synaptic weight [8, 9]. In 1982, Erkki Oja observed that a linear neuron
with Hebbian plasticity and synaptic scaling learns the first principal component of its inputs [10]. In
1985, Oja and Karhunen proved that this is a global attractor of the Hebbian dynamics [11]. This led
to a fountain of research on unsupervised feature learning in neural networks [12, 13].
Principal component analysis (PCA) describes second-order features of a random variable. Both
naturalistic stimuli and neural activity can, however, exhibit higher-order correlations [14, 15].
Canonical models of retinal and thalamic processing whiten inputs, removing pairwise features
[16–22]. Beyond-pairwise features, encoded in tensors, can provide a powerful substrate for learning
from data [23–27].
The basic Hebbian postulate does not take into account fundamental nonlinear aspects of biological
synaptic plasticity in cortical pyramidal neurons. First, synaptic plasticity depends on beyond-pairwise
activity correlations [28–33]. Second, spatially clustered and temporally coactive synapses exhibit
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

