Tractable Regularization of Probabilistic Circuits

Guy Van den Broeck
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Anji Liu
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
liuanji@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) are a promising avenue for probabilistic modeling.
They combine advantages of probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) with those
of neural networks (NNs). Crucially, however, they are tractable probabilistic
models, supporting efficient and exact computation of many probabilistic inference
queries, such as marginals and MAP. Further, since PCs are structured computation graphs, they can take advantage of deep-learning-style parameter updates,
which greatly improves their scalability. However, this innovation also makes
PCs prone to overfitting, which has been observed in many standard benchmarks.
Despite the existence of abundant regularization techniques for both PGMs and
NNs, they are not effective enough when applied to PCs. Instead, we re-think
regularization for PCs and propose two intuitive techniques, data softening and
entropy regularization, that both take advantage of PCs’ tractability and still have
an efficient implementation as a computation graph. Specifically, data softening provides a principled way to add uncertainty in datasets in closed form,
which implicitly regularizes PC parameters. To learn parameters from a softened dataset, PCs only need linear time by virtue of their tractability. In entropy regularization, the exact entropy of the distribution encoded by a PC can
be regularized directly, which is again infeasible for most other density estimation models. We show that both methods consistently improve the generalization
performance of a wide variety of PCs. Moreover, when paired with a simple PC
structure, we achieved state-of-the-art results on 10 out of 20 standard discrete
density estimation benchmarks. Open-source code and experiments are available
at https://github.com/UCLA-StarAI/Tractable-PC-Regularization.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) [1, 2] are considered to be the lingua franca for Tractable Probabilistic
Models (TPMs) as they offer a unified framework to abstract from a wide variety of TPM circuit
representations, such as arithmetic circuits (ACs) [3], sum-product networks (SPNs) [4], and probabilistic sentential decision diagrams (PSDDs) [5]. PCs are a successful combination of classic
probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) and neural networks (NNs). Moreover, by enforcing various
structural properties, PCs permit efficient and exact computation of a large family of probabilistic
inference queries [6, 7, 8]. The ability to answer these queries leads to successful applications in
areas such as model compression [9] and model bias detection [10, 11]. At the same time, PCs are
analogous to NNs since their evaluation is also carried out using computation graphs. By exploiting
the parallel computation power of GPUs, dedicated implementations [2, 12] can train a complex PC
with millions of parameters in minutes. These innovations have made PCs much more expressive and
scalable to richer datasets that are beyond the reach of “older” TPMs [13].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

