On Inductive Biases for Heterogeneous Treatment
Effect Estimation
Alicia Curth
University of Cambridge
amc253@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We investigate how to exploit structural similarities of an individual’s potential
outcomes (POs) under different treatments to obtain better estimates of conditional
average treatment effects in finite samples. Especially when it is unknown whether
a treatment has an effect at all, it is natural to hypothesize that the POs are similar –
yet, some existing strategies for treatment effect estimation employ regularization
schemes that implicitly encourage heterogeneity even when it does not exist and fail
to fully make use of shared structure. In this paper, we investigate and compare three
end-to-end learning strategies to overcome this problem – based on regularization,
reparametrization and a flexible multi-task architecture – each encoding inductive
bias favoring shared behavior across POs. To build understanding of their relative
strengths, we implement all strategies using neural networks and conduct a wide
range of semi-synthetic experiments. We observe that all three approaches can
lead to substantial improvements upon numerous baselines and gain insight into
performance differences across various experimental settings.

1

Introduction

The advent of fields such as personalized medicine has led to rapid growth of the machine learning
(ML) literature on heterogeneous treatment effect estimation in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
To further advance the understanding of how to incorporate insights from other areas of ML into
treatment effect estimation, we revisit the well-established problem of estimating the conditional
average treatment effect (CATE) of a binary treatment within the potential outcomes (PO) framework
[9]. The PO framework allows to conceptualize the problem as estimating the expected difference
between an individual’s expected ‘potential’ outcome with and without treatment, of which only one
is observed in the factual world. This fundamental problem of causal inference [10] leads to the
consensus that CATE estimation is not ‘just another’ supervised learning problem [6].
Under the standard assumption of ignorability – which precludes hidden confounding – we consider
two statistical features central to estimating CATE: (i) the presence of confounding and (ii) CATE
being a contrast between two PO functions, possibly exhibiting simpler structure than each PO
separately. Much of the recent ML literature on CATE estimation has focused on the first feature, and
treated confounding as a covariate shift problem. At this point, a range of sophisticated solutions
exist which reduce the effect of confounding by balancing the covariate space [3, 4], importance
weighting [11, 12, 13, 14] or propensity drop-out [15]. How to exploit the second feature in an
end-to-end manner, however, has received little explicit attention so far and is what we focus on here.
We build on the intuition that the two tasks in the CATE problem – estimating the expected PO with
and without treatment – are expected to be strongly related in practical applications (regardless of the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

