Mitigating Covariate Shift in Imitation Learning
via Offline Data Without Great Coverage
Masatoshi Uehara∗
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
mu223@cornell.edu

Jonathan D. Chang∗
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
jdc396@cornell.edu
Dhruv Sreenivas
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
ds844@cornell.edu

Rahul Kidambi†
Amazon Search & AI
rk773@cornell.edu

Wen Sun
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper studies offline Imitation Learning (IL) where an agent learns to imitate
an expert demonstrator without additional online environment interactions. Instead, the learner is presented with a static offline dataset of state-action-next state
transition triples from a potentially less proficient behavior policy. We introduce
Model-based IL from Offline data (MILO): an algorithmic framework that utilizes
the static dataset to solve the offline IL problem efficiently both in theory and in
practice. In theory, even if the behavior policy is highly sub-optimal compared
to the expert, we show that as long as the data from the behavior policy provides
sufficient coverage on the expert state-action traces (and with no necessity for a
global coverage over the entire state-action space), MILO can provably combat
the covariate shift issue in IL. Complementing our theory results, we also demonstrate that a practical implementation of our approach mitigates covariate shift on
benchmark MuJoCo continuous control tasks. We demonstrate that with behavior
policies whose performances are less than half of that of the expert, MILO still
successfully imitates with an extremely low number of expert state-action pairs
while traditional offline IL methods such as behavior cloning (BC) fail completely.
Source code is provided at https://github.com/jdchang1/milo.

1

Introduction

Covariate shift is a core issue in Imitation Learning (IL). Traditional IL methods like behavior cloning
(BC) [49], while simple, suffer from covariate shift, learning a policy that can make arbitrary mistakes
in parts of the state space not covered by the expert dataset. This leads to compounding errors in the
agent’s performance [57], hurting the generalization capabilities in practice.
Prior works have presented several means to combat this phenomenon in IL. One line of thought
utilizes an interactive expert, i.e. an expert that can be queried at an arbitrary state encountered during
the training procedure. Interactive IL algorithms such as DAgger [59], LOLS [15], DART [40], and
AggreVaTe(D) [58; 66] utilize a reduction to no-regret online learning and demonstrate that under
certain conditions, they can successfully learn a policy that imitates the expert. These interactive IL
algorithms, however, cannot provably avoid covariate shift if the expert is not recoverable. That is,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work done outside Amazon

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

