Think Big, Teach Small:
Do Language Models Distil Occam’s Razor?

Gonzalo Jaimovitch-López1

David Castellano-Falcón1

Cèsar Ferri1

José Hernández-Orallo1,2
1

2

VRAIN - Universitat Politècnica de València
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence - University of Cambridge

{gonzalojaimovitch,dcastf01}@gmail.com,cferri@dsic.upv.es,jorallo@upv.es

Abstract
Large language models have recently shown a remarkable ability for few-shot
learning, including patterns of algorithmic nature. However, it is still an open
question to determine what kind of patterns these models can capture and how
many examples they need in their prompts. We frame this question as a teaching
problem with strong priors, and study whether language models can identify simple
algorithmic concepts from small witness sets. In particular, we explore how several
GPT architectures, program induction systems and humans perform in terms of
the complexity of the concept and the number of additional examples, and how
much their behaviour differs. This first joint analysis of language models and
machine teaching can address key questions for artificial intelligence and machine
learning, such as whether some strong priors, and Occam’s razor in particular, can
be distilled from data, making learning from a few examples possible.

1

Introduction

An effective and reliable interaction between humans and machines depends on a proper understanding
of their priors. The alignment between these priors, in the form of knowledge and other predispositions
used as bias, is especially critical for communication and learning (Sun et al., 2020). For instance,
after a human utters the prompt “on off on off on”, another human would expect “off” to be a more
likely continuation than “on”. In contrast, after the prompt “twinkle twinkle little” we would expect
“star” to be more likely. The former depends on an abstract pattern intrinsic to the sequence (a simple
algorithmic sequence alternating “on” and “off”), while the latter depends on some language pattern
extrinsic to the sequence (common use in the English language because of a popular song).
Language models are a kind of AI systems extrapolating sequences of symbols, and are very good at
exploiting the extrinsic patterns that are borrowed from humans after training over massive natural
language corpora. However, it is only recently, with systems such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018),
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), that we see how these models can also
discover some intrinsic patterns provided in the prompts. This kind of inference is called ‘few-shot
learning’, even if there is no further training or fine-tuning of the model. Many of these language
models are based on transformers and other attention-based architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017),
which do not feature recursion or loops, unlike some approaches based on recurrent neural networks.
Some particularly well-chosen and optimised prompts have shown remarkable extrapolations (Xu
et al., 2020; Izacard and Grave, 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2021), illustrating this new kind of abstraction
on the go. However, it is unclear how elaborate or algorithmic these abstractions can be. More
studies are needed to determine the optimal prompts and example order that make the model capture
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

