Collaborative Learning in the Jungle
(Decentralized, Byzantine, Heterogeneous,
Asynchronous and Nonconvex Learning)

El-Mahdi El-Mhamdi ∗
École Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
el-mahdi.el-mhamdi@polytechnique.edu
Rachid Guerraoui ∗
IC School, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
rachid.guerraoui@epfl.ch

Sadegh Farhadkhani ∗
IC School, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
sadegh.farhadkhani@epfl.ch

Arsany Guirguis ∗
IC School, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
arsany.guirguis@epfl.ch

Lê-Nguyên Hoang ∗
IC School, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
le.hoang@epfl.ch

Sébastien Rouault ∗
IC School, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
sebastien.rouault@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study Byzantine collaborative learning, where n nodes seek to collectively
learn from each others’ local data. The data distribution may vary from one node
to another. No node is trusted, and f < n nodes can behave arbitrarily. We prove
that collaborative learning is equivalent to a new form of agreement, which we call
averaging agreement. In this problem, nodes start each with an initial vector and
seek to approximately agree on a common vector, which is close to the average of
honest nodes’ initial vectors. We present two asynchronous solutions to averaging
agreement, each we prove optimal according to some dimension. The first, based on
the minimum-diameter averaging, requires n ≥ 6f +1, but achieves asymptotically
the best-possible averaging constant up to a multiplicative constant. The second,
based on reliable broadcast and coordinate-wise trimmed mean, achieves optimal
Byzantine resilience, i.e., n ≥ 3f + 1. Each of these algorithms induces an optimal
Byzantine collaborative learning protocol. In particular, our equivalence yields new
impossibility theorems on what any collaborative learning algorithm can achieve
in adversarial and heterogeneous environments.

1

Introduction

The distributed nature of data, the prohibitive cost of data transfers and the privacy concerns all call
for collaborative machine learning. The idea consists for each machine to keep its data locally and to
“simply” exchange with other machines what it learned so far. If all machines correctly communicate
and execute the algorithms assigned to them, collaborative learning is rather easy. It can be achieved
through the standard workhorse optimization algorithm: stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [37],
which can be effectively distributed through averaging [26].
∗

Authors are listed alphabetically.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

