Understanding and Improving Early Stopping for
Learning with Noisy Labels

Yingbin Bai1∗ Erkun Yang2∗ Bo Han3
Jiatong Li4 Yinian Mao4 Gang Niu5
1

Yanhua Yang2
Tongliang Liu1†

TML Lab, University of Sydney; 2 Xidian University; 3 Hong Kong Baptist University;
4
Meituan-Dianping Group; 5 RIKEN AIP

Abstract
The memorization effect of deep neural network (DNN) plays a pivotal role in
many state-of-the-art label-noise learning methods. To exploit this property, the
early stopping trick, which stops the optimization at the early stage of training,
is usually adopted. Current methods generally decide the early stopping point
by considering a DNN as a whole. However, a DNN can be considered as a
composition of a series of layers, and we find that the latter layers in a DNN are
much more sensitive to label noise, while their former counterparts are quite robust.
Therefore, selecting a stopping point for the whole network may make different
DNN layers antagonistically affect each other, thus degrading the final performance.
In this paper, we propose to separate a DNN into different parts and progressively
train them to address this problem. Instead of the early stopping which trains a
whole DNN all at once, we initially train former DNN layers by optimizing the
DNN with a relatively large number of epochs. During training, we progressively
train the latter DNN layers by using a smaller number of epochs with the preceding
layers fixed to counteract the impact of noisy labels. We term the proposed method
as progressive early stopping (PES). Despite its simplicity, compared with the
traditional early stopping, PES can help to obtain more promising and stable results.
Furthermore, by combining PES with existing approaches on noisy label training,
we achieve state-of-the-art performance on image classification benchmarks. The
code is made public at https://github.com/tmllab/PES.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have revolutionized a wide variety of tasks, such as image processing, speech
recognition, and language modeling [7], However, this highly relies on the availability of large
annotated data, which may not be feasible in practice. Instead, many large datasets with lower
quality annotations are collected from online queries [5] or social-network tagging [18]. Such
annotations inevitably contain mistakes or label noise. As deep networks have large model capacities,
they can easily memorize and eventually overfit the noisy labels, leading to poor generalization
performance [36]. Therefore, it is of great importance to develop a methodology that is robust to
noisy annotations.
Existing methods on learning with noisy labels (LNL) can be mainly categorized into two groups:
model-based and model-free algorithms. Methods in the first category mainly model noisy labels with
the noise transition matrix [24, 34, 33, 30]. With perfectly estimated noise transition matrix, models
trained with corrected losses can approximate to the models trained with clean labels. However,
∗
†

co-first author
Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au)

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

