On Joint Learning for Solving Placement and
Routing in Chip Design

Ruoyu Cheng
Junchi Yan∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 200240
{roy account,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
For its advantage in GPU acceleration and less dependency on human experts,
machine learning has been an emerging tool for solving the placement and routing
problems, as two critical steps in modern chip design flow. Being still in its
early stage, there are fundamental issues: scalability, reward design, and end-toend learning paradigm etc. To achieve end-to-end placement learning, we first
propose a joint learning method termed by DeepPlace for the placement of macros
and standard cells, by the integration of reinforcement learning with a gradient
based optimization scheme. To further bridge the placement with the subsequent
routing task, we also develop a joint learning approach via reinforcement learning
to fulfill both macro placement and routing, which is called DeepPR. One key
design in our (reinforcement) learning paradigm involves a multi-view embedding
model to encode both global graph level and local node level information of the
input macros. Moreover, the random network distillation is devised to encourage
exploration. Experiments on public chip design benchmarks show that our method
can effectively learn from experience and also provides intermediate placement for
the post standard cell placement, within few hours for training.

1

Introduction

With the breakthrough of semiconductor technology, the scale of integrated circuit (IC) has surged
exponentially, which challenges the scalability of existing Electronic Design Automation (EDA)
algorithms and technologies. Placement is one of the most crucial but time-consuming steps of the
chip design process. It maps the components of a netlist including macros and standard cells to
locations on the chip layout, where standard cells are basic logic cells e.g. logic gates and macros
are functional blocks e.g. SRAMs. A good placement leads to better chip area utilization, timing
performance and routability. Based on the placement assignment, routing assigns wires to connect the
components, which is strongly coupled with placement task. In addition, the placement solution also
serves as a rough estimation of wirelength and congestion, which is valuable in guiding the earlier
stages of design flow. The objective of placement is to minimize metrics of power, performance, and
area (PPA) without violating the constraints such as placement density and routing congestion.
We provide a pipeline to the placement problem: the input of placement is a netlist represented by
hypergraph H = (V, E), where V denotes set of nodes (cells) and E denotes set of hyperedges
(nets) that indicates the connectivity between circuit components. Marco placement firstly determines
the locations of macros on the chip canvas, followed by immense numbers of standard cells adjust
their position based on adjacent macros and finally obtains the full placement solution, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). The routing problem, however, takes placement solution as input and tries to connect
∗

Correspondence author is Junchi Yan.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

