Tractable Density Estimation on Learned Manifolds
with Conformal Embedding Flows
Brendan Leigh Ross
Layer 6 AI
brendan@layer6.ai

Jesse C. Cresswell
Layer 6 AI
jesse@layer6.ai

Abstract
Normalizing flows are generative models that provide tractable density estimation
via an invertible transformation from a simple base distribution to a complex target
distribution. However, this technique cannot directly model data supported on an
unknown low-dimensional manifold, a common occurrence in real-world domains
such as image data. Recent attempts to remedy this limitation have introduced
geometric complications that defeat a central benefit of normalizing flows: exact
density estimation. We recover this benefit with Conformal Embedding Flows, a
framework for designing flows that learn manifolds with tractable densities. We
argue that composing a standard flow with a trainable conformal embedding is the
most natural way to model manifold-supported data. To this end, we present a series
of conformal building blocks and apply them in experiments with synthetic and realworld data to demonstrate that flows can model manifold-supported distributions
without sacrificing tractable likelihoods.

1

Introduction

Deep generative modelling is the task of modelling a complex, high-dimensional data distribution from
a sample set. Research has encompassed major approaches such as normalizing flows (NFs) [16, 59],
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [23], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [36], autoregressive
models [52], energy-based models [18], score-based models [64], and diffusion models [29, 63]. NFs
in particular describe a distribution by modelling a change-of-variables mapping to a known base
density. This approach provides the unique combination of efficient inference, efficient sampling,
and exact density estimation, but in practice generated images have not been as detailed or realistic as
those of those of other methods [7, 10, 29, 32, 68].
One limitation of traditional NFs is the use of a base density with the same dimensionality as the
data. This stands in contrast to models such as GANs and VAEs, which generate data by sampling
from a low-dimensional latent prior and mapping the sample to data space. In many application
domains, it is known or commonly assumed that the data of interest lives on a lower-dimensional
manifold embedded in the higher-dimensional data space [21]. For example, when modelling images,
data samples belong to [0, 1]n , where n is the number of pixels in each image and each pixel has a
brightness in the domain [0, 1]. However, most points in this data space correspond to meaningless
noise, whereas meaningful images of objects lie on a submanifold of dimension m ⌧ n. A traditional
NF cannot take advantage of the lower-dimensional nature of realistic images.
There is growing research interest in injective flows, which account for unknown manifold structure
by incorporating a base density of lower dimensionality than the data space [6, 12, 13, 39, 41].
Flows with low-dimensional latent spaces could benefit from making better use of fewer parameters,
being more memory efficient, and could reveal information about the intrinsic structure of the data.
Properties of the data manifold, such as its dimensionality or the semantic meaning of latent directions,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

