Best-of-All-Worlds Bounds for
Online Learning with Feedback Graphs

Liad Erez
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
liaderez1@gmail.com

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study the online learning with feedback graphs framework introduced by Mannor and Shamir [24], in which the feedback received by the online learner is specified by a graph 𝐺 over the available actions. We develop
an algorithm that simultap
neously achieves regret bounds of the form: O( θ (𝐺)𝑇) with adversarial
losses;
p
O( θ (𝐺) polylog 𝑇) with stochastic losses; and O( θ (𝐺) polylog 𝑇 + θ (𝐺)𝐶) with
stochastic losses subject to 𝐶 adversarial corruptions. Here, θ (𝐺) is the clique
covering number of the graph 𝐺. Our algorithm is an instantiation of Follow-theRegularized-Leader with a novel regularization that can be seen as a product of
a Tsallis entropy component (inspired by Zimmert and Seldin [27]) and a Shannon entropy component (analyzed in the corrupted stochastic case by Amir et al.
[3]), thus subtly interpolating between the two forms of entropies. One of our
key technical contributions is in establishing the convexity of this regularizer and
controlling its inverse Hessian, despite its complex product structure.

1

Introduction

Online learning models a repeated interaction between a learner and an environment. In this
framework, the learner has to choose an arm (or action) from a set of 𝑁 arms, iteratively across 𝑇
rounds. After choosing an arm the learner incurs an associated loss and receives feedback from the
environment. The feedback the learner receives can range between the full-information setting where
after choosing an action the learner sees the losses of all 𝑁 arms, and the multi-armed bandit (MAB)
setting where only the loss of the arm chosen at the current round is revealed. Traditionally, the way
the losses are generated is either in an adversarial manner (i.e., can be arbitrary in each round), or
stochastically (i.e., sampled i.i.d. from an unknown distribution).
Recently, online algorithms achieving best-of-both-worlds guarantees have drawn significant attention: these are algorithms that are able to perform optimally in both the stochastic and adversarial
settings, without prior knowledge of the regime and its parameters. Recent advances in this line of
work [3, 27, 13, 28, 18] have resulted with algorithms that achieve a remarkable best-of-all-worlds
guarantee: in a general intermediate adversarially-corrupted regime, where losses are generated
stochastically but then may be modified by an adversary in an arbitrary way, these algorithms attain
regret that grows with the square-root of the total amount of corruption introduced. Even more, these
guarantees significantly outperform those obtained by specialized algorithms designed exclusively
for the corrupted stochastic setting [22, 11, 23].
Our goal in this work is to extend these best-of-all-worlds results from the full-information and MAB
settings to more general online learning problems and feedback models. We focus on the general
framework of online learning with graph-structure feedback, originally introduced by Mannor and
Shamir [24] and studied extensively since (e.g., [1, 10, 16, 9, 21, 20, 12]). In this model, feedback is
described by an undirected graph 𝐺 over the arms; the set of observations received following each
prediction is comprised of the loss of the chosen arm as well as the loss of all of its neighbors in 𝐺.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

