Grad2Task: Improved Few-shot Text Classification
Using Gradients for Task Representation
Jixuan Wang1,2,3
Kuan-Chieh Wang1,2
Frank Rudzicz1,2,4
Michael Brudno1,2,3
1
2
3
4
University of Toronto, Vector Institute, University Health Network, Unity Health Toronto
{jixuan, wangkua1, frank, brudno}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Large pretrained language models (LMs) like BERT have improved performance
in many disparate natural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, fine tuning
such models requires a large number of training examples for each target task.
Simultaneously, many realistic NLP problems are "few shot", without a sufficiently
large training set. In this work, we propose a novel conditional neural process-based
approach for few-shot text classification that learns to transfer from other diverse
tasks with rich annotation. Our key idea is to represent each task using gradient
information from a base model and to train an adaptation network that modulates a
text classifier conditioned on the task representation. While previous task-aware
few-shot learners represent tasks by input encoding, our novel task representation
is more powerful, as the gradient captures input-output relationships of a task.
Experimental results show that our approach outperforms traditional fine-tuning,
sequential transfer learning, and state-of-the-art meta learning approaches on a
collection of diverse few-shot tasks. We further conducted analysis and ablations
to justify our design choices.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based pretrained large-scale language models (LMs) have achieved tremendous success
on many NLP tasks [15, 34], but require a large number of in-domain labeled examples for finetuning [54]. One approach to alleviate that issue is to fine-tune the model on an intermediate (source)
task that is related to the target task. While previous work has focused on this setting for a single
source task [33, 50], the problem of transferring from a set of source tasks has not been thoroughly
considered. Wang et al. [51] showed that a naïve combination of multiple source tasks may negatively
impact target task performance. Additionally, transfer learning methods typically consider the setting
where more than a medium (N>100) number of training examples are available for both the source
and target tasks.
In this work we develop a method to improve a large pre-trained LM for few-shot text classification
problems by transferring from multiple source tasks. While it is possible to directly adapt recent
advances in meta-learning developed for few-shot image classification, a unique challenge in the
NLP setting is that source tasks do no share the same task structure. Namely, on standard few-shot
image classification benchmarks, the training tasks are sampled from a “single” larger dataset, and
the label space contains the same task structure for all tasks. In contrast, in text classification tasks,
the set of source tasks available during training can range from sentiment analysis to grammatical
acceptability judgment. Different source tasks could not only be different in terms of input domain,
but also their task structure (i.e. label semantics, and number of output labels).
This challenging problem requires resistance to overfitting due to its few-shot nature and more
task-specific adaptation due to the distinct nature among tasks. Fine-tuning based approaches are
known to suffer from the overfitting issue and approaches like MAML [17] and prototypical networks
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

