Data driven semi-supervised learning

Maria-Florina Balcan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Dravyansh Sharma
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dravyans@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider a novel data driven approach for designing semi-supervised learning
algorithms that can effectively learn with only a small number of labeled examples.
We focus on graph-based techniques, where the unlabeled examples are connected
in a graph under the implicit assumption that similar nodes likely have similar labels.
Over the past two decades, several elegant graph-based semi-supervised learning
algorithms for inferring the labels of the unlabeled examples given the graph and a
few labeled examples have been proposed. However, the problem of how to create
the graph (which impacts the practical usefulness of these methods significantly)
has been relegated to heuristics and domain-specific art, and no general principles
have been proposed. In this work we present a novel data driven approach for
learning the graph and provide strong formal guarantees in both the distributional
and online learning formalizations. We show how to leverage problem instances
coming from an underlying problem domain to learn the graph hyperparameters for
commonly used parametric families of graphs that provably perform well on new
instances from the same domain. We obtain low regret and efficient algorithms
in the online setting, and generalization guarantees in the distributional setting.
We also show how to combine several very different similarity metrics and learn
multiple hyperparameters, our results hold for large classes of problems. We expect
some of the tools and techniques we develop along the way to be of independent
interest, for data driven algorithms more generally.

1

Introduction

In recent years machine learning has found gainful application in diverse domains. A major bottleneck
of the currently used approaches is the heavy dependence on expensive labeled data. Advances in
cheap computing and storage have made it relatively easier to store and process large amounts of
unlabeled data. Therefore, an important focus of the present research community is to develop general
domain-independent methods to learn effectively from the unlabeled data, along with a small amount
of labels. Achieving this goal would significantly elevate the state-of-the-art machine intelligence,
which currently lags behind the human capability of learning from a few labeled examples. Our work
is a step in this direction, and provides algorithms and guarantees that enable fundamental techniques
for semi-supervised learning to provably adapt to problem domains.
Graph-based approaches have been popular for learning from unlabeled data for the past two decades
[Zhu and Goldberg, 2009]. Labeled and unlabeled examples form the graph nodes and (possibly
weighted) edges denote the feature similarity between examples. The graph therefore captures how
each example is related to other examples, and by optimizing a suitably regularized objective over
it one obtains an efficient discriminative, nonparametric method for learning the labels. There are
several well-studied ways to define and regularize an objective on the graph [Chapelle et al., 2010],
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

