Heuristic-Guided Reinforcement Learning

Ching-An Cheng
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
chinganc@microsoft.com

Andrey Kolobov
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
akolobov@microsoft.com

Adith Swaminathan
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
adswamin@microsoft.com

Abstract
We provide a framework for accelerating reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
by heuristics constructed from domain knowledge or offline data. Tabula rasa
RL algorithms require environment interactions or computation that scales with
the horizon of the sequential decision-making task. Using our framework, we
show how heuristic-guided RL induces a much shorter-horizon subproblem that
provably solves the original task. Our framework can be viewed as a horizon-based
regularization for controlling bias and variance in RL under a finite interaction
budget. On the theoretical side, we characterize properties of a good heuristic
and its impact on RL acceleration. In particular, we introduce the novel concept
of an improvable heuristic, a heuristic that allows an RL agent to extrapolate
beyond its prior knowledge. On the empirical side, we instantiate our framework
to accelerate several state-of-the-art algorithms in simulated robotic control tasks
and procedurally generated games. Our framework complements the rich literature
on warm-starting RL with expert demonstrations or exploratory datasets, and
introduces a principled method for injecting prior knowledge into RL.

1

Introduction

Many recent empirical successes of reinforcement learning (RL) require solving problems with very
long decision-making horizons. OpenAI Five [1] used episodes that were 20000 timesteps on average,
while AlphaStar [2] used roughly 5000 timesteps. Long-term credit assignment is a very challenging
statistical problem, with the sample complexity growing quadratically (or worse) with the horizon [3].
Long horizons (or, equivalently, large discount factors) also increase RL’s computational burden,
leading to slow optimization convergence [4]. This makes RL algorithms require prohibitively large
amounts of interactions and compute: even with tuned hyperparameters, AlphaStar needed over 108
samples and OpenAI Five needed over 107 PFLOPS of compute.
A popular approach to mitigate the statistical and computational issues of tabula rasa RL methods is to
warm-start or regularize learning with prior knowledge [1, 2, 5–10]. For instance, AlphaStar learned
a policy and value function from human demonstrations and regularized the RL agent using imitation
learning (IL). AWAC [9] warm-started a policy using batch policy optimization on exploratory
datasets. While these approaches have been effective in different domains, none of them explicitly
address RL’s complexity dependence on horizon.
In this paper, we propose a complementary regularization technique that relies on heuristic value
functions, or heuristics1 for short, to effectively shorten the problem horizon faced by an online RL
agent for fast learning. We call this approach Heuristic-Guided Reinforcement Learning (HuRL).
The core idea is simple: given a Markov decision process (MDP) M = (S, A, P, r, γ) and a
heuristic h : S → R, we select a mixing coefficient λ ∈ [0, 1] and have the agent solve a new MDP
f = (S, A, P, re, γ
M
e) with a reshaped reward and a smaller discount (i.e. a shorter horizon):
re(s, a) := r(s, a) + (1 − λ)γEs0 ∼P (·|s,a) [h(s0 )] and γ
e := λγ.
(1)
1

We borrow this terminology from the planning literature to refer to guesses of V ∗ in an MDP [11].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

