Fair Scheduling for Time-dependent Resources

Bo Li ∗
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Hong Kong
comp-bo.li@polyu.edu.hk

Minming Li ∗
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
Kowloon Tang, Hong Kong
minming.li@cityu.edu.hk

Ruilong Zhang ∗ †
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
Kowloon Tang, Hong Kong
ruilzhang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We study a fair resource scheduling problem,nwhere a set of interval jobs are to be
allocated to heterogeneous machines controlled by intellectual agents. Each job
is associated with release time, deadline and processing time such that it can be
processed if its complete processing period is between its release time and deadline.
The machines gain possibly different utilities by processing different jobs, and
all jobs assigned to the same machine should be processed without overlap. We
consider two widely studied solution concepts, namely, maximin share fairness
and envy-freeness. For both criteria, we discuss the extent to which fair allocations
exist and present constant approximation algorithms for various settings.

1

Introduction

With the rapid progress of AI technologies, AI algorithms are widely deployed in many societal
settings such as the distribution of job and education opportunities where complex social effects may
significantly diminish the performance of the algorithms. To motivate our study, let us consider a
problem faced by the Students Affairs Office (SAO). An SAO clerk is assigning multiple part-time
jobs to the students who submitted job applications. Each part-time job occupies a consecutive time
period within a possibly flexible interval. For example, an one-hour math tutorial needs to be given
between 8:00am and 11:00am on June 26th. A feasible assignment requires that the jobs assigned to
an applicant can be scheduled without mutual overlap. The students are heterogeneous, i.e., different
students may hold different job preferences. It is important that the students are treated equally in
terms of getting job opportunities, and thus the clerk’s task is to make the assignment fair.
The SAO problem falls under the umbrella of the research on job scheduling, which has been studied
in numerous fields, including operations research Gentner et al. [2004], machine learning Paleja et
al. [2020], parallel computing Drozdowski [2009], cloud computing Al-Arasi and Saif [2020], etc.
Following the convention of job scheduling research, each part-time job, or job for short, is associated
with release time, deadline, and processing time. The students are modeled as machines, who have
different utility gains for completing jobs. Traditionally, the objective of designing scheduling
algorithms is solely focused on efficiency or profit. However, motivated by various real-world AI
driven deployments where the data points of the algorithms are real human beings who should be
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

