Learning and Generalization in RNNs

Abhishek Panigrahi ∗
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
ap34@princeton.edu

Navin Goyal
Microsoft Research India
navingo@microsoft.com

Abstract
Simple recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and their more advanced cousins LSTMs
etc. have been very successful in sequence modeling. Their theoretical understanding, however, is lacking and has not kept pace with the progress for feedforward
networks, where a reasonably complete understanding in the special case of highly
overparameterized one-hidden-layer networks has emerged. In this paper, we make
progress towards remedying this situation by proving that RNNs can learn functions
of sequences. In contrast to the previous work that could only deal with functions
of sequences that are sums of functions of individual tokens in the sequence, we
allow general functions. Conceptually and technically, we introduce new ideas
which enable us to extract information from the hidden state of the RNN in our
proofs—addressing a crucial weakness in previous work. We illustrate our results
on some regular language recognition problems.

1

Introduction

Simple Recurrent Neural Networks [1] also known as Elman RNNs or vanilla RNNs (just RNNs
henceforth) along with their more advanced versions such as LSTMs [2] and GRU [3] are among the
most successful models for processing sequential data, finding wide-ranging applications including
natural language processing, audio processing [4] and time series classification [5]. Feedforward
networks (FFNs) model functions on inputs of fixed length, such as vectors in Rd . In contrast, RNNs
model functions whose input consists of sequences of tokens x(1) , x(2) , . . ., where x(i) ∈ Rd for each
i. RNNs have a notion of memory; formally it is given by the hidden state vector which is denoted
by h(t) after processing the t-th token. RNNs apply a fixed function to h(t) and x(t+1) to compute
h(t+1) and the output. This fixed function is modeled by a neural networks with one hidden-layer.
Compared to FFNs, new challenges arise in the analysis of RNNs: for example, the use of memory
and the same function at each step introduces dependencies across time and RNN training suffers
from vanishing and exploding gradients [6].
Studies aimed at understanding the effectiveness of RNNs have been conducted since their introduction; for some of the early work, see, e.g., [7, 8]. These works take the form of experimental
probing of the inner workings of these models as well as theoretical studies. The theoretical studies
are often focused on expressibility, training and generalization questions in isolation rather than all
together—the latter needs to be addressed to approach full understanding of RNNs and appears to be
far more challenging. While experimental probing has continued apace, e.g., [9, 10], progress on
theoretical front has been slow. It is only recently that training and generalization are starting to be
addressed in the wake of progress on the relatively easier case of FFNs as discussed next.
RNNs are closely related to deterministic finite automata [11, 9] as well as to dynamical systems.
With finite precision and ReLU activation, they are equivalent to finite automata [11] in computational
power. In the last few years progress was made on theoretical analysis of overparameterized FFNs
∗

Work done as a research fellow in Microsoft Research India

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

