Online Variational Filtering and Parameter Learning

Andrew Campbell ∗
Yuyang Shi ∗
Tom Rainforth
Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
{campbell, yshi, rainforth, doucet}@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a variational method for online state estimation and parameter learning
in state-space models (SSMs), a ubiquitous class of latent variable models for
sequential data. As per standard batch variational techniques, we use stochastic
gradients to simultaneously optimize a lower bound on the log evidence with
respect to both model parameters and a variational approximation of the states’
posterior distribution. However, unlike existing approaches, our method is able
to operate in an entirely online manner, such that historic observations do not
require revisitation after being incorporated and the cost of updates at each time
step remains constant, despite the growing dimensionality of the joint posterior
distribution of the states. This is achieved by utilizing backward decompositions
of this joint posterior distribution and of its variational approximation, combined
with Bellman-type recursions for the evidence lower bound and its gradients.
We demonstrate the performance of this methodology across several examples,
including high-dimensional SSMs and sequential Variational Auto-Encoders.

1

Introduction

Many tasks in machine learning with time series data—such as video prediction [16, 27], speech
enhancement [35] or robot localization [9, 18, 28]—often need to be performed online. Online
techniques are also necessary in contexts as diverse as target tracking [4], weather prediction [13]
and financial forecasting [42]. A popular class of models for these sequential data are SSMs which,
when combined with neural network ideas, can also be used to define powerful sequential Variational
Auto-Encoders (VAEs); see e.g. [8, 15, 16, 30]. However, performing inference in SSMs is a
challenging problem and approximate inference techniques for such models remain an active research
area.
Formally, an SSM is described by a latent Markov process and an observation process. Even if the
model parameters are assumed known, online inference of the states of the latent process is a complex
problem known as filtering. Standard approximations such as the extended Kalman Filter (KF),
ensemble KF, and unscented KF can be used, but only provide an ad hoc Gaussian approximation to
the filter [13, 17, 37]. More generally, assumed density filtering techniques [3, 7, 32] can provide
other simple parametric family approximations. These approximate filtering methods can be used, in
turn, to develop online parameter learning procedures by either augmenting the state with the static
parameters or using gradient-based approaches. However, such approaches are notoriously unreliable
[19]. Particle Filtering (PF) methods, on the other hand, provide a more principled approach for
online state and parameter estimation with theoretical guarantees [11, 12, 19, 41], but the variance of
PF estimates typically scales exponentially with the state dimension [6].
Although they typically do not return consistent estimates, variational techniques provide an attractive
alternative for simultaneous state estimation and parameter learning which scales better to highdimensional latent states than PF, and are not restricted to simple parametric approximations. Many
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

