Equilibrium and non-Equilibrium regimes in the
learning of Restricted Boltzmann Machines

Aurélien Decelle1,2,†

Cyril Furtlehner2

Beatriz Seoane1,?
1

2

Departamento de Fı́sica Téorica, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, INRIA Tau team, LISN, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
†
adecelle@ucm.es; ? bseoane@ucm.es

Abstract
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) has been challenging for a long
time due to the difficulty of computing precisely the log-likelihood gradient. Over
the past decades, many works have proposed more or less successful training
recipes but without studying the crucial quantity of the problem: the mixing time,
i.e. the number of Monte Carlo iterations needed to sample new configurations
from a model. In this work, we show that this mixing time plays a crucial role
in the dynamics and stability of the trained model, and that RBMs operate in two
well-defined regimes, namely equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium, depending on
the interplay between this mixing time of the model and the number of steps, k,
used to approximate the gradient. We further show empirically that this mixing
time increases with the learning, which often implies a transition from one regime
to another as soon as k becomes smaller than this time. In particular, we show that
using the popular k (persistent) contrastive divergence approaches, with k small,
the dynamics of the learned model are extremely slow and often dominated by
strong out-of-equilibrium effects. On the contrary, RBMs trained in equilibrium
display faster dynamics, and a smooth convergence to dataset-like configurations
during the sampling. Finally we discuss how to exploit in practice both regimes
depending on the task one aims to fulfill: (i) short k can be used to generate
convincing samples in short learning times, (ii) large k (or increasingly large) is
needed to learn the correct equilibrium distribution of the RBM. Finally, the existence of these two operational regimes seems to be a general property of energy
based models trained via likelihood maximization.

1

Introduction

Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) are one of the generative stochastic neural networks that
have been available for decades [1] and are renowned for their capacity to learn complex datasets [2]
and draw similar new data. Furthermore, the hidden correlations found in the data are easily accessible [3, 4, 5], which is particularly interesting for a scientific use of Big Data. Despite these
positive features, RBMs still remain hard to train and evaluate, and hence to use in practical problems. In comparison, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [6] (for which it is much harder to
find a working architecture) are more commonly used, not only because of the advantages given by
convolutional layers, but also because the generative process does not depend on a costly sampling
procedure with an uncontrolled convergence time.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

