Backward-Compatible Prediction Updates:
A Probabilistic Approach

Frederik Träuble 1 ∗ †

Julius von Kügelgen 1,3 ∗

Francesco Locatello 2

Matthäus Kleindessner 2

Bernhard Schölkopf 2

Peter Gehler 2†

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Amazon Tübingen, Germany
3
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

Abstract
When machine learning systems meet real world applications, accuracy is only
one of several requirements. In this paper, we assay a complementary perspective
originating from the increasing availability of pre-trained and regularly improving state-of-the-art models. While new improved models develop at a fast pace,
downstream tasks vary more slowly or stay constant. Assume that we have a large
unlabelled data set for which we want to maintain accurate predictions. Whenever a
new and presumably better ML models becomes available, we encounter two problems: (i) given a limited budget, which data points should be re-evaluated using the
new model?; and (ii) if the new predictions differ from the current ones, should we
update? Problem (i) is about compute cost, which matters for very large data sets
and models. Problem (ii) is about maintaining consistency of the predictions, which
can be highly relevant for downstream applications; our demand is to avoid negative
flips, i.e., changing correct to incorrect predictions. In this paper, we formalize
the Prediction Update Problem and present an efficient probabilistic approach as
answer to the above questions. In extensive experiments on standard classification
benchmark data sets, we show that our method outperforms alternative strategies
along key metrics for backward-compatible prediction updates.

1

Introduction

The machine learning (ML) community develops new models at a fast pace: for example, just in
the past year, the state-of-the-art on ImageNet has changed at least five times [9, 10, 31, 50, 51].
As reproducibility has increasingly been scrutinized [33, 34, 42], it is now common practice to
release pre-trained models upon publication. In this work we take the perspective of an owner of an
unlabelled data set who is interested in keeping the best possible predictions at all times. When a new
pre-trained model is released, we face what we refer to as the Prediction Update Problem: (i) decide
which points in the data set to re-evaluate with the new model, and (ii) integrate the new, possibly
contradicting, predictions. For this task, we postulate the following three desiderata:
1. The prediction updates should improve overall accuracy.
2. The prediction updates should avoid introducing new errors.
3. The prediction updates should be as cheap as possible since the target data set could be huge.
∗
†

Work done while FT and JvK were interning at Amazon.
Correspondence to: frederik.traeuble@tuebingen.mpg.de and pgehler@amazon.com

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

