Multi-Objective Meta Learning

Feiyang Ye1,2,∗ , Baijiong Lin1,∗, Zhixiong Yue1,2 , Pengxin Guo1 , Qiao Xiao3 , and Yu Zhang1,4,†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
University of Technology Sydney
3
Eindhoven University of Technology
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{12060007,linbj,yuezx,12032913}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
{qiaoxiao7282,yu.zhang.ust}@gmail.com

1

Abstract
Meta learning with multiple objectives has been attracted much attention recently
since many applications need to consider multiple factors when designing learning
models. Existing gradient-based works on meta learning with multiple objectives
mainly combine multiple objectives into a single objective in a weighted sum manner. This simple strategy usually works but it requires to tune the weights associated
with all the objectives, which could be time consuming. Different from those works,
in this paper, we propose a gradient-based Multi-Objective Meta Learning (MOML)
framework without manually tuning weights. Specifically, MOML formulates the
objective function of meta learning with multiple objectives as a Multi-Objective
Bi-Level optimization Problem (MOBLP) where the upper-level subproblem is
to solve several possibly conflicting objectives for the meta learner. To solve the
MOBLP, we devise the first gradient-based optimization algorithm by alternatively solving the lower-level and upper-level subproblems via the gradient descent
method and the gradient-based multi-objective optimization method, respectively.
Theoretically, we prove the convergence properties of the proposed gradient-based
optimization algorithm. Empirically, we show the effectiveness of the proposed
MOML framework in several meta learning problems, including few-shot learning,
domain adaptation, multi-task learning, and neural architecture search. The source
code of MOML is available at https://github.com/Baijiong-Lin/MOML.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, deep learning has achieved great success in various fields [43] because it can
effectively and efficiently process massive and high-dimensional data. However, training a deep
learning model from scratch often requires a large amount of labeled data to learn a large number of
model parameters and needs to choose hyperparameters by hand.
As a way to address those problems by enabling models to learn how to learn, meta learning has
attracted considerable attention recently [19, 20]. Meta learning gains knowledge from multiple meta
training tasks so that the knowledge can be reused in new tasks or new environments rapidly with
a few training examples. Taken broadly, objective functions of meta learning models are usually
formulated as a bi-level optimization problem where the lower-level subproblem represents the
adaptation to a given task with learned meta parameters and the upper-level subproblem tries to
optimize these meta parameters via a meta objective [19]. Hence, from this view, meta learning has a
wide range of applications such as hyperparameter optimization [13], Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) [29], and Reinforcement Learning (RL) [68].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

