Neural Distance Embeddings for Biological Sequences

Gabriele Corso∗
MIT

Rex Ying
Stanford University

Michal Pándy
University of Cambridge

Petar Veličković
DeepMind

Jure Leskovec
Stanford University

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge

Abstract
The development of data-dependent heuristics and representations for biological
sequences that reflect their evolutionary distance is critical for large-scale biological
research. However, popular machine learning approaches, based on continuous
Euclidean spaces, have struggled with the discrete combinatorial formulation of
the edit distance that models evolution and the hierarchical relationship that characterises real-world datasets. We present Neural Distance Embeddings (NeuroSEED),
a general framework to embed sequences in geometric vector spaces, and illustrate
the effectiveness of the hyperbolic space that captures the hierarchical structure and
provides an average 22% reduction in embedding RMSE against the best competing
geometry. The capacity of the framework and the significance of these improvements are then demonstrated devising supervised and unsupervised NeuroSEED
approaches to multiple core tasks in bioinformatics. Benchmarked with common
baselines, the proposed approaches display significant accuracy and/or runtime
improvements on real-world datasets. As an example for hierarchical clustering,
the proposed pretrained and from-scratch methods match the quality of competing
baselines with 30x and 15x runtime reduction, respectively.

1

Introduction

Over the course of evolution, biological sequences constantly mutate and a large part of biological
research is based on the analysis of these mutations. Biologists have developed accurate statistical
models to estimate the evolutionary distance between pairs of sequences based on their edit distance
D(s1 , s2 ): the minimum number of (weighted) insertions, deletions or substitutions required to
transform a string s1 into another string s2 .
However, the computation of this edit distance kernel D with traditional methods is bound to a
quadratic complexity and hardly parallelizable, making its computation a bottleneck in large scale
analyses, such as microbiome studies [1, 2, 3]. Furthermore, the accurate computation of similarities
among multiple sequences, at the foundation of critical tasks such as hierarchical clustering and
multiple sequence alignment, is computationally intractable even for relatively small numbers of
sequences. Problems that in other spaces are relatively simple become combinatorially hard in the
space of sequences defined by the edit distance. For example, finding the Steiner string, a classical
problem in bioinformatics that can be thought of as computing the geometric median in the space of
sequences, is NP-complete.
Classical algorithms and heuristics [4, 5, 6, 7] widely used in bioinformatics for these tasks are
data-independent and, therefore, cannot exploit the low-dimensional manifold assumption that
characterises real-world data [8, 9, 10]. Leveraging the available data to produce efficient and data∗

Correspondence to gcorso@mit.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

