End-to-End Training of Multi-Document Reader and
Retriever for Open-Domain Question Answering
Devendra Singh Sachan1,2 , Siva Reddy1,2 , William Hamilton1,2 , Chris Dyer3 , Dani Yogatama3
1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
2
School of Computer Science, McGill University
3
DeepMind
sachande@mila.quebec, {siva, wlh}@cs.mcgill.ca
{cdyer, dyogatama}@deepmind.com

Abstract
We present an end-to-end differentiable training method for retrieval-augmented
open-domain question answering systems that combine information from multiple
retrieved documents when generating answers. We model retrieval decisions as
latent variables over sets of relevant documents. Since marginalizing over sets
of retrieved documents is computationally hard, we approximate this using an
expectation-maximization algorithm. We iteratively estimate the value of our latent
variable (the set of relevant documents for a given question) and then use this
estimate to update the retriever and reader parameters. We hypothesize that such
end-to-end training allows training signals to flow to the reader and then to the
retriever better than stage-wise training. This results in a retriever that is able
to select more relevant documents for a question and a reader that is trained on
more accurate documents to generate an answer. Experiments on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms all existing approaches
of comparable size by 2-3 absolute exact match points, achieving new state-of-theart results. Our results also demonstrate the feasibility of learning to retrieve to
improve answer generation without explicit supervision of retrieval decisions.

1

Introduction

Open-domain question answering (OpenQA) is a question answering task where the goal is to train a
language model to produce an answer for a given question. In contrast to many question answering
tasks, an OpenQA model is only provided with the question as its input without accompanying
documents that contain the answer. One of the most promising approaches to OpenQA is based on
augmenting the language model with an external knowledge source such as Wikipedia (often referred
to as the evidence documents). In this approach, the model consists of two core components (Chen
et al., 2017): (i) an information retrieval system to identify useful pieces of text from the knowledge
source (the retriever); and (ii) a system to produce the answer given the retrieved documents and the
question (the reader).
We can view such a model as a latent variable model, where the latent variables represent retrieved
documents that are used to produce answers given questions (Lee et al., 2019). End-to-end (joint)
training of this model is challenging since we need to learn both to generate an answer given retrieved
documents and what to retrieve. Previous work considers two potential solutions (see Table 1 for
a high-level summary). First, they adopt a stage-wise training, where the retriever is trained while
freezing the reader and vice versa (Karpukhin et al., 2020, Izacard and Grave, 2021b,a). Another
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

