On the Expressivity of Markov Reward

David Abel
DeepMind
dmabel@deepmind.com

Will Dabney
DeepMind
wdabney@deepmind.com

Anna Harutyunyan
DeepMind
harutyunyan@deepmind.com

Mark K. Ho
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
mho@princeton.edu

Michael L. Littman
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
mlittman@cs.brown.edu

Doina Precup
DeepMind
doinap@deepmind.com

Satinder Singh
DeepMind
baveja@deepmind.com

Abstract
Reward is the driving force for reinforcement-learning agents. This paper is
dedicated to understanding the expressivity of reward as a way to capture tasks
that we would want an agent to perform. We frame this study around three new
abstract notions of “task” that might be desirable: (1) a set of acceptable behaviors,
(2) a partial ordering over behaviors, or (3) a partial ordering over trajectories.
Our main results prove that while reward can express many of these tasks, there
exist instances of each task type that no Markov reward function can capture. We
then provide a set of polynomial-time algorithms that construct a Markov reward
function that allows an agent to optimize tasks of each of these three types, and
correctly determine when no such reward function exists. We conclude with an
empirical study that corroborates and illustrates our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

How are we to use algorithms for reinforcement learning (RL) to solve problems of relevance in the
world? Reward plays a significant role as a general purpose signal: For any desired behavior, task, or
other characteristic of agency, there must exist a reward signal that can incentivize an agent to learn
to realize these desires. Indeed, the expressivity of reward is taken as a backdrop assumption that
frames RL, sometimes called the reward hypothesis: “...all of what we mean by goals and purposes
can be well thought of as maximization of the expected value of the cumulative sum of a received
scalar signal (reward)” [53, 29, 6]. In this paper, we establish first steps toward a systematic study of
the reward hypothesis by examining the expressivity of reward as a signal. We proceed in three steps.
1. An Account of “Task”. As rewards encode tasks, goals, or desires, we first ask, “what is
a task?”. We frame our study around a thought experiment (Figure 1) involving the interactions
between a designer, Alice, and a learning agent, Bob, drawing inspiration from Ackley and Littman
[2], Sorg [50], and Singh et al. [46]. In this thought experiment, we draw a distinction between how
Alice thinks of a task (TASK Q) and the means by which Alice incentivizes Bob to pursue this task
(E XPRESSION Q). This distinction allows us to analyze the expressivity of reward as an answer to the
latter question, conditioned on how we answer the former. Concretely, we study three answers to
the TASK Q in the context of finite Markov Decision Processes (MDPs): A task is either (1) a set of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

