Universal Semi-Supervised Learning

Zhuo Huang1,2,3 , Chao Xue3 , Bo Han4 , Jian Yang1,2 , Chen Gong1,2,3 ( )
1
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
JD Explore Academy 4 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{hzhuo, csjyang, chen.gong}@njust.edu.cn,
xuechao19@jd.com, bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Universal Semi-Supervised Learning (UniSSL) aims to solve the open-set problem
where both the class distribution (i.e., class set) and feature distribution (i.e., feature
domain) are different between labeled dataset and unlabeled dataset. Such a
problem seriously hinders the realistic landing of classical SSL. Different from
the existing SSL methods targeting at the open-set problem that only study one
certain scenario of class distribution mismatch and ignore the feature distribution
mismatch, we consider a more general case where a mismatch exists in both
class and feature distribution. In this case, we propose a “Class-shAring data
detection and Feature Adaptation” (CAFA) framework which requires no prior
knowledge of the class relationship between the labeled dataset and unlabeled
dataset. Particularly, CAFA utilizes a novel scoring strategy to detect the data in
the shared class set. Then, it conducts domain adaptation to fully exploit the value
of the detected class-sharing data for better semi-supervised consistency training.
Exhaustive experiments on several benchmark datasets show the effectiveness of
our method in tackling open-set problems.

1

Introduction

A critical drawback of training a good neural network [25] is that it typically requires lots of labeled
data, which is quite difficult to satisfy due to the unaffordable monetary cost as well as the huge
demand for human resources. A popular way to solve such a problem is Semi-Supervised Learning
(SSL) [7] which can effectively leverage scarce labeled data and abundant unlabeled data to train an
accurate classifier. However, classical SSL [14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 39, 41, 49] relies on the closed-set
assumption that the labeled and unlabeled data are drawn from the same class distribution and
the same feature distribution. To be concrete, the class set of labeled data C l is equal to that of
unlabeled data C u , and the marginal distribution pl (x) of the labeled data is identical to the unlabeled
feature distribution pu (x), which is shown in Figure 1 (a). However, in practice, the datasets at hand
could greatly violate the above assumption by having both class distribution mismatch and feature
distribution mismatch, which is denoted as open-set1 . In this situation, traditional closed-set SSL
would suffer from severe performance degradation [31].
Recent works [4, 9, 19, 22, 29, 31, 45] have focused on dealing with the class distribution mismatch
problem to extend SSL into the wild. For example, Guo et al. (2020) [19] considers the subset
mismatch situation when the classes in labeled data are only a subset of the classes in unlabeled data,
1
Note that there are some other works [4, 45] also named as “open-set SSL”. However, they all focus on
the class distribution mismatch and do not deal with the feature distribution mismatch, so their setting is very
different from ours.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

