Pipeline Combinators for Gradual AutoML

Guillaume Baudart
Inria, ENS – PSL University, France
guillaume.baudart@inria.fr
Parikshit Ram
IBM Research, USA
parikshit.ram@ibm.com

Martin Hirzel
IBM Research, USA
hirzel@us.ibm.com

Avraham Shinnar
IBM Research, USA
shinnar@us.ibm.com

Kiran Kate
IBM Research, USA
kakate@us.ibm.com
Jason Tsay
IBM Research, USA
jason.tsay@ibm.com

Abstract
Automated machine learning (AutoML) can make data scientists more productive.
But if machine learning is totally automated, that leaves no room for data scientists
to apply their intuition. Hence, data scientists often prefer not total but gradual
automation, where they control certain choices and AutoML explores the rest. Unfortunately, gradual AutoML is cumbersome with state-of-the-art tools, requiring
large non-compositional code changes. More concise compositional code can be
achieved with combinators, a powerful concept from functional programming. This
paper introduces a small set of orthogonal combinators for composing machinelearning operators into pipelines. It describes a translation scheme from pipelines
and associated hyperparameter schemas to search spaces for AutoML optimizers.
On that foundation, this paper presents Lale, an open-source sklearn-compatible
AutoML library, and evaluates it with a user study.

1

Introduction

Automated machine learning can make data scientists more productive by lowering the barrier to
entry for novices as well as reducing the tedium for experts. With total automation, the data scientist
just provides data and the AutoML tool does the rest. While this yields a convenient starting point, it
gives users little control. Instead, gradual automation, where the user tweaks some choices by hand,
leverages user expertise for better outcomes and wastes less compute time. Unfortunately, gradual
automation is not easy with existing AutoML tools and their programming interfaces. Existing
AutoML tools tend to have different interfaces from those for manual machine learning, preventing
a gradual transition between the two. Furthermore, with existing tools, code changes for gradual
automation tend to be large and non-compositional. The programming interface of existing tools
is often coupled to a given optimizer. And finally, tools often support controlling some aspects of
automated pipeline search only with a much lower-level programming interface, if at all.
We hypothesize that gradual AutoML can be made easier via combinators. Combinators were
first discovered by Schönfinkel in the 1920s in an attempt to find elementary building blocks of
logic [41]. Combinators are functions that compose functions and play an important role in functional
programming. For instance, Lisp provides the combinators map and reduce [43], which inspired the
MapReduce programming model [11, 22]. Combinators enable a tacit programming style, where data
remains unnamed, keeping function compositions concise and minimizing edits when re-arranging
them. We argue that sklearn’s make_pipeline and make_union [7] are combinators: they compose
machine-learning operators into pipelines without naming datasets such as X or y during composition.
These two combinators enable the two primary execution modes, training and prediction, of sklearn
pipelines. This paper streamlines them with infix notation, adds a choice combinator, and adds
AutoML search as a third execution mode.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

