Contrast and Mix: Temporal Contrastive Video
Domain Adaptation with Background Mixing

Aadarsh Sahoo1 Rutav Shah1 Rameswar Panda2 Kate Saenko2,3 Abir Das1
1
IIT Kharagpur, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 Boston University
{sahoo_aadarsh@, rutavms@, abir@cse.}iitkgp.ac.in, rpanda@ibm.com, saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation which aims to adapt models trained on a labeled
source domain to a completely unlabeled target domain has attracted much attention
in recent years. While many domain adaptation techniques have been proposed
for images, the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation in videos remains
largely underexplored. In this paper, we introduce Contrast and Mix (CoMix),
a new contrastive learning framework that aims to learn discriminative invariant
feature representations for unsupervised video domain adaptation. First, unlike
existing methods that rely on adversarial learning for feature alignment, we utilize
temporal contrastive learning to bridge the domain gap by maximizing the similarity
between encoded representations of an unlabeled video at two different speeds
as well as minimizing the similarity between different videos played at different
speeds. Second, we propose a novel extension to the temporal contrastive loss by
using background mixing that allows additional positives per anchor, thus adapting
contrastive learning to leverage action semantics shared across both domains.
Moreover, we also integrate a supervised contrastive learning objective using target
pseudo-labels to enhance discriminability of the latent space for video domain
adaptation. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed approach over state-of-the-art methods. Project page:
https://cvir.github.io/projects/comix.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), which alleviates the requirement of large amounts of
annotated data by adapting a model learned on a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target
domain, has drawn a great deal of attention in the last few years [12, 80]. Much progress has been
made in developing deep UDA methods by minimizing the cross-domain divergence [39, 70], adding
adversarial domain discriminators [20, 74], and image-to-image translation techniques [26, 51].
However, despite impressive results on commonly used benchmark datasets (e.g., [61, 75, 57]), most
of the methods have been developed only for images and not for videos, where the annotation task is
often more complicated requiring tedious human labor in comparison to images.
More recently, very few works have attempted deep UDA for video action recognition by directly
matching segment-level features [8, 27, 50, 42] or with attention weights [11, 53]. However, (1)
trivially matching segment-level feature distributions by extending the image-specific approaches,
without considering the rich temporal information may not alone be sufficient for video domain
adaptation; (2) prior methods often focus on aligning target features with source, rather than exploiting
any action semantics shared across both domains (e.g., difference in background with the same action:
videos in the top row of Figure 1 are from the source and target domain respectively, but both capture
the same action walking); (3) existing methods often rely on complex adversarial learning which is
unwieldy to train, resulting in very fragile convergence.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

