Uniform Sampling over Episode Difficulty

Sébastien M. R. Arnold1∗ , Guneet S. Dhillon2∗ , Avinash Ravichandran3 , Stefano Soatto3,4
1
University of Southern California, 2 University of Oxford,
3
Amazon Web Services, 4 University of California, Los Angeles
seb.arnold@usc.edu, guneet.dhillon@stats.ox.ac.uk,
ravinash@amazon.com, soattos@amazon.com

Abstract
Episodic training is a core ingredient of few-shot learning to train models on tasks
with limited labelled data. Despite its success, episodic training remains largely
understudied, prompting us to ask the question: what is the best way to sample
episodes? In this paper, we first propose a method to approximate episode sampling
distributions based on their difficulty. Building on this method, we perform an
extensive analysis and find that sampling uniformly over episode difficulty outperforms other sampling schemes, including curriculum and easy-/hard-mining.
As the proposed sampling method is algorithm agnostic, we can leverage these
insights to improve few-shot learning accuracies across many episodic training
algorithms. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method across popular few-shot
learning datasets, algorithms, network architectures, and protocols.

1

Introduction

Large amounts of high-quality data have been the key for the success of deep learning algorithms.
Furthermore, factors such as data augmentation and sampling affect model performance significantly.
Continuously collecting and curating data is a resource (cost, time, storage, etc.) intensive process.
Hence, recently, the machine learning community has been exploring methods for performing
transfer-learning from large datasets to unseen tasks with limited data.
A popular genre of these approaches is called meta-learning few-shot approaches, where, in addition to
the limited data from the task of interest, a large dataset of disjoint tasks is available for (pre-)training.
These approaches are prevalent in the area of computer vision [31] and reinforcement learning [6].
A key component of these methods is the notion of episodic training, which refers to sampling
tasks from the larger dataset for training. By learning to solve these tasks correctly, the model can
generalize to new tasks.
However, sampling for episodic training remains surprisingly understudied despite numerous methods
and applications that build on it. To the best of our knowledge, only a handful of works [69, 55,
33] explicitly considered the consequences of sampling episodes. In comparison, stochastic [46]
and mini-batch [4] sampling alternatives have been thoroughly analyzed from the perspectives of
optimization [17, 5], information theory [27, 9], and stochastic processes [68, 66], among many
others. Building a similar understanding of sampling for episodic training will help theoreticians and
practitioners develop improved sampling schemes, and is thus of crucial importance to both.
In this paper, we explore many sampling schemes to understand their impact on few-shot methods.
Our work revolves around the following fundamental question: what is the best way to sample
episodes? Our focus will be restricted to image classification in the few-shot learning setting – where
“best” is taken to mean “higher transfer accuracy of unseen episodes” – and leave analyses and
applications to other areas for future work.
∗

Equal contributions; work done while at Amazon Web Services.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

