R-Drop: Regularized Dropout for Neural Networks

Xiaobo Liang1∗ Lijun Wu2∗ Juntao Li1 Yue Wang1 Qi Meng2
Tao Qin2 Wei Chen2 Min Zhang1 Tie-Yan Liu2
1
Soochow University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
xbliang3@stu.suda.edu.cn, {ljt,minzhang}@suda.edu.cn, wangyuenlp@gmail.com
{lijuwu,meq,taoqin,wche,tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Dropout is a powerful and widely used technique to regularize the training of deep
neural networks. Though effective and performing well, the randomness introduced
by dropout causes unnegligible inconsistency between training and inference. In
this paper, we introduce a simple consistency training strategy to regularize dropout,
namely R-Drop, which forces the output distributions of different sub models generated by dropout to be consistent with each other. Specifically, for each training
sample, R-Drop minimizes the bidirectional KL-divergence between the output distributions of two sub models sampled by dropout. Theoretical analysis reveals that
R-Drop reduces the above inconsistency. Experiments on 5 widely used deep learning tasks (18 datasets in total), including neural machine translation, abstractive
summarization, language understanding, language modeling, and image classification, show that R-Drop is universally effective. In particular, it yields substantial
improvements when applied to fine-tune large-scale pre-trained models, e.g., ViT,
RoBERTa-large, and BART, and achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances
with the vanilla Transformer model on WMT14 English→German translation
(30.91 BLEU) and WMT14 English→French translation (43.95 BLEU), even
surpassing models trained with extra large-scale data and expert-designed advanced
variants of Transformer models. Our code is available at GitHub2 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various areas, e.g., natural language
processing, computer vision, speech/audio processing, etc. When training a deep neural network,
regularization techniques [57, 60, 27, 3, 67, 58, 23, 71] are indispensable to prevent over-fitting and
improve the generalization ability of deep models. Among them, the dropout technique [24], the most
widely used one, aims to prevent co-adaptation and performs implicit ensemble by simply dropping a
certain proportion of hidden units from the neural network during training. Existing literature [40, 77]
has revealed the possible side effect of dropout that there is an unnegligible inconsistency between
training and inference stage of dropout models, i.e., the randomly sampled sub model (caused by
dropout) during training is inconsistent with the full model (without dropout) during inference.
Through imposing L2 regularization on the inconsistent hidden states [40, 77], current methods can
mitigate the inconsistency problem to some extent but are far from being widely used.
In this paper, we introduce a simple yet more effective alternative to regularize the training inconsistency induced by dropout, named as R-Drop. Concretely, in each mini-batch training, each data
sample goes through the forward pass twice, and each pass is processed by a different sub model
by randomly dropping out some hidden units. R-Drop forces the two distributions for the same
∗
2

Equal contribution (listed in alphabetical order).
https://github.com/dropreg/R-Drop

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

