Differentially Private Federated Bayesian
Optimization with Distributed Exploration

Zhongxiang Dai† , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low† , Patrick Jaillet§
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA§
{daizhongxiang,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg† ,jaillet@mit.edu§

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) has recently been extended to the federated learning
(FL) setting by the federated Thompson sampling (FTS) algorithm, which has
promising applications such as federated hyperparameter tuning. However, FTS is
not equipped with a rigorous privacy guarantee which is an important consideration
in FL. Recent works have incorporated differential privacy (DP) into the training
of deep neural networks through a general framework for adding DP to iterative
algorithms. Following this general DP framework, our work here integrates DP into
FTS to preserve user-level privacy. We also leverage the ability of this general DP
framework to handle different parameter vectors, as well as the technique of local
modeling for BO, to further improve the utility of our algorithm through distributed
exploration (DE). The resulting differentially private FTS with DE (DP-FTS-DE)
algorithm is endowed with theoretical guarantees for both the privacy and utility
and is amenable to interesting theoretical insights about the privacy-utility trade-off.
We also use real-world experiments to show that DP-FTS-DE achieves high utility
(competitive performance) with a strong privacy guarantee (small privacy loss) and
induces a trade-off between privacy and utility.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has become popular for optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box
functions, such as tuning the hyperparameters of deep neural networks (DNNs) [56]. Motivated by
the growing computational capability of edge devices and concerns over sharing the raw data, BO has
recently been extended to the federated learning (FL) setting [46] to derive the setting of federated
BO (FBO) [12]. The FBO setting allows multiple agents with potentially heterogeneous objective
functions to collaborate in black-box optimization tasks without requiring them to share their raw
data. For example, mobile phone users can use FBO to collaborate in optimizing the hyperparameters
of their DNN models used in a smart keyboard application without sharing their sensitive raw data.
Hospitals can use FBO to collaborate with each other when selecting the patients to perform a medical
test [67] without sharing the sensitive patient information. An important consideration in FL has been
a rigorous protection of the privacy of the users/agents, i.e., how to guarantee that by participating
in a FL system, an agent would not reveal sensitive information about itself [29]. Furthermore,
incorporating rigorous privacy preservation into BO has recently attracted increasing attention due to
its importance to real-world BO applications [33, 36, 48, 71]. However, the state-of-the-art algorithm
in the FBO setting, federated Thompson sampling (FTS) [12], is not equipped with privacy guarantee
and thus lacks rigorous protection of the sensitive agent information.
Differential privacy (DP) [20] provides a rigorous privacy guarantee for data release and has become
the state-of-the-art method for designing privacy-preserving ML algorithms [28]. Recently, DP
has been applied to the iterative training of DNNs using stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) [1]
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

