Generalization Error Rates in Kernel Regression:
The Crossover from the Noiseless to Noisy Regime

Hugo Cui
SPOC, EPFL, Lausanne
hugo.cui@epfl.ch

Bruno Loureiro
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Florent Krzakala
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Lenka Zdeborová
SPOC, EPFL, Lausanne

Abstract
In this manuscript we consider Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) under the Gaussian
design. Exponents for the decay of the excess generalization error of KRR have
been reported in various works under the assumption of power-law decay of
eigenvalues of the features co-variance. These decays were, however, provided for
sizeably different setups, namely in the noiseless case with constant regularization
and in the noisy optimally regularized case. Intermediary settings have been left
substantially uncharted. In this work, we unify and extend this line of work,
providing characterization of all regimes and excess error decay rates that can
be observed in terms of the interplay of noise and regularization. In particular,
we show the existence of a transition in the noisy setting between the noiseless
exponents to its noisy values as the sample complexity is increased. Finally, we
illustrate how this crossover can also be observed on real data sets.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods are among the most popular models in machine learning. Despite their relative
simplicity, they define a powerful framework in which non-linear features can be exploited without
leaving the realm of convex optimisation. Kernel methods in machine learning have a long and rich
literature dating back to the 60s [1, 2], but have recently made it back to the spotlight as a proxy
for studying neural networks in different regimes, e.g. the infinite width limit [3–6] and the lazy
regime of training [7]. Despite being defined in terms of a non-parametric optimisation problem,
kernel methods can be mathematically understood as a standard parametric linear problem in a
(possibly infinite) Hilbert space spanned by the kernel eigenvectors (a.k.a features). This dual picture
fully characterizes the asymptotic performance of kernels in terms of a trade-off between two key
quantities: the relative decay of the eigenvalues of the kernel (a.k.a. its capacity) and the coefficients
of the target function when expressed in feature space (a.k.a. the source). Indeed, a sizeable body of
work has been devoted to understanding the decay rates of the excess error as a function of these two
relative decays, and investigated whether these rates are attained by algorithms such as stochastic
gradient descent [8, 9].
Rigorous optimal rates for the excess generalization error in kernel ridge regression and are wellknown since the seminal works of [10, 11]. However, recent interesting works [12, 13] surprisingly
reported very different - and actually better - rates supported by numerical evidences. These papers
appeared to either not comment on this discrepancy [13], or to attribute this apparent contradiction
to a difference between typical and worse-case analysis [12]. As we shall see, the key difference
between these works stems instead from the fact that most of classical works considered noisy data
and fine-tuned regularization, while [12, 13] focused on noiseless data sets. This observation raises a
number of questions: is there a connection between both sets of exponents? Are Gaussian design
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

