Absolute Neighbour Difference based Correlation
Test for Detecting Heteroscedastic Relationships

Lifeng Zhang
School of Information
Renmin University of China
59, Zhongguancun street, Haidian, Beijing, P.R.China 100872
l.zhang@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
It is a challenge to detect complicated data relationships thoroughly. Here, we
propose a new statistical measure, named the absolute neighbour difference based
neighbour correlation coefficient, to detect the associations between variables
through examining the heteroscedasticity of the unpredictable variation of dependent variables. Different from previous studies, the new method concentrates on
measuring nonfunctional relationships rather than functional or mixed associations.
Either used alone or in combination with other measures, it enables not only a
convenient test of heteroscedasticity, but also measuring functional and nonfunctional relationships separately that obviously leads to a deeper insight into the data
associations. The method is concise and easy to implement that does not rely on
explicitly estimating the regression residuals or the dependencies between variables
so that it is not restrict to any kind of model assumption. The mechanisms of the
correlation test are proved in theory and demonstrated with numerical analyses.

1

Introduction

Detecting relationships between variables is a fundamental problem of data-driven discovery. The
well-known Pearson’s correlation coefficient (Cor), Spearman’s rank correlation, and Kendall’s tau
are concise, computationally efficient, and theoretically well understood, however can capture only
linear or monotonic relationships. Developing more powerful association detection methods has been
a challenging research and attracted extensive attention in the past decades.
A number of techniques have been developed to estimate the score of mutual information (MI) as
a measure of the dependence between variables, such as bining (partitioning) [19, 20, 11], kernel
density estimation (KDE) [17, 25], and k-nearest neighbor distances (kNN) [4, 13]. Distance
correlation (dCor) is a kind of more general statistics defined on reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHS) [9, 10]. It has a compact representation analogous to Cor, but can capture a wider range
of associations [24, 23]. Randomized dependence coefficient (RDC) is a measure of nonlinear
dependence between random variables of arbitrary dimension based on the Hirschfeld-GebeleinRenyi maximum correlation coefficient [16]. Other approaches include maximal correlation [21, 3],
kernel canonical correlation analysis (KCCA) [1], principal curve based methods [5, 6], and nonlinear
spectral correlation [15]. Recently, [28] introduced an order statistics based association measure
called the neighbour correlation coefficient (nCor). With sufficient sample size, nCor is able to
detect any type of functional relationships and approximate the R2 of the underlying association.
The associations between variables are sometimes too complicated to be quickly and thoroughly
identified. Heteroscedasticity is a kind of association pattern that often occurs in real world data and
always indicates that an interaction may exist between the independent variable under test and one or
more other known or unknown variables. To address this problem, a number of statistical tests have
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

