Convex Polytope Trees
Mohammadreza Armandpour
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
armand@stat.tamu.edu

Ali Sadeghian
Department of Computer Science
University of Florida
asadeghian@ufl.edu

Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
A decision tree is commonly restricted to use a single hyperplane to split the
covariate space at each of its internal nodes. It often requires a large number of
nodes to achieve high accuracy. In this paper, we propose convex polytope trees
(CPT) to expand the family of decision trees by an interpretable generalization of
their decision boundary. The splitting function at each node of CPT is based on
the logical disjunction of a community of differently weighted probabilistic linear
decision-makers, which also geometrically corresponds to a convex polytope in
the covariate space. We use a nonparametric Bayesian prior at each node to infer
the community’s size, encouraging simpler decision boundaries by shrinking the
number of polytope facets. We develop a greedy method to efficiently construct
CPT and scalable end-to-end training algorithms for the tree parameters when
the tree structure is given. We empirically demonstrate the efficiency of CPT
over existing state-of-the-art decision trees in several real-world classification and
regression tasks from diverse domains.

1

Introduction

Decision trees [8] are highly interpretable models, which make them favorable in high-stakes domains
such as medicine [32, 43] and criminal justice [6]. They are also resistant, if not completely immune,
to the inclusion of many irrelevant predictor variables. However, trees usually do not have high
accuracy, which somewhat limits their use in practice. Current main approaches to improve the
performance of decision trees are making large trees or using ensemble methods [11, 12, 18, 53], such
as bagging [7] and boosting [13, 16], which come with the price of harming model interpretability.
There is a trade-off challenge between the accuracy and interpretability of a decision tree.
Prior work has attempted to address the aforementioned challenge and improve the performance
of trees by introducing oblique tree models [19, 34]. These families of models are generalizations
of classical trees, where the decision boundaries are hyperplanes that are not constrained to be
axis-parallel and can have an arbitrary orientation. This change in the decision boundaries has been
shown to reduce the size of trees. However, the tree size often remains too large in real datasets
to make it amenable to interpretation. There has been an extensive body of research to improve
the training of the oblique trees and enhance their performance [5, 9, 28, 46], yet their large size
remains a challenge.
In this paper, we propose convex polytope decision trees (CPT) to expand the class of oblique trees
by extending hyperplane cuts to more flexible geometric shapes. To be more specific, the decision
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

