Modular Gaussian Processes for Transfer Learning

Pablo Moreno-Muñoz∗

Antonio Artés-Rodríguez†

Mauricio A. Álvarez‡

∗

Section for Cognitive Systems, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Dept. of Signal Theory and Communications, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
†
Evidence-Based Behavior (eB2), Spain
‡
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
pabmo@dtu.dk, antonio@tsc.uc3m.es, mauricio.alvarez@sheffield.ac.uk

†

Abstract
We present a framework for transfer learning based on modular variational Gaussian
processes (GP). We develop a module-based method that having a dictionary
of well fitted GPs, one could build ensemble GP models without revisiting any
data. Each model is characterised by its hyperparameters, pseudo-inputs and their
corresponding posterior densities. Our method avoids undesired data centralisation,
reduces rising computational costs and allows the transfer of learned uncertainty
metrics after training. We exploit the augmentation of high-dimensional integral
operators based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence between stochastic processes
to introduce an efficient lower bound under all the sparse variational GPs, with
different complexity and even likelihood distribution. The method is also valid for
multi-output GPs, learning correlations a posteriori between independent modules.
Extensive results illustrate the usability of our framework in large-scale and multitask experiments, also compared with the exact inference methods in the literature.

1

Introduction

Imagine a supervised learning problem, for instance regression, where N data points are processed
for training a model. At a later time, new data are observed, this time corresponding to a binary
classification task, that we know are generated by the same phenomena, e.g. using a different sensor.
Having kept the observations from regression stored, a
common approach would be to use them in combination
with the classification dataset to generate a new model.
However, this practice might be inconvenient because of
i) the need of centralising data to train the model, ii) the
rising data-dependent computational cost as the number
of samples increases and iii) the obsolescence of fitted
models, whose future usability is not guaranteed for the
new set of observations. Looking at the deployment in
large-scale scenarios, by any organization or use case,
where data are ever changing, this solution becomes
prohibitive. The main challenge is to incorporate unseen Figure 1: GP modules (A, B, C) are used
tasks as former models are recurrently discarded.
for training (D) without revisiting data.
Alternatively, we propose a framework based on modules of Gaussian processes (GP) (Rasmussen
and Williams, 2006). Considering the current example, the regression model (or module) is kept
intact. Once new data arrives, one fits a meta-GP using the module, but without revisiting any sample.
If no data are observed, combining multiple modules is also allowed — see Figure 1. Under this
framework, a new family of module-driven GP models emerges.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

