Independent mechanism analysis, a new concept?

Luigi Gresele∗1

Julius von Kügelgen∗1,2

Bernhard Schölkopf 1
1

Vincent Stimper 1,2

Michel Besserve 1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Cambridge
{luigi.gresele,jvk,vincent.stimper,bs,besserve}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Independent component analysis provides a principled framework for unsupervised
representation learning, with solid theory on the identifiability of the latent code
that generated the data, given only observations of mixtures thereof. Unfortunately,
when the mixing is nonlinear, the model is provably nonidentifiable, since statistical
independence alone does not sufficiently constrain the problem. Identifiability can
be recovered in settings where additional, typically observed variables are included
in the generative process. We investigate an alternative path and consider instead
including assumptions reflecting the principle of independent causal mechanisms
exploited in the field of causality. Specifically, our approach is motivated by
thinking of each source as independently influencing the mixing process. This
gives rise to a framework which we term independent mechanism analysis. We
provide theoretical and empirical evidence that our approach circumvents a number
of nonidentifiability issues arising in nonlinear blind source separation.

1

Introduction

One of the goals of unsupervised learning is to uncover properties of the data generating process, such
as latent structures giving rise to the observed data. Identifiability [55] formalises this desideratum:
under suitable assumptions, a model learnt from observations should match the ground truth, up to
well-defined ambiguities. Within representation learning, identifiability has been studied mostly in the
context of independent component analysis (ICA) [17, 40], which assumes that the observed data x
results from mixing unobserved independent random variables si referred to as sources. The aim is to
recover the sources based on the observed mixtures alone, also termed blind source separation (BSS).
A major obstacle to BSS is that, in the nonlinear case, independent component estimation does not
necessarily correspond to recovering the true sources: it is possible to give counterexamples where
the observations are transformed into components yi which are independent, yet still mixed with
respect to the true sources si [20, 39, 98]. In other words, nonlinear ICA is not identifiable.
In order to achieve identifiability, a growing body of research postulates additional supervision or
structure in the data generating process, often in the form of auxiliary variables [28, 30, 37, 38, 41].
In the present work, we investigate a different route to identifiability by drawing inspiration from the
field of causal inference [71, 78] which has provided useful insights for a number of machine learning
tasks, including semi-supervised [87, 103], transfer [6, 23, 27, 31, 61, 72, 84, 85, 97, 102, 107],
reinforcement [7, 14, 22, 26, 53, 59, 60, 106], and unsupervised [9, 10, 54, 70, 88, 91, 104, 105]
learning. To this end, we interpret the ICA mixing as a causal process and apply the principle
of independent causal mechanisms (ICM) which postulates that the generative process consists of
independent modules which do not share information [43, 78, 87]. In this context, “independent” does
not refer to statistical independence of random variables, but rather to the notion that the distributions
and functions composing the generative process are chosen independently by Nature [43, 48]. While
a formalisation of ICM [43, 57] in terms of algorithmic (Kolmogorov) complexity [51] exists, it is not
computable, and hence applying ICM in practice requires assessing such non-statistical independence
∗

Equal contribution. Code available at: https://github.com/lgresele/independent-mechanism-analysis

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

