Combining Recurrent, Convolutional,
and Continuous-time Models with
Linear State-Space Layers

Albert Gu† , Isys Johnson‡ , Karan Goel† , Khaled Saab∗ , Tri Dao† , Atri Rudra‡ , Christopher Ré†
†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
∗
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
{albertgu,knrg,ksaab,trid}@stanford.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu
{isysjohn,atri}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), temporal convolutions, and neural differential
equations (NDEs) are popular families of deep learning models for time-series data,
each with unique strengths and tradeoffs in modeling power and computational
efficiency. We introduce a simple sequence model inspired by control systems
that generalizes these approaches while addressing their shortcomings. The Linear State-Space Layer (LSSL) maps a sequence u 7→ y by simply simulating a
linear continuous-time state-space representation ẋ = Ax + Bu, y = Cx + Du.
Theoretically, we show that LSSL models are closely related to the three aforementioned families of models and inherit their strengths. For example, they generalize
convolutions to continuous-time, explain common RNN heuristics, and share features of NDEs such as time-scale adaptation. We then incorporate and generalize
recent theory on continuous-time memorization to introduce a trainable subset of
structured matrices A that endow LSSLs with long-range memory. Empirically,
stacking LSSL layers into a simple deep neural network obtains state-of-the-art
results across time series benchmarks for long dependencies in sequential image
classification, real-world healthcare regression tasks, and speech. On a difficult
speech classification task with length-16000 sequences, LSSL outperforms prior
approaches by 24 accuracy points, and even outperforms baselines that use handcrafted features on 100x shorter sequences.

1

Introduction

A longstanding challenge in machine learning is efficiently modeling sequential data longer than a
few thousand time steps. The usual paradigms for designing sequence models involve recurrence
(e.g. RNNs), convolutions (e.g. CNNs), or differential equations (e.g. NDEs), which each come
with tradeoffs. For example, RNNs are a natural stateful model for sequential data that require
only constant computation/storage per time step, but are slow to train and suffer from optimization
difficulties (e.g., the "vanishing gradient problem" [39]), which empirically limits their ability to
handle long sequences. CNNs encode local context and enjoy fast, parallelizable training, but are not
sequential, resulting in more expensive inference and an inherent limitation on the context length.
NDEs are a principled mathematical model that can theoretically address continuous-time problems
and long-term dependencies [37], but are very inefficient.
Ideally, a model family would combine the strengths of these paradigms, providing properties like
parallelizable training (convolutional), stateful inference (recurrence) and time-scale adaptation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

