On the Expected Complexity of Maxout Networks

Hanna Tseran
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences
04103 Leipzig, Germany
hanna.tseran@mis.mpg.de
Guido Montúfar
Department of Mathematics and Department of Statistics, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA;
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences
04103 Leipzig, Germany
montufar@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Learning with neural networks relies on the complexity of the representable functions, but more importantly, the particular assignment of typical parameters to
functions of different complexity. Taking the number of activation regions as a
complexity measure, recent works have shown that the practical complexity of
deep ReLU networks is often far from the theoretical maximum. In this work, we
show that this phenomenon also occurs in networks with maxout (multi-argument)
activation functions and when considering the decision boundaries in classification
tasks. We also show that the parameter space has a multitude of full-dimensional
regions with widely different complexity, and obtain nontrivial lower bounds on
the expected complexity. Finally, we investigate different parameter initialization
procedures and show that they can increase the speed of convergence in training.

1

Introduction

We are interested in the functions parametrized by artificial feedforward neural networks with
maxout units. Maxout units compute parametric affine functions followed by a fixed multi-argument
activation function of the form (s1 , . . . , sK ) 7→ max{s1 , . . . , sK } and can be regarded as a natural
generalization of ReLUs, which have a single-argument activation function s 7→ max{0, s}. For
any choice of parameters, these networks subdivide their input space into activation regions where
different pre-activation features attain the maximum and the computed function is (affine) linear. We
are concerned with the expected number of activation regions and their volume given probability
distributions of parameters, as well as corresponding properties for the decision boundaries in
classification tasks. We show that different architectures can attain very different numbers of regions
with positive probability, but for parameter distributions for which the conditional densities of bias
values and the expected gradients of activation values are bounded, the expected number of regions is
at most polynomial in the rank K and the total number of units.
Activation regions of neural networks For neural networks with piecewise linear activation functions, the number of activation regions serves as a complexity measure and summary description
which has proven useful in the investigation of approximation errors, Lipschitz constants, speed of
convergence, implicit biases of parameter optimization, and robustness against adversarial attacks.
In particular, Pascanu et al. (2013); Montúfar et al. (2014); Telgarsky (2015, 2016) obtained depth
separation results showing that deep networks can represent functions with many more linear regions
than any of the functions that can be represented by shallow networks with the same number of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

