Causal Navigation by
Continuous-time Neural Networks
Charles Vorbach1,∗, Ramin Hasani1,∗ , Alexander Amini1 , Mathias Lechner2 , Daniela Rus1

Abstract
Imitation learning enables high-fidelity, vision-based learning of policies within
rich, photorealistic environments. However, such techniques often rely on traditional discrete-time neural models and face difficulties in generalizing to domain
shifts by failing to account for the causal relationships between the agent and the
environment. In this paper, we propose a theoretical and experimental framework
for learning causal representations using continuous-time neural networks, specifically over their discrete-time counterparts. We evaluate our method in the context
of visual-control learning of drones over a series of complex tasks, ranging from
short- and long-term navigation, to chasing static and dynamic objects through
photorealistic environments. Our results demonstrate that causal continuous-time
deep models can perform robust navigation tasks, where advanced recurrent models
fail. These models learn complex causal control representations directly from raw
visual inputs and scale to solve a variety of tasks using imitation learning.

1

Input

Introduction

NCP

ODE-RNN

LSTM

CT-GRU

Time

Unlike machine learning systems, natural learning systems
excel at generalizing learned
skills beyond the original data
distribution (Hasani et al., 2020,
Hassabis et al., 2017, Sarma
et al., 2018). This is due to the
mechanisms they deploy during
their learning process, such as
active use of closed-loop interventions, accounting for distribution shifts, and the temporal
structures (de Haan et al., 2019,
Schölkopf, 2019). These factors
are largely disregarded or are en- Figure 1: Causal navigation from raw visual inputs. Given a
gineered away in the develop- sequence of raw RGB inputs (left) a drone is trained to navigate
towards the red-cube target. We visualize the saliency maps (right)
ment of modern ML systems.
for each model. Neural circuit policies (Lechner et al., 2020a)
To take the first steps towards re- (a specific representation of CT-RNNs) can learn causal relationsolving these issues, we can in- ships (i.e., attend to the red-cube) directly from data while other
vestigate the spectrum of causal models fail to do so. ODE-RNNs (Rubanova et al., 2019b), LSTM
modeling (Peters et al., 2017). At (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) and CT- Gated Recurrent
one end of the spectrum, there Units (Mozer et al., 2017). Saliency maps are computed by the
are physical models of agents visual backprop algorithm (Bojarski et al., 2016).
∗
Equal Contributions. 1 CSAIL MIT, 2 IST Austria, Correspondence to: rhasani@mit.edu Code and data
are available at: https://github.com/mit-drl/deepdrone

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

