Learning Transferable Features for Point Cloud
Detection via 3D Contrastive Co-training

Yihan Zeng1∗ Chunwei Wang1∗ Yunbo Wang1
Hang Xu2 Chaoqiang Ye2 Zhen Yang2 Chao Ma1†
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zengyihan,weiwei0224,yunbow,chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn
{xu.hang,yechaoqiang,yang.zhen}@huawei.com

Abstract
Most existing point cloud detection models require large-scale, densely annotated datasets. They typically underperform in domain adaptation settings, due
to geometry shifts caused by different physical environments or LiDAR sensor
configurations. Therefore, it is challenging but valuable to learn transferable features between a labeled source domain and a novel target domain, without any
access to target labels. To tackle this problem, we introduce the framework of
3D Contrastive Co-training (3D-CoCo) with two technical contributions. First,
3D-CoCo is inspired by our observation that the bird-eye-view (BEV) features
are more transferable than low-level geometry features. We thus propose a new
co-training architecture that includes separate 3D encoders with domain-specific
parameters, as well as a BEV transformation module for learning domain-invariant
features. Second, 3D-CoCo extends the approach of contrastive instance alignment
to point cloud detection, whose performance was largely hindered by the mismatch
between the fictitious distribution of BEV features, induced by pseudo-labels, and
the true distribution. The mismatch is greatly reduced by 3D-CoCo with transformed point clouds, which are carefully designed by considering specific geometry
priors. We construct new domain adaptation benchmarks using three large-scale 3D
datasets. Experimental results show that our proposed 3D-CoCo effectively closes
the domain gap and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by large margins.

1

Introduction

3D point cloud detection shows remarkable significance in real-world scenarios, such as autonomous
driving [14, 43, 38, 44], in which the recent progress is largely driven by the emergence of highprecision LiDAR sensors and large-scale, densely annotated point cloud datasets [1, 6, 26]. Most
existing 3D detection models assume that the training domain and testing domain are independently
and identically distributed. In practice, however, domain shifts are often inevitable due to differences
in physical environments or LiDAR sensor configurations, including different numbers of laser beams
and installation positions, etc. To address this issue, we present an early study of the unsupervised
domain adaptation problem for point cloud detection, which aims to effectively adapt 3D detectors
from the labeled source domain to a novel unlabeled target domain by learning transferable features.
Previous domain adaptation approaches for image data [27, 12, 24, 2] are not readily applicable
to point clouds. As shown in Fig. 1, different from the domain shifts of 2D scenes that usually
∗
†

The first two authors have equal contributions.
C. Ma is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

