REMIPS: Physically Consistent 3D Reconstruction of
Multiple Interacting People under Weak Supervision

1

Mihai Fieraru3
mihai.fieraru@imar.ro

Mihai Zanfir1
mihaiz@google.com

Teodor Alexandru Szente1,3
teosz@google.com

Eduard Gabriel Bazavan1
egbazavan@google.com

Vlad Olaru3
vlad.olaru@imar.ro

Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
sminchisescu@google.com

Google Research 2 Lund University 3 Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Abstract
The three-dimensional reconstruction of multiple interacting humans given a
monocular image is crucial for the general task of scene understanding, as capturing the subtleties of interaction is often the very reason for taking a picture.
Current 3D human reconstruction methods either treat each person independently,
ignoring most of the context, or reconstruct people jointly, but cannot recover interactions correctly when people are in close proximity. In this work, we introduce
REMIPS, a model for 3D Reconstruction of Multiple Interacting People under
Weak Supervision. REMIPS can reconstruct a variable number of people directly
from monocular images. At the core of our methodology stands a novel transformer
network that combines unordered person tokens (one for each detected human)
with positional-encoded tokens from image features patches. We introduce a novel
unified model for self- and interpenetration-collisions based on a mesh approximation computed by applying decimation operators. We rely on self-supervised
losses for flexibility and generalisation in-the-wild and incorporate self-contact and
interaction-contact losses directly into the learning process. With REMIPS, we
report state-of-the-art quantitative results on common benchmarks even in cases
where no 3D supervision is used. Additionally, qualitative visual results show
that our reconstructions are plausible in terms of pose and shape and coherent for
challenging images, collected in-the-wild, where people are often interacting.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing three-dimensional models of multiple interacting people from images is an important
computer vision task with applications in behavior analysis, automatic video analysis of sport events,
or collaborative augmented reality applications. As the demands on the depth of analysis increase,
beyond qualitative pose, one often seeks to know whether people are in contact or not, what is the
nature of that contact, and how long it lasts. As such questions become important, it is clear that very
coarse estimates of pose or even shape are no longer sufficient. One needs accurate models of shape
and contact with predictable response over time. This is difficult due to the various degree of occlusion
that occurs, the depth ambiguities particularly given only monocular images (but more generally
given that occlusion and self-occlusion for people are frequent), the high degree of variability of even
valid human poses, their different scales and underlying spatial image support, ranging from the large
body parts like torso or thighs – informed by larger image regions – to hands, with parts typically
accounted for by smaller spatial support, comparatively.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

