Overparameterization Improves Robustness to
Covariate Shift in High Dimensions
Nilesh Tripuraneni⇤
U.C. Berkeley†
nilesh_tripuraneni@berkeley.edu

Ben Adlam⇤
Brain Team, Google Research
adlam@google.com

Jeffrey Pennington⇤
Brain Team, Google Research
jpennin@google.com

Abstract
A significant obstacle in the development of robust machine learning models is
covariate shift, a form of distribution shift that occurs when the input distributions
of the training and test sets differ while the conditional label distributions remain
the same. Despite the prevalence of covariate shift in real-world applications, a
theoretical understanding in the context of modern machine learning has remained
lacking. In this work, we examine the exact high-dimensional asymptotics of random feature regression under covariate shift and present a precise characterization
of the limiting test error, bias, and variance in this setting. Our results motivate
a natural partial order over covariate shifts that provides a sufficient condition
for determining when the shift will harm (or even help) test performance. We
find that overparameterized models exhibit enhanced robustness to covariate shift,
providing one of the first theoretical explanations for this ubiquitous empirical phenomenon. Additionally, our analysis reveals an exact linear relationship between
the in-distribution and out-of-distribution generalization performance, offering an
explanation for this surprising recent observation.

1

Introduction

Theoretical justification for almost all machine learning methods relies upon the equality of the
distributions from which the training and test data are drawn. Nevertheless, in many real-world
applications, this equality is violated—naturally-occurring distribution shift between the training data
and the data encountered during deployment is the rule, not the exception [31]. Even non-adversarial
changes in distributions can uncover the surprising fragility of modern machine learning models
[55, 56, 43, 26, 12, 50]. Such shifts are distinct from adversarial examples, which require explicit
poisoning attacks [22]; rather, they can result from mild corruptions, ranging from changes of camera
angle or blur [26], to subtle, unintended changes in data acquisition procedures [56]. Moreover, this
fragility limits the application of deep learning in certain safety-critical areas [31].
Empirical studies of distribution shift have observed several intriguing phenomena, including linear
trends between model performance on shifted and unshifted test distributions [56, 26, 31], dramatic
degradation in calibration [50], and surprising spurious inductive biases [12]. Theoretical understanding of why such patterns occur across a variety of real-world domains is scant. Even basic
questions such as what makes a certain distribution shift likely to hurt (or help) a model’s performance,
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Work performed while the author was at Google.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

