Exact Privacy Guarantees for Markov Chain
Implementations of the Exponential Mechanism with
Artificial Atoms
Jeremy Seeman
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
State College, PA 16803
jhs5496@psu.edu

Matthew Reimherr
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
State College, PA 16803
mlr36@psu.edu

Aleksandra Slavković
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
State College, PA 16803
abs12@psu.edu

Abstract
Implementations of the exponential mechanism in differential privacy often require sampling from intractable distributions. When approximate procedures like
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) are used, the end result incurs costs to both
privacy and accuracy. Existing work has examined these effects asymptotically,
but implementable finite sample results are needed in practice so that users can
specify privacy budgets in advance and implement samplers with exact privacy
guarantees. In this paper, we use tools from ergodic theory and perfect simulation
to design exact finite runtime sampling algorithms for the exponential mechanism
by introducing an intermediate modified target distribution using artificial atoms.
We propose an additional modification of this sampling algorithm that maintains
its -DP guarantee and has improved runtime at the cost of some utility. We then
compare these methods in scenarios where we can explicitly calculate a δ cost (as
in (, δ)-DP) incurred when using standard MCMC techniques. Much as there is a
well known trade-off between privacy and utility, we demonstrate that there is also
a trade-off between privacy guarantees and runtime.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem setup

The exponential mechanism [17] is one of the workhorses of -differential privacy (-DP). Many common DP mechanisms, such as the Laplace Mechanism [7], K-norm and K-norm gradient mechanisms
[22, 4], pMSE mechanism [24], and even posterior sampling under certain regularity conditions
[26], can all be viewed as instances of the exponential mechanism. In fact, any mechanism can be
equivalently expressed as an instance of the exponential mechanism depending on the choice of
loss function and base measure [2]. However, the output of the exponential mechanism often has
an intractable distribution, making it difficult to sample from in practice. This necessitates using
a sampling algorithm such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to computationally generate
an approximate sample from the distribution. However, methods like these only approximate the
target distribution asymptotically, meaning that the resulting sample need not satisfy the originally
prescribed privacy guarantees.
In practice, analyzing the privacy cost incurred due to sampling is a messy problem. Existing
approaches rely on analyzing convergence rates of distances between the approximating distribution
and the target distribution. While these approaches have produced nice theoretical results, the
analyses are usually asymptotic and lack closed form expressions for constants required to determine
finite-sample incurred costs. However, for uniformly ergodic chains that admit atoms in their state
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

