BCORLE(λ): An Offline Reinforcement Learning
and Evaluation Framework for Coupons
Allocation in E-commerce Market
Yang Zhang∗
Faculty of Electronics and Information
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Qingyu Yang†
Faculty of Electronics and Information
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Hongyin Tang
Institute of Software
Chinese Academy of Sciences

Bo Tang
Alibaba Group

Dou An
Faculty of Electronics and Information
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Chenyang Xi
Alibaba Group

Xueying Li
Alibaba Group

Feiyu Xiong
Alibaba Group

Abstract
Coupons allocation is an important tool for enterprises to increase the activity and
loyalty of users on the e-commerce market. One fundamental problem related is
how to allocate coupons within a fixed budget while maximizing users’ retention
on the e-commerce platform. The online e-commerce environment is complicated and ever changing, so it requires the coupons allocation policy learning
can quickly adapt to the changes of the company’s business strategy. Unfortunately, existing studies with a huge computation overhead can hardly satisfy the
requirements of real-time and fast-response in the real world. Specifically, the
problem of coupons allocation within a fixed budget is usually formulated as a
Lagrangian problem. Existing solutions need to re-learn the policy once the value
of Lagrangian multiplier variable λ is updated, causing a great computation overhead. Besides, a mature e-commerce market often faces tens of millions of users
and dozens of types of coupons which construct the huge policy space, further
increasing the difficulty of solving the problem. To tackle with above problems, we
propose a budget constrained offline reinforcement learning and evaluation with
λ-generalization (BCORLE(λ)) framework. The proposed method can help enterprises develop a coupons allocation policy which greatly improves users’ retention
rate on the platform while ensuring the cost does not exceed the budget. Specifically, λ-generalization method is proposed to lead the policy learning process can
be executed according to different λ values adaptively, avoiding re-learning new
polices from scratch. Thus the computation overhead is greatly reduced. Further, a
novel offline reinforcement learning method and an off-policy evaluation algorithm
are proposed for policy learning and policy evaluation, respectively. Finally, experiments on the simulation platform and real-world e-commerce market validate the
effectiveness of our approach.

∗
†

Work was done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
Correspondence:yangqingyu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

