The Effect of the Intrinsic Dimension on the
Generalization of Quadratic Classifiers

Fabian Latorre, Leello Dadi, Paul Rolland and Volkan Cevher
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, EPFL, Switzerland.
{first}.{last}@epfl.ch

Abstract
It has been recently observed that neural networks, unlike kernel methods, enjoy
a reduced sample complexity when the distribution is isotropic (i.e., when the
covariance matrix is the identity). We find that this sensitivity to the data distribution
is not exclusive to neural networks, and the same phenomenon can be observed
on the class of quadratic classifiers (i.e., the sign of a quadratic polynomial) with
a nuclear-norm constraint. We demonstrate this by deriving an upper bound on
the Rademacher Complexity that depends on two key quantities: (i) the intrinsic
dimension, which is a measure of isotropy, and (ii) the largest eigenvalue of the
second moment (covariance) matrix of the distribution. Our result improves the
dependence on the dimension over the best previously known bound and precisely
quantifies the relation between the sample complexity and the level of isotropy of
the distribution.

1

Introduction

We revisit the problem of supervised classification using quadratic features of the data. We do so
to highlight the influence of properties of data distrbution on the generalization error. Most of the
existing results on this error only use a bound on the support of the distribution. By leveraging results
from matrix concentration, we show an improved bound that uses more refined properties of the data
distribution, like the second moment matrix.
The use of the second moment matrix in the error bound shows that the intrinsic dimension of the
data distribution plays an important role. This is of particular interest because it is widely believed
that real-world data distributions have nice properties that allow classifiers, namely neural networks,
to avoid the worst-case sample complexities predicted by generalization bounds Jiang* et al. (2020).
Indeed, assumptions like the manifold hypothesis, which state that the data lies on lower dimensional
embedded manifold, are often made to explain the practical success of some generative methods. A
recent paper by Pope et al. (2021) computes estimates of this true dimensionality of common machine
learning datasets and shows that they are much lower than the ambient dimension of the pixel space
[0, 1]d . It is therefore important that properties of the data distribution, going beyond simple bounds
on the support, intervene in the study of generalization.
This influence of intrinsic dimension on generalization has been recently observed in the context of
differentiating neural networks and from their kernel approximations, like the neural tangent kernel
Jacot et al. (2018) or random feature models Yehudai and Shamir (2019). In particular, Ghorbani
et al. (2020) observe that neural networks seem to require fewer samples than kernel methods to learn
when the data distribution is isotropic.
We show that a similar phenomenon occurs in the simpler setting of quadratic classifiers, which leads
to a better understanding of the causes. An improvement in sample complexity on isotropic data
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

