SLOE: A Faster Method for Statistical Inference in
High-Dimensional Logistic Regression

Steve Yadlowsky∗
yadlowsky@google.com

Taedong Yun†
tedyun@google.com

Cory McLean†
cym@google.com

Alexander D’Amour∗
alexdamour@google.com

Abstract
Logistic regression remains one of the most widely used tools in applied statistics,
machine learning and data science. However, in moderately high-dimensional
problems, where the number of features d is a non-negligible fraction of the sample
size n, the logistic regression maximum likelihood estimator (MLE), and statistical
procedures based the large-sample approximation of its distribution, behave poorly.
Recently, Sur and Candès [2019] showed that these issues can be corrected by
applying a new approximation of the MLE’s sampling distribution in this highdimensional regime. Unfortunately, these corrections are difficult to implement
in practice, because they require an estimate of the signal strength, which is a
function of the underlying parameters β of the logistic regression. To address
this issue, we propose SLOE, a fast and straightforward approach to estimate the
signal strength in logistic regression. The key insight of SLOE is that the Sur
and Candès [2019] correction can be reparameterized in terms of the corrupted
b We
signal strength, which is only a function of the estimated parameters β.
propose an estimator for this quantity and show that dimensionality correction
with it is accurate in finite samples. We demonstrate the importance of routine
dimensionality correction in the Heart Disease dataset from the UCI repository,
and a genomics application using the UK Biobank. Compared to the existing
ProbeFrontier heuristic, SLOE is conceptually simpler and orders of magnitude
faster, making it suitable for routine use. Additionally, we provide consistency
guarantees in the relevant high-dimensional regime.

1

Introduction

Logistic regression is a workhorse in statistics, machine learning, data science, and many applied
fields. It is a generalized linear model that models a binary scalar outcome Y ∈ {0, 1} conditional on
observed features X ∈ Rd via
1
E[Y | X = x] = g(β > x), with g(t) := 1+exp(−t)
,

(1.1)

with the coefficients β fit using observed data. Logistic regression is popular as a scientific tool
because the model is often accurate, and comes with well-established statistical inference procedures
for quantifying uncertainty about the parameters β and predictions g(β > x) at test inputs x. For
example, most statistical software packages not only produce predictions from the model, but also
summaries such as confidence intervals (CIs) and p-values that enable practitioners to understand the
strength of evidence for the prediction in a quantitative way. These widely adopted estimation and
∗
†

Google Research, Brain Team
Google Health

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

