Littlestone Classes are Privately Online Learnable

Noah Golowich
MIT CSAIl
nzg@mit.edu

Roi Livni
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the problem of online classification under a privacy constraint. In
this setting a learner observes sequentially a stream of labelled examples (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑦 𝑡 ),
for 1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇, and returns at each iteration 𝑡 a hypothesis ℎ𝑡 which is used to
predict the label of each new example 𝑥 𝑡 . The learner’s performance is measured
by her regret against a known hypothesis class H. We require that the algorithm
satisfies the following privacy constraint: the sequence ℎ1 , . . . , ℎ𝑇 of hypotheses
output by the algorithm needs to be an ( ², δ)-differentially private function of
the whole input sequence (𝑥 1 , 𝑦 1 ), . . . , (𝑥𝑇 , 𝑦𝑇 ). We provide the first non-trivial
regret bound for the realizable setting. Specifically, we show that if the class H
has constant Littlestone dimension then, given an oblivious sequence of labelled
examples, there is a private learner that makes in expectation at most 𝑂 (log 𝑇)
mistakes – comparable to the optimal mistake bound in the non-private case, up to
a logarithmic factor. Moreover, for general values of the Littlestone dimension 𝑑,
the same mistake bound holds but with a doubly-exponential in 𝑑 factor. A recent
line of work has demonstrated a strong connection between classes that are online
learnable and those that are differentially-private learnable. Our results strengthen
this connection and show that an online learning algorithm can in fact be directly
privatized (in the realizable setting). √We also discuss an adaptive setting and
provide a sublinear regret bound of 𝑂 ( 𝑇).

1

Introduction

Privacy-preserving machine learning has attracted considerable attention in recent years, motivated
by the fact that individuals’ data is often collected to train statistical models, and such models can
leak sensitive data about those individuals [13, 32]. The notion of differential privacy has emerged
as a central tool which can be used to formally reason about the privacy-accuracy tradeoffs one
must make in the process of analyzing and learning from data. A considerable body of literature on
differentially private machine learning has resulted, ranging from empirical works which train deep
neural networks with a differentially private form of stochastic gradient descent [1], to a recent line
of theoretical works which aim to characterize the optimal sample complexity of privately learning
an arbitrary hypothesis class [3, 11, 20].
Nearly all of these prior works on differentially private learning, however, are limited to the statistical
learning setting (also known as the offline setting): this is the setting where the labeled data, (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑦 𝑡 ),
are assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from some unknown population distribution. This setting, while
very well-understod and readily amenable to analysis, is unlikely to hold in practice. Indeed, the
data (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑦 𝑡 ) fed as input into the learning algorithm may shift over time (e.g., as a consequence of
demographic changes in a population), or may be subject to more drastic changes which are adaptive
to the algorithm’s prior predictions (e.g., drivers’ reactions to the recommendations of route-planning
apps may affect traffic patterns, which influence the input data to those apps). For this reason, it is
desirable to develop provable algorithms which make fewer assumptions on the data.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

