Greedy and Random Quasi-Newton Methods
with Faster Explicit Superlinear Convergence

Dachao Lin1∗
Haishan Ye2∗
Zhihua Zhang3
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
2
School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University; Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University; Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
1

lindachao@pku.edu.cn

yehaishan@xjtu.edu.cn

zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn.

Abstract
In this paper, we follow Rodomanov and Nesterov [19]’s work to study quasiNewton methods. We focus on the common SR1 and BFGS quasi-Newton methods
to establish better explicit (local) superlinear convergence rates. First, based on
the greedy quasi-Newton update which greedily selects the direction to maximize
a certain measure of progress, we improve the convergence rate to a conditionnumber-free superlinear convergence rate. Second, based on the random quasiNewton update that selects the direction randomly from a spherically symmetric
distribution, we show the same superlinear convergence rate established as above.
Our analysis is closely related to the approximation of a given Hessian matrix,
unconstrained quadratic objective, as well as the general strongly convex, smooth
and strongly self-concordant functions.

1

Introduction

We study the superlinear convergence of famous quasi-Newton methods that replace the exact Hessian
applied in classical Newton methods with certain approximations. The approximation is updated in
iterations based on some special formulas from the previous variation. There exist various quasiNewton algorithms with different Hessian approximations. The three most popular versions are the
Davidon-Fletcher-Powell (DFP) method [7, 10], the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS)
method [2, 3, 9, 11, 21], and the Symmetric Rank 1 (SR1) method [1, 7], all of which belong to
the Broyden family [1] of quasi-Newton algorithms. The most attractive property of quasi-Newton
methods is their superlinear convergence, which can trace back to the 1970s [4, 8, 17]. However, the
superlinear convergence rates provided in prior work are asymptotic [5, 13, 15, 22, 24]. The results
only show that the ratio of successive residuals tends to zero as the running iterations approach to
infinity, while still lacking a specific superlinear convergence rate.
Recently, Rodomanov and Nesterov [19] gave the first explicit local superlinear convergence for their
proposed new quasi-Newton methods. They introduced greedy quasi-Newton updates by greedily
selecting from basis vectors to maximize a certain measure of progress, and established an explicit
non-asymptotic bound on the local superlinear convergence rate correspondingly. Their proofs are
mainly applicable to the DFP methods because they reduced all possible Broyden family to the
DFP update based on the monotonicity property (see Lemma 2.2). However, the SR1 and BFGS
updates are more popular and faster than the DFP update in practice, which also has been verified in
their experiments. In addition, Rodomanov and Nesterov [19] also discovered that the randomized
methods do not lose superlinear convergence but they did not provide theoretical guarantees.
∗

Equal Contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

