Improving Visual Quality of Image Synthesis by A
Token-based Generator with Transformers
Yanhong Zeng1,2∗ Huan Yang3 Hongyang Chao1,2 Jianbo Wang4 Jianlong Fu3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
3
4
Microsoft Research Asia
University of Tokyo

Abstract
We present a new perspective of achieving image synthesis by viewing this task as
a visual token generation problem. Different from existing paradigms that directly
synthesize a full image from a single input (e.g., a latent code), the new formulation
enables a flexible local manipulation for different image regions, which makes it
possible to learn content-aware and fine-grained style control for image synthesis.
Specifically, it takes as input a sequence of latent tokens to predict the visual tokens
for synthesizing an image. Under this perspective, we propose a token-based
generator (i.e.,TokenGAN). Particularly, the TokenGAN inputs two semantically
different visual tokens, i.e., the learned constant content tokens and the style tokens
from the latent space. Given a sequence of style tokens, the TokenGAN is able to
control the image synthesis by assigning the styles to the content tokens by attention
mechanism with a Transformer. We conduct extensive experiments and show that
the proposed TokenGAN has achieved state-of-the-art results on several widelyused image synthesis benchmarks, including FFHQ and LSUN CHURCH with
different resolutions. In particular, the generator is able to synthesize high-fidelity
images with 1024 × 1024 size, dispensing with convolutions entirely.

1

Introduction

Unconditional image synthesis generates images from latent codes by adversarial training [10, 16, 19,
25, 27, 33, 50]. Recent advances have been achieved by a style-based generator architecture in terms
of both the visual quality and resolution of generated images [26, 27, 28, 37, 52]. In particular, the
style-based generator has been widely used in many other generative tasks, including facial editing
[9, 40], style transfer [1, 38], image super-resolution [17, 31], and image inpainting [2, 52].
The key to the success of the style-based generator lies in the learning of the style control based on
the intermediate latent space W [27, 28]. Instead of feeding the input latent code z ∈ Z through
the input layer only (Figure1-a), the style-based generator maps the input z to an intermediate latent
space w ∈ W, which then controls the “style” of the image at each layer via adaptive instance
normalization (AdaIN [21]) (Figure 1-b). It has been demonstrated that such a design allows a less
entangled representation learning in W, leading to better generative image modeling [12, 23, 27, 40].
Despite the promising results, the style-based generator can suffer from the style control via AdaIN
operation [28, 52]. Specifically, the style control is content-independent. It “washes away” the
original information of features by normalization and assigns new styles decided by the latent codes
regardless of the image/feature content. Besides, the style code w affects the entire image by scaling
and biasing complete feature maps with a single value via AdaIN operation [35, 44, 54]. Such an
imposed single style over multiple image regions can inevitably result in entangled representation of
∗

This work was done while Yanhong Zeng was a research intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

