Invertible Tabular GANs: Killing Two Birds with One
Stone for Tabular Data Synthesis

Jaehoon Lee
Yonsei University
ljh5694@yonsei.ac.kr

Jihyeon Hyeong
Yonsei University
jiji.hyeong@yonsei.ac.kr

Noseong Park
Yonsei University
noseong@yonsei.ac.kr

Jinsung Jeon
Yonsei University
Jjsjjs0902@yonsei.ac.kr

Jihoon Cho
Samsung SDS
jihoon1.cho@samsung.com

Abstract
Tabular data synthesis has received wide attention in the literature. This is because
available data is often limited, incomplete, or cannot be obtained easily, and data
privacy is becoming increasingly important. In this work, we present a generalized
GAN framework for tabular synthesis, which combines the adversarial training of
GANs and the negative log-density regularization of invertible neural networks.
The proposed framework can be used for two distinctive objectives. First, we can
further improve the synthesis quality, by decreasing the negative log-density of real
records in the process of adversarial training. On the other hand, by increasing the
negative log-density of real records, realistic fake records can be synthesized in
a way that they are not too much close to real records and reduce the chance of
potential information leakage. We conduct experiments with real-world datasets
for classification, regression, and privacy attacks. In general, the proposed method
demonstrates the best synthesis quality (in terms of task-oriented evaluation metrics,
e.g., F1) when decreasing the negative log-density during the adversarial training. If
increasing the negative log-density, our experimental results show that the distance
between real and fake records increases, enhancing robustness against privacy
attacks.

1

Introduction

Generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) and variational autoencoders
(VAEs), have proliferated over the past several years [24, 15, 31, 2, 18, 1, 16]. GANs are one of the
most successful models among generative models, and tabular data synthesis is one of the many GAN
applications [7, 4, 28, 27, 21, 38].
However, tabular data synthesis is challenging due to the following two problems: i) Tabular data
frequently contains sensitive information. ii) It is required to share tabular data with people, some of
whom are trustworthy while others are not. Therefore, generating fake records as similar as possible
to real ones, which is commonly accepted to enhance the synthesis quality, is not always preferred in
tabular data synthesis, e.g., sharing with unverified people [27, 5].
In [5], it was revealed that one can effectively extract privacy-related information from a pre-trained
GAN model if its log-densities are high enough. To this end, we propose a generalized framework,
called invertible tabular GAN (IT-GAN), where we integrate the adversarial training of GANs and

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

