Smooth Normalizing Flows

Jonas Köhler∗ †

†

Andreas Krämer∗ †

Frank Noé † ‡ §

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie Universität Berlin
‡
Department of Physics, Freie Universität Berlin
§
Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX
{jonas.koehler, andreas.kraemer, frank.noe}@fu-berlin.de

Abstract
Normalizing flows are a promising tool for modeling probability distributions in
physical systems. While state-of-the-art flows accurately approximate distributions
and energies, applications in physics additionally require smooth energies to compute forces and higher-order derivatives. Furthermore, such densities are often
defined on non-trivial topologies. A recent example are Boltzmann Generators for
generating 3D-structures of peptides and small proteins. These generative models
leverage the space of internal coordinates (dihedrals, angles, and bonds), which is
a product of hypertori and compact intervals. In this work, we introduce a class of
smooth mixture transformations working on both compact intervals and hypertori.
Mixture transformations employ root-finding methods to invert them in practice,
which has so far prevented bi-directional flow training. To this end, we show that
parameter gradients and forces of such inverses can be computed from forward
evaluations via the inverse function theorem. We demonstrate two advantages of
such smooth flows: they allow training by force matching to simulation data and
can be used as potentials in molecular dynamics simulations.

1

Introduction

Generative learning using normalizing flows (NF) [50, 42, 39] has become a widely applicable tool
in the physical sciences which has e.g. been used for sampling lattice models [36, 37, 31, 4, 1],
approximating the equilibrium density of molecular systems [38, 29, 56, 58] or estimating free energy
differences [55, 10].
Such models approximate a target density µ via diffeomorphic maps f (·; θ) : Ω ⊂ Rd → Ω by
transforming samples z ∼ p0 (z) of a base density into samples x = f (z; θ) such that they follow
the push-forward density

x ∼ pf (x; θ) := p0 f −1 (x; θ) det ∂x f −1 (x; θ) .
(1)
Flows can be trained on data by maximizing the likelihood or via minimizing of the reverse KL
divergence DKL [pf (·; θ)kµ] if µ is known up to a normalizing constant.
While NFs are usually introduced as smooth diffeomorphisms, most applications like density estimation or sampling only require C 1 -smooth transformations. Higher-order smoothness of flows has not
been discussed so far and can become a challenge as soon as multi-modal transformations on other
topologies than Rd are discussed.
∗

J.K and A.K. contributed equally to this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

