Capturing implicit hierarchical structure in 3D
biomedical images with self-supervised hyperbolic
representations

Joy Hsu∗
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
joycj@stanford.edu

Jeffrey Gu∗
ICME
Stanford University
jeffgu@stanford.edu

Wah Chiu
Department of Bioengineering
Stanford University
wahc@stanford.edu

Gong Her Wu
Department of Bioengineering
Stanford University
wukon@stanford.edu

Serena Yeung
Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University
syyeung@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of representation learning for unsupervised segmentation
of 3D voxel-grid biomedical images. We show that models that capture implicit
hierarchical relationships between subvolumes are better suited for this task. To that
end, we consider encoder-decoder architectures with a hyperbolic latent space, to
explicitly capture hierarchical relationships present in subvolumes of the data. We
propose utilizing a 3D hyperbolic variational autoencoder with a novel gyroplane
convolutional layer to map from the embedding space back to 3D images. To
capture these relationships, we introduce an essential self-supervised loss—in
addition to the standard VAE loss—which infers approximate hierarchies and
encourages implicitly related subvolumes to be mapped closer in the embedding
space. We present experiments on both synthetic data and biomedical data to
validate our hypothesis.

1

Introduction

Advances in biomedical imaging techniques such as cryogenic electron tomography (cryo-ET) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have resulted in an ever-increasing amount of 3D biomedical
image data. In these data domains, a growing body of work shows that, when provided with labels,
machine learning models achieve good performance on many tasks [Çiçek et al., 2016, Milletari et al.,
2017, Dou et al., 2017, Falk et al., 2019]. However, these labels, especially for segmentation, are very
costly as they often have to be provided by experts in the appropriate field. Consequently, supervised
learning and even semi-supervised learning remain limited in this setting as (1) tasks and domains
are very diverse, making it intractable for experts to provide labelled data for all problems; and (2)
experts can only label objects they already know, restricting the potential for scientific discovery
using machine learning methods. In this work, we tackle the task of unsupervised segmentation in
3D biomedical image data.
Our key insight is that 3D biomedical images have inherent hierarchical structure. For example,
in the cryo-ET domain, an image of a cell has a hierarchy that at the highest level comprises the
entire cell; at a finer level comprises organelles such as the mitochondria and nucleus; and at an even
∗

These authors contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

