BooVI: Provably Efficient Bootstrapped Value
Iteration
Boyi Liu⇤

Qi Cai†

Zhuoran Yang‡

Zhaoran Wang§

Abstract
Despite the tremendous success of reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximation, efficient exploration remains a significant challenge, both practically
and theoretically. In particular, existing theoretically grounded RL algorithms
based on upper confidence bounds (UCBs), such as optimistic least-squares value
iteration (LSVI), are often incompatible with practically powerful function approximators, such as neural networks. In this paper, we develop a variant of
bootstrapped LSVI, namely BooVI, which bridges such a gap between practice
and theory. Practically, BooVI drives exploration through (re)sampling, making it
compatible with
p general function approximators. Theoretically, BooVI inherits the
worst-case e
O( d3 H 3 T )-regret of optimistic LSVI in the episodic linear setting.
Here d is the feature dimension, H is the episode horizon, and T is the total number
of steps.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximation demonstrates significant empirical success
in a broad range of applications [e.g., 16, 38, 40, 45]. However, computationally and statistically
efficient exploration of large and intricate state spaces remains a major barrier. Practically, the lack of
temporally-extended exploration [31, 28, 30] in existing RL algorithms, e.g., deterministic policy
gradient [39] and soft actor-critic [19], hinders them from solving more challenging tasks, e.g.,
Montezuma’s Revenge in Atari Games [42, 17], in a more sample-efficient manner. Theoretically, it
remains unclear how to design provably efficient RL algorithms with finite sample complexities or
regrets that allow for practically powerful function approximators, e.g., neural networks.
There exist two principled approaches to efficient exploration in RL, namely optimism in the face of
uncertainty [e.g., 4, 41, 21, 11, 12, 5, 23, 24] and posterior sampling [e.g., 29, 34, 33, 30, 27, 36].
• The optimism-based approach is often instantiated by incorporating upper confidence bounds
(UCBs) into the estimated (action-)value functions as bonuses, which are used to direct
exploration. In the tabular setting, the resulting algorithms, e.g., variants of upper confidence
bound reinforcement learning (UCRL) [4, 21, 11, 5], are known to attain the optimal worstcase regret [32]. Beyond the tabular setting, it remains unclear how to construct closed-form
UCBs in a principled manner for general function approximators, e.g., neural networks.
The only exception is the linear setting [51, 52, 24, 8], where optimistic least-squares value
iteration (LSVI) [24] is known to attain a near-optimal (with respect to T = KH) worst-case
regret. However, the closed-form UCB therein is tailored to linear models [1, 9] rather than
fully general-purpose.
⇤

Northwestern University; boyiliu2018@u.northwestern.edu
Northwestern University; qicai2022@u.northwestern.edu
‡
Princeton University; zy6@princeton.edu
§
Northwestern University; zhaoranwang@gmail.com
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

