FACMAC: Factored Multi-Agent Centralised
Policy Gradients

Bei Peng∗ †
University of Liverpool

Tabish Rashid∗
University of Oxford

Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny†
Facebook AI Research

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford

Christian A. Schroeder de Witt∗
University of Oxford
Wendelin Böhmer
Delft University of Technology

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford

Abstract
We propose FACtored Multi-Agent Centralised policy gradients (FACMAC), a new
method for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning in both discrete and continuous action spaces. Like MADDPG, a popular multi-agent actor-critic method,
our approach uses deep deterministic policy gradients to learn policies. However,
FACMAC learns a centralised but factored critic, which combines per-agent utilities into the joint action-value function via a non-linear monotonic function, as
in QMIX, a popular multi-agent Q-learning algorithm. However, unlike QMIX,
there are no inherent constraints on factoring the critic. We thus also employ a
nonmonotonic factorisation and empirically demonstrate that its increased representational capacity allows it to solve some tasks that cannot be solved with
monolithic, or monotonically factored critics. In addition, FACMAC uses a centralised policy gradient estimator that optimises over the entire joint action space,
rather than optimising over each agent’s action space separately as in MADDPG.
This allows for more coordinated policy changes and fully reaps the benefits of a
centralised critic. We evaluate FACMAC on variants of the multi-agent particle
environments, a novel multi-agent MuJoCo benchmark, and a challenging set of
StarCraft II micromanagement tasks. Empirical results demonstrate FACMAC’s
superior performance over MADDPG and other baselines on all three domains.

1

Introduction

Significant progress has been made in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) under
the paradigm of centralised training with decentralised execution (CTDE) [27, 18] in recent years,
both in value-based [41, 31, 37, 32, 44, 30] and actor-critic [23, 9, 36, 13, 8] approaches. Most
popular multi-agent actor-critic methods such as COMA [9] and MADDPG [23] learn a centralised
critic with decentralised actors. The critic is centralised to make use of all available information (i.e.,
it can condition on the global state and the joint action) to estimate the joint action-value function
Qtot , unlike a decentralised critic that estimates the local action-value function Qa based only on
individual observations and actions for each agent a.3 Even though the joint action-value function
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Bei Peng <bei.peng@liverpool.ac.uk>
Work done while the authors were at the University of Oxford.
3
COMA learns a single centralised critic for all cooperative agents due to parameter sharing. For each
agent the critic has different inputs and can thus output different values for the same state and joint action.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

