Learning to Generate Visual Questions
with Noisy Supervision
Kai Shen∗†, Lingfei Wu∗‡, Siliang Tang§†, Yueting Zhuang†,
Zhen He‡, Zhuoye Ding‡, Yun Xiao‡, and Bo Long‡
†
Zhejiang University ‡JD.COM
shenkai@zju.edu.cn, lwu@email.wm.edu, {siliang,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn,
{bjhezhen,dingzhuoye,xiaoyun1,bo.long}@jd.com

Abstract
The task of visual question generation (VQG) aims to generate human-like neural
questions from an image and potentially other side information (e.g., answer type or
the answer itself). Existing works often suffer from the severe one image to many
questions mapping problem, which generates uninformative and non-referential
questions. Recent work has demonstrated that by leveraging double visual and answer hints, a model can faithfully generate much better quality questions. However,
visual hints are not available naturally. Despite they proposed a simple rule-based
similarity matching method to obtain candidate visual hints, they could be very
noisy practically and thus restrict the quality of generated questions. In this paper,
we present a novel learning approach for double-hints based VQG, which can be
cast as a weakly supervised learning problem with noises. The key rationale is
that the salient visual regions of interest can be viewed as a constraint to improve
the generation procedure for producing high-quality questions. As a result, given
the predicted salient visual regions of interest, we can focus on estimating the
probability of being ground-truth questions, which in turn implicitly measures the
quality of predicted visual hints. Experimental results on two benchmark datasets
show that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches by a
large margin on a variety of metrics, including both automatic machine metrics and
human evaluation.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in the Visual Question Generation (VQG) task. VQG
aims to generate human-like neural questions from an image and potentially other side information
(e.g., answer type or the answer itself). VQG is one of the effective data augmentation approaches for
providing high-quality synthetic training data for visual question answering (VQA) [28] and visual
dialog system [19]. Moreover, VQG models are also particularly useful for the few-shot learning
or zero-shot learning [36, 44]. Conceptually, VQG is a very challenging task since the generated
questions are not only required to be consistent with the image content but also meaningful and
answerable to humans.
To handle the VQG task, recent approaches explore three directions mainly. One direction is focusing
on VQG without any hints. Although more diverse questions can be generated, it often leads to
non-informative questions and hard to find any corresponding answers. Furthermore, in view of data
augmentation, a successful VQG system should be goal-driven in order to provide valuable additional
QA pairs to further enhance generalization capability of its dual VQA task [22].
∗
§

Both Authors Contributed Equally. This work was conducted when the first author was an intern in JD.COM.
Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

