Risk Bounds for Over-parameterized
Maximum Margin Classification on
Sub-Gaussian Mixtures
Yuan Cao
Department of Statistics & Actuarial Science
Department of Mathematics
The University of Hong Kong
yuancao@hku.hk

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Mikhail Belkin
Halicioğlu Data Science Institute
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
mbelkin@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Modern machine learning systems such as deep neural networks are often highly
over-parameterized so that they can fit the noisy training data exactly, yet they
can still achieve small test errors in practice. In this paper, we study this “benign
overfitting” phenomenon of the maximum margin classifier for linear classification
problems. Specifically, we consider data generated from sub-Gaussian mixtures,
and provide a tight risk bound for the maximum margin linear classifier in the
over-parameterized setting. Our results precisely characterize the condition under
which benign overfitting can occur in linear classification problems, and improve on
previous work. They also have direct implications for over-parameterized logistic
regression.

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning, complex models such as deep neural networks have become increasingly
popular. These complicated models are capable of fitting noisy training data sets, while at the same
time achieving small test errors. In fact, this benign overfitting phenomenon is not a unique feature of
deep learning. Even for kernel methods and linear models, [5] demonstrated that interpolators on
the noisy training data can still perform near optimally on the test data. A series of recent works
[4, 20, 11, 2] theoretically studied how over-parameterization can achieve small population risk.
In particular in [2] the authors considered the setting where the data are generated from a ground-truth
linear model with noise, and established a tight population risk bound for the minimum norm linear
interpolator with a matching lower bound. More recently, [23] further studied benign overfitting in
ridge regression, and established non-asymptotic generalization bounds for over-parametrized ridge
regression. They showed that those bounds are tight for a range of regularization parameter values.
Notably, these results cover arbitrary covariance structure of the data, and give a nice characterization
of how the spectrum of the data covariance matrix affects the population risk in the over-parameterized
regime.
Very recently, benign overfitting has also been studied in the setting of linear classification [6, 19, 25].
Specifically, [19] studied the setting where the data inputs are Gaussian and the labels are generated
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

