Arbitrary Conditional Distributions with Energy

Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science
UNC at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27514
joliva@cs.unc.edu

Ryan R. Strauss
Department of Computer Science
UNC at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27514
rrs@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Modeling distributions of covariates, or density estimation, is a core challenge in
unsupervised learning. However, the majority of work only considers the joint
distribution, which has limited utility in practical situations. A more general and
useful problem is arbitrary conditional density estimation, which aims to model
any possible conditional distribution over a set of covariates, reflecting the more
realistic setting of inference based on prior knowledge. We propose a novel method,
Arbitrary Conditioning with Energy (ACE), that can simultaneously estimate the
distribution p(xu | xo ) for all possible subsets of unobserved features xu and
observed features xo . ACE is designed to avoid unnecessary bias and complexity
— we specify densities with a highly expressive energy function and reduce the
problem to only learning one-dimensional conditionals (from which more complex
distributions can be recovered during inference). This results in an approach that
is both simpler and higher-performing than prior methods. We show that ACE
achieves state-of-the-art for arbitrary conditional likelihood estimation and data
imputation on standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Density estimation, a core challenge in machine learning, attempts to learn the probability density
of some random variables given samples from their true distribution. The vast majority of work on
density estimation focuses on the joint distribution p(x) [10, 4, 25, 11, 23, 22, 6], i.e., the distribution
of all variables taken together. While the joint distribution can be useful (e.g., to learn the distribution
of pixel configurations that represent human faces), it is limited in the types of predictions it can
make. We are often more interested in conditional probabilities, which communicate the likelihood of
an event given some prior information. For example, given a patient’s medical history and symptoms,
a doctor determines the likelihoods of different illnesses and other patient attributes. Conditional
distributions are often more practical since real-world decisions are nearly always informed by prior
information.
However, we often do not know ahead of time which conditional distribution (or distributions) will
be of interest. That is, we may not know which features will be known (observed) or which will
be inferred (unobserved). For example, not every patient that a doctor sees will have had the same
tests performed (i.e., have the same observed features). A naïve approach requires building an
exponential number of models to cover all possible cases (one for every conditional distribution),
which quickly becomes intractable. Thus, an intelligent system needs to understand the intricate
conditional dependencies between all arbitrary subsets of covariates, and it must do so with a single
model to be practical.
In this work, we consider the problem of learning the conditional distribution p(xu | xo ) for any
arbitrary subsets of unobserved variables xu ∈ R|u| and observed variables xo ∈ R|o| , where
u, o ⊆ {1, . . . , d} and o ∩ u = ∅. We propose a method, Arbitrary Conditioning with Energy (ACE),
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

