Neural Human Performer: Learning Generalizable
Radiance Fields for Human Performance Rendering

Youngjoong Kwon1 , Dahun Kim2 , Duygu Ceylan3 , Henry Fuchs1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 2 KAIST. 3 Adobe Research.

1

{youngjoong,fuchs}@cs.unc.edu

{mcahny}@kaist.ac.kr

{ceylan}@adobe.com

Abstract
In this paper, we aim at synthesizing a free-viewpoint video of an arbitrary human
performance using sparse multi-view cameras. Recently, several works have
addressed this problem by learning person-specific neural radiance fields (NeRF) to
capture the appearance of a particular human. In parallel, some work proposed to
use pixel-aligned features to generalize radiance fields to arbitrary new scenes and
objects. Adopting such generalization approaches to humans, however, is highly
challenging due to the heavy occlusions and dynamic articulations of body parts.
To tackle this, we propose Neural Human Performer, a novel approach that learns
generalizable neural radiance fields based on a parametric human body model for
robust performance capture. Specifically, we first introduce a temporal transformer
that aggregates tracked visual features based on the skeletal body motion over
time. Moreover, a multi-view transformer is proposed to perform cross-attention
between the temporally-fused features and the pixel-aligned features at each time
step to integrate observations on the fly from multiple views. Experiments on the
ZJU-MoCap and AIST datasets show that our method significantly outperforms
recent generalizable NeRF methods on unseen identities and poses. The video
results and code are available at https://youngjoongunc.github.io/nhp.

1

Introduction

Free-viewpoint video of a human performer has a variety of applications in the area of telepresence, mixed reality, gaming and etc. Conventional free-viewpoint video systems require extremely
expensive setups such as dense camera rigs [4, 7, 43] or accurate depth sensors [6, 13], to capture
person-specific appearance information. In this paper, we aim at a scalable solution for free-viewpoint
human performance rendering that generalizes across different human performers and requires only
sparse camera views. However, representing and rendering arbitrary human performances is extremely challenging when the observations are highly sparse (up to three to four views) due to heavy
self-occlusions and dynamic articulations of the body parts. In particular, an effective solution needs
to coherently aggregate appearance information from sparse multi-view observations across time as
the body undergoes a 3D motion. Furthermore, the solution needs to generalize to unseen motions
and characters at test time.
Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRF) [26, 11, 17, 30, 33, 35, 36, 47, 50, 52, 53] have shown
photo-realistic novel view synthesis results in per-scene optimization settings. To avoid the expensive
per-scene training and improve the practicality, generalizable NeRFs [36, 52, 47] have been proposed
which use image-conditioned, pixel-aligned features and achieve feed-forward view synthesis from
sparse input views [36, 52]. Direct application of these methods to complex and non-rigid human
motion is not straightforward, however, and naive solutions suffer from significant artifacts as shown
in Fig. 3. Some existing methods [37, 52] aggregate image features across multiple views by simple
average pooling, which often leads to over-smoothed outputs when details observed from multiple
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

