Self-Supervised Representation Learning on Neural
Network Weights for Model Characteristic Prediction

Konstantin Schürholt
konstantin.schuerholt@unisg.ch
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen
Dimche Kostadinov
dimche.kostadinov@unisg.ch
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen

Damian Borth
damian.borth@unisg.ch
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has been shown to learn useful and informationpreserving representations. Neural Networks (NNs) are widely applied, yet their
weight space is still not fully understood. Therefore, we propose to use SSL to
learn hyper-representations of the weights of populations of NNs. To that end, we
introduce domain specific data augmentations and an adapted attention architecture.
Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that self-supervised representation learning
in this domain is able to recover diverse NN model characteristics. Further, we show
that the proposed learned representations outperform prior work for predicting
hyper-parameters, test accuracy, and generalization gap as well as transfer to
out-of-distribution settings. Code and datasets are publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

This work investigates populations of Neural Network (NN) models and aims to learn representations
of them using Self-Supervised Learning. Within NN populations, not all model training is successful,
i.e., some overfit and others generalize. This may be due to the non-convexity of the loss surface
during optimization [Goodfellow et al., 2015], the high dimensionality of the optimization space, or
the sensitivity to hyperparameters [Hanin and Rolnick, 2018], which causes models to converge to
different regions in weight space. What is still not yet fully understood, is how different regions in
weight space are related to model characteristics.
Previous work has made progress investigating characteristics of NN models, e.g by visualizing
learned features [Zeiler and Fergus, 2014, Karpathy et al., 2015]. Another line of work compares the
activations of pairs of NN models [Raghu et al., 2017, Morcos et al., 2018, Kornblith et al., 2019].
Both approaches rely on the expressiveness of the data, and are, in the latter case, limited to two
models at a time. Other approaches predict model properties, such as accuracy, generalization gap, or
hyperparameters from the margin distribution [Yak et al., 2019, Jiang et al., 2019], graph topology
features [Corneanu et al., 2020] or eigenvalue decomposition of the weight matrices [Martin and
Mahoney, 2019]. In a similar direction, other publications propose to investigate populations of
models and to predict properties directly from their weights or weight statistics in a supervised way
[Unterthiner et al., 2020, Eilertsen et al., 2020]. However, these manually designed features may not
fully capture the latent model characteristics embedded in the weight space.
1

https://github.com/HSG-AIML/NeurIPS_2021-Weight_Space_Learning

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

