On the Equivalence between Neural Network and
Support Vector Machine
Yilan Chen
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
yilan@ucsd.edu

Wei Huang
Engineering and Information Technology
University of Technology Sydney
Ultimo, Australia
weihuang.uts@gmail.com

Lam M. Nguyen
IBM Research
Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY
LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com

Tsui-Wei Weng
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
lweng@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recent research shows that the dynamics of an infinitely wide neural network (NN)
trained by gradient descent can be characterized by Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
[27]. Under the squared loss, the infinite-width NN trained by gradient descent
with an infinitely small learning rate is equivalent to kernel regression with NTK
[4]. However, the equivalence is only known for ridge regression currently [6],
while the equivalence between NN and other kernel machines (KMs), e.g. support
vector machine (SVM), remains unknown. Therefore, in this work, we propose
to establish the equivalence between NN and SVM, and specifically, the infinitely
wide NN trained by soft margin loss and the standard soft margin SVM with NTK
trained by subgradient descent. Our main theoretical results include establishing
the equivalence between NN and a broad family of `2 regularized KMs with finitewidth bounds, which cannot be handled by prior work, and showing that every
finite-width NN trained by such regularized loss functions is approximately a KM.
Furthermore, we demonstrate our theory can enable three practical applications,
including (i) non-vacuous generalization bound of NN via the corresponding
KM; (ii) nontrivial robustness certificate for the infinite-width NN (while existing
robustness verification methods would provide vacuous bounds); (iii) intrinsically
more robust infinite-width NNs than those from previous kernel regression.

1

Introduction

Recent research has made some progress towards deep learning theory from the perspective of infinitewidth NN. For a fully-trained neural network, it follows kernel gradient descent in the function space
with respect to NTK [27]. Under this linear regime and squared loss, it is rigorously proved that the
fully-trained net is equivalent to kernel regression with NTK [4], which gives the generalization ability
of such a model [5]. NTK helps us understand the optimization [27, 18] and generalization [5, 12] of
NN through the perspective of kernels. However, existing theories about NTK [27, 30, 4, 13] usually
assume the loss is a function of the model output, which does not include the case of regularization.
Besides, they usually consider the squared loss which corresponds to a kernel regression, which may
have limited insights to understand classification problems since squared loss and kernel regression
are usually used for regression problems.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

