MICo: Improved representations via sampling-based
state similarity for Markov decision processes

Pablo Samuel Castro∗

Tyler Kastner∗

Prakash Panangaden

Mark Rowland

Google Research, Brain Team

McGill University

McGill University

DeepMind

Abstract
We present a new behavioural distance over the state space of a Markov decision process, and demonstrate the use of this distance as an effective means of
shaping the learnt representations of deep reinforcement learning agents. While
existing notions of state similarity are typically difficult to learn at scale due to
high computational cost and lack of sample-based algorithms, our newly-proposed
distance addresses both of these issues. In addition to providing detailed theoretical
analysis, we provide empirical evidence that learning this distance alongside the
value function yields structured and informative representations, including strong
results on the Arcade Learning Environment benchmark.

1

Introduction

The success of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms in large-scale, complex tasks depends on
forming useful representations of the environment with which the algorithms interact. Feature
selection and feature learning has long been an important subdomain of RL, and with the advent of
deep reinforcement learning there has been much recent interest in understanding and improving the
representations learnt by RL agents.
Much of the work in representation learning has taken place from the perspective of auxiliary
tasks [Jaderberg et al., 2017, Bellemare et al., 2017, Fedus et al., 2019]; in addition to the primary
reinforcement learning task, the agent may attempt to predict and control additional aspects of the
environment. Auxiliary tasks shape the agent’s representation of the environment implicitly, typically
via gradient descent on the additional learning objectives. As such, while auxiliary tasks continue to
play an important role in improving the performance of deep RL algorithms, our understanding of
the effects of auxiliary tasks on representations in RL is still in its infancy.
In contrast to the implicit representation shaping of auxiliary tasks, a separate line of work on behavioural metrics, such as bisimulation metrics [Desharnais et al., 1999, 2004, Ferns et al., 2004,
2006], aims to capture structure in the environment by learning a metric measuring behavioral
similarity between states. Recent works have successfully used behavioural metrics to shape the
representations of deep RL agents [Gelada et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2021, Agarwal et al., 2021a].
However, in practice behavioural metrics are difficult to estimate from both statistical and computational perspectives, and these works either rely on specific assumptions about transition dynamics to
make the estimation tractable, and as such can only be applied to limited classes of environments, or
are applied to more general classes of environments not covered by theoretical guarantees.
The principal objective of this work is to develop new measures of behavioral similarity that avoid
the statistical and computational difficulties described above, and simultaneously capture richer
information about the environment. We introduce the MICo (Matching under Independent Couplings)
distance, and develop the theory around its computation and estimation, making comparisons with
existing metrics on the basis of computational and statistical efficiency. We demonstrate the usefulness
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to Pablo Samuel Castro: psc@google.com.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

