Redesigning the Transformer Architecture with
Insights from Multi-particle Dynamical Systems

Subhabrata Dutta
Jadavpur University
India
subha0009@gmail.com

Tanya Gautam
IIIT-Delhi
India
tanya18048@iiitd.ac.in

Soumen Chakrabarti
IIT-Bombay
India
soumen@cse.iitb.ac.in

Tanmoy Chakraborty
IIIT-Delhi
India
tanmoy@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
The Transformer and its variants have been proven to be efficient sequence learners
in many different domains. Despite their staggering success, a critical issue has
been the enormous number of parameters that must be trained (ranging from 107
to 1011 ) along with the quadratic complexity of dot-product attention. In this work,
we investigate the problem of approximating the two central components of the
Transformer — multi-head self-attention and point-wise feed-forward transformation, with reduced parameter space and computational complexity. We build upon
recent developments in analyzing deep neural networks as numerical solvers of
ordinary differential equations. Taking advantage of an analogy between Transformer stages and the evolution of a dynamical system of multiple interacting
particles, we formulate a temporal evolution scheme, TransEvolve, to bypass
costly dot-product attention over multiple stacked layers. We perform exhaustive experiments with TransEvolve on well-known encoder-decoder as well as
encoder-only tasks. We observe that the degree of approximation (or inversely,
the degree of parameter reduction) has different effects on the performance, depending on the task. While in the encoder-decoder regime, TransEvolve delivers
performances comparable to the original Transformer, in encoder-only tasks it consistently outperforms Transformer along with several subsequent variants. Code is
available in: https://github.com/LCS2-IIITD/TransEvolve.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have evolved from early feed-forward and convolutional networks, to recurrent
networks, to very deep and wide ‘Transformer’ networks based on attention [Vaswani et al., 2017].
Transformers and their enhancements, such as BERT [Devlin et al., 2019], T5 [Raffel et al., 2020]
and GPT [Brown et al., 2020] are, by now, the default choice in many language applications. Both
their training data and model sizes are massive. BERT-base has 110 million parameters. BERT-large,
which often leads to better task performance, has 345 million parameters. GPT-3 has 175 billion
trained parameters. Larger BERT models already approach the limits of smaller GPUs. GPT-3 is
outside the resource capabilities of most research groups. Training these gargantuan models is even
more challenging, with significant energy requirements and carbon emissions [Strubell et al., 2020].
In response, a growing community of researchers is focusing on post-facto reduction of model sizes,
which can help with the deployment of pre-trained models in low-resource environments. However,
training complexity is also critically important. A promising recent approach to faster training uses a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

