Delayed Gradient Averaging: Tolerate the
Communication Latency in Federated Learning
Ligeng Zhu1

Hongzhou Lin2 Yao Lu3 Yujun Lin1
1
MIT 2 Amazon 3 Google
https://dga.mit.edu

Song Han1

Abstract
Federated Learning is an emerging direction in distributed machine learning that enables jointly training a model without sharing the data. Since the data is distributed
across many edge devices through wireless / long-distance connections, federated
learning suffers from inevitable high communication latency. However, the latency
issues are undermined in the current literature [15] and existing approaches such
as FedAvg [27] become less efficient when the latency increases. To overcome
the problem, we propose Delayed Gradient Averaging (DGA), which delays the
averaging step to improve efficiency and allows local computation in parallel to
communication. We theoretically prove that DGA attains a similar convergence
rate as FedAvg, and empirically show that our algorithm can tolerate high network
latency without compromising accuracy. Specifically, we benchmark the training
speed on various vision (CIFAR, ImageNet) and language tasks (Shakespeare),
with both IID and non-IID partitions, and show DGA can bring 2.55⇥ to 4.07⇥
speedup. Moreover, we built a 16-node Raspberry Pi cluster and show that DGA
can consistently speed up real-world federated learning applications.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning [18, 27] has gained growing attention as it enables multi-clients distributed
training without exposing the data from private users. During the training, only the model updates are
exchanged between clients and servers, thus private training data never leave local devices, enhancing
privacy. Many successful applications such as next-word prediction [10], voice recognition [38], and
health care applications [50] have been derived under the framework.
A significant difference between federated scenarios and typical in-center distributed settings [6, 8] is
the networking condition. Unlike high-end in-cluster network infrastructures where high bandwidth
(100⇠Gbps) and low latency (1ms) network is available, edge devices are usually connected
through wireless and long-distance connection, thus the bandwidth and latency are strictly limited.
This dwarfs the performance of federated systems and slows the development of related applications.
While the bandwidth constraints have been efficiently addressed by gradient compression [25], lowrank updates [18] and quantization techniques [43], the issue related to network latency is rarely
studied in the recent literature [12, 15]. However, high network latency is inevitable in federated
settings because of (1) wireless connections and (2) long-distance transmission (Figure. 1.(b)). On the
one hand, the high-density urban office and home environments create a lot of contention, as dozens
of devices compete for the same radio frequency. On the other hand, the multi-geographic located
data entails a minimum latency cost: even with the speed of light, it requires hundreds of milliseconds
to send a packet across the world. In either case, the high latency is a hard barrier introduced by
physical limits thus inevitable. If not handled specifically, such communication lag, in the magnitude
of hundreds of milliseconds, or even seconds, will significantly degrade the scalability of the learning
algorithm as shown in the Figure. 1.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

