HyperSPNs:
Compact and Expressive Probabilistic Circuits
Andy Shih
Stanford University
andyshih@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic circuits (PCs) are a family of generative models which allows for the
computation of exact likelihoods and marginals of its probability distributions. PCs
are both expressive and tractable, and serve as popular choices for discrete density
estimation tasks. However, large PCs are susceptible to overfitting, and only a
few regularization strategies (e.g., dropout, weight-decay) have been explored.
We propose HyperSPNs: a new paradigm of generating the mixture weights of
large PCs using a small-scale neural network. Our framework can be viewed as a
soft weight-sharing strategy, which combines the greater expressiveness of large
models with the better generalization and memory-footprint properties of small
models. We show the merits of our regularization strategy on two state-of-theart PC families introduced in recent literature – RAT-SPNs and EiNETs – and
demonstrate generalization improvements in both models on a suite of density
estimation benchmarks in both discrete and continuous domains.

1

Introduction

One of the core motivations for building models of probability distributions from data is to reason
about the data distribution. For example, given a model of the distribution over driving routes,
we may like to reason about the probability that a driver will take a certain route given that there
is congestion on a certain street. Or, given a distribution over weather conditions, we may like
to reason about the probability of it raining k times in the next year. Traditional probabilistic
models such as Categorical/Gaussian Mixture Models or Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are wellequipped to answer these types of queries with exact probabilities that are consistent with the model
distribution [1]. However, their learned model distribution might not accurately approximate the data
distribution due to their simplicity.
On the other end of the spectrum, the modern wave of deep generative models has largely focused
on learning accurate approximations of the true data distribution, at the cost of tractability. High
capacity models such as autoregressive or flow models can mimic the true data distribution with great
fidelity [33, 13, 22]. However, they are not designed for reasoning about the probability distribution
beyond computation of likelihoods. More illustrative of this trend are GANs and EBMs, which are
expressive enough to sample high-quality images, but give up even the ability to compute exact
likelihoods [9, 14].
To maintain the ability to reason about the distribution induced by our model, we need to explore
within tractable probabilistic models. Of these model families, probabilistic circuits (e.g. Sum
Product Networks) are one of the most expressive and general, subsuming shallow mixture models,
and HMMs while maintaining their tractable properties [6, 26, 34]. Their expressive power comes
from their hierarchical / deep architecture, allowing them to express a large number of modes in
their distribution. Their tractability comes from global constraints imposed in their network structure,
enabling efficient and exact computation of likelihoods, marginals, and more. Probabilistic circuits
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

