Towards Enabling Meta-Learning
from Target Models∗

Su Lu
Han-Jia Ye
Le Gan
De-Chuan Zhan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{lus,yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {ganl,zhandc}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Meta-learning can extract an inductive bias from previous learning experience and
assist the training of new tasks. It is often realized through optimizing a metamodel with the evaluation loss of task-specific solvers. Most existing algorithms
sample non-overlapping support sets and query sets to train and evaluate the solvers
respectively due to simplicity (S/Q protocol). Different from S/Q protocol, we can
also evaluate a task-specific solver by comparing it to a target model T , which is the
optimal model for this task or a model that behaves well enough on this task (S/T
protocol). Although being short of research, S/T protocol has unique advantages
such as offering more informative supervision, but it is computationally expensive.
This paper looks into this special evaluation method and takes a step towards putting
it into practice. We find that with a small ratio of tasks armed with target models,
classic meta-learning algorithms can be improved a lot without consuming many
resources. We empirically verify the effectiveness of S/T protocol in a typical
application of meta-learning, i.e., few-shot learning. In detail, after constructing
target models by fine-tuning the pre-trained network on those hard tasks, we match
the task-specific solvers and target models via knowledge distillation.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning means improving performance measures over a family of tasks by their training
experience [22]. It has been researched in various fields such as image classification [11, 16] and
reinforcement learning [6, 14]. By reusing transferable meta-knowledge extracted from previous
tasks, we can learn new tasks with a higher efficiency or a shortage of data.
A typical meta-learning algorithm can be decomposed into two iterative phases. In the first phase,
we train a solver of a task on its training set with assistance of meta-model. In the second phase, we
optimize the solver’s performance to update meta-model. One key factor in this procedure is the way
to evaluate the solver because the evaluation result acts as the supervision signal for meta-model.
Early meta-learning algorithms [19, 23] directly use the solver’s training loss as its performance
metric, and optimize this metric over a distribution of tasks. Obviously, inner-task over-fitting may
happen during the training of task-specific solvers, resulting in an inaccurate supervision signal for
the meta-model. This drawback is even more amplified in applications where the training set of each
task is limited such as few-shot learning and noisy learning.
Intuitively, assessment of solvers should be independent of their training sets. This principle draws
forth two important meta-learning algorithms in 2016 [24, 28], which respectively export solver
evaluation from the perspective of “data” and “model”. In this paper, we call these two methodologies
S/Q protocol and S/T protocol. In S/Q protocol, S means support set and Q means query set. They
∗

De-Chuan Zhan is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

