Credal Self-Supervised Learning

Julian Lienen
Department of Computer Science
Paderborn University
Paderborn 33098, Germany
julian.lienen@upb.de

Eyke Hüllermeier
Institute of Informatics
University of Munich (LMU)
Munich 80538, Germany
eyke@ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
Self-training is an effective approach to semi-supervised learning. The key idea
is to let the learner itself iteratively generate “pseudo-supervision” for unlabeled
instances based on its current hypothesis. In combination with consistency regularization, pseudo-labeling has shown promising performance in various domains, for
example in computer vision. To account for the hypothetical nature of the pseudolabels, these are commonly provided in the form of probability distributions. Still,
one may argue that even a probability distribution represents an excessive level
of informedness, as it suggests that the learner precisely knows the ground-truth
conditional probabilities. In our approach, we therefore allow the learner to label
instances in the form of credal sets, that is, sets of (candidate) probability distributions. Thanks to this increased expressiveness, the learner is able to represent
uncertainty and a lack of knowledge in a more flexible and more faithful manner. To
learn from weakly labeled data of that kind, we leverage methods that have recently
been proposed in the realm of so-called superset learning. In an exhaustive empirical evaluation, we compare our methodology to state-of-the-art self-supervision
approaches, showing competitive to superior performance especially in low-label
scenarios incorporating a high degree of uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Recent progress and practical success in machine learning, especially in deep learning, is largely
due to an increased availability of data. However, even if data collection is cheap in many domains,
labeling the data so as to make it amenable to supervised learning algorithms might be costly and often
comes with a significant effort. As a consequence, many data sets are only partly labeled, i.e., only a
few instances are labeled while the majority is not. This is the key motivation for semi-supervised
learning (SSL) methods [7], which seek to exploit both labeled and unlabeled data simultaneously.
As one simple yet effective methodology, so-called self-training [26], often also referred to as pseudolabeling, has proven effective in leveraging unlabeled data to improve over training solely on labeled
data. The key idea is to let the learner itself generate “pseudo-supervision” for unlabeled instances
based on its own current hypothesis. In the case of probabilistic classifiers, such pseudo-targets
are usually provided in the form of (perhaps degenerate) probability distributions. Obviously, since
pseudo-labels are mere guesses and might be wrong, this comes with the danger of biasing the
learning process, a problem commonly known as confirmation bias [46]. Therefore, self-training is
nowadays typically combined with additional regularization means, such as consistency regularization
[2, 40], or additional uncertainty-awareness [38].
Labeling an instance x with a probability distribution on the target space Y is certainly better than
committing to a precise target value, for example a single class label in classification, as the latter
would suggest a level of conviction that is not warranted. Still, one may argue that even a probability
distribution represents an excessive level of informedness. In fact, it actually suggests that the learner
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

