PortaSpeech: Portable and High-Quality
Generative Text-to-Speech

Yi Ren∗
Zhejiang University
rayeren@zju.edu.cn

Jinglin Liu∗
Zhejiang University
jinglinliu@zju.edu.cn

Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-autoregressive text-to-speech (NAR-TTS) models such as FastSpeech 2 [24]
and Glow-TTS [8] can synthesize high-quality speech from the given text in parallel.
After analyzing two kinds of generative NAR-TTS models (VAE and normalizing
flow), we find that: VAE is good at capturing the long-range semantics features (e.g.,
prosody) even with small model size but suffers from blurry and unnatural results;
and normalizing flow is good at reconstructing the frequency bin-wise details but
performs poorly when the number of model parameters is limited. Inspired by these
observations, to generate diverse speech with natural details and rich prosody using
a lightweight architecture, we propose PortaSpeech, a portable and high-quality
generative text-to-speech model. Specifically, 1) to model both the prosody and
mel-spectrogram details accurately, we adopt a lightweight VAE with an enhanced
prior followed by a flow-based post-net with strong conditional inputs as the main
architecture. 2) To further compress the model size and memory footprint, we
introduce the grouped parameter sharing mechanism to the affine coupling layers
in the post-net. 3) To improve the expressiveness of synthesized speech and reduce
the dependency on accurate fine-grained alignment between text and speech, we
propose a linguistic encoder with mixture alignment combining hard word-level
alignment and soft phoneme-level alignment, which explicitly extracts word-level
semantic information. Experimental results show that PortaSpeech outperforms
other TTS models in both voice quality and prosody modeling in terms of subjective
and objective evaluation metrics, and shows only a slight performance degradation
when reducing the model parameters to 6.7M (about 4x model size and 3x runtime
memory compression ratio compared with FastSpeech 2). Our extensive ablation
studies demonstrate that each design in PortaSpeech is effective3 .

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning-based text-to-speech (TTS) has attracted a lot of attention in speech community [2, 15, 20, 22, 24, 25, 29, 35]. Among neural network-based TTS systems, some of them generate
mel-spectrograms autoregressively from text [15, 22, 29, 35] and suffer from slow inference speed
and robustness (word skipping and repeating) problems [25], while others [8, 12, 16, 19, 24, 25]
generate mel-spectrograms in parallel with comparable quality using non-autoregressive architecture,
called NAR-TTS, which enjoys fast inference and avoids robustness issues in the meanwhile. In
general, modern TTS models aim to achieve the following goals:
• Fast: to reduce the cost of computational resources and apply the model to real-time applications,
the inference speed of TTS model should be fast.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author
3
Audio samples are available at https://portaspeech.github.io/.

†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

