Breaking the Sample Complexity Barrier to
Regret-Optimal Model-Free Reinforcement Learning

Gen Li∗
Princeton

Laixi Shi†
CMU

Yuxin Chen∗
Princeton

Yuantao Gu‡
Tsinghua

Yuejie Chi†
CMU

Abstract
Achieving sample efficiency in online episodic reinforcement learning (RL) requires optimally balancing exploration and exploitation. When it comes to a
finite-horizon episodic Markov decision process with S states, A actions and
horizon length H, substantial progress has been achieved towards
characterizing
√
the minimax-optimal regret, which scales on the order of H 2 SAT (modulo
log factors) with T the total number of samples. While several competing solution paradigms have been proposed to minimize regret, they are either memoryinefficient, or fall short of optimality unless the sample size exceeds an enormous
threshold (e.g., S 6 A4 poly(H) for existing model-free methods).
To overcome such a large sample size barrier to efficient RL, we design a novel
model-free algorithm, with space complexity O(SAH), that achieves near-optimal
regret as soon as the sample size exceeds the order of SA poly(H). In terms of
this sample size requirement (also referred to the initial burn-in cost), our method
improves — by at least a factor of S 5 A3 — upon any prior memory-efficient
algorithm that is asymptotically regret-optimal. Leveraging the recently introduced
variance reduction strategy (also called reference-advantage decomposition), the
proposed algorithm employs an early-settled reference update rule, with the aid of
two Q-learning sequences with upper and lower confidence bounds. The design
principle of our early-settled variance reduction method might be of independent
interest to other RL settings that involve intricate exploration-exploitation tradeoffs.

1

Introduction

Contemporary reinforcement learning (RL) has to deal with unknown environments with unprecedentedly large dimensionality. How to make the best use of samples in the face of high-dimensional
state/action space lies at the core of modern RL practice. An ideal RL algorithm would learn to
act favorably even when the number of available data samples scales sub-linearly in the ambient
dimension of the model, i.e., the number of parameters needed to describe the transition dynamics of
the environment. The challenge is further compounded when this task needs to be accomplished with
limited memory.
Simultaneously achieving the desired sample and memory efficiency is particularly challenging when
it comes to online episodic RL scenarios. In contrast to the simulator setting that permits sampling
of any state-action pair, an agent in online episodic RL is only allowed to draw sample trajectories
by executing a policy in the unknown Markov decision process (MDP), where the initial states are
pre-assigned and might even be chosen by an adversary. Careful deliberation needs to be undertaken
when deciding what policies to use to allow for effective interaction with the unknown environment,
∗

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
USA.
‡
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

