Self-Supervised GANs with Label Augmentation
Liang Hou1,3 , Huawei Shen1,3 , Qi Cao1 , Xueqi Cheng2,3
1
Data Intelligence System Research Center,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{houliang17z,shenhuawei,caoqi,cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, transformation-based self-supervised learning has been applied to generative adversarial networks (GANs) to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in the
discriminator by introducing a stationary learning environment. However, the
separate self-supervised tasks in existing self-supervised GANs cause a goal inconsistent with generative modeling due to the fact that their self-supervised classifiers
are agnostic to the generator distribution. To address this problem, we propose a
novel self-supervised GAN that unifies the GAN task with the self-supervised task
by augmenting the GAN labels (real or fake) via self-supervision of data transformation. Specifically, the original discriminator and self-supervised classifier are
unified into a label-augmented discriminator that predicts the augmented labels to
be aware of both the generator distribution and the data distribution under every
transformation, and then provide the discrepancy between them to optimize the
generator. Theoretically, we prove that the optimal generator could converge to
replicate the real data distribution. Empirically, we show that the proposed method
significantly outperforms previous self-supervised and data augmentation GANs on
both generative modeling and representation learning across benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14] have developed rapidly in synthesizing realistic images
in recent years [4, 23, 24]. Conventional GANs consist of a generator and a discriminator, which
are trained adversarially in a minimax game. The discriminator attempts to distinguish the real
data from the fake ones that are synthesized by the generator, while the generator aims to confuse
the discriminator to reproduce the real data distribution. However, the continuous evolution of
the generator results in a non-stationary learning environment for the discriminator. In such a
non-stationary environment, the single discriminative signal (real or fake) provides unstable and
limited information to the discriminator [37, 7, 70, 57]. Therefore, the discriminator may encounter
catastrophic forgetting [25, 6, 55], leading to the training instability of GANs and thereby mode
collapse [52, 61, 33, 36] of the generator in learning high-dimensional, complex data distributions.
To alleviate the forgetting problem of the discriminator, transformation-based self-supervised tasks
such as rotation recognition [13] have been applied to GANs [6]. Self-supervised tasks are designed
to predict the constructed pseudo-labels of data, establishing a stationary learning environment as the
distribution of training data for this task does not change during training. The discriminator enhanced
by the stationary self-supervision is able to learn stable representations to resist the forgetting problem,
and thus can provide continuously informative gradients to obtain a well-performed generator. After
obtaining empirical success, self-supervised GAN was theoretically analyzed and partially improved
by a new self-supervised task [57]. However, these self-supervised tasks cause a goal inconsistent with
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

