Matrix factorisation and the interpretation of
geodesic distance
Nick Whiteley
University of Bristol
nick.whiteley@bristol.ac.uk

Annie Gray
University of Bristol
annie.gray@bristol.ac.uk

Patrick Rubin-Delanchy
University of Bristol
patrick.rubin-delanchy@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Given a graph or similarity matrix, we consider the problem of recovering a
notion of true distance between the nodes, and so their true positions. We show
that this can be accomplished in two steps: matrix factorisation, followed by
nonlinear dimension reduction. This combination is effective because the point
cloud obtained in the first step lives close to a manifold in which latent distance
is encoded as geodesic distance. Hence, a nonlinear dimension reduction tool,
approximating geodesic distance, can recover the latent positions, up to a simple
transformation. We give a detailed account of the case where spectral embedding
is used, followed by Isomap, and provide encouraging experimental evidence for
other combinations of techniques.

1

Introduction

Assume we observe, or are given as the result of a computational procedure, data in the form of a
symmetric matrix A 2 Rn⇥n which we relate to unobserved vectors Z1 , . . . , Zn 2 Z ⇢ Rd , where
d ⌧ n, by
Aij = f (Zi , Zj ) + Eij , 1  i  j  n,
(1)

for some real-valued symmetric function f which will be called a kernel, and a matrix of unobserved
perturbations, E 2 Rn⇥n . As illustrative examples, A could be the observed adjacency matrix of a
graph with n vertices, a similarity matrix associated with n items, or some matrix-valued estimator
of covariance or correlation between n variates.
Broadly stated, our goal is to recover Z1 , . . . , Zn given A, up to identifiability constraints. We seek a
method to perform this recovery which can be implemented in practice without any knowledge of f ,
nor of any explicit statistical model for A, and to which we can plug in various matrix-types, be it
adjacency, similarity, covariance, or other.

At face value, this may seem rather a lot to ask. Without assumptions, neither f , the Zi ’s, nor even
d are identifiable [24]. However, under quite general assumptions, we will show that a practical
solution is provided by the key combination of two procedures: i) matrix factorisation of A, such as
spectral embedding, followed by ii) nonlinear dimension reduction, such as Isomap [57].
This combination is effective because of the following facts, only the first of which is already known.
The matrix factorisation step approximates high-dimensional images of the Zi ’s, living near a ddimensional manifold [45]. Under regularity and non-degeneracy assumptions on the kernel, which
for our analysis is taken to be positive definite, geodesic distance in this manifold equals Euclidean
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

