Fair Sparse Regression with Clustering: An Invex
Relaxation for a Combinatorial Problem
Adarsh Barik
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
abarik@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of fair sparse regression on a biased dataset
where bias depends upon a hidden binary attribute. The presence of a hidden
attribute adds an extra layer of complexity to the problem by combining sparse
regression and clustering with unknown binary labels. The corresponding optimization problem is combinatorial, but we propose a novel relaxation of it as an
invex optimization problem. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first invex
relaxation for a combinatorial problem. We show that the inclusion of the debiasing/fairness constraint in our model has no adverse effect on the performance.
Rather, it enables the recovery of the hidden attribute. The support of our recovered regression parameter vector matches exactly with the true parameter vector. Moreover, we simultaneously solve the clustering problem by recovering the
exact value of the hidden attribute for each sample. Our method uses carefully
constructed primal dual witnesses to provide theoretical guarantees for the combinatorial problem. To that end, we show that the sample complexity of our method
is logarithmic in terms of the dimension of the regression parameter vector.

1

Introduction

In modern times, machine learning algorithms are used in a wide variety of applications, many of
which are decision making processes such as hiring (Hoffman et al., 2018), predicting human behavior (Subrahmanian & Kumar, 2017), COMPAS (Correctional Offender Management Profiling for
Alternative Sanctions) risk assessment (Brennan et al., 2009), among others. These decisions have
large impacts on society (Kleinberg et al., 2018). Consequently, researchers have shown interest
in developing methods that can mitigate unfair decisions and avoid bias amplification. Several fair
algorithms have been proposed for machine learning problems such as regression (Agarwal, 2019;
Berk, 2017; Calders, 2013), classification (Agarwal et al., 2018; Donini et al., 2018; Dwork et al.,
2012; Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt et al., 2016; Huang & Vishnoi, 2019; Pedreshi et al., 2008; Zafar
et al., 2019; Zemel et al., 2013) and clustering (Backurs et al., 2019; Bera et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2019; Chierichetti et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2019). A common thread in the above literature is that
performance is only viewed in terms of risks, e.g., misclassification rate, false positive rate, false
negative rate, mean squared error.
In the literature, fairness is discussed in the context of discrimination based on membership to a
particular group (e.g. race, religion, gender) which is considered a sensitive attribute. Fairness is
generally modeled explicitly by adding a fairness constraint or implicitly by incorporating it in the
model itself. There have been several notions of fairness studied in linear regression. Berk (2017)
proposed notions of individual fairness and group fairness, and modeled them as penalty functions.
Calders (2013) proposed the fairness notions of equal means and balanced residuals by modeling
them as explicit constraints. Agarwal (2019), Fitzsimons (2019) and Chzhen et al. (2020) studied
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

