Mind the Gap: Assessing Temporal Generalization in
Neural Language Models

Angeliki Lazaridou∗ ♥4♠ Adhiguna Kuncoro?♥4 Elena Gribovskaya?♥4
Devang Agrawal♦♥ Adam Liška♦♥ Tayfun Terzi♦ Mai Gimenez♦
Cyprien de Masson d’Autume♦ Tomas Kocisky♥ Sebastian Ruder♥
Dani Yogatama♣ Kris Cao♣ Susannah Young♣ Phil Blunsom♣♠
DeepMind, London, UK
{angeliki,akuncoro,egribovskaya}@deepmind.com

Abstract
Our world is open-ended, non-stationary, and constantly evolving; thus what we
talk about and how we talk about it change over time. This inherent dynamic nature
of language contrasts with the current static language modelling paradigm, which
trains and evaluates models on utterances from overlapping time periods. Despite
impressive recent progress, we demonstrate that Transformer-XL language models
perform worse in the realistic setup of predicting future utterances from beyond
their training period, and that model performance becomes increasingly worse with
time. We find that, while increasing model size alone—a key driver behind recent
progress—does not solve this problem, having models that continually update their
knowledge with new information can indeed mitigate this performance degradation
over time. Hence, given the compilation of ever-larger language modelling datasets,
combined with the growing list of language-model-based NLP applications that
require up-to-date factual knowledge about the world, we argue that now is the
right time to rethink the static way in which we currently train and evaluate our
language models, and develop adaptive language models that can remain up-to-date
with respect to our ever-changing and non-stationary world. We publicly release
our dynamic, streaming language modelling benchmarks for WMT and AR X IV to
facilitate language model evaluation that takes temporal dynamics into account.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, substantial efforts in neural language modelling have focused on finding better neural
architectures, building increasingly larger models, and compiling ever-larger amounts of training
data, which have been shown to endow language models with the ability to perform well on a wide
variety of downstream tasks with minimal fine-tuning (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020). While this approach has led to impressive progress, it nevertheless relies on a
static experimental paradigm. Concretely, the prevailing practice is to curate a large pretraining web
crawl—randomly partitioned into a training set and a validation set in a time-agnostic fashion—and
then evaluate on tasks and benchmarks that mostly overlap in time with the pretraining data.2
∗
Equal contribution. ♠ Project initiation. 4 Paper writing. ♦ Project technical infrastructure. ♥ Model
design and experiments. ♣ Project support and advice.
1
We release our dynamic (streaming) language modelling benchmark for WMT and AR X IV at https:
//github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/master/pitfalls_static_language_models.
2
In the case of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), such tasks include LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016), TriviaQA
(Joshi et al., 2017b), and WMT translation datasets, among others. These tasks were introduced between 2014
and 2017, which overlap in time with the GPT-3 CommonCrawl dataset that covered the period of 2016-2019.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

