Human-Adversarial Visual Question Answering

Sasha Sheng‡∗ Amanpreet Singh‡∗ Vedanuj Goswami‡

Jose Alberto Lopez Magana†

Tristan Thrush‡ Wojciech Galuba‡ Devi Parikh‡§
‡
Facebook AI Research † Tecnológico de Monterrey

§

Douwe Kiela‡
Georgia Tech

https://adversarialvqa.org

Abstract
Performance on the most commonly used Visual Question Answering dataset
(VQA v2) is starting to approach human accuracy. However, in interacting with
state-of-the-art VQA models, it is clear that the problem is far from being solved.
In order to stress test VQA models, we benchmark them against human-adversarial
examples. Human subjects interact with a state-of-the-art VQA model, and for
each image in the dataset, attempt to find a question where the model’s predicted
answer is incorrect. We find that a wide range of state-of-the-art models perform
poorly when evaluated on these examples. We conduct an extensive analysis of the
collected adversarial examples and provide guidance on future research directions.
We hope that this Adversarial VQA (AdVQA) benchmark can help drive progress
in the field and advance the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Visual question answering (VQA) is widely recognized as an important evaluation task for vision and
language research. Besides direct applications such as helping the visually impaired or multimodal
content understanding on the web, it offers a mechanism for probing machine understanding of
images via natural language queries. Making progress on VQA requires bringing together different
subfields in AI – combining advances from natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision
together with those in multimodal fusion – making it an exciting task in AI research.
Over the years, the performance of VQA models has started to plateau on the popular VQA v2
dataset [20] – approaching inter-human agreement – as evidenced by Fig. 1. This raises important
questions for the field: To what extent have we solved the problem? If we haven’t, what are we still
missing? How good are we really?
An intriguing method for investigating these questions is dynamic data collection [29], where human
annotators and state-of-the-art models are put “in the loop” together to collect data adversarially.
Annotators are tasked with and rewarded for finding model-fooling examples, which are then verified
by other humans. The easier it is to find such examples, the worse the model’s performance can be
said to be. The collected data can be used to “stress test” current VQA models and serve as the next
iteration of the VQA benchmark helping drive further progress.
The commonly used VQA dataset [20] was collected by instructing annotators to “ask a question
about this scene that [a] smart robot probably can not answer” [4]. One way of thinking about our
proposed human-adversarial data collection is that it explicitly ensures that the questions can not be
answered by today’s “smartest” models.
∗
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to advqa@fb.com.
Work done as an intern at Facebook AI Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

