MIRACLE: Causally-Aware Imputation via
Learning Missing Data Mechanisms
Trent Kyono⇤
University of California, Los Angeles
tmkyono@ucla.edu
Alexis Bellot
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
alexis.bellot@eng.ox.ac.uk

Yao Zhang⇤
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Missing data is an important problem in machine learning practice. Starting from
the premise that imputation methods should preserve the causal structure of the
data, we develop a regularization scheme that encourages any baseline imputation
method to be causally consistent with the underlying data generating mechanism.
Our proposal is a causally-aware imputation algorithm (MIRACLE). MIRACLE
iteratively refines the imputation of a baseline by simultaneously modeling the
missingness generating mechanism, encouraging imputation to be consistent with
the causal structure of the data. We conduct extensive experiments on synthetic
and a variety of publicly available datasets to show that MIRACLE is able to
consistently improve imputation over a variety of benchmark methods across all
three missingness scenarios: at random, completely at random, and not at random.

1

Introduction

Missing data is an unavoidable byproduct of collecting data in most practical domains. In medicine,
for example, doctors may choose to omit what they deem to be irrelevant information (e.g., some
patients may be asked to get comprehensive blood tests while others don’t), data may be explicitly
omitted by the patient (e.g., avoiding questions on smoking status precisely because of their smoking
habit) or simply misrecorded in electronic health systems (see e.g., [3, 12, 28]).
Imputation algorithms can be used to estimate missing values
based on data that was recorded, but their correctness depends on
the type of missingness. For instance, expanding on the example
above, younger patients may also be more likely to omit their
smoking status. As illustrated in Figure 1, the challenge is that
implicitly conditioning inference on observed data introduces a Figure 1: Missingness may introduce
spurious path of correlation between age and the prevalence of spurious dependencies.
smoking that wouldn’t exist with complete data.
Missing data creates a shift between the available missing data distribution and the target complete
data distribution. It is a shift that may be explicitly modeled as missingness indicators in an underlying
causal model (i.e., a missingness graph as proposed by Mohan et al. [19]) as shown in Figure 1.
The learning problem is one of extrapolation, learning with access to a missing data distribution for
⇤

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

