Widening the Pipeline in Human-Guided
Reinforcement Learning with Explanation and
Context-Aware Data Augmentation

Lin Guan
School of Computing & AI
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
lguan9@asu.edu

Mudit Verma
School of Computing & AI
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
mverma13@asu.edu

Ruohan Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
zharu@stanford.edu

Sihang Guo
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sguo19@utexas.edu

Subbarao Kambhampati
School of Computing & AI
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
rao@asu.edu

Abstract
Human explanation (e.g., in terms of feature importance) has been recently used
to extend the communication channel between human and agent in interactive
machine learning. Under this setting, human trainers provide not only the ground
truth but also some form of explanation. However, this kind of human guidance
was only investigated in supervised learning tasks, and it remains unclear how to
best incorporate this type of human knowledge into deep reinforcement learning. In
this paper, we present the first study of using human visual explanations in humanin-the-loop reinforcement learning (HIRL). We focus on the task of learning from
feedback, in which the human trainer not only gives binary evaluative "good" or
"bad" feedback for queried state-action pairs, but also provides a visual explanation
by annotating relevant features in images. We propose EXPAND (EXPlanation
AugmeNted feeDback) to encourage the model to encode task-relevant features
through a context-aware data augmentation that only perturbs irrelevant features
in human salient information. We choose five tasks, namely Pixel-Taxi and four
Atari games, to evaluate the performance and sample efficiency of this approach.
We show that our method significantly outperforms methods leveraging human
explanation that are adapted from supervised learning, and Human-in-the-loop RL
baselines that only utilize evaluative feedback.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have achieved many successes in solving problems
with high-dimensional state and action spaces [27, 3]. However, DRL’s performance is limited by its
sample (in)efficiency. It is often impractical to collect millions of training samples as required by
standard DRL algorithms. One way to tame this problem is to leverage additional human guidance
by following the general paradigm of Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning (HIRL) [51]. It
often allows the agent to achieve better performance and higher sample efficiency.
One popular form of human guidance in HIRL is the binary evaluative feedback [15], in which
humans provide a "good" or "bad" judgment for a queried state-action pair. This framework allows
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

