Determinantal point processes based on orthogonal
polynomials for sampling minibatches in SGD

Rémi Bardenet∗
Université de Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
remi.bardenet@univ-lille.fr
Subhroshekhar Ghosh∗ †
National University of Singapore, Department of Mathematics
10 Lower Kent Ridge Road, 119076, Singapore
subhrowork@gmail.com
Meixia Lin∗ †
National University of Singapore, Institute of Operations Research and Analytics
10 Lower Kent Ridge Road, 119076, Singapore
lin_meixia@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a cornerstone of machine learning. When the
number N of data items is large, SGD relies on constructing an unbiased estimator
of the gradient of the empirical risk using a small subset of the original dataset,
called a minibatch. Default minibatch construction involves uniformly sampling a
subset of the desired size, but alternatives have been explored for variance reduction.
In particular, experimental evidence suggests drawing minibatches from determinantal point processes (DPPs), tractable distributions over minibatches that favour
diversity among selected items. However, like in recent work on DPPs for coresets,
providing a systematic and principled understanding of how and why DPPs help
has been difficult. In this work, we contribute an orthogonal polynomial-based
determinantal point process paradigm for performing minibatch sampling in SGD.
Our approach leverages the specific data distribution at hand, which endows it with
greater sensitivity and power over existing data-agnostic methods. We substantiate
our method via a detailed theoretical analysis of its convergence properties, interweaving between the discrete data set and the underlying continuous domain. In
particular, we show how specific DPPs and a string of controlled approximations
can lead to gradient estimators with a variance that decays faster with the batchsize
than under uniform sampling. Coupled with existing finite-time guarantees for
SGD on convex objectives, this entails that, for a large enough batchsize and a fixed
budget of item-level gradients to evaluate, DPP minibatches lead to a smaller bound
on the mean square approximation error than uniform minibatches. Moreover, our
estimators are amenable to a recent algorithm that directly samples linear statistics
of DPPs (i.e., the gradient estimator) without sampling the underlying DPP (i.e.,
the minibatch), thereby reducing computational overhead. We provide detailed
synthetic as well as real data experiments to substantiate our theoretical claims.
∗
†

Alphabetical order
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

