Generating High-Quality Explanations for Navigation
in Partially-Revealed Environments

Gregory J. Stein
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA
gjstein@gmu.edu

Abstract
We present an approach for generating natural language explanations of high-level
behavior of autonomous agents navigating in partially-revealed environments. Our
counterfactual explanations communicate changes to interpratable statistics of the
belief (e.g., the likelihood an exploratory action will reach the unseen goal) that
are estimated from visual input via a deep neural network and used (via a Bellman
equation variant) to inform planning far into the future. Additionally, our novel
training procedure mimics explanation generation, allowing us to use planning
performance as an objective measure of explanation quality. Simulated experiments
validate that our explanations are both high-quality and can be used in interventions
to directly correct bad behavior; agents trained via our training-by-explaining
procedure achieve 9.1% lower average cost than a non-learned baseline (12.7%
after interventions) in environments derived from real-world floor plans.
If we are to welcome robots into our homes and trust them to make decisions on their own, they
should be able to clearly explain both what they are doing and why they are doing it in terms
that both expert and non-expert users can understand. As learning (particularly deep learning) is
increasingly used to inform decisions, it is equally important to ensure that data-driven systems
are easy to inspect and audit both during development and after deployment [33, 6]. The field of
explanatory artificial intelligence has developed significantly in recent years to address this need in
the hopes of improving reliability and combating problematic data biases that can go unnoticed when
decision-making is opaque. Myriad explainability tools aim to probe deep neural networks trained
via supervised learning, often with a focus on understanding perceptual tasks, like detecting objects
in images [24, 30, 28, 31, 38]. Yet in many real-world navigation and home care scenarios, robots
are expected to make effective decisions even when their knowledge of the world is incomplete or
stale; in this case, planning effectively requires making predictions about unseen space and about the
potential impact of actions far into the future [39, 29, 3], complicating efforts to apply existing tools
to explain robot behavior in this setting. In this work, we focus on the challenging task of navigation
in partially-revealed environments, in which reaching an unseen goal in minimum expected time may
require recognizing subtle visual cues—e.g., that green markings signal a route likely to reach the
goal—and incorporating multiple such observations when deciding where to explore next.
Designing an agent that both achieves state-of-the-art performance and can meaningfully explain
its actions has so far proven out of reach for existing approaches to planning under uncertainty.
Symbolic abstraction—in which actions correspond to interaction with symbols (e.g., objects) or
movement through the environment—is an effective tool for planning in fully-known environments
and yields plans that are interpretable-by-design, since symbolic task plans are human-understandable
by construction [25, 15]. Yet when planning under uncertainty, it is not always obvious how to abstract
knowledge without problematically degrading performance, particularly when the agent perceives
the world via high-dimensional sensor observations, like images. Owing to challenges associated
with data and computation, many state-of-the-art approaches to planning under uncertainty learn the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

