Hierarchical Clustering:
O(1)-Approximation for Well-Clustered Graphs∗

Bogdan-Adrian Manghiuc
School of Informatics
The University of Edinburgh
b.a.manghiuc@sms.ed.ac.uk

He Sun
School of Informatics
The University of Edinburgh
h.sun@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering studies a recursive partition of a data set into clusters
of successively smaller size, and is a fundamental problem in data analysis. In
this work we study the cost function for hierarchical clustering introduced by
Dasgupta [12], and present two polynomial-time approximation algorithms: Our
first result is an O(1)-approximation algorithm for graphs of high conductance.
Our simple construction bypasses complicated recursive routines of finding sparse
cuts known in the literature (e.g., [6, 11]). Our second and main result is an O(1)approximation algorithm for a wide family of graphs that exhibit a well-defined
structure of clusters. This result generalises the previous state-of-the-art [10], which
holds only for graphs generated from stochastic models. The significance of our
work is demonstrated by the empirical analysis on both synthetic and real-world
data sets, on which our presented algorithm outperforms the previously proposed
algorithm for graphs with a well-defined cluster structure [10].

1

Introduction

Hierarchical clustering (HC) studies a recursive partition of a data set into clusters of successively
smaller size, via an effective binary tree representation. As a basic technique, hierarchical clustering
has been employed as a standard package in data analysis, and has comprehensive applications in
practice. While traditionally HC trees are constructed through bottom-up (agglomerative) heuristics,
which lacked a clearly-defined objective function, Dasgupta [12] has recently introduced a simple
objective function to measure the quality of a particular hierarchical clustering and his work has
inspired a number of research on this topic [3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 20, 24]. Consequently, there has been a
significant interest in studying efficient HC algorithms that not only work in practice, but also have
proven theoretical guarantees with respect to Dasgupta’s cost function.
Our contribution. In this work, we present two new approximation algorithms for constructing
HC trees that can be rigorously analysed with respect to Dasgupta’s cost function. For our first result,
we construct an HC tree of an input graph G entirely based on the degree sequence of V (G), and we
show that the approximation guarantee of our constructed tree is with respect to the conductance of
G, which will be defined formally in Section 2. The striking fact of this result is that, for any n-vertex
graph G with m edges and conductance Ω(1) (a.k.a. expander graph), an O(1)-approximate HC
tree of G can be very easily constructed in O(m + n log n) time, although obtaining such result for
general graphs is impossible under the Small Set Expansion Hypothesis (SSEH) [6]. Our theorem is
in line with a sequence of results for problems that are naturally linked to the Unique Games and
Small Set Expansion problems: it has been shown that such problems are much easier to solve once
∗

The full version of the paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.09055.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

