Neural Routing by Memory

Kaipeng Zhang1,2

Zhenqiang Li1
Zhifeng Li2∗
Wei Liu2∗
Yoichi Sato1∗
Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo
2
Tencent Data Platform
{kpzhang, lzq}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
michaelzfli@tencent.com
wl2223@columbia.edu
ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
1

Abstract
Recent Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved significant success
by stacking multiple convolutional blocks, named procedures in this paper, to
extract semantic features. However, they use the same procedure sequence for all
inputs, regardless of the intermediate features. This paper proffers a simple yet
effective idea of constructing parallel procedures and assigning similar intermediate features to the same specialized procedures in a divide-and-conquer fashion.
It relieves each procedure’s learning difficulty and thus leads to superior performance. Specifically, we propose a routing-by-memory mechanism for existing
CNN architectures. In each stage of the network, we introduce parallel Procedural
Units (PUs). A PU consists of a memory head and a procedure. The memory
head maintains a summary of a type of features. For an intermediate feature, we
search its closest memory and forward it to the corresponding procedure in both
training and testing. In this way, different procedures are tailored to different
features and therefore tackle them better. Networks with the proposed mechanism
can be trained efficiently using a four-step training strategy. Experimental results
show that our method improves VGGNet, ResNet, and EfficientNet’s accuracies
on Tiny ImageNet, ImageNet, and CIFAR-100 benchmarks with a negligible extra
computational cost.

1

Introduction

Human memory is often understood as an informational processing system. It plays an essential role
in human intelligence and comprises short-term memory and long-term memory, inspiring many
well-known machine learning models, such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) [14], and Neural Turing Machine (NTM) [11]. Episodic memories, a type of longterm memory, are the collection of past personal experiences. They can be retrieved and exploited by
the brain when tackling problems that have been encountered before. Different memories activate
different neurons in the brain, directing us to perform specific procedures that we have done before.
Inspired by this observation, we introduce the routing-by-memory mechanism to the neural network.
It uses memory (a summary of seen features) to guide networks to process different features with
different procedures in a divide-and-conquer manner, easing the difficulty of learning and achieving
better performance. This paper applies the mechanism to the feature extraction in CNNs and refers to
networks employing it as Routing-by-Memory Networks (RMNs). In the following, we will introduce
conventional CNNs and our RMN.
Recent Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieve state-of-the-art results on computer vision
tasks by stacking convolutional blocks (e.g., residual block [13], inception block [33], and Dense
block [17]), named procedures in this paper, to extract semantic features. However, they use the same
*

Co-corresponding authors

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

