Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting in Incremental
Few-Shot Learning by Finding Flat Minima

Guangyuan Shi,∗ Jiaxin Chen∗, Wenlong Zhang, Li-Ming Zhan, Xiao-Ming Wu†
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{guang-yuan.shi, jiax.chen, wenlong.zhang, lmzhan.zhan}@connect.polyu.hk
xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper considers incremental few-shot learning, which requires a model to
continually recognize new categories with only a few examples provided. Our
study shows that existing methods severely suffer from catastrophic forgetting,
a well-known problem in incremental learning, which is aggravated due to data
scarcity and imbalance in the few-shot setting. Our analysis further suggests that
to prevent catastrophic forgetting, actions need to be taken in the primitive stage –
the training of base classes instead of later few-shot learning sessions. Therefore,
we propose to search for flat local minima of the base training objective function
and then fine-tune the model parameters within the flat region on new tasks. In
this way, the model can efficiently learn new classes while preserving the old ones.
Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms
all prior state-of-the-art methods and is very close to the approximate upper bound.
The source code is available at https://github.com/moukamisama/F2M.

1

Introduction

Why study incremental few-shot learning? Incremental learning enables a model to continually
learn new concepts from new data without forgetting previously learned knowledge. Rooted from
real-world applications, this topic has attracted a significant amount of interest in recent years [5, 30,
31, 40, 26]. Incremental learning assumes sufficient training data is provided for new classes, which
is impractical in many application scenarios, especially when the new classes are rare categories
which are costly or difficult to collect. This motivates the study of incremental few-shot learning, a
more difficult paradigm that aims to continually learn new tasks with only a few examples.
Challenges. The major challenge for incremental learning is catastrophic forgetting [14, 28, 35],
which refers to the drastic performance drop on previous tasks after learning new tasks. This
phenomenon is caused by the inaccessibility to previous data while learning on new data. Catastrophic
forgetting presents a bigger challenge for incremental few-shot learning. Due to the small amount of
training data in new tasks, the model tends to severely overfit on new classes while quickly forgetting
old classes, resulting in catastrophic performance.
Current research. The study of incremental few-shot learning has just started [47, 41, 60, 9, 8,
34, 59]. Current works mainly borrow ideas from research in incremental learning to overcome the
forgetting problem, by enforcing strong constraints on model parameters to penalize the changes
of parameters [34, 28, 56], or by saving a small amount of exemplars from old classes and adding
constraints on the exemplars to avoid forgetting [40, 20, 4]. However, in our empirical study, we find
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

