Action-guided 3D Human Motion Prediction

Jiangxin Sun∗
Sun Yat-sen University
sunjx5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Jian-Fang Hu†
Sun Yat-sen University
hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Zihang Lin
Sun Yat-sen University
linzh59@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Jia Xu
Huya Inc
xujia@huya.com

Xintong Han
Huya Inc
hanxintong@huya.com
Wei-Shi Zheng
Sun Yat-sen University
wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
The ability of forecasting future human motion is important for human-machine
interaction systems to understand human behaviors and make interaction. In this
work, we focus on developing models to predict future human motion from past
observed video frames. Motivated by the observation that human motion is closely
related to the action being performed, we propose to explore action context to
guide motion prediction. Specifically, we construct an action-specific memory
bank to store representative motion dynamics for each action category, and design
a query-read process to retrieve some motion dynamics from the memory bank.
The retrieved dynamics are consistent with the action depicted in the observed
video frames and serve as a strong prior knowledge to guide motion prediction. We
further formulate an action constraint loss to ensure the global semantic consistency
of the predicted motion. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach, and we achieve state-of-the-art performance on 3D human
motion prediction.

1

Introduction

Imagining and predicting the future motion of a person doing some actions (e.g., walking, standing
up) is a natural ability of human beings. However, it is still very challenging for machines to
achieve reasonable forecasting. In this work, we focus on 3D human motion prediction task which
aims to forecast the future state of the 3D human body conditioned on several observed past video
frames. Future motion prediction is important for many real-world applications like human-machine
interaction and autonomous driving. The main challenge is that the future motion can vary greatly
(i.e., the prediction space is large), which would increase the uncertainty and ambiguity of future
motion prediction.
We observe that there exists a strong correlation between human motion and action category, which
could be exploited to reduce such uncertainty and ambiguity. As illustrated in Figure 1, human action
always contains some representative sub-processes such as swinging arm, throwing something out,
etc. We name these sub-processes as motion dynamics. By exactly examining the videos in Figure
1, we further find that the motion dynamics could be shared across different subjects performing
the same action. Motivated by the above observations, we propose to exploit representative motion
dynamics for each action class to guide motion prediction and reduce the learning difficulty.
∗

This work was partially done when Jiangxin Sun was an intern at Huya Inc.
Jian-Fang Hu is the corresponding author. Hu is also with Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of
Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China and Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced
Computing, Ministry of Education, China.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

