Optimization-Based Algebraic Multigrid Coarsening
Using Reinforcement Learning

Ali Taghibakhshi
Mechanical Science and Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
alit2@illinois.edu

Scott MacLachlan
Mathematics and Statistics
Memorial University of Newfoundland
and Labrador
St. John’s, NL, Canada
smaclachlan@mun.ca

Luke Olson
Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
lukeo@illinois.edu

Matthew West
Mechanical Science and Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
mwest@illinois.edu

Abstract
Large sparse linear systems of equations are ubiquitous in science and engineering,
such as those arising from discretizations of partial differential equations. Algebraic multigrid (AMG) methods are one of the most common methods of solving
such linear systems, with an extensive body of underlying mathematical theory. A
system of linear equations defines a graph on the set of unknowns and each level of
a multigrid solver requires the selection of an appropriate coarse graph along with
restriction and interpolation operators that map to and from the coarse representation. The efficiency of the multigrid solver depends critically on this selection
and many selection methods have been developed over the years. Recently, it has
been demonstrated that it is possible to directly learn the AMG interpolation and
restriction operators, given a coarse graph selection. In this paper, we consider
the complementary problem of learning to coarsen graphs for a multigrid solver, a
necessary step in developing fully learnable AMG methods. We propose a method
using a reinforcement learning (RL) agent based on graph neural networks (GNNs),
which can learn to perform graph coarsening on small planar training graphs and
then be applied to unstructured large planar graphs, assuming bounded node degree.
We demonstrate that this method can produce better coarse graphs than existing
algorithms, even as the graph size increases and other properties of the graph are
varied. We also propose an efficient inference procedure for performing graph
coarsening that results in linear time complexity in graph size.

1

Introduction

Algebraic multigrid (AMG) [1, 2, 3] is a widely used method for approximating the solution to
large, sparse linear systems, particularly those arising from elliptic boundary value problems. AMG
has proven to be effective for a variety of problems, including partial differential equations (PDEs),
image and video processing [4, 5], and sparse Markov chains [6]. The focus of this work is on
developing reinforcement learning agents to construct optimal AMG methods for improved efficiency
and robustness.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

