Contrastive Graph Poisson Networks:
Semi-Supervised Learning with Extremely Limited
Labels
Sheng Wan1,2,3,∗, Yibing Zhan3 , Liu Liu4 , Baosheng Yu4 , Shirui Pan5 , Chen Gong1,2,3,†
1
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
JD Explore Academy 4 The University of Sydney
5
Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty of IT, Monash University
wansheng315@hotmail.com, zhanyibing@jd.com,
{liu.liu1, baosheng.yu}@sydney.edu.au,
shirui.pan@monash.edu, chen.gong@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable performance in the
task of semi-supervised node classification. However, most existing GNN models
require sufficient labeled data for effective network training. Their performance
can be seriously degraded when labels are extremely limited. To address this
issue, we propose a new framework termed Contrastive Graph Poisson Networks
(CGPN) for node classification under extremely limited labeled data. Specifically,
our CGPN derives from variational inference; integrates a newly designed Graph
Poisson Network (GPN) to effectively propagate the limited labels to the entire
graph and a normal GNN, such as Graph Attention Network, that flexibly guides
the propagation of GPN; applies a contrastive objective to further exploit the
supervision information from the learning process of GPN and GNN models.
Essentially, our CGPN can enhance the learning performance of GNNs under
extremely limited labels by contrastively propagating the limited labels to the
entire graph. We conducted extensive experiments on different types of datasets to
demonstrate the superiority of CGPN.

1

Introduction

Graph-based Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) refers to classifying unlabeled data based on a handful
of labeled data and a given graph structure indicating the connections between all data. Recently,
graph-based SSL has attracted increasing attention due to its solid mathematical foundation, and
satisfactory performance [1, 2, 3].
As the mainstream to solve graph-based SSL problems, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which
operate in the graph domain, have achieved impressive performance in recent years [4, 5, 6, 7].
Nevertheless, current GNNs, such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [8] and graph attention
networks (GATs) [9], require sufficient labeled data to obtain satisfactory generalization abilities.
Unfortunately, the reliance on sufficient labeled data increases the burden of data collection, and the
number of labels can be extremely limited in some real-world scenarios. The performance of most
∗
†

This work was done when Sheng was a research intern at JD Explore Academy.
C. Gong is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

