Curriculum Design for Teaching via Demonstrations:
Theory and Applications

Gaurav Yengera1,2
gyengera@mpi-sws.org

Rati Devidze1

Parameswaran Kamalaruban3

Adish Singla1

rdevidze@mpi-sws.org

kparameswaran@turing.ac.uk

adishs@mpi-sws.org

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Saarbrucken, Germany
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus (SIC), Saarbrucken, Germany
3
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK

1
2

Abstract
We consider the problem of teaching via demonstrations in sequential decisionmaking settings. In particular, we study how to design a personalized curriculum
over demonstrations to speed up the learner’s convergence. We provide a unified
curriculum strategy for two popular learner models: Maximum Causal Entropy
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (MaxEnt-IRL) and Cross-Entropy Behavioral
Cloning (CrossEnt-BC). Our unified strategy induces a ranking over demonstrations based on a notion of difficulty scores computed w.r.t. the teacher’s optimal
policy and the learner’s current policy. Compared to the state of the art, our
strategy doesn’t require access to the learner’s internal dynamics and still enjoys
similar convergence guarantees under mild technical conditions. Furthermore,
we adapt our curriculum strategy to the setting where no teacher agent is present
using task-specific difficulty scores. Experiments on a synthetic car driving
environment and navigation-based environments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our curriculum strategy.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning is a paradigm in which a learner acquires a new set of skills by imitating a
teacher’s behavior. The importance of imitation learning is realized in real-world applications where
the desired behavior cannot be explicitly defined but can be demonstrated easily. These applications
include the settings involving both human-to-machine interaction [1–4], and human-to-human interaction [5, 6]. The two most popular approaches to imitation learning are Behavioral Cloning
(BC) [7] and Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [8]. BC algorithms aim to directly match the
behavior of the teacher using supervised learning methods. IRL algorithms operate in a two-step
approach: first, a reward function explaining the teacher’s behavior is inferred; then, the learner
adopts a policy corresponding to the inferred reward.
In the literature, imitation learning has been extensively studied from the learner’s point of view to
design efficient learning algorithms [9–15]. However, much less work is done from the teacher’s
point of view to reduce the number of demonstrations required to achieve the learning objective. In
this paper, we focus on the problem of Teaching via Demonstrations (TvD), where a helpful teacher
assists the imitation learner in converging quickly by designing a personalized curriculum [16–20].
Despite a substantial amount of work on curriculum design for reinforcement learning agents [21–
27], curriculum design for imitation learning agents is much less investigated.
Prior work on curriculum design for IRL learners has focused on two concrete settings: noninteractive and interactive. In the non-interactive setting [17, 18], the teacher provides a
near-optimal set of demonstrations as a single batch. These curriculum strategies do not incorporate
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

