S3: Sign-Sparse-Shift Reparametrization for Effective
Training of Low-bit Shift Networks
Xinlin Li1 , Bang Liu2 , Yaoliang Yu3 , Wulong Liu1 , Chunjing Xu1 , and Vahid Partovi Nia1
1

2

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
Department of Computer Science and Operations Research (DIRO), University of Montreal.
3
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo.

Abstract
Shift neural networks reduce computation complexity by removing expensive
multiplication operations and quantizing continuous weights into low-bit discrete
values, which are fast and energy-efficient compared to conventional neural networks. However, existing shift networks are sensitive to the weight initialization
and yield a degraded performance caused by vanishing gradient and weight sign
freezing problem. To address these issues, we propose S3 re-parameterization, a
novel technique for training low-bit shift networks. Our method decomposes a
discrete parameter in a sign-sparse-shift 3-fold manner. This way, it efficiently
learns a low-bit network with weight dynamics similar to full-precision networks
and insensitive to weight initialization. Our proposed training method pushes the
boundaries of shift neural networks and shows 3-bit shift networks compete with
their full-precision counterparts in terms of top-1 accuracy on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved widely success in various tasks, the training
and inference of DNNs usually cost prohibitive resources due to the fact that they are often overparametrized and composed of computational costly multiplication operations for both forward and
backward propagation [28]. To enable the application feasibility of DNNs in resource-constrained
scenarios, substantial efforts have been made to reduce the computation complexity of neural networks
while preserving their accuracy. Among different proposed approaches for this purpose, low-bit
neural networks with binary weights [6, 22] or ternary weights [15] are recently designed to replace
the expensive operations like multiplication with cheaper ones, e.g., replacing multiplication with
sign flip operation during inference.
We focus on low-bit shift neural networks [11, 9, 30] that replace multiplication with the bit-shift
operation. Following the conventional linear algebra notations, we denote scalars by x, vectors in
bold small letters x, and matrices by P
bold capital letters X. Traditional neural networks require
computing the inner product w> x = i wi xi , where w is the weight vector and x is the feature
vector. In comparison, shift neural networks limit the values of the weight vectors to a set of discrete
values wshift ∈ {0} ∪ {±2p }. In this case, multiplication can be replaced with bit-shift operations,
as multiplying wi = 2p is equavilent to shifting p places to the left (if p is positive) or to the right
(if p is negative). The bit-shift operation alone only covers discrete neural networks with positive
weights, therefore, most shift neural networks further add a sign flip operation to the shift to allow
wi = {±2p }. Inference with bit-shift operations is highly hardware friendly and can save up to 196×
energy cost on FPGA and 24× on ASIC compare to their multiplication counterparts [28].
Several works aim to further improve the memory efficiency of shift neural networks by reducing
the bit-width of the weights. Zhou et al. [30] propose to fine-tune pre-trained full-precision weights
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

