Iterative Teacher-Aware Learning

Luyao Yuan1
yuanluyao@ucla.edu

Dongruo Zhou1
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Jeffrey L. Chen1
jlchen0@ucla.edu

Juhong Shen2
jhshen@ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu1
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Jingdong Gao1
mxuan@ucla.edu

Ying Nian Wu3
ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Song-Chun Zhu1,3,4
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
1

Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Mathematics, 3 Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
4
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)

Abstract
In human pedagogy, teachers and students can interact adaptively to maximize
communication efficiency. The teacher adjusts her teaching method for different
students, and the student, after getting familiar with the teacher’s instruction
mechanism, can infer the teacher’s intention to learn faster. Recently, the benefits
of integrating this cooperative pedagogy into machine concept learning in discrete
spaces have been proved by multiple works. However, how cooperative pedagogy
can facilitate machine parameter learning hasn’t been thoroughly studied. In this
paper, we propose a gradient optimization based teacher-aware learner who can
incorporate teacher’s cooperative intention into the likelihood function and learn
provably faster compared with the naive learning algorithms used in previous
machine teaching works. We give theoretical proof that the iterative teacher-aware
learning (ITAL) process leads to local and global improvements. We then validate
our algorithms with extensive experiments on various tasks including regression,
classification, and inverse reinforcement learning using synthetic and real data. We
also show the advantage of modeling teacher-awareness when agents are learning
from human teachers.

1

Introduction

Cooperative pedagogy is invoked across language, cognitive development, cultural anthropology, and
robotics to explain people’s ability to effectively transmit information and accumulate knowledge [19,
64]. As the usage of artificial intelligence and machine learning based systems ratchets up, it is
foreseeable that extensive human-computer and agent-agent pedagogical scenarios will occur in the
near future [49]. However, there is still a distance away from robots being able to directly teach
or learn from humans as efficiently and effectively as humans do. One of the many difficulties is
that machine learning and teaching are now usually studied in single-agent frameworks. Most of
the prevailing machine learning methods focus on the improvement of individual learners and the
explanations of how knowledge is obtained focus entirely on each learner’s unilateral experiences,
either passive observations from a Markov decision process [45, 55], random samples from a data
distribution [52, 29], responses of active queries provided by an oracle [3, 53], or demonstrations
from an expert [4].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

