Learning Transferable Adversarial Perturbations

Krishna Kanth Nakka1 , Mathieu Salzmann1,2
1
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
2
ClearSpace, Switzerland
{krishna.nakka, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
While effective, deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In particular, recent work has shown that such attacks could be generated
by another deep network, leading to significant speedups over optimization-based
perturbations. However, the ability of such generative methods to generalize to
different test-time situations has not been systematically studied. In this paper,
we therefore investigate the transferability of generated perturbations when the
conditions at inference time differ from the training ones in terms of target architecture, target data, and target task. Specifically, we identify the mid-level features
extracted by the intermediate layers of DNNs as common ground across different
architectures, datasets, and tasks. This lets us introduce a loss function based on
such mid-level features to learn an effective, transferable perturbation generator.
Our experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
universal and transferable attack strategies.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in a wide range of
applications [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, DNNs have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial
examples [5] crafted by adding imperceptible perturbations to clean images. In particular, two broad
categories of attacks have been studied. The first one consists of iterative algorithms [5, 6, 7], which
optimize the perturbation for each instance, and thus tend to be computationally expensive. The
second one encompasses generative methods [8, 9, 10], which train a deep network to produce
perturbations. As such, attacking the target network only involves a forward pass through the
generator, typically resulting in much faster attacks than iterative methods. However, speed is not
the only important factor to assess the strength of an attacker; its ability to generalize to different
situations is also key to its success.
In this paper, we therefore study the transferability of perturbations obtained with generative methods.
Specifically, we investigate the transfer of such perturbations when the conditions at inference time
differ from the training ones in terms of (i) target architecture, e.g., the generator was trained to attack
a VGG-16 but the target network is a ResNet152; (ii) target data, e.g., the generator was trained using
the Paintings dataset but the test data comes from ImageNet; (iii) target task, e.g., the generator was
trained to attack an image recognition model but faces an object detector at test time. To the best of
our knowledge, for generative methods, our work constitutes the first attempt at transferability across
tasks, and only [11] has studied generalization across architectures and data, by introducing a loss
function acting on the relative class probabilities of the attacked and unattacked examples.
Here, by contrast, we improve the transferability of a perturbation generator across architectures, data,
and tasks by exploiting the mid-level features of DNNs. The key motivation behind our approach is
our observation that the mid-level features extracted by DNNs with different architectures, different
data, or for different tasks bear strong similarities. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where we visualize
the features extracted by different backbones and for different tasks, and thus different datasets, using
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

