Metadata-based Multi-Task Bandits
with Bayesian Hierarchical Models

Runzhe Wan Lin Ge Rui Song
Department of Statistics
North Carolina State University
{rwan, lge, rsong}@ncsu.edu

Abstract
How to explore efficiently is a central problem in multi-armed bandits. In this paper, we introduce the metadata-based multi-task bandit problem, where the agent
needs to solve a large number of related multi-armed bandit tasks and can leverage some task-specific features (i.e., metadata) to share knowledge across tasks.
As a general framework, we propose to capture task relations through the lens
of Bayesian hierarchical models, upon which a Thompson sampling algorithm is
designed to efficiently learn task relations, share information, and minimize the
cumulative regrets. Two concrete examples for Gaussian bandits and Bernoulli
bandits are carefully analyzed. The Bayes regret for Gaussian bandits clearly
demonstrates the benefits of information sharing with our algorithm. The proposed method is further supported by extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a popular framework for sequential decision making problems,
where the agent will sequentially choose among a few arms and receive a random reward for the
arm [37]. Since the mean rewards for the arms are not known a priori and must be learned through
partial feedbacks, the agent is faced with the well-known exploration-exploitation trade-off. MAB
is receiving increasing attention and has been widely applied to areas such as clinical trials [19],
finance [54], recommendation systems [70], among others.
How to explore efficiently is a central problem in MAB. In many modern applications, we usually
have a large number of separate but related MAB tasks. For example, in e-commerce, the company
needs to find the optimal display mode for each of many products, and in medical applications, each
patient needs to individually undergo a series of treatment periods to find the personalized optimal
treatment. These tasks typically share similar problem structures, but may have different reward
distributions. Intuitively, appropriate information sharing can largely speed up our learning process
and reduce the regret, while a naive pooling may cause a linear regret due to the bias.
This paper is concerned with the following question: given a large number of MAB tasks, how
do we efficiently share information among them? The central task is to capture task relations in a
principled way [68]. While a few approaches have been proposed (see Section 2), most of them
only utilize the action-reward pairs observed for each task. To our knowledge, none of the existing
works can leverage another valuable information source, i.e., the metadata of each task, which
contains some static task-specific features. Such metadata is commonly available in real applications
[66, 68, 57], such as the demographic features of each customer or patient, or basic information of
each web page or product. Although the metadata can hardly be directly utilized in a single MAB
task, it usually contains intrinsic information about each task, and hence can guide us to learn task
relations and efficiently share knowledge in the multi-task setup. Specifically, suppose task i has a
feature vector xi (i.e., metadata) and its expected reward vector for all arms is ri . We consider a
general formulation that ri is sampled from the conditional distribution P(ri |xi ). When P(ri |xi ) is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

