Relative stability toward diffeomorphisms
indicates performance in deep nets

Leonardo Petrini,

Alessandro Favero,

Mario Geiger,

Matthieu Wyart

Institute of Physics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
{name.surname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Understanding why deep nets can classify data in large dimensions remains a challenge. It has been proposed that they do so by becoming stable to diffeomorphisms,
yet existing empirical measurements support that it is often not the case. We revisit
this question by defining a maximum-entropy distribution on diffeomorphisms, that
allows to study typical diffeomorphisms of a given norm. We confirm that stability
toward diffeomorphisms does not strongly correlate to performance on benchmark
data sets of images. By contrast, we find that the stability toward diffeomorphisms
relative to that of generic transformations Rf correlates remarkably with the test
error t . It is of order unity at initialization but decreases by several decades during
training for state-of-the-art
architectures. For CIFAR10 and 15 known architectures
p
we find t ≈ 0.2 Rf , suggesting that obtaining a small Rf is important to achieve
good performance. We study how Rf depends on the size of the training set and
compare it to a simple model of invariant learning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning algorithms LeCun et al. (2015) are now remarkably successful at a wide range of
tasks Amodei et al. (2016); Huval et al. (2015); Mnih et al. (2013); Shi et al. (2016); Silver et al.
(2017). Yet, understanding how they can classify data in large dimensions remains a challenge. In
particular, the curse of dimensionality associated with the geometry of space in large dimension
prohibits learning in a generic setting Luxburg and Bousquet (2004). If high-dimensional data can be
learnt, then they must be highly structured.
A popular idea is that during training, hidden layers of neurons learn a representation Le (2013) that
is insensitive to aspects of the data unrelated to the task, effectively reducing the input dimension and
making the problem tractable Ansuini et al. (2019); Recanatesi et al. (2019); Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby
(2017). Several quantities have been introduced to study this effect empirically. It includes (i) the
mutual information between the hidden and visible layers of neurons Saxe et al. (2019); Shwartz-Ziv
and Tishby (2017), (ii) the intrinsic dimension of the neural representation of the data Ansuini et al.
(2019); Recanatesi et al. (2019) and (iii) the projection of the label of the data on the main features of
the network Kopitkov and Indelman (2020); Oymak et al. (2019); Paccolat et al. (2021a), the latter
being defined from the top eigenvectors of the Gram matrix of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) Jacot
et al. (2018). All these measures support that the neuronal representation of the data indeed becomes
well-suited to the task. Yet, they are agnostic to the nature of what varies in the data that need not
being represented by hidden neurons, and thus do not specify what it is.
Recently, there has been a considerable effort to understand the benefits of learning features for onehidden-layer fully connected nets. Learning features can occur and improve performance when the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

