TokenLearner: Adaptive Space-Time Tokenization
for Videos
Michael S. Ryoo1,2 , AJ Piergiovanni1 , Anurag Arnab1 , Mostafa Dehghani1 , Anelia Angelova1
1
Google Research
2
Stony Brook University
{mryoo,ajpiergi,aarnab,dehghani,anelia}@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel visual representation learning which relies on
a handful of adaptively learned tokens, and which is applicable to both image
and video understanding tasks. Instead of relying on hand-designed splitting
strategies to obtain visual tokens and processing a large number of densely sampled
patches for attention, our approach learns to mine important tokens in visual
data. This results in efficiently and effectively finding a few important visual
tokens and enables modeling of pairwise attention between such tokens, over a
longer temporal horizon for videos, or the spatial content in image frames. Our
experiments demonstrate strong performance on several challenging benchmarks
for video recognition tasks. Importantly, due to our tokens being adaptive, we
accomplish competitive results at significantly reduced computational cost. We
establish new state-of-the-arts on multiple video datasets, including Kinetics-400,
Kinetics-600, Charades, and AViD.
The code will be available at: https://github.com/google-research/
scenic/tree/main/scenic/projects/token_learner

1

Introduction

Videos provide an abundance of visual information. Video understanding particularly requires
employing effective spatial-temporal processing of frames to capture long-range interactions [5,
37, 21, 17, 24, 12, 34, 20, 25, 1]. An important aspect of this understanding is how to quickly
learn which parts of the input video stream are important, both spatially and temporally, and to
focus computational resources on them. But what basic processing mechanism are able to do so
successfully?
Recent advancements in Transformers demonstrate improved accuracy on vision classification tasks.
For example, departing from standard convolutional approaches, the Vision Transformer (ViT) [9]
treats the image as a sequence of patches, utilizing the Transformer architecture [39] similar to text
understanding. Standard approaches for video recognition take videos as stacked images (i.e., a spacetime volume) and tend to extend 2D neural architectures to 3D (e.g., 3D-ResNets [17, 5, 38, 11]).
Motivated by ViT, recent approaches [2, 3] also extend Transformers for videos by creating 3D
‘tubelet’ video tokens with regular 3D-grids, which often result in computationally heavy models.
There are often too many tokens to process, especially for longer videos.
The main question addressed in this work is how to adaptively learn the representation from visual
inputs to most effectively capture the spatial information for image frames and spatio-temporal
interactions for videos. Here are our main ideas:
The first key observation is we are able to learn to represent visual data by learning to ‘tokenize’ the
representations. This is in contrast to previous approaches which used densely sampled tokens e.g.,
16x16 or 32x32 over a series of attention layers [9, 3].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

