Towards Stable and Robust AdderNets
Minjing Dong1,2 , Yunhe Wang2∗, Xinghao Chen2 , Chang Xu1
1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
mdon0736@uni.sydney.edu.au, yunhe.wang@huawei.com,
xinghao.chen@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Adder neural network (AdderNet) replaces the original convolutions with massive
multiplications by cheap additions while achieving comparable performance thus
yields a series of energy-efficient neural networks. Compared with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), the training of AdderNets is much more sophisticated
including several techniques for adjusting gradient and batch normalization. In
addition, variances of both weights and activations in resulting adder networks
are very enormous which limits its performance and the potential for applying to
other tasks. To enhance the stability and robustness of AdderNets, we first thoroughly analyze the variance estimation of weight parameters and output features
of an arbitrary adder layer. Then, we develop a weight normalization scheme for
adaptively optimizing the weight distribution of AdderNets during the training
procedure, which can reduce the perturbation on running mean and variance in
batch normalization layers. Meanwhile, the proposed weight normalization can
also be utilized to enhance the adversarial robustness of resulting networks. Experiments conducted on several benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed approach for generating AdderNets with higher performance.

1

Introduction

By hint of the success of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs), a wide range of computer
vision tasks can be tackled with satisfactory performance, including image classification [13, 9, 10,
25], super-resolution [32, 4, 12, 22], object detection [16, 19, 7, 8], etc.. DCNNs are mainly trained
and inferred on graphics processing unit (GPU) devices which suffice to fulfill the high computational
complexity and enormous energy consumption. However, it is intractable for DCNNs to be deployed
on low-power devices due to the limited computational speed and power capacity, such as mobile and
embedded devices. As a result, substantial research efforts have been devoted to energy reduction
and speed acceleration of DCNNs [3, 29, 1, 26].
Recently, Chen et al.[1] advocate the use of ℓ1 -distance for similarity measure instead of crosscorrelation in CNNs to replace multiplications with additions. Compared with multiplications,
addition operations are much cheap, which benefits the power-efficiency [28, 23, 30]. Adder neural
network (ANN) has demonstrated extraordinary performance on several computer vision tasks with
huge energy reduction, which can be seen as a good complement to the classical CNNs.
The performance achieved by ANNs on classification is impressive, but some observations raise
our concerns. e.g., the optimization of ANNs is not stable as CNNs where the test accuracy curve
has dramatic fluctuations during the optimization, as shown in Figure 1 (a). The test accuracy of
ANNs has a large variation until the end of training while that of convolution networks is much
more stable. Furthermore, weights of ANNs have demonstrated a significantly different statistical
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

