On Model Calibration for Long-Tailed
Object Detection and Instance Segmentation

Tai-Yu Pan1∗ Cheng Zhang1∗ Yandong Li2 Hexiang Hu2
Dong Xuan1 Soravit Changpinyo2 Boqing Gong2 Wei-Lun Chao1
1

The Ohio State University

2

Google Research

Abstract
Vanilla models for object detection and instance segmentation suffer from the
heavy bias toward detecting frequent objects in the long-tailed setting. Existing
methods address this issue mostly during training, e.g., by re-sampling or reweighting. In this paper, we investigate a largely overlooked approach — postprocessing calibration of confidence scores. We propose N OR C AL, Normalized
Calibration for long-tailed object detection and instance segmentation, a simple
and straightforward recipe that reweighs the predicted scores of each class by its
training sample size. We show that separately handling the background class and
normalizing the scores over classes for each proposal are keys to achieving superior
performance. On the LVIS dataset, N OR C AL can effectively improve nearly all the
baseline models not only on rare classes but also on common and frequent classes.
Finally, we conduct extensive analysis and ablation studies to offer insights into
various modeling choices and mechanisms of our approach. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/tydpan/NorCal.

1

Introduction

Object detection and instance segmentation are the fundamental tasks in computer vision and have
been approached from various perspectives over the past few decades [8, 13, 26, 36, 52]. With the
recent advances in neural networks [1, 4, 10, 18, 29, 30, 32, 37, 40, 41, 43], we have witnessed an
unprecedented breakthrough in detecting and segmenting frequently seen objects such as people,
cars, and TVs [14, 15, 21, 31, 70]. Yet, when it comes to detect rare, less commonly seen objects
(e.g., walruses, pitchforks, seaplanes, etc.) [12, 51], there is a drastic performance drop largely due to
insufficient training samples [47, 68]. How to overcome the “long-tailed” distribution of different
object classes [69] has therefore attracted increasing attention lately [27, 35, 46, 55].
To date, most existing works tackle this problem in the model training phase, e.g., by developing
algorithms, objectives, or model architectures to tackle the long-tailed distribution [12, 20, 27, 46,
48, 53, 55, 57, 58]. Wang et al. [55] investigated the widely used instance segmentation model Mask
R-CNN [18] and found that the performance drop comes primarily from mis-classification of object
proposals. Concretely, the model tends to give frequent classes higher confidence scores [7], hence
biasing the label assignment towards frequent classes. This observation suggests that techniques of
class-imbalanced learning [2, 6, 16, 42] can be applied to long-tailed detection and segmentation.
Building upon the aforementioned observation, we take another route in the model inference phase by
explicit post-processing calibration [2, 22, 23, 33, 61], which adjusts a classifier’s confidence scores
among classes, without changing its internal weights or architectures. Post-processing calibration
is efficient and widely applicable since it requires no re-training of the classifier. Its effectiveness
∗

Equal contributions

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

