Black Box Probabilistic Numerics
Onur Teymur
University of Kent
Alan Turing Institute

Christopher N. Foley
University of Cambridge
Optima Partners

Toni Karvonen
University of Helsinki
Alan Turing Institute

Philip G. Breen
Roar AI

Chris. J. Oates
Newcastle University
Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Probabilistic numerics casts numerical tasks, such the numerical solution of differential equations, as inference problems to be solved. One approach is to model the
unknown quantity of interest as a random variable, and to constrain this variable
using data generated during the course of a traditional numerical method. However,
data may be nonlinearly related to the quantity of interest, rendering the proper
conditioning of random variables difficult and limiting the range of numerical
tasks that can be addressed. Instead, this paper proposes to construct probabilistic
numerical methods based only on the final output from a traditional method. A convergent sequence of approximations to the quantity of interest constitute a dataset,
from which the limiting quantity of interest can be extrapolated, in a probabilistic
analogue of Richardson’s deferred approach to the limit. This black box approach
(1) massively expands the range of tasks to which probabilistic numerics can be
applied, (2) inherits the features and performance of state-of-the-art numerical
methods, and (3) enables provably higher orders of convergence to be achieved.
Applications are presented for nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations,
as well as for eigenvalue problems—a setting for which no probabilistic numerical
methods have yet been developed.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic numerics (PN) has attracted significant recent interest from researchers in machine learning, motivated by the possibility of incorporating probabilistic descriptions of numerical uncertainty
into applications of probabilistic inference and decision support [1, 2]. PN treats the intermediate
calculations performed in running a traditional (i.e. non-probabilistic) numerical procedure as data,
which can be used to constrain a random variable model for the quantity of interest [3]. Conjugate
Gaussian inference has been widely exploited, with an arsenal of PN methods developed for linear
algebra [4–11], cubature [12–30], optimisation [31–36], and differential equations [37–55]. However,
nonlinear tasks pose a major technical challenge to this approach, as well as to computational statistics
in general, due to the absence of explicit conditioning formulae. Compared to traditional numerical
methods, which have benefited from a century or more of sustained research effort, the current scope
of PN is limited. The performance gap is broadly characterised by the absence of certain important
functionalities—adaptivity, numerical well-conditioning, efficient use of computational resource—all
of which contribute to limited applicability in real-world settings.
This article proposes a pragmatic solution that enables state-of-the-art numerical algorithms to be
immediately exploited in the context of PN. The idea, which we term black box probabilistic numerics
(BBPN), is a statistical perspective on Richardson’s deferred approach to the limit (RDAL) [56].
The starting point for BBPN is a sequence of increasingly accurate approximations produced by a
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

