C OMPACTER:
Efficient Low-Rank Hypercomplex Adapter Layers

Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi
EPFL University, Idiap Research Institute
rabeeh.karimi@idiap.ch

James Henderson
Idiap Research Institute
james.henderson@idiap.ch

Sebastian Ruder
DeepMind
ruder@google.com

Abstract
Adapting large-scale pretrained language models to downstream tasks via
fine-tuning is the standard method for achieving state-of-the-art performance on
NLP benchmarks. However, fine-tuning all weights of models with millions or
billions of parameters is sample-inefficient, unstable in low-resource settings, and
wasteful as it requires storing a separate copy of the model for each task. Recent
work has developed parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods, but these approaches
either still require a relatively large number of parameters or underperform standard
fine-tuning. In this work, we propose C OMPACTER, a method for fine-tuning
large-scale language models with a better trade-off between task performance and
the number of trainable parameters than prior work. C OMPACTER accomplishes this
by building on top of ideas from adapters, low-rank optimization, and parameterized
hypercomplex multiplication layers.
Specifically, C OMPACTER inserts task-specific weight matrices into a pretrained
model’s weights, which are computed efficiently as a sum of Kronecker products between shared “slow” weights and “fast” rank-one matrices defined per C OMPACTER
layer. By only training 0.047% of a pretrained model’s parameters, C OMPACTER
performs on par with standard fine-tuning on GLUE and outperforms standard
fine-tuning on SuperGLUE and low-resource settings. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/rabeehk/compacter.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art pretrained language models
With four parameters I can fit an elephant,
(PLMs) in natural language processing (NLP) have
and with five I can make him wiggle his trunk.
used heavily over-parameterized representations
consisting of hundreds of millions or billions of
John von Neumann
parameters to achieve success on a wide range of
NLP benchmarks [2, 3, 4]. These models are generally applied to downstream tasks via fine-tuning
[5], which requires updating all parameters and storing one copy of the fine-tuned model per task.
This causes substantial storage and deployment costs and hinders the applicability of large-scale PLMs
to real-world applications. Additionally, fine-tuning of over-parameterized models on low-resource
datasets has been shown to be subject to instabilities and may lead to poor performance [6, 7].
Inspired by John von Neumann’s quotation, we ask, given that we have already learned general-purpose
language representations via a PLM (i.e. we have fit our elephant), how many more parameters
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

