Towards Multi-Grained Explainability for Graph
Neural Networks
Xiang Wang§†‡ , Ying-Xin Wu§ , An Zhang† , Xiangnan He§∗, Tat-Seng Chua†
‡
Sea-NExT Joint Lab
†
National University of Singapore
§
University of Science and Technology of China
xiangwang@u.nus.edu, wuyxin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, an_zhang@nus.edu.sg
xiangnanhe@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
When a graph neural network (GNN) made a prediction, one raises question
about explainability: “Which fraction of the input graph is most influential to the
model’s decision?” Producing an answer requires understanding the model’s inner
workings in general and emphasizing the insights on the decision for the instance at
hand. Nonetheless, most of current approaches focus only on one aspect: (1) local
explainability, which explains each instance independently, thus hardly exhibits the
class-wise patterns; and (2) global explainability, which systematizes the globally
important patterns, but might be trivial in the local context. This dichotomy limits
the flexibility and effectiveness of explainers greatly. A performant paradigm
towards multi-grained explainability is until-now lacking and thus a focus of our
work. In this work, we exploit the pre-training and fine-tuning idea to develop our
explainer and generate multi-grained explanations. Specifically, the pre-training
phase accounts for the contrastivity among different classes, so as to highlight the
class-wise characteristics from a global view; afterwards, the fine-tuning phase
adapts the explanations in the local context. Experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets show the superiority of our explainer, in terms of AUC on
explaining graph classification over the leading baselines. Our codes and datasets
are available at https://github.com/Wuyxin/ReFine.

1

Introduction

While graph neural networks (GNNs) [1, 2] have achieved great success in a variety of applications,
they usually come as black-box models. The general problem about GNN explainability [3] is to
answer “What knowledge does the model use to arrive at the conclusions in general and the specific
decision at hand?”. Thoroughly answering this question requires the global understanding of the
model’s inner workings and the local insights on a specific instance. Take a GNN model for molecular
property prediction as an example. The global understanding exhibits the knowledge encoded in the
model, such as the distribution of the chemical groups; meanwhile, the local insight identifies certain
chemical groups responsible for a given molecule’s property. Such multi-grained explainability
flexibly and reliably inspects the decision-making process of the GNN [4, 5], which is critical to the
applications on safety, fairness, and privacy [6, 7].
In the field of GNN explainability [8], explainer models broadly attribute model prediction to the
input graph, then sample a salient subgraph as the explanation for the model prediction. However,
most of current explainers focus on either on local [9, 10, 6, 11, 12] or global explainability [13, 7],
thereby suffer from inherent limitations correspondingly:
∗

Xiangnan He is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

