Achieving Rotational Invariance with
Bessel-Convolutional Neural Networks
Valentin Delchevalerie,1 Adrien Bibal,2 Benoît Frénay,2∗ Alexandre Mayer3∗
1
PReCISE, NADI & naXys institutes, University of Namur, Belgium
2
PReCISE, NADI institute, University of Namur, Belgium
3
Department of Physics, naXys institute, University of Namur, Belgium
{valentin.delchevalerie, adrien.bibal, benoit.frenay, alexandre.mayer}@unamur.be

Abstract
For many applications in image analysis, learning models that are invariant to
translations and rotations is paramount. This is the case, for example, in medical
imaging where the objects of interest can appear at arbitrary positions, with arbitrary
orientations. As of today, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are one of the
most powerful tools for image analysis. They achieve, thanks to convolutions,
an invariance with respect to translations. In this work, we present a new type
of convolutional layer that takes advantage of Bessel functions, well known in
physics, to build Bessel-CNNs (B-CNNs) that are invariant to all the continuous
set of possible rotation angles by design.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models, and more particularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), are known as
being among the most powerful tools for image analysis. For this reason, they are still constantly
upgraded in order to achieve better performance [1]. One of the main reasons why CNNs are so much
used in computer vision lies in the fact that they achieve translation invariance thanks to convolutions.
Filters sweep the image locally and patterns can be recognized regardless of their absolute position in
the image. However, some other important types of invariance are more difficult to obtain. It is for
example the case for the rotational invariance, which is relevant for many applications. One could for
example consider medical imaging where tissues, cells, tumors or other objects of interest have a
local, arbitrary, orientation in the images [2]. Another example is satellite imaging of ships, where
both the global orientation of the satellite and the local orientation of a ship are arbitrary [3].
Multiple works proposed solutions in order to bring rotational invariance in CNNs. However, many
of them (i) only make the model more robust to rotations without providing guarantees regarding
the rotational invariance [4, 5, 6, 7, 8], (ii) only provide guarantees for a finite set of rotation
angles [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] or (iii) only handle global rotational invariance, while a local one is
sometimes more relevant [4, 5, 6]. In addition to that, and more similarly to the method proposed in
this paper, other works present solutions to build CNNs that are rotational invariant for all rotation
angles, while providing mathematical guarantees. One can for example cite [16, 17, 18]. Our work
is in the continuity of those. We integrate a new kind of convolutional layer in CNNs to build
Bessel-Convolutional Neural Networks (B-CNNs). In B-CNNs, Bessel functions from physics are
used to build a representation of the images that is more adapted to deal with rotations. We propose a
new way to use this representation in order to compute feature maps in a rotational equivariant way
(see Figure 1 for an example). This rotational equivariance can then lead to rotational invariance with
a proper choice of architecture.
∗

B. Frénay and A. Mayer are co-last authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

