SimiGrad: Fine-Grained Adaptive Batching for Large Scale
Training using Gradient Similarity Measurement

Heyang Qin
University of Nevada, Reno
heyang_qin@nevada.unr.edu

Samyam Rajbhandari
Microsoft
samyamr@microsoft.com

Olatunji Ruwase
Microsoft
olruwase@microsoft.com

Feng Yan
University of Nevada, Reno
fyan@unr.edu

Lei Yang
University of Nevada, Reno
leiy@unr.edu

Yuxiong He
Microsoft
yuxhe@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large scale training requires massive parallelism to finish the training within a
reasonable amount of time. To support massive parallelism, large batch training is
the key enabler but often at the cost of generalization performance. Existing works
explore adaptive batching or hand-tuned static large batching, in order to strike
a balance between the computational efficiency and the performance. However,
these methods can provide only coarse-grained adaption (e.g., at a epoch level) due
to the intrinsic expensive calculation or hand tuning requirements. In this paper, we
propose a fully automated and lightweight adaptive batching methodology to enable
fine-grained batch size adaption (e.g., at a mini-batch level) that can achieve stateof-the-art performance with record breaking batch sizes. The core component of
our method is a lightweight yet efficient representation of the critical gradient noise
information. We open-source the proposed methodology by providing a plugin
tool that supports mainstream machine learning frameworks. Extensive evaluations
on popular benchmarks (e.g., CIFAR10, ImageNet, and BERT-Large) demonstrate
that the proposed methodology outperforms state-of-the-art methodologies using
adaptive batching approaches or hand-tuned static strategies in both performance
and batch size. Particularly, we achieve a new state-of-the-art batch size of 78k in
BERT-Large pretraining with SQuAD score 90.69 compared to 90.58 reported in
previous state-of-the-art with 59k batch size.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the success of deep learning in a variety of applications, such as
computer vision [1] and natural language processing [2, 3]. To push the performance boundaries,
deep learning models in many applications have become increasingly complicated, and training such
models requires large amounts of data as well as high cost. Taking GPT3 [3] (an autoregressive
language model that uses deep learning to produce human-like text) as an example, the state-of-the-art
model has 175 billion parameters and is trained on 300 billion data, which costs $12 million for a
single training run [4]. Therefore, it is of critical importance to study scalable and efficient training
for large scale machine learning [5, 6].
The core idea of large scale machine learning is to parallelize model training across vast amounts
of computing resources to speed up the training process. However, the overhead of the model
synchronization due to massive parallelism in training can be the bottleneck for large scale training.
To reduce the model synchronization overhead, large-batch training is a commonly employed strategy
that can reduce the synchronization frequency. Taking BERT training as an example, increasing batch
size from 256 to 4k can increase the training speed 2.5x faster on a 16-GPU cluster. OpenAI uses
a batch size of 3.2 million to train GPT3 over a supercomputing cluster [3], which accelerates the
training speed by approximately over 500x compared to sample-by-sample run on a 16-GPU cluster.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

