The Skellam Mechanism for
Differentially Private Federated Learning
Naman Agarwal†
Peter Kairouz†
Ziyu Liu‡⇤
†
‡
Google Research
Carnegie Mellon University
{namanagarwal, kairouz}@google.com, ziyuliu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce the multi-dimensional Skellam mechanism, a discrete differential
privacy mechanism based on the difference of two independent Poisson random
variables. To quantify its privacy guarantees, we analyze the privacy loss distribution via a numerical evaluation and provide a sharp bound on the Rényi divergence
between two shifted Skellam distributions. While useful in both centralized and
distributed privacy applications, we investigate how it can be applied in the context
of federated learning with secure aggregation under communication constraints.
Our theoretical findings and extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that
the Skellam mechanism provides the same privacy-accuracy trade-offs as the continuous Gaussian mechanism, even when the precision is low. More importantly,
Skellam is closed under summation and sampling from it only requires sampling
from a Poisson distribution – an efficient routine that ships with all machine learning and data analysis software packages. These features, along with its discrete
nature and competitive privacy-accuracy trade-offs, make it an attractive practical
alternative to the newly introduced discrete Gaussian mechanism.

1

Introduction

The Gaussian mechanism is the workhorse for a multitude of differentially private learning algorithms
[46, 10, 1]. While simple enough for mathematical reasoning and privacy accounting analyses, its
continuous nature presents a number of challenges in practice. For example, it cannot be exactly
represented on finite computers, making it prone to numerical errors that can break its privacy
guarantees [35]. Moreover, it cannot be used in distributed learning settings with cryptographic
multi-party computation primitives involving modular arithmetic, such as secure aggregation [12, 11].
To address these shortcomings, the binomial and (distributed) discrete Gaussian mechanisms were
recently introduced [19, 2, 15, 25]. Unfortunately, both have their own drawbacks: the privacy loss for
the binomial mechanism can be infinite with a non-zero probability, and the discrete Gaussian: (a) is
not closed under summation (i.e. sum of discrete Gaussians is not a discrete Gaussian), complicating
analysis in distributed settings and leading to a performance worse than continuous Gaussian in the
highly distributed, low-noise regime [25]; (b) requires a sampling algorithm that is not shipped with
mainstream machine learning or data analysis software packages, making it difficult for engineers to
use it in production settings (naïve implementations may lead to catastrophic privacy errors).
Our contributions To overcome these limitations, we introduce and analyze the multi-dimensional
Skellam mechanism, a mechanism based on adding noise distributed according to the difference of
two independent Poisson random variables. The Skellam noise is closed under summation (i.e. sums
of Skellam random variables is again Skellam distributed) and can be sampled from easily – efficient
Poisson samplers are widely available in numerical software packages. Being discrete in nature also
⇤

Work done while at Google Research. § Alphabetical authorship.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

