Learning with User-Level Privacy

Daniel Levy∗,1
Alex Kulesza3
1

Ziteng Sun∗,2
Kareem Amin3
Satyen Kale3
3,4
Mehryar Mohri
Ananda Theertha Suresh3

Stanford University 2 Cornell University 3 Google Research 4 Courant Institute
danilevy@stanford.edu,
zs335@cornell.edu,
{kamin, satyenkale, kulesza, mohri, theertha}@google.com

Abstract
We propose and analyze algorithms to solve a range of learning tasks under userlevel differential privacy constraints. Rather than guaranteeing only the privacy
of individual samples, user-level DP protects a user’s entire contribution (m ≥ 1
samples), providing more stringent but more realistic protection against information leaks. We show that for high-dimensional mean estimation, empirical risk
minimization with smooth losses, stochastic convex optimization, and learning
√hypothesis classes with finite metric entropy, the privacy cost decreases as O(1/ m)
as users provide more samples. In contrast, when increasing the number of users n,
the privacy cost decreases at a faster O(1/n) rate. We complement these results
with lower bounds showing the minimax optimality of our algorithms for mean
estimation and stochastic convex optimization. Our algorithms rely on novel techniques for private mean estimation in arbitrary dimension with error scaling as the
concentration radius τ of the distribution rather than the entire range.

1

Introduction

Releasing seemingly innocuous functions of a data set can easily compromise the privacy of individuals, whether the functions are simple counts [35] or complex machine learning models like
deep neural networks [52, 30]. To protect against such leaks, Dwork et al. proposed the notion of
differential privacy (DP). Given some data from n participants in a study, we say that a statistic of the
data is differentially private if an attacker who already knows the data of n − 1 participants cannot
reliably determine from the statistic whether the n-th remaining participant is Alice or Bob. With
the recent explosion of publicly available data, progress in machine learning, and widespread public
release of machine learning models and other statistical inferences, differential privacy has become
an important standard and is widely adopted by both industry and government [32, 5, 21, 55].
The standard setting of DP described in [22] assumes that each participant contributes a single data
point to the dataset, and preserves privacy by “noising” the output in a way that is commensurate with
the maximum contribution of a single example. This is not the situation faced in many applications of
machine learning models, where users often contribute multiple samples to the model—for example,
when language and image recognition models are trained on the users’ own data, or in federated
learning settings [37]. As a result, current techniques either provide privacy guarantees that degrade
with a user’s increased participation or naively add a substantial amount of noise, relying on the group
property of differential privacy, which significantly harms the performance of the deployed model.
To remedy this issue, we consider user-level DP, which instead of guaranteeing privacy for individual
samples, protects a user’s entire contribution (m ≥ 1 samples). This is a more stringent but more
realistic privacy desideratum. To hold, it requires that the output of our algorithm does not significantly
∗

Equal contribution. Work was done during an internship at Google Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

