Parallel and Efficient Hierarchical k-Median
Clustering

Vincent Cohen-Addad∗
Google Research
cohenaddad@google.com
Ashkan Norouzi-Fard∗
Google Research
ashkannorouzi@google.com

Silvio Lattanzi∗
Google Research
silviol@google.com

Christian Sohler†∗
University of Cologne
csohler@uni-koeln.de

Ola Svensson∗
EPFL
ola.svensson@epfl.ch

Abstract
As a fundamental unsupervised learning task, hierarchical clustering has been
extensively studied in the past decade. In particular, standard metric formulations
as hierarchical k-center, k-means, and k-median received a lot of attention and
the problems have been studied extensively in different models of computation.
Despite all this interest, not many efficient parallel algorithms are known for these
problems. In this paper we introduce a new parallel algorithm for the Euclidean
hierarchical k-median problem that, when using machines with memory s (for
s ∈ Ω(log2 (n + ∆ + d))), outputs a hierarchical clustering such that for every
fixed value of k the cost of the solution is at most an O(min{d, log n} log ∆) factor
larger in expectation than that of an optimal solution. Furthermore, we also get
that in for all k simultanuously the cost of the solution is at most an expected
O(min{d, log n} log ∆ log(∆dn)) factor bigger that the corresponding optimal
solution. The algorithm requires in O (logs (nd log(n + ∆))) rounds. Here d is the
dimension of the data set and ∆ is the ratio between the maximum and minimum
distance of two points in the input dataset. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first parallel algorithm for the hierarchical k-median problem with theoretical
guarantees. We further complement our theoretical results with an empirical study
of our algorithm that shows its effectiveness in practice.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central tool in any large scale machine learning library. The goal of clustering is to
group objects into subsets so that similar objects are in the same groups while dissimilar objects are
in different groups. There are many different definitions of clustering depending on the description of
the objects, the similarity measure between objects, as well as the application. While it is impossible
to find the perfect formulation for a clustering problem ([29], see also [13]), the metric version of the
problem has received a lot of attention over the last decades and is a central topic in unsupervised
learning research.
Here we focus on one fundamental metric clustering problem: the hierarchical Euclidean k-median
problem. In this formulation, the input objects are described by vectors and the distance (dissimilarity)
between objects is measured by their Euclidean distance. More formally, given a set P ⊆ Rd , the
objective of the hierarchical k-median problem in its classic formulation [33] is to return an ordering
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work was partially done while author was visiting researcher at Google Research, Switzerland.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

