Convergence Rates of Stochastic Gradient Descent
under Infinite Noise Variance
Hongjian Wang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
hjnwang@cmu.edu

Mert Gürbüzbalaban
Rutgers University
mg1366@rutgers.edu

Umut Şimşekli
INRIA & ENS – PSL Research University
umut.simsekli@inria.fr

Lingjiong Zhu
Florida State University
zhu@math.fsu.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Recent studies have provided both empirical and theoretical evidence illustrating
that heavy tails can emerge in stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in various scenarios. Such heavy tails potentially result in iterates with diverging variance, which
hinders the use of conventional convergence analysis techniques that rely on the
existence of the second-order moments. In this paper, we provide convergence
guarantees for SGD under a state-dependent and heavy-tailed noise with a potentially infinite variance, for a class of strongly convex objectives. In the case where
the p-th moment of the noise exists for some p ∈ [1, 2), we first identify a condition
on the Hessian, coined ‘p-positive (semi-)definiteness’, that leads to an interesting
interpolation between the positive semi-definite cone (p = 2) and the cone of
diagonally dominant matrices with non-negative diagonal entries (p = 1). Under
this condition, we provide a convergence rate for the distance to the global optimum
in Lp . Furthermore, we provide a generalized central limit theorem, which shows
that the properly scaled Polyak-Ruppert averaging converges weakly to a multivariate α-stable random vector. Our results indicate that even under heavy-tailed
noise with infinite variance, SGD can converge to the global optimum without
necessitating any modification neither to the loss function nor to the algorithm
itself, as typically required in robust statistics. We demonstrate the implications of
our results over misspecified models, in the presence of heavy-tailed data.

1

Introduction

We consider the unconstrained minimization problem
minimize
f (x),
n
x∈R

(1.1)

using the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm. Initialized at x0 ∈ Rn , the SGD algorithm is
given by the iterations,

xt+1 = xt − γt+1 ∇f (xt ) + ξ t+1 (xt ) , t = 0, 1, 2, ...
(1.2)
where {γt }t∈N+ denotes the step-size sequence, and {ξ t }t∈N+ is a martingale difference sequence
adapted to a filtration {Ft }t∈N , characterizing the noise in the gradient (the sequence {xt }t∈N is also
adapted to the same filtration, if we assume x0 is F0 -measurable).

Our focus is on the case where the
noise is state dependent, and its variance is infinite, i.e., E kξ t k22 = ∞.
∗

Work partially conducted while affiliated with the Vector Institute.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

