On learning sparse vectors from mixture of responses

Nikita Polyanskii
IOTA Foundation
Berlin, Germany
nikitapolyansky@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we address two learning problems. Suppose a family of ` unknown
sparse vectors is fixed, where each vector has at most k non-zero elements. In the
first problem, we concentrate on robust learning the supports of all vectors from the
family using a sequence of noisy responses. Each response to a query vector shows
the sign of the inner product between a randomly chosen vector from the family
and the query vector. In the second problem, we aim at designing queries such that
all sparse vectors from the family can be approximately reconstructed based on the
error-free responses. This learning model was introduced in the work of Gandikota
et al., 2020, and these problems can be seen as generalizations of support recovery
and approximate recovery problems, well-studied under the framework of 1-bit
compressed sensing. As the main contribution of the paper, we prove the existence
of learning algorithms for the first problem which work without any assumptions.
Under a mild structural assumption on the unknown vectors, we also show the
existence of learning algorithms for the second problem and rigorously analyze
their query complexity.

1

Introduction

Many digital data acquisition methods can be expressed as recovering an unknown real-valued sparse
vector from linear measurements. Compressed sensing is a signal processing methodology proposed
in [9, 5] to make the process of vector reconstruction reliable and efficient. Criticism of classical
compressed sensing is that it assumes infinite precision of real-valued measurements. One interesting
setup for compressed sensing is that the measurement outcomes are quantized, e.g., only signs of
measurements are captured. Different aspects of the 1-bit compressed sensing problem have been
extensively investigated in recent years [1, 3, 25, 2, 16, 18, 13]. One important sub-problem that
often arises in 1-bit compressed sensing is to learn the support of an unknown sparse vector. A vast
body of literature focuses on this task and gives bounds on the minimum number of measurements
sufficient for support recovery [1, 16, 13].
In this paper, we investigate a model which can be seen as a generalization of 1-bit compressed
sensing. In this model, a family of ` unknown sparse k-sparse vectors in Rn is fixed, and the response
to a query vector shows the sign of the inner product between the query vector and a vector picked
uniformly at random from the family. The goal is to reconstruct the vectors (or only the supports of
the vectors) using the least number of queries. In real-life applications, the measurements are suffered
by noise, which causes sign flips. Thereby, we also suggest considering a variation of the model that
admits adversarial noise.
Our problem statement is in spirit of many machine learning models, e.g., a mixture of linear
regression models [7, 19, 27, 21, 17, 30, 29, 6] and a mixture of binary linear classifiers [29].
However, we stress an important difference from the classical machine learning setting: in our model,
one constructs data points and an oracle provides the label for each of them; the goal is to find the
minimal number of data points sufficient for learning all the components in a mixture of binary linear
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

