Implicit Finite-Horizon Approximation and Efficient
Optimal Algorithms for Stochastic Shortest Path

Liyu Chen
University of Southern California
liyuc@usc.edu

Mehdi Jafarnia-Jahromi
University of Southern California
mjafarni@usc.edu

Rahul Jain
University of Southern California
rahul.jain@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
We introduce a generic template for developing regret minimization algorithms in
the Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) model, which achieves minimax optimal regret
as long as certain properties are ensured. The key of our analysis is a new technique
called implicit finite-horizon approximation, which approximates the SSP model
by a finite-horizon counterpart only in the analysis without explicit implementation.
Using this template, we develop two new algorithms: the first one is model-free
(the first in the literature to our knowledge) and minimax optimal under strictly
positive costs; the second one is model-based and minimax optimal even with
zero-cost state-action pairs, matching the best existing result from [Tarbouriech
et al., 2021b]. Importantly, both algorithms admit highly sparse updates, making
them computationally more efficient than all existing algorithms. Moreover, both
can be made completely parameter-free.

1

Introduction

We study the Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) model, where an agent aims to reach a goal state
with minimum cost in a stochastic environment. SSP is well-suited for modeling many real-world
applications, such as robotic manipulation, car navigation, and others. Although it is widely studied
empirically (e.g., [Andrychowicz et al., 2017, Nasiriany et al., 2019]) and in optimal control theory
(e.g., [Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1991, Bertsekas and Yu, 2013]), it has received less attention under
the regret minimization setting where a learner needs to learn the environment and improve her policy
on-the-fly through repeated interaction. Specifically, the problem proceeds in K episodes. In each
episode, the learner starts at a fixed initial state, sequentially takes action, suffers some cost, and
transits to the next state, until reaching a predefined goal state. The performance of the learner is
measured by her regret, which is the difference between her total costs and that of the best policy.
Tarbouriech et
pal. [2020a] develop the first regret minimization algorithm for SSP with a regret bound
of Õ(D3/2 S AK/cmin ), where D is the diameter, S is the number of states, A is the number of
actions, and cmin is the minimum cost among all state-action pairs.√ Cohen et al. [2020] improve
over their results and give a near optimal regret bound of Õ(B? S AK), where B? ≤ D is the
largest expected cost of the optimal policy
√ starting from any state. Even more recently, Cohen et al.
[2021] achieve minimax regret of Õ(B? SAK) through a finite-horizon reduction technique, and
concurrently Tarbouriech et al. [2021b] also propose minimax optimal and parameter-free algorithms.
Notably, all existing algorithms are model-based with space complexity Ω(S 2 A). Moreover, they all
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

