Efficient Bayesian network structure learning via
local Markov boundary search

Ming Gao
The University of Chicago
minggao@uchicago.edu

Bryon Aragam
The University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth

Abstract
We analyze the complexity of learning directed acyclic graphical models from
observational data in general settings without specific distributional assumptions.
Our approach is information-theoretic and uses a local Markov boundary search
procedure in order to recursively construct ancestral sets in the underlying graphical model. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that for certain graph ensembles, a
simple forward greedy search algorithm (i.e. without a backward pruning phase)
suffices to learn the Markov boundary of each node. This substantially improves
the sample complexity, which we show is at most polynomial in the number of
nodes. This is then applied to learn the entire graph under a novel identifiability
condition that generalizes existing conditions from the literature. As a matter of
independent interest, we establish finite-sample guarantees for the problem of
recovering Markov boundaries from data. Moreover, we apply our results to the
special case of polytrees, for which the assumptions simplify, and provide explicit
conditions under which polytrees are identifiable and learnable in polynomial time.
We further illustrate the performance of the algorithm, which is easy to implement,
in a simulation study. Our approach is general, works for discrete or continuous
distributions without distributional assumptions, and as such sheds light on the
minimal assumptions required to efficiently learn the structure of directed graphical
models from data.

1

Introduction

Learning the structure of a distribution in the form of a graphical model is a classical problem in
statistical machine learning, whose roots date back to early problems in structural equations and
covariance selection [12, 45, 46]. Graphical models such as Markov networks and Bayesian networks
impose structure in the form of an undirected graph (UG, in the case of Markov networks) or a
directed acyclic graph (DAG, in the case of Bayesian networks). This structure is useful for variety
of tasks ranging from querying and sampling to inference of conditional independence and causal
relationships, depending on the type of graph used. In practice, of course, this structure is rarely
known and we must rely on structure learning to first infer the graphical structure. The most basic
version of this problems asks, given n samples from some distribution P that is represented by a
graphical model G = (V, E), whether or not it is possible to reconstruct G.
In this paper, we study the structure learning problem for Bayesian networks (BNs). Our main
contribution is a fine-grained analysis of a polynomial time and sample complexity algorithm for
learning the structure of BNs with potentially unbounded maximum in-degree and without faithfulness.
In particular, in our analysis we attempt to expose the underlying probabilistic assumptions that are
important for these algorithms to work, drawing connections with existing work on local search
algorithms and the conditional independence properties of P .
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

