A Compositional Atlas of Tractable Circuit
Operations for Probabilistic Inference

Antonio Vergari∗
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
avergari@ed.ac.uk

YooJung Choi
CS Department
UCLA
yjchoi@cs.ucla.edu

Stefano Teso
CS Department
University of Trento, Italy
stefano.teso@unitn.it

Anji Liu
CS Department
UCLA
liuanji@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
CS Department
UCLA
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Circuit representations are becoming the lingua franca to express and reason
about tractable generative and discriminative models. In this paper, we show
how complex inference scenarios for these models that commonly arise in machine learning—from computing the expectations of decision tree ensembles to
information-theoretic divergences of sum-product networks—can be represented
in terms of tractable modular operations over circuits. Specifically, we characterize the tractability of simple transformations—sums, products, quotients, powers,
logarithms, and exponentials—in terms of sufficient structural constraints of the
circuits they operate on, and present novel hardness results for the cases in which
these properties are not satisfied. Building on these operations, we derive a unified
framework for reasoning about tractable models that generalizes several results in
the literature and opens up novel tractable inference scenarios.

1

Introduction

Many core computational tasks in machine learning (ML) and AI involve solving complex integrals,
such as expectations appearing in training losses or in information-theoretic quantities including
entropies or divergences. A fundamental question naturally arises: under which conditions do these
quantities admit tractable computation? Or equivalently, when can we compute them reliably and
efficiently without resorting to approximations or heuristics? If we are able to find model classes
to tractably compute these quantities of interest—henceforth called queries—we can then design
efficient algorithms with important applications in learning, approximate inference [44], model
compression [28], explainable AI [24, 47, 52] and algorithmic bias detection [23, 7, 6].
This “quest” for tracing the tractability of different queries has been carried out several times, often
independently for different model classes in ML and AI and crucially, for each query in isolation. For
example, the computation of the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) is known to have a closed form
for Gaussians, but only recently has an exact algorithm been derived for a more complex tractable
model class such as probabilistic sentential decision diagrams (PSDDs) [28]. On the other hand,
tractable computation of the entropy, despite being a sub-routine for the KLD, has only been derived
for a different tractable model class—selective sum-product networks (SPNs) [36]—by Shih and
Ermon [44]. In the current paradigm, if one were to trace the tractability of a query that has not
∗

This work was done while AV was at the CS Department at UCLA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

