Powerpropagation:
A sparsity inducing weight reparameterisation

Jonathan Schwarz
DeepMind &
Gatsby Unit, UCL
schwarzjn@google.com

Siddhant M. Jayakumar
DeepMind &
University College London

Peter E. Latham
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind

Yee Whye Teh
DeepMind

Abstract
The training of sparse neural networks is becoming an increasingly important tool
for reducing the computational footprint of models at training and evaluation, as
well enabling the effective scaling up of models. Whereas much work over the
years has been dedicated to specialised pruning techniques, little attention has
been paid to the inherent effect of gradient based training on model sparsity. In
this work, we introduce Powerpropagation, a new weight-parameterisation for
neural networks that leads to inherently sparse models. Exploiting the behaviour
of gradient descent, our method gives rise to weight updates exhibiting a “rich get
richer” dynamic, leaving low-magnitude parameters largely unaffected by learning.
Models trained in this manner exhibit similar performance, but have a distribution
with markedly higher density at zero, allowing more parameters to be pruned safely.
Powerpropagation is general, intuitive, cheap and straight-forward to implement
and can readily be combined with various other techniques. To highlight its versatility, we explore it in two very different settings: Firstly, following a recent
line of work, we investigate its effect on sparse training for resource-constrained
settings. Here, we combine Powerpropagation with a traditional weight-pruning
technique as well as recent state-of-the-art sparse-to-sparse algorithms, showing
superior performance on the ImageNet benchmark. Secondly, we advocate the use
of sparsity in overcoming catastrophic forgetting, where compressed representations allow accommodating a large number of tasks at fixed model capacity. In all
cases our reparameterisation considerably increases the efficacy of the off-the-shelf
methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are emerging as the dominant choice across several domains, from language [e.g.
1, 2] to vision [e.g. 3, 4] to RL [e.g. 5, 6]. One particular characteristic of these architectures is
that they perform optimally in the overparameterised regime. In fact, their size seems to be mostly
limited by hardware constraints. While this is potentially counter-intuitive, given a classical view on
overfitting, the current understanding is that model size tends to have a dual role: It leads to better
behaved loss surfaces, making optimisation easy, but also acts as a regulariser. This gives rise to the
double descent phenomena, where test error initially behaves as expected, growing with model size
due to overfitting, but then decreases again as the model keeps growing, and asymptotes as the model
size goes to infinity to a better performance than obtained in the classical regime [7, 8].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

