Beyond Smoothness: Incorporating Low-Rank
Analysis into Nonparametric Density Estimation

Robert A. Vandermeulen
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universiät Berlin
Berlin, Germany
vandermeulen@tu-berlin.de

Antoine Ledent
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
Kaiserslautern, Germany
ledent@cs.uni-kl.de

Abstract
The construction and theoretical analysis of the most popular universally consistent
nonparametric density estimators hinge on one functional property: smoothness.
In this paper we investigate the theoretical implications of incorporating a multiview latent variable model, a type of low-rank model, into nonparametric density
estimation. To do this we perform extensive analysis on histogram-style estimators
that integrate a multi-view model. Our analysis culminates in showing that there
exists a universally consistent histogram-style estimator that converges to any
multi-view model with a finite number of Lipschitz continuous components at
√
a rate of e
O(1/ 3 n) in L1 error. In contrast,
the standard histogram estimator
√
can converge at a rate slower than 1/ d n on the same class of densities. We
also introduce a new nonparametric latent variable model based on the Tucker
decomposition. A rudimentary implementation of our estimators experimentally
demonstrates a considerable performance improvement over the standard histogram
estimator. We also provide a thorough analysis of the sample complexity of our
Tucker decomposition-based model and a variety of other results. Thus, our paper
provides solid theoretical foundations for extending low-rank techniques to the
nonparametric setting.

1

Introduction

Nonparametric density estimators are density estimators capable of estimating a density p while
making few to no assumptions on p. Two commonly used nonparametric density estimators include
the histogram estimator and the kernel density estimator (KDE). A common characteristic of these
two estimators is that they make estimation tractable via a hyperparameter that relates to smoothness,
namely bin width and bandwidth. Large bin width or bandwidth allows for good control of estimation
error* at the cost of increased approximation error via large bin volume for the histogram and
smoothing for KDEs. Selection of this parameter is crucial for estimator performance. In fact a recent
survey on bandwidth selection for KDEs found at least 30 methods for setting this value along with a
few surveys dedicated to the topic [15].
While nonparametric density estimation has been shown to be effective for many tasks, it has been
observed empirically that estimator performance typically declines as data dimensionality increases,
a manifestation of the curse of dimensionality. For the histogram and KDE this phenomenon has
concrete mathematical analogs. For example, these estimators are only universally consistent† if
* For an estimator V restricted space a of densities P, the estimation error refers to the difference between
kV − pk and minq∈P kp − qk, where p is the target density. This is similar to estimator variance.
†
A density estimator is universally consistent if it asymptotically recovers any density.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

