Why Generalization in RL is Difficult:
Epistemic POMDPs and Implicit Partial
Observability

Dibya Ghosh∗ ,1

Jad Rahme∗,2

Aviral Kumar1

Ryan P. Adams2

Amy Zhang1,3

Sergey Levine1

Abstract
Generalization is a central challenge for the deployment of reinforcement learning
(RL) systems in the real world. In this paper, we show that the sequential structure
of the RL problem necessitates new approaches to generalization beyond the
well-studied techniques used in supervised learning. While supervised learning
methods can generalize effectively without explicitly accounting for epistemic
uncertainty, we show that, perhaps surprisingly, this is not the case in RL. We show
that generalization to unseen test conditions from a limited number of training
conditions induces implicit partial observability, effectively turning even fullyobserved MDPs into POMDPs. Informed by this observation, we recast the problem
of generalization in RL as solving the induced partially observed Markov decision
process, which we call the epistemic POMDP. We demonstrate the failure modes of
algorithms that do not appropriately handle this partial observability, and suggest a
simple ensemble-based technique for approximately solving the partially observed
problem. Empirically, we demonstrate that our simple algorithm derived from
the epistemic POMDP achieves significant gains in generalization over current
methods on the Procgen benchmark suite.

1

Introduction

Generalization is a central challenge in machine learning. However, much of the research on
reinforcement learning (RL) has been concerned with the problem of optimization: how to master
a specific task through online or logged interaction. Generalization to new test-time contexts has
received comparatively less attention, although several works have observed empirically [1, 2, 3, 4]
that generalization to new situations poses a significant challenge to RL policies learned from a
fixed training set of situations. In standard supervised learning, it is known that in the absence of
distribution shift and with appropriate inductive biases, optimizing for performance on the training
set (i.e., empirical risk minimization) translates into good generalization performance. It is tempting
to suppose that the generalization challenges in RL can be solved in the same manner as empirical
risk minimization in supervised learning: when provided a training set of contexts, learn the optimal
policy within these contexts and then use that policy in new contexts at test-time.
Perhaps surprisingly, we show that such “empirical risk minimization” approaches can be sub-optimal
for generalizing to new contexts in RL, even when these new contexts are drawn from the same
distribution as the training contexts. As an anecdotal example of why this sub-optimality arises,
imagine a robotic zookeeper for feeding otters that must be trained on some set of zoos. When placed
∗
Equal contribution. 1 UC Berkeley, 2 Princeton University, 3 Facebook AI Research. Correspond to:
dibya@berkeley.edu, jrahme@math.princeton.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

