Adversarially Robust Change Point Detection

Mengchu Li
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
mengchu.li@warwick.ac.uk

Yi Yu
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
yi.yu.2@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Change point detection is becoming increasingly popular in many application
areas. On one hand, most of the theoretically-justified methods are investigated
in an ideal setting without model violations, or merely robust against identical
heavy-tailed noise distribution across time and/or against isolate outliers; on the
other hand, we are aware that there have been exponentially growing attacks from
adversaries, who may pose systematic contamination on data to purposely create
spurious change points or disguise true change points. In light of the timely need
of a change point detection method that is robust against adversaries, we start
with, arguably, the simplest univariate mean change point detection problem. The
adversarial attacks are formulated through the Huber ε-contamination framework,
which in particular allows the contamination distributions to be different at each
time point. In this paper, we demonstrate a phase transition phenomenon in
change point detection. This detection boundary is a function of the contamination
proportion ε and is the first time shown in the literature. In addition, we derive
the minimax-rate optimal localisation error rate, quantifying the cost of accuracy
in terms of the contamination proportion. We propose a computationally-feasible
method, matching the minimax lower bound under certain conditions, saving
for logarithmic factors. Extensive numerical experiments are conducted with
comparisons to existing robust change point detection methods.

1

Introduction

Change point detection is attracting tremendous attention due to the demand from various application
areas, including bioinformatics [e.g. 1, 2], climatology [e.g. 3, 4] and finance [e.g. 5, 6], among many
others. In the last few decades, a vast body of methods and theory on change point analysis have
been studied based on different data types [e.g. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. The majority of the methods
are studied in a model-specific way, in the sense that the noise distributions are sub-Gaussian/subExponential and the between change points data are independent and identically distributed. The few
robust change point detection results [e.g. 13, 14, 15] are designed against isolated outliers and/or
heavy-tailed noise.
In recent years, we are aware of the risk of adversary attacks in emerging application areas, ranging
from image classification [16], object detection [17], to natural language processing [18] and beyond.
In this paper, we consider a change point analysis setting possibly attacked by adversaries. As a
teaser, we consider a concrete climate data set from [19] containing the daily average PM2.5 index
data in Beijing from 15-Apr-2017 to 15-Feb-2021. The original and adversarially contaminated data
(with a spurious change point created on 17-Jan-2020) are shown in Figure 1, where the orange
points in the right panel denote the adversarially chosen contamination points. As we will see more
details in Sections 4.2 and E.3, applying the B IWEIGHT(3) method [15] to the original data set leads
to two change point estimators, while only the spurious change point is detected in the presence of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

