Two-step lookahead Bayesian optimization with
inequality constraints

Yunxiang Zhang
Cornell University
yz2547@cornell.edu

Xiangyu Zhang
Cornell University
xz556@cornell.edu

Peter I. Frazier
Cornell University
pf98@cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in computationally efficient non-myopic Bayesian optimization
offer improved query efficiency over traditional myopic methods like expected
improvement, with only a modest increase in computational cost. These advances
have been largely limited to unconstrained BO methods with only a few exceptions
which require heavy computation. For instance, one existing multi-step lookahead
constrained BO method [1] relies on computationally expensive unreliable bruteforce derivative-free optimization of a Monte Carlo rollout acquisition function.
Methods that use the reparameterization trick for more efficient derivative-based
optimization of non-myopic acquisition functions in the unconstrained setting,
like sample average approximation and infinitesimal perturbation analysis, do not
extend: constraints introduce discontinuities in the sampled acquisition function
surface. Moreover, we argue here that being non-myopic is even more important in
constrained problems because fear of violating constraints pushes myopic methods
away from sampling the boundary between feasible and infeasible regions, slowing
the discovery of optimal solutions with tight constraints. In this paper, we propose
a computationally efficient two-step lookahead constrained Bayesian optimization
acquisition function (2-OPT-C) supporting both sequential and batch settings.
To enable fast acquisition function optimization, we develop a novel likelihoodratio-based unbiased estimator of the gradient of the two-step optimal acquisition
function that does not use the reparameterization trick. In numerical experiments,
2-OPT-C typically improves query efficiency by 2x or more over previous methods,
and in some cases by 10x or more.

1

Introduction

We consider constrained optimization of a continuous black-box function f under continuous blackbox constraints gi , minx∈A f (x) subject to gi (x) ≤ 0, i = 1, . . . , I, within the compact design space
A ⊆ Rd . We suppose both f (x) and gi (x) are derivative-free, time-consuming-to-evaluate and also
noise-free. Such problems arise, for example, in tuning hyperparameters of machine learning models
subject to runtime or fairness constraints and policy optimization in reinforcement learning with
safety constraints. For instance, neural networks deployed on mobile phones must be accurate but
may also have limited computation available while needing to respond to users in real time, creating
a constraint on how long the model takes to predict at test time [2]. Another example, from [3], is
predicting recidivism risk in the criminal justice system with a fairness constraint ensuring that false
positive rates are equal across racial and ethnic groups. Other applications arise in drug discovery [4]
and aircraft design [5].
Bayesian optimization (BO) has proven successful at solving black-box optimization problems
with expensive objectives [6, 7], including constrained problems of the form above. BO methods
for constrained problems include constrained expected improvement (EIC as in [8], rediscovered
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

