Adversarial Training Helps Transfer Learning via
Better Representations
Zhun Deng⇤
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
zhundeng@g.harvard.edu

Linjun Zhang⇤
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
linjun.zhang@rutgers.edu

Kenji Kawaguchi
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
kkawaguchi@fas.harvard.edu

Kailas Vodrahalli
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94025
kailasv@stanford.edu

James Zou
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94025
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Transfer learning aims to leverage models pre-trained on source data to efficiently
adapt to target setting, where only limited data are available for model fine-tuning.
Recent works empirically demonstrate that adversarial training in the source data
can improve the ability of models to transfer to new domains. However, why
this happens is not known. In this paper, we provide a theoretical model to
rigorously analyze how adversarial training helps transfer learning. We show that
adversarial training in the source data generates provably better representations,
so fine-tuning on top of this representation leads to a more accurate predictor of
the target data. We further demonstrate both theoretically and empirically that
semi-supervised learning in the source data can also improve transfer learning by
similarly improving the representation. Moreover, performing adversarial training
on top of semi-supervised learning can further improve transferability, suggesting
that the two approaches have complementary benefits on representations. We
support our theories with experiments on popular data sets and deep learning
architectures.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning is a popular methodology to obtain well-performing machine learning models in
settings where high-quality labeled data is scarce [20, 48]. The general idea of transfer learning to
take a pre-trained model from a source domain—where labeled data is abundant—and adapt it to a
new target domain. Because the target data distribution often differs from the source setting, standard
transfer learning fine-tunes the model using a small-amount of labeled data from the target domain.
In many applications, the fine-tuning is performed only on the last few layers of the network if the
amount of target data is limited or if the one only has access to a representation (i.e. intermediate
layers) produced by the model instead of the full model.
Transfer learning has demonstrated substantial empirical success and there is an exciting literature
investigating different approaches to making transfer learning more effective [26, 27]. Recent
experiments empirically demonstrated an intriguing phenomenon that models that are trained using
adversarial-robust optimization on the source data transfer better to target data compared to nonadversarially trained models. We illustrate this phenomenon in Figure 1, which replicates the findings
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

