Solving Min-Max Optimization with Hidden
Structure via Gradient Descent Ascent
Lampros Flokas∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
lamflokas@cs.columbia.edu

Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
emvlatakis@cs.columbia.edu

Georgios Piliouras
Singapore University of Technology & Design
georgios.piliouras@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Many recent AI architectures are inspired by zero-sum games, however, the behavior of their dynamics is still not well understood. Inspired by this, we study standard
gradient descent ascent (GDA) dynamics in a specific class of non-convex nonconcave zero-sum games, that we call hidden zero-sum games. In this class, players
control the inputs of smooth but possibly non-linear functions whose outputs are
being applied as inputs to a convex-concave game. Unlike general zero-sum games,
these games have a well-defined notion of solution; outcomes that implement the
von-Neumann equilibrium of the “hidden" convex-concave game. We provide
conditions under which vanilla GDA provably converges not merely to local Nash,
but the actual von-Neumann solution. If the hidden game lacks strict convexity
properties, GDA may fail to converge to any equilibrium, however, by applying
standard regularization techniques we can prove convergence to a von-Neumann solution of a slightly perturbed zero-sum game. Our convergence results are non-local
despite working in the setting of non-convex non-concave games. Critically, under
proper assumptions we combine the Center-Stable Manifold Theorem along with
novel type of initialization dependent Lyapunov functions to prove that almost all
initial conditions converge to the solution. Finally, we discuss diverse applications
of our framework ranging from generative adversarial networks to evolutionary
biology.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, our understanding of convex-concave games revolves around von Neumann’s celebrated
minimax theorem, which implies the existence of saddle point solutions with a uniquely defined value.
These solutions are called von Nemann solutions and guarantee to each agent their corresponding
value regardless of opponent play. Although many learning algorithms are known to be able to
compute such saddle points [13], recently there has there has been a fervor of activity in proving
stronger results such as faster regret minimization rates or analysis of the day-to-day behavior [46,
17, 7, 1, 66, 19, 2, 45, 5, 25, 70, 29, 6, 48, 30, 56].
This interest has been largely triggered by the impressive successes of AI architectures inspired by
min-max games such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANS) [26], adversarial training [40]
and reinforcement learning self-play in games [63]. Critically, however, all these applications are
based upon non-convex non-concave games, our understanding of which is still nascent. Nevertheless,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

