Channel Permutations for N:M Sparsity

Jeff Pool
NVIDIA
jpool@nvidia.com

1

Chong Yu1,2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
NVIDIA
chongy@nvidia.com

Abstract
We introduce channel permutations as a method to maximize the accuracy of N:M
sparse networks. N:M sparsity requires N out of M consecutive elements to be zero
and has been shown to maintain accuracy for many models and tasks with a simple
prune and fine-tune workflow. By permuting weight matrices along their channel
dimension and adjusting the surrounding layers appropriately, we demonstrate
accuracy recovery for even small, parameter-efficient networks, without affecting
inference run-time. We also present both a quality metric to simplify judging
permutations as well as efficient methods to search for high-quality permutations,
including two optimizations to escape local minima. Finally, we share an ablation
study to show the importance of each part of our search algorithm, experimental
results showing correlation between our quality metric and final network accuracy,
improved sparse network accuracy using our techniques with insignificant overhead to training time, and the transformation of unstructured to structured sparse
workloads. Code to use these techniques when generating a 2:4 sparse network is
available at https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex/tree/master/apex/contrib/sparsity.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) excel at complex tasks such as image classification, object detection,
and language modeling. Their success often comes at the cost of immense computational complexity,
and growing model size generally results in even higher-quality results. To combat this everincreasing computational workload at inference, various approaches have been used to save effort;
for example, network pruning removes weights from the network, and quantization can replace
floating-point operations with simpler integer operations. We focus on one type of network pruning
that is accelerated in hardware: 2:4 structured sparsity [22] (a particular form of the more general
N:M sparsity), since it has been shown to maintain accuracy across a wide range of networks and
tasks while being easy to save computation. While many networks do recover accuracy with a
fine-tuning step, some small, parameter-efficient image-classification networks that were designed
with economy of memory and computation in mind cannot recover the accuracy lost due to pruning
with this suggested workflow. Further, this workflow repeats the dense training all over again, which,
while straightforward, can be costly if the lifetime of the deployment model is not long enough to
amortize this extra training.
We seek to address these shortcomings with the observation that the 2:4 pruning step, which forces
two out of every four consecutive elements to be zero (the "2:4 constraint"), sometimes must prune a
relatively large, and intuitively important, value. If different options were available to each group
of four values, then more advantageous choices can be made, as illustrated in Figure 1. When the
example weight matrix (top-left) is pruned with 2:4 sparsity in its original order, it results in a sparse
matrix (top-right) with total weight magnitude of 44.5. By first changing the order of the columns
in the matrix, though (bottom-left), the resulting sparse matrix (bottom-right) has a total weight
magnitude of 58.6. It is simple to find this fruitful column permutation in such a small example, but
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

