How Data Augmentation affects Optimization for
Linear Regression

Boris Hanin∗
Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
bhanin@princeton.edu

Yi Sun∗
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
yisun@statistics.uchicago.edu

Abstract
Though data augmentation has rapidly emerged as a key tool for optimization in
modern machine learning, a clear picture of how augmentation schedules affect
optimization and interact with optimization hyperparameters such as learning rate
is nascent. In the spirit of classical convex optimization and recent work on implicit
bias, the present work analyzes the effect of augmentation on optimization in the
simple convex setting of linear regression with MSE loss.
We find joint schedules for learning rate and data augmentation scheme under which
augmented gradient descent provably converges and characterize the resulting
minimum. Our results apply to arbitrary augmentation schemes, revealing complex
interactions between learning rates and augmentations even in the convex setting.
Our approach interprets augmented (S)GD as a stochastic optimization method
for a time-varying sequence of proxy losses. This gives a unified way to analyze
learning rate, batch size, and augmentations ranging from additive noise to random
projections. From this perspective, our results, which also give rates of convergence,
can be viewed as Monro-Robbins type conditions for augmented (S)GD.

1

Introduction

Data augmentation, a popular set of techniques in which data is augmented (i.e. modified) at every
optimization step, has become increasingly crucial to training models using gradient-based optimization. However, in modern overparametrized settings where there are many different minimizers of the
training loss, the specific minimizer selected by training and the quality of the resulting model can be
highly sensitive to choices of augmentation hyperparameters. As a result, practitioners use methods
ranging from simple grid search to Bayesian optimization and reinforcement learning [8, 9, 17] to
select and schedule augmentations by changing hyperparameters over the course of optimization.
Such approaches, while effective, often require extensive compute and lack theoretical grounding.
These empirical practices stand in contrast to theoretical results from the implicit bias and stochastic
optimization literature. The extensive recent literature on implicit bias [15, 29, 32] gives provable
guarantees on which minimizer of the training loss is selected by GD and SGD in simple settings,
but considers cases without complex scheduling. On the other hand, classical theorems in stochastic
optimization, building on the Monro-Robbins theorem in [25], give provably optimal learning rate
schedules for strongly convex objectives. However, neither line of work addresses the myriad
augmentation and hyperparameter choices crucial to gradient-based training effective in practice.
The present work takes a step towards bridging this gap. We consider two main questions for a
learning rate schedule and data augmentation policy:
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

