Uncertainty Quantification and Deep Ensembles

Rahul Rahaman
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
National University of Singapore
rahul.rahaman@u.nus.edu
Alexandre H. Thiery
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
National University of Singapore
a.h.thiery@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep Learning methods are known to suffer from calibration issues: they typically
produce over-confident estimates. These problems are exacerbated in the low data
regime. Although the calibration of probabilistic models is well studied, calibrating extremely over-parametrized models in the low-data regime presents unique
challenges. We show that deep-ensembles do not necessarily lead to improved
calibration properties. In fact, we show that standard ensembling methods, when
used in conjunction with modern techniques such as mixup regularization, can
lead to less calibrated models. This text examines the interplay between three of
the most simple and commonly used approaches to leverage deep learning when
data is scarce: data-augmentation, ensembling, and post-processing calibration
methods. Although standard ensembling techniques certainly help boost accuracy,
we demonstrate that the calibration of deep ensembles relies on subtle trade-offs.
We also find that calibration methods such as temperature scaling need to be slightly
tweaked when used with deep-ensembles and, crucially, need to be executed after the averaging process. Our simulations indicate that this simple strategy can
halve the Expected Calibration Error (ECE) on a range of benchmark classification
problems compared to standard deep-ensembles in the low data regime.

1

Introduction

Overparametrized deep models can memorize datasets with labels entirely randomized [48]. It is
consequently not entirely clear why such extremely flexible models are able to generalize well on
unseen data and trained with algorithms as simple as stochastic gradient descent, although a lot of
progress on these questions have recently been reported [8, 19, 2, 31, 39, 10].
The high capacity of neural network models, and their ability to easily overfit complex datasets,
makes them especially vulnerable to calibration issues. In many situations, standard deep-learning
approaches are known to produce probabilistic forecasts that are over-confident [16]. In this text,
we consider the regime where the size of the training sets is very small, which typically amplifies
these issues. This can lead to problematic behaviors when deep neural networks are deployed in
scenarios where a proper quantification of the uncertainty is necessary. Indeed, a host of methods [22,
30, 40, 12, 37] have been proposed to mitigate these calibration issues, even though no gold standard
has so far emerged. Many different forms of regularization techniques [35, 48, 50] have been
shown to reduce overfitting in deep neural networks. Importantly, practical implementations and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

