Surrogate Regret Bounds for Polyhedral Losses

Rafael Frongillo
University of Colorado Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

Bo Waggoner
University of Colorado Boulder
bwag@colorado.edu

Abstract
Surrogate risk minimization is an ubiquitous paradigm in supervised machine
learning, wherein a target problem is solved by minimizing a surrogate loss on a
dataset. Surrogate regret bounds, also called excess risk bounds, are a common tool
to prove generalization rates for surrogate risk minimization. While surrogate regret
bounds have been developed for certain classes of loss functions, such as proper
losses, general results are relatively sparse. We provide two general results. The
first gives a linear surrogate regret bound for any polyhedral (piecewise-linear and
convex) surrogate, meaning that surrogate generalization rates translate directly to
target rates. The second shows that for sufficiently non-polyhedral surrogates, the
regret bound is a square root, meaning fast surrogate generalization rates translate
to slow rates for the target. Together, these results suggest polyhedral surrogates
are optimal in many cases.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning, our goal is to learn a hypothesis that solves some target problem given labeled
data. The problem is often specified by a target loss ` that is discrete in the sense that the prediction
lies in a finite set, as with classification, ranking, and structured prediction. As minimizing the target
` over a data set is typically NP-hard, we instead turn to the general paradigm of surrogate risk
minimization. Here a surrogate loss function L is chosen and minimized instead of the target `. A
link function ψ then maps the surrogate predictions to target predictions.
Naturally, a central question in surrogate risk minimization is how to choose the surrogate L. A
minimal requirement is statistical consistency, which roughly says that approaching the best possible
surrogate loss will eventually lead to the best possible target loss. A more precise goal is to understand
the rate at which this target minimization occurs, called the generalization rate: how quickly the
target loss approaches the best possible, in terms of the number of data points. In other words, if we
define the regret of a hypothesis to be its performance relative to the Bayes optimal hypothesis, we
wish to know how quickly the `-regret approaches zero.
Surrogate regret bounds are a common tool to prove generalization rates for surrogate risk minimization, by bounding the target regret as a function of the surrogate regret. This bound allows
generalization rates for surrogate losses—of which there are many, often leveraging properties of L
like strong convexity and smoothness—to imply rates for the target problem. Roughly speaking, a
surrogate regret bound takes the form
∀ surrogate hypotheses h,

Regret` (ψ ◦ h) ≤ ζ( RegretL (h) ) ,

(1)

where the regret transfer function ζ : R+ → R+ controls how surrogate regret translates to target regret. For example, if we have a sequence of surrogate hypotheses
hn achieving a fast rate
√
RegretL (hn ) = O(1/n), and we have a regret
transfer
of
ζ()
=
,
then
we can only guarantee a
√
slower target rate of Regret` (ψ ◦hn ) = O(1/ n). The ideal regret transfer is linear, i.e. ζ() = C ·
for some C > 0, which would have directly translated the fast-rate guarantee to the target.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

