An Exact Characterization of the Generalization
Error for the Gibbs Algorithm
Gholamali Aminian ⇤
University College London
g.aminian @ucl.ac.uk
Laura Toni
University College London
l.toni@ucl.ac.uk

Yuheng Bu ⇤
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
buyuheng@mit.edu
Miguel Rodrigues
University College London
m.rodrigues@ucl.ac.uk

Gregory Wornell
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
gww@mit.edu

Abstract
Various approaches have been developed to upper bound the generalization error of
a supervised learning algorithm. However, existing bounds are often loose and lack
of guarantees. As a result, they may fail to characterize the exact generalization
ability of a learning algorithm. Our main contribution is an exact characterization of
the expected generalization error of the well-known Gibbs algorithm (a.k.a. Gibbs
posterior) using symmetrized KL information between the input training samples
and the output hypothesis. Our result can be applied to tighten existing expected
generalization error and PAC-Bayesian bounds. Our approach is versatile, as it also
characterizes the generalization error of the Gibbs algorithm with data-dependent
regularizer and that of the Gibbs algorithm in the asymptotic regime, where it
converges to the empirical risk minimization algorithm. Of particular relevance,
our results highlight the role the symmetrized KL information plays in controlling
the generalization error of the Gibbs algorithm.

1

Introduction

Evaluating the generalization error of a learning algorithm is one of the most important challenges in
statistical learning theory. Various approaches have been developed [55], including VC dimensionbased bounds [66], algorithmic stability-based bounds [16], algorithmic robustness-based bounds
[72], PAC-Bayesian bounds [45], and information-theoretic bounds [71].
However, upper bounds on generalization error may not entirely capture the generalization ability of a
learning algorithm. One apparent reason is the tightness issue, some upper bounds [9] can be far away
from the true generalization error or even vacuous when evaluated in practice. More importantly,
existing upper bounds do not fully characterize all the aspects that could influence the generalization
error of a supervised learning problem. For example, VC dimension-based bounds depend only
on the hypothesis class, and algorithmic stability-based bounds only exploit the properties of the
learning algorithm. As a consequence, both methods fail to capture the fact that generalization
error depends strongly on the interplay between the hypothesis class, learning algorithm, and the
⇤

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

