DRONE: Data-aware Low-rank Compression for
Large NLP Models

Patrick H. Chen
UCLA
Los Angels, CA
patrickchen@g.ucla.edu

Hsian-fu, Yu
Amazon
Palo Alto, CA
rofu.yu@gmail.com

Inderjit S. Dhillon
UT Austin & Amazon
Palo Alto, CA
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Cho-jui, Hsieh
UCLA & Amazon
Los Angels, CA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The representations learned by large-scale NLP models such as BERT have been
widely used in various tasks. However, the increasing model size of the pre-trained
models also brings efficiency challenges, including inference speed and model
size when deploying models on mobile devices. Specifically, most operations
in BERT consist of matrix multiplications. These matrices are not low-rank and
thus canonical matrix decompositions do not lead to efficient approximations. In
this paper, we observe that the learned representation of each layer lies in a lowdimensional space. Based on this observation, we propose DRONE (data-aware
low-rank compression), a provably optimal low-rank decomposition of weight
matrices, which has a simple closed form solution that can be efficiently computed.
DRONE can be applied to both fully-connected and self-attention layers appearing
in the BERT model. In addition to compressing standard models, our method
can also be used on distilled BERT models to further improve the compression
rate. Experimental results show that DRONE is able to improve both model size
and inference speed with limited loss in accuracy. Specifically, DRONE alone
achieves 1.92x speedup on the MRPC task with only 1.5% loss in accuracy, and
when DRONE is combined with distillation, it further achieves over 12.3x speedup
on various natural language inference tasks.

1

Introduction

The representations learned by large-scale Natural Language Processing (NLP) models such as BERT
and its variations have been widely used in various tasks [8, 2, 25, 3, 24]. The successes of these large
NLP models rely on the usage of large corpus and big models. Indeed, researchers have reported
better results with models that have more parameters [31] and number of layers [1]. The increasing
model size of the pre-trained models inhibits public users from training a model from scratch, and it
also brings forth efficiency challenges, including inference speed and model size when deploying
models on mobile devices.
To deal with efficiency issues, most existing work resorts to adjusting the model structure or distillation. For instance, [17] used locality-sensitive hashing to accelerate dot-product attention, [18] used
repeating model parameters to reduce the size and [44] applied a pre-defined attention pattern to save
computation. A large body of prior work focused on variants of distillation has also been explored
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

