AC-GC: Lossy Activation Compression
with Guaranteed Convergence

R. David Evans
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
rdevans@ece.ubc.ca

Tor M. Aamodt
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
aamodt@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
Parallel hardware devices (e.g., graphics processor units) have limited highbandwidth memory capacity. This negatively impacts the training of deep neural
networks (DNNs) by increasing runtime and/or decreasing accuracy when reducing
model and/or batch size to fit this capacity. Lossy compression is a promising
approach to tackling memory capacity constraints, but prior approaches rely on
hyperparameter search to achieve a suitable trade-off between convergence and
compression, negating runtime benefits. In this paper we build upon recent developments on Stochastic Gradient Descent convergence to prove an upper bound
on the expected loss increase when training with compressed activation storage.
We then express activation compression error in terms of this bound, allowing
the compression rate to adapt to training conditions automatically. The advantage
of our approach, called AC-GC, over existing lossy compression frameworks is
that, given a preset allowable increase in loss, significant compression without
significant increase in error can be achieved with a single training run. When
combined with error-bounded methods, AC-GC achieves 15.1× compression with
an average accuracy change of 0.1% on text and image datasets. AC-GC functions
on any model composed of the layers analyzed and, by avoiding compression rate
search, reduces overall training time by 4.6× over SuccessiveHalving.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has proven efficient and effective for optimizing Deep and Convolutional Neural Networks (DNNs and CNNs). However, due to deeper and automatically generated
networks [20, 22, 44, 52], improvement of accuracy has caused a rapid increase in training memory
requirements, which are dominated by the temporary storage of activations between the forward and
backward pass of the back-propagation algorithm [45, 48]. Reducing memory consumption leads to
faster training and, thus, more effective research of DNN models and applications. However, doing
this by decreasing the batch size has many drawbacks. On parallel processors, such as GPUs, a small
batch size can lead to poor compute saturation, and reduced training throughput [47]. Smaller batch
sizes also introduce errors that impact convergence and accuracy [18]. Over 50GB of memory is
required to train some networks, e.g., GPIPE [22].
Many works have examined reducing activation storage overheads. Lossy compression of activations
in memory can reduce memory footprint without network modifications [6, 14, 25, 27]. Error bounded
lossy compression (EBC) [27] has bounded activation error, however, it uses an empirical study to
select an error target. Activations can also be offloaded to an external memory (e.g. CPU DRAM),
using either an uncompressed link [31, 45] or compressed link [14, 46]. Activation compression
and offloading have performance overheads from 5% to 60% [7, 14, 25, 27, 45]. Reduced precision
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

