Scalable and Stable Surrogates for Flexible Classifiers
with Fairness Constraints
Harry Bendekgey∗
hbendekg@uci.edu

Erik B. Sudderth∗
sudderth@uci.edu

Abstract
We investigate how fairness relaxations scale to flexible classifiers like deep neural
networks for images and text. We analyze an easy-to-use and robust way of imposing fairness constraints when training, and through this framework prove that some
prior fairness surrogates exhibit degeneracies for non-convex models. We resolve
these problems via three new surrogates: an adaptive data re-weighting, and two
smooth upper-bounds that are provably more robust than some previous methods.
Our surrogates perform comparably to the state-of-the-art on low-dimensional
fairness benchmarks, while achieving superior accuracy and stability for more
complex computer vision and natural language processing tasks.

1

Introduction

A growing body of research has explored the ethical and societal implications of increasingly
automated decision-making. One critical concern is whether particular machine learning algorithms
perform differently on average for members of marginalized groups. In addition to being an ethical
question, this is a legal one: Attributes such as race and gender are legally-protected categories, and
an employer whose decision-making process disproportionately hurts one group can be litigated for
committing adverse or disparate impact. One quantitative notion of fairness is called demographic
parity, which states that a decision maker should accept (or classify as positive) a roughly equal
proportion of each group [8]. An employer who hires many male applicants, but few female applicants,
violates demographic parity by disproportionately allocating resources to one sensitive group.
Machine learning is also increasingly used by law enforcement, where ethical questions become
civil rights questions. Facial recognition and risk assessment algorithms have been shown to have
disparities in accuracy between black and white defendants [2, 7], which may lead to the arrest of an
innocent person [29]. The equalized odds [27] fairness criterion requires a decision maker to have the
same false negative rates, as well as the same false positive rates, for each sensitive group. Equality of
opportunity requires only one of those two equalities to hold, whichever is considered more ethically
important (e.g., in law enforcement, we may ensure that innocent individuals have similar treatment).
Other notions of fairness include predictive parity [16], which matches classifier precision across
groups, or the minimization of mutual information [34] between predictions and sensitive attributes.
Except in degenerate cases, some pairs of criteria cannot be achieved simultaneously [3], meaning a
domain expert must make a moral decision about which fairness constraint they aim to satisfy.
We formalize the problem of fair classification as learning the highest-accuracy model that satisfies a
constraint on some fairness criterion (either demographic parity or equality of opportunity). This
constrained optimization problem is mathematically difficult to solve, which has lead to the creation
of a variety of fair classification algorithms, many involving relaxations of constraints like those
analyzed in this paper. Prior work has mostly limited experiments to small tabular data sets like
COMPAS [2], obscuring the fact that many previous methods are either heuristic, or have guarantees
that are limited to linear classifiers with convex losses.
∗
Department of Computer Science, University of California Irvine School of Information and Computer
Science, Irvine, CA, USA

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

