The functional specialization of visual cortex emerges
from training parallel pathways with self-supervised
predictive learning

Shahab Bakhtiari
Mila & McGill University
bakhtias@mila.quebec

Patrick Mineault
patrick.mineault@gmail.com

Tim Lillicrap
DeepMind
timothylillicrap@google.com

Christopher C. Pack
McGill University
christopher.pack@mcgill.ca

Blake A. Richards
CIFAR, Mila & McGill University
blake.richards@mila.quebec

Abstract
The visual system of mammals is comprised of parallel, hierarchical specialized
pathways. Different pathways are specialized in so far as they use representations
that are more suitable for supporting specific downstream behaviours. In particular, the clearest example is the specialization of the ventral (“what”) and dorsal
(“where”) pathways of the visual cortex. These two pathways support behaviours
related to visual recognition and movement, respectively. To-date, deep neural
networks have mostly been used as models of the ventral, recognition pathway.
However, it is unknown whether both pathways can be modelled with a single
deep ANN. Here, we ask whether a single model with a single loss function can
capture the properties of both the ventral and the dorsal pathways. We explore
this question using data from mice, who like other mammals, have specialized
pathways that appear to support recognition and movement behaviours. We show
that when we train a deep neural network architecture with two parallel pathways
using a self-supervised predictive loss function, we can outperform other models
in fitting mouse visual cortex. Moreover, we can model both the dorsal and ventral
pathways. These results demonstrate that a self-supervised predictive learning
approach applied to parallel pathway architectures can account for some of the
functional specialization seen in mammalian visual systems.

1

Introduction

In the mammalian visual cortex information is processed in a hierarchical manner using two specialized pathways [15, 52]: the ventral, or “where” pathway, and the dorsal, or “what” pathway. These two
pathways are specialized for visual recognition and movement, respectively [42, 24, 19, 58, 59, 17].
For example, damage to the ventral pathway may impair object recognition, whereas damage to the
dorsal pathway may impair motion perception [64].
Deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) trained in a supervised manner on object categorization have
been successful at matching the representations of the ventral visual stream [62, 57, 32]. They have
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

