Two-sided fairness in rankings via Lorenz dominance
Virginie Do1,2 , Sam Corbett-Davies1 , Jamal Atif2 , Nicolas Usunier1
1
Facebook AI
2
LAMSADE, Université PSL, Université Paris Dauphine, CNRS, France
virginiedo@fb.com, scd@fb.com, jamal.atif@dauphine.psl.eu, usunier@fb.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of generating rankings that are fair towards both users and
item producers in recommender systems. We address both usual recommendation
(e.g., of music or movies) and reciprocal recommendation (e.g., dating). Following
concepts of distributive justice in welfare economics, our notion of fairness aims at
increasing the utility of the worse-off individuals, which we formalize using the
criterion of Lorenz efficiency. It guarantees that rankings are Pareto efficient, and
that they maximally redistribute utility from better-off to worse-off, at a given level
of overall utility. We propose to generate rankings by maximizing concave welfare
functions, and develop an efficient inference procedure based on the Frank-Wolfe
algorithm. We prove that unlike existing approaches based on fairness constraints,
our approach always produces fair rankings. Our experiments also show that it
increases the utility of the worse-off at lower costs in terms of overall utility.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have a growing impact on the information we see and on our life opportunities,
as they help us browse news articles, find a new job, house, or people to connect with. While the
objective of recommender systems is usually defined as maximizing the quality of recommendations
from the user’s perspective, the recommendations also have an impact on the recommended “items”.
News outlets rely on exposure to generate revenue, finding a job depends on which recruiter gets to see
our resume, and the effectiveness of a dating application also depends on who we are recommended
to—and if we are being recommended, then someone else is not. Two-sided fairness in rankings is
the problem of generating personalized recommendations by fairly mediating between the interests of
users and items. It involves a complex multidimensional trade-off. Fairness towards item producers
requires boosting the exposure of small producers (e.g., to avoid winner-take-all effects and popularity
biases [1]) at the expense of average user utility. Fairness towards users aims at increasing the utility
of the least served users (e.g., so that least served users do not support the cost of item-side fairness),
once again at the expense of average user utility. The goal of this paper is to provide an algorithmic
framework to generate rankings that achieve a variety of these trade-offs, leaving the choice of a
specific trade-off to the practitioner.
The leading approach to fairness in rankings is to maximize user utility under constraints of equal
item exposure (or equal quality-weighted exposure) [54, 7] or equal user satisfaction [6]. When these
constraints imply an unacceptable decrease in average user utility, so-called “trade-offs between utility
and fairness” [65, 41] are obtained by relaxing the fairness constraints, leading to the optimization of
a trade-off between average user utility and a measure of users’ or items’ inequality.
Thinking about fairness in terms of optimal utility/inequality trade-offs has, however, two fundamental
limitations. First, the optimization of a utility/inequality trade-off is not necessarily Pareto-efficient
from the point of view of users and items: it sometimes chooses solutions that decrease the utility
of some individuals without making anybody else better off. We argue that reducing inequalities
by decreasing the utility of the better-off is not desirable if it does not benefit anyone. The second
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

