Self-Instantiated Recurrent Units
with Dynamic Soft Recursion

Aston Zhang† , Yi Tay‡∗, Yikang Shen• , Alvin Chan/ , Shuai Zhang
†
Amazon Web Services AI, ‡ Google Research
•
Mila, Université de Montréal, / NTU, Singapore,  ETH Zürich
az@astonzhang.com

Abstract
While standard recurrent neural networks explicitly impose a chain structure on
different forms of data, they do not have an explicit bias towards recursive selfinstantiation where the extent of recursion is dynamic. Given diverse and even
growing data modalities (e.g., logic, algorithmic input and output, music, code,
images, and language) that can be expressed in sequences and may benefit from
more architectural flexibility, we propose the self-instantiated recurrent unit (SelfIRU) with a novel inductive bias towards dynamic soft recursion. On one hand, the
Self-IRU is characterized by recursive self-instantiation via its gating functions,
i.e., gating mechanisms of the Self-IRU are controlled by instances of the Self-IRU
itself, which are repeatedly invoked in a recursive fashion. On the other hand, the
extent of the Self-IRU recursion is controlled by gates whose values are between
0 and 1 and may vary across the temporal dimension of sequences, enabling
dynamic soft recursion depth at each time step. The architectural flexibility and
effectiveness of our proposed approach are demonstrated across multiple data
modalities. For example, the Self-IRU achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the logical inference dataset [Bowman et al., 2014] even when comparing with
competitive models that have access to ground-truth syntactic information.

1

Introduction

Models based on the notion of recurrence have enjoyed pervasive impact across various applications. In particular, most effective recurrent neural networks (RNNs) operate with gating functions.
Such gating functions not only ameliorate vanishing gradient issues when modeling and capturing
long-range dependencies, but also benefit from fine-grained control over temporal composition for
sequences [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997, Cho et al., 2014].
With diverse and even growing data modalities (e.g., logic, algorithmic input and output, music, code,
images, and language) that can be expressed in sequences and may benefit from more architectural
flexibility, recurrent neural networks that only explicitly impose a chain structure on such data but
lack an explicit bias towards recursive self-instantiation may be limiting. For example, their gating
functions are typically static across the temporal dimension of sequences. In view of such, this paper
aims at studying an inductive bias towards recursive self-instantiation where the extent of recursion is
dynamic at different time steps.
We propose a novel recurrent unit whose gating functions are repeatedly controlled by instances of
the recurrent unit itself. Our proposed model is called the self-instantiated recurrent unit (Self-IRU),
where self-instantiation indicates modeling via the own instances of the model itself in a recursive
fashion. Specifically, two gates of the Self-IRU are controlled by Self-IRU instances. Biologically,
∗

Work was done at NTU.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

