Adversarial Attack Generation Empowered by
Min-Max Optimization
Jingkang Wang1,2⇤ Tianyun Zhang3⇤ Sijia Liu4,5
Pin-Yu Chen5 Jiacen Xu6 Makan Fardad7 Bo Li8
University of Toronto1 , Vector Institute2 , Cleveland State University3
Michigan State University4 , MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research5
University of California, Irvine6 , Syracuse University7
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign8

Abstract
The worst-case training principle that minimizes the maximal adversarial loss, also
known as adversarial training (AT), has shown to be a state-of-the-art approach for
enhancing adversarial robustness. Nevertheless, min-max optimization beyond the
purpose of AT has not been rigorously explored in the adversarial context. In this
paper, we show how a general framework of min-max optimization over multiple
domains can be leveraged to advance the design of different types of adversarial
attacks. In particular, given a set of risk sources, minimizing the worst-case attack
loss can be reformulated as a min-max problem by introducing domain weights
that are maximized over the probability simplex of the domain set. We showcase
this unified framework in three attack generation problems – attacking model
ensembles, devising universal perturbation under multiple inputs, and crafting
attacks resilient to data transformations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach leads to substantial attack improvement over the existing heuristic
strategies as well as robustness improvement over state-of-the-art defense methods
trained to be robust against multiple perturbation types. Furthermore, we find
that the self-adjusted domain weights learned from our min-max framework can
provide a holistic tool to explain the difficulty level of attack across domains. Code
is available at https://github.com/wangjksjtu/minmax-adv.

1

Introduction

Training a machine learning model that is capable of assuring its worst-case performance against
possible adversaries given a specified threat model is a fundamental and challenging problem,
especially for deep neural networks (DNNs) [64, 22, 13, 69, 70]. A common practice to train an
adversarially robust model is based on a specific form of min-max training, known as adversarial
training (AT) [22, 40], where the minimization step learns model weights under the adversarial loss
constructed at the maximization step in an alternative training fashion. In practice, AT has achieved
the state-of-the-art defense performance against `p -norm-ball input perturbations [3].
Although the min-max principle is widely used in AT and its variants [40, 59, 76, 65], few work
has studied its power in attack generation. Thus, we ask: Beyond AT, can other types of min-max
formulation and optimization techniques advance the research in adversarial attack generation? In
this paper, we give an affirmative answer corroborated by the substantial performance gain and the
ability of self-learned risk interpretation using our proposed min-max framework on several tasks for
adversarial attack.
⇤

Equal contributions.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

