Generalizable Multi-Linear Attention Network
Zhou Zhao∗
Zhejiang University
zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

Tao Jin
Zhejiang University
jint_zju@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The majority of existing multimodal sequential learning methods focus on how
to obtain powerful individual representations and neglect to effectively capture
the multimodal joint representation. Bilinear attention network (BAN) is a commonly used integration method, which leverages tensor operations to associate
the features of different modalities. However, BAN has a poor compatibility for
more modalities, since the computational complexity of the attention map increases
exponentially with the number of modalities. Based on this concern, we propose a
new method called generalizable multi-linear attention network (MAN), which can
associate more modalities in acceptable complexity with hierarchical approximation decomposition. Specifically, considering the fact that softmax attention kernels
cannot be decomposed as linear operation directly, we adopt the addition random
features mechanism to approximate the non-linear softmax functions with enough
theoretical analysis. Furthermore, we also introduce the local sequential constraints,
which can be combined with ARF conveniently, as positional information. We
conduct extensive experiments on several datasets of corresponding tasks, the
experimental results show that MAN could achieve competitive results compared
with baseline methods, showcasing the effectiveness of our contributions.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning draws increasing attention in recent years, which aims to process and understand
the information from multiple modalities (i.e. vision, language, audio) with machine learning
skills. Many endeavors have been devoted to the multimodal interaction and robust individual
representation learning [29, 6, 39, 40]. Existing multimodal interaction methods could be categorized
into Transformer-based [29, 6] and Non-Transformer-based methods [39, 40]. With deep stacked
attention blocks [30] and suitable number of training samples, Transformer-based methods could
achieve relatively good performances with relatively high computational complexity. After obtaining
the individual representations of all the modalities, joint representation learning [5, 15, 14, 19, 36]
is performed by leveraging simple matrix and vector operations. Bilinear functions have been
widely utilized in this field. Specifically, bilinear pooling [15] employs low-rank decomposition to
approximate high-order tensor operations for input vectors. Bilinear attention network (BAN) [14]
uses a bilinear attention distribution, on top of low-rank bilinear pooling. In general, BAN exploits
bilinear interactions between two groups of input channels and bilinear pooling extracts the joint
representations for each pair of channels. Besides, bilinear pooling could be extended to multi-linear
pooling with acceptable computational complexity. However, BAN has the limitation to generalize to
more modalities due to the complexity. For example, when we want to integrate the features with
m
the same space Rd×T of m modalities, we would obtain a high-order tensor A ∈ RT that captures
multimodal interactions. It is observed that A scales exponentially with the number of modalities.
Motivated by the observations, in this paper, we propose a novel method called generalizable multilinear attention network (MAN), which could be leveraged to integrate as many modalities as possible
∗

Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

