Stable, Fast and Accurate: Kernelized Attention with
Relative Positional Encoding

Shengjie Luo1∗ , Shanda Li2∗, Tianle Cai4 , Di He6†,
Dinglan Peng5 , Shuxin Zheng6†, Guolin Ke5 , Liwei Wang1,2,3 , Tie-Yan Liu6
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 4 Princeton University
5
University of Science and Technology of China 6 Microsoft Research
luosj@stu.pku.edu.cn, lishanda@pku.edu.cn,
tianle.cai@princeton.edu, pengdinglan@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{dihe, shuz, guoke, tyliu}@microsoft.com, wanglw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The attention module, which is a crucial component in Transformer, cannot scale
efficiently to long sequences due to its quadratic complexity. Many works focus
on approximating the dot-then-exponentiate softmax function in the original attention, leading to sub-quadratic or even linear-complexity Transformer architectures.
However, we show that these methods cannot be applied to more powerful attention
modules that go beyond the dot-then-exponentiate style, e.g., Transformers with
relative positional encoding (RPE). Since in many state-of-the-art models, relative
positional encoding is used as default, designing efficient Transformers that can
incorporate RPE is appealing. In this paper, we propose a novel way to accelerate
attention calculation for Transformers with RPE on top of the kernelized attention.
Based upon the observation that relative positional encoding forms a Toeplitz matrix, we mathematically show that kernelized attention with RPE can be calculated
efficiently using Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). With FFT, our method achieves
O(n log n) time complexity. Interestingly, we further demonstrate that properly
using relative positional encoding can mitigate the training instability problem of
vanilla kernelized attention. On a wide range of tasks, we empirically show that our
models can be trained from scratch without any optimization issues. The learned
model performs better than many efficient Transformer variants and is faster than
standard Transformer in the long-sequence regime.

1

Introduction

Transformer [45] has achieved tremendous success on a variety of tasks in natural language processing
[34, 9, 50], computer vision [2, 10, 42] and speech [13]. Despite the great success, Transformers are
usually inefficient in modeling long-sequence input since the key component—the attention module—
needs to calculate pairwise correlations between all the positions, which comes with quadratic time
and memory cost with respect to the sequence length n.
To reduce the cost, many works focus on approximating the dot-then-exponentiate function in the
attention module of the original Transformer [41]. Most works can be roughly categorized into
three classes: sparse attention [3, 33, 30, 15, 21, 46, 7], low-rank approximation-based attention
[49, 48] and kernelized attention [17, 32, 4]. Sparse attention variants design either pre-defined
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Di He <dihe@microsoft.com> and Shuxin Zheng <shuz@microsoft.com>.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

