Fair Sequential Selection Using
Supervised Learning Models

Mohammad Mahdi Khalili
CIS Department
University of Delaware
Newark, DE, USA
khalili@udel.edu

Xueru Zhang
CSE Department
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
zhang.12807@osu.edu

Mahed Abroshan
Alan Turing Institute
London, UK
mabroshan@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider a selection problem where sequentially arrived applicants apply for a
limited number of positions/jobs. At each time step, a decision maker accepts or
rejects the given applicant using a pre-trained supervised learning model until all
the vacant positions are filled. In this paper, we discuss whether the fairness notions
(e.g., equal opportunity, statistical parity, etc.) that are commonly used in classification problems are suitable for the sequential selection problems. In particular, we
show that even with a pre-trained model that satisfies the common fairness notions,
the selection outcomes may still be biased against certain demographic groups.
This observation implies that the fairness notions used in classification problems
are not suitable for a selection problem where the applicants compete for a limited
number of positions. We introduce a new fairness notion, “Equal Selection (ES),”
suitable for sequential selection problems and propose a post-processing approach
to satisfy the ES fairness notion. We also consider a setting where the applicants
have privacy concerns, and the decision maker only has access to the noisy version
of sensitive attributes. In this setting, we can show that the perfect ES fairness can
still be attained under certain conditions.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) techniques have been increasingly used for automated decision-making in
high-stake applications such as criminal justice, loan application, face recognition surveillance, etc.
While the hope is to improve societal outcomes with these ML models, they may inflict harm by being
biased against certain demographic groups. For example, companies such as IBM, Amazon, and
Microsoft had to stop sales of their face recognition surveillance technology to the police in summer
2020 because of the significant racial bias [1, 2]. COMPAS (Correctional Offender Management
Profiling for Alternative Sanctions), a decision support tool widely used by courts across the United
States to predict the recidivism risk of defendants, is biased against African Americans [3]. In lending,
the Apple card application system has shown gender biases by assigning a lower credit limit to
females than their male counterparts [4].
To measure and remedy the unfairness issues in ML, various fairness notions have been proposed.
They can be roughly classified into two categories [5]: 1) Individual fairness: it implies that similar
individuals should be treated similarly [6, 7, 8]. 2) Group fairness: it requires that certain statistical
measures to be equal across different groups [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. In this work, we mainly
focus on the notions of group fairness. We consider a sequential selection problem where a set of

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

