Stochastic Bias-Reduced Gradient Methods
Hilal Asi⇤

Yair Carmon†

Arun Jambulapati⇤

Yujia Jin⇤

Aaron Sidford⇤

Abstract
We develop a new primitive for stochastic optimization: a low-bias, low-cost
estimator of the minimizer x? of any Lipschitz strongly-convex function. In
particular, we use a multilevel Monte-Carlo approach due to Blanchet and Glynn
[8] to turn any optimal stochastic gradient method into an estimator of x? with bias
, variance O(log(1/ )), and an expected sampling cost of O(log(1/ )) stochastic
gradient evaluations. As an immediate consequence, we obtain cheap and nearly
unbiased gradient estimators for the Moreau-Yoshida envelope of any Lipschitz
convex function, allowing us to perform dimension-free randomized smoothing.
We demonstrate the potential of our estimator through four applications. First, we
develop a method for minimizing the maximum of N functions, improving on
recent results and matching a lower bound up to logarithmic factors. Second and
third, we recover state-of-the-art rates for projection-efficient and gradient-efficient
optimization using simple algorithms with a transparent analysis. Finally, we
show that an improved version of our estimator would yield a nearly linear-time,
optimal-utility, differentially-private non-smooth stochastic optimization method.

1

Introduction

Consider the fundamental problem of minimizing a µ-strongly convex function F : X ! R given
access to a stochastic (sub-)gradient estimator r̂F satisfying E r̂F (x) 2 @F (x) and Ekr̂F (x)k2 
G2 for every x 2 X . Is it possible to transform the unbiased estimator r̂F into a (nearly) unbiased
estimatorpof the minimizer x? := argminx2X F (x)? In particular, can we improve upon the
O(G/(µ T )) bias achieved by T iterations of stochastic gradient descent (SGD)?
In this paper, we answer this question in the affirmative, proposing an optimum estimator x̂? , which
(for any fixed > 0) has
✓ 2
✓ ◆◆
G
G
bias kEx̂? x? k = O( ) and variance Ekx̂? Ex̂? k2 = O
log
,
µ2
µ
p
and, in expectation, costs O(log( µG )) evaluations of r̂F .3 Setting = G/(µ T ), we obtain the
same bias bound as T iterations of SGD, but with expected cost of only O(log T ) stochastic gradient
evaluations (the worst-case cost is T ). Further, the bias can be made arbitrarily small with only
logarithmic increase in the variance and the stochastic gradient evaluations of our estimator, and
therefore—paralleling the term “nearly linear-time” [27]—we call x̂? nearly unbiased.
Our estimator is an instance of the multilevel Monte Carlo technique for de-biasing estimator
sequences [25] and more specifically the method of Blanchet and Glynn [8]. Our key observation is
that this method is readily applicable to strongly-convex variants of SGD, or indeed any stochastic
optimization method with the same (optimal) rate of convergence.
⇤

Stanford University, {asi,jmblpati,yujiajin,sidford}@stanford.edu
Tel Aviv University, ycarmon@tauex.tau.ac.il
P
3
When X = BR (x0 ) ⇢ Rd , F (x) = n1 i2[n] F̂ (x; i), and r̂F is the subgradient of a uniformly random

†

F̂ (x; i) we can also get an estimator with bias 0 and expected cost O(log(nd)). See Appendix A.1 for details.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

