DominoSearch: Find layer-wise fine-grained N:M
sparse schemes from dense neural networks

Wei Sun†∗ Aojun Zhou‡∗ Sander Stuijk† Andrew Nelson† Rob Wijnhoven¶
Hongsheng Li‡ Henk Corporaal†
†
Eindhoven University of Technology ¶ ViNotion B.V., the Netherlands
‡
CUHK-Sensetime Joint Lab, CUHK
w.sun@tue.nl aojunzhou@gmail.com
rob.wijnhoven@vinotion.nl hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
{s.stuijk,a.nelson,h.corporaal}@tue.nl

Abstract
Neural pruning is a widely-used compression technique for Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs). Recent innovations in Hardware Architectures (e.g. Nvidia Ampere
Sparse Tensor Core) and N:M fine-grained Sparse Neural Network algorithms (i.e.
every M-weights contains N non-zero values) reveal a promising research line of
neural pruning. However, the existing N:M algorithms only address the challenge of
how to train N:M sparse neural networks in a uniform fashion (i.e. every layer has
the same N:M sparsity) and suffer from a significant accuracy drop for high sparsity
(i.e. when sparsity > 80%). To tackle this problem, we present a novel technique –
DominoSearch to find mixed N:M sparsity schemes from pre-trained dense deep
neural networks to achieve higher accuracy than the uniform-sparsity scheme with
equivalent complexity constraints (e.g. model size or FLOPs). For instance, for
the same model size with 2.1M parameters (87.5% sparsity), our layer-wise N:M
sparse ResNet18 outperforms its uniform counterpart by 2.1% top-1 accuracy, on
the large-scale ImageNet dataset. For the same computational complexity of 227M
FLOPs, our layer-wise sparse ResNet18 outperforms the uniform one by 1.3% top-1
accuracy. Furthermore, our layer-wise fine-grained N:M sparse ResNet50 achieves
76.7% top-1 accuracy with 5.0M parameters. This is competitive to the results
achieved by layer-wise unstructured sparsity that is believed to be the upper-bound
of Neural Network pruning with respect to the accuracy-sparsity trade-off. We
believe that our work can build a strong baseline for further sparse DNN research
and encourage future hardware-algorithm co-design work. Our code and models
are publicly available at https://github.com/NM-sparsity/DominoSearch.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve remarkable success in various tasks such as computer
vision and language processing at a cost of memory footprint, computation, energy and storage. These
have all become bottlenecks of deploying DNNs on commodity hardware for real-world applications.
To address these challenges, many model compression techniques have been proposed to optimize
DNN models. Neural network pruning is one promising technique orthogonal to quantization [1–3],
network architecture search [4–6] and knowledge distillation [7–9].
Recent innovations in hardware architectures (e.g. Nvidia Ampere Sparse Tensor Core [10]) and
N:M fine-grained sparse DNN pruning algorithms [11, 12] reveal a promising research line of neural
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

