Speedy Performance Estimation for Neural
Architecture Search
Binxin Ru1 ∗

Clare Lyle1 ∗ Lisa Schut1

Mark van der Wilk2
1

Miroslav Fil1

Yarin Gal1

OATML Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
Reliable yet efficient evaluation of generalisation performance of a proposed architecture is crucial to the success of neural architecture search (NAS). Traditional
approaches face a variety of limitations: training each architecture to completion
is prohibitively expensive, early stopped validation accuracy may correlate poorly
with fully trained performance, and model-based estimators require large training sets. We instead propose to estimate the final test performance based on a
simple measure of training speed. Our estimator is theoretically motivated by
the connection between generalisation and training speed, and is also inspired by
the reformulation of a PAC-Bayes bound under the Bayesian setting. Our modelfree estimator is simple, efficient, and cheap to implement, and does not require
hyperparameter-tuning or surrogate training before deployment. We demonstrate
on various NAS search spaces that our estimator consistently outperforms other
alternatives in achieving better correlation with the true test performance rankings.
We further show that our estimator can be easily incorporated into both query-based
and one-shot NAS methods to improve the speed or quality of the search.

1

Introduction

Reliably estimating the generalisation performance of a proposed architecture is crucial to the success
of Neural Architecture Search (NAS) but has always been a major bottleneck in NAS algorithms [13].
The traditional approach of training each architecture for a large number of epochs and evaluating it
on validation data (full training) provides a reliable performance measure, but requires prohibitively
large computational resources on the order of thousands of GPU days [55, 39, 56, 38, 13]. This
motivates the development of methods for speeding up performance estimation to make NAS practical
for limited computing budgets.
A popular simple approach is early-stopping, which offers a low-fidelity approximation of generalisation performance by training for fewer epochs [27, 14, 25]. However, if we stop training early and
evaluate the set of models on validation data, their relative performance ranking may not correlate
well with the performance ranking of the fully-trained models [53], i.e. their relative performance on
the test set after the entire training budget has been used. Another line of work focuses on learning
curve extrapolation [10, 23, 3], which trains a surrogate model to predict the final generalisation
performance based on the initial learning curve or meta-features of the architecture. However, the
training of the surrogate often requires hundreds of fully evaluated architectures to achieve satisfactory extrapolation performance and the hyper-parameters of the surrogate also need to be optimised.
Alternatively, the idea of weight sharing is adopted in one-shot NAS methods to speed up evaluation
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to robin@robots.ox.ac.uk.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

