Online Facility Location with Multiple Advice

Matteo Almanza
Dipartimento di Informatica
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
almanza@di.uniroma1.it

Flavio Chierichetti
Dipartimento di Informatica
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
flavio@di.uniroma1.it

Alessandro Panconesi
Dipartimento di Informatica
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
ale@di.uniroma1.it

Silvio Lattanzi
Google Research
Zurich, Switzerland
silviol@google.com

Giuseppe Re
Dipartimento di Informatica
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
re@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract
Clustering is a central topic in unsupervised learning and its online formulation has
received a lot of attention in recent years. In this paper, we study the classic facility
location problem in the presence of multiple machine-learned advice. We design
an algorithm with provable performance guarantees such that, if the advice is good,
it outperforms the best-known online algorithms for the problem, and if it is bad it
still matches their performance. We complement our theoretical analysis with an
in-depth study of the performance of our algorithm, showing its effectiveness on
synthetic and real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central topic in unsupervised learning [Jain and Dubes, 1988, Aggarwal and Reddy,
2014, Gan et al., 2020] In the past few years, its online version has gained a lot of attention [Zhang
et al., 2004, Liberty et al., 2016, Lattanzi and Vassilvitskii, 2017, Cohen-Addad et al., 2021]. In this
paper we are interested in the fundamental question of whether machine-learned advice, especially
when coming from multiple sources, can boost the performance of clustering algorithms in the online
setting. In particular, we are interested in designing online algorithms with access to multiple advice
that exhibit strong theoretical guarantees together with a good experimental performance.
To explore the interplay between online algorithms and multiple advice we focus on facility location,
a classic clustering problem with a long and rich history in computer science and operations research
[Korte and Vygen, 2018], which can also be seen as the Lagrangian relaxation of k−median clustering.
In the online setting of k−median clustering, it is easy to see that if the requirement of having k
clusters is a hard constraint then the cost of solutions is bound to be arbitrarily far from the optimum,
which makes the straightforward online formulation rather uninteresting algorithmically. There are
two standard ways in which the constraint can be relaxed: bi-criteria solutions and the Lagrangian
relaxation. Facility location captures the latter.
In the online version of facility location, points arrive in sequence and, as soon as a point arrives, an
irrevocable decision must be made: we either assign it to an existing opened facility or we open a new
one to serve it. Each facility, therefore, induces a cluster, consisting of the points assigned to it. The
cost of this sequence of decisions is given by the sum of the service costs (i.e. the distance between a
point and its facility) and the total facility cost (opening each facility has a cost, which in this paper
we assume to be uniform). The goal is to find as cheap a clustering as possible. This online version
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

