Rethinking Calibration of Deep Neural Networks:
Do Not Be Afraid of Overconfidence
Deng-Bao Wang,1,2 Lei Feng,3 Min-Ling Zhang1,2∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China
wangdb@seu.edu.cn, lfeng@cqu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Capturing accurate uncertainty quantification of the predictions from deep neural
networks is important in many real-world decision-making applications. A reliable
predictor is expected to be accurate when it is confident about its predictions and
indicate high uncertainty when it is likely to be inaccurate. However, modern
neural networks have been found to be poorly calibrated, primarily in the direction
of overconfidence. In recent years, there is a surge of research on model calibration
by leveraging implicit or explicit regularization techniques during training, which
achieve well calibration performance by avoiding overconfident outputs. In our
study, we empirically found that despite the predictions obtained from these regularized models are better calibrated, they suffer from not being as calibratable, namely,
it is harder to further calibrate these predictions with post-hoc calibration methods
like temperature scaling and histogram binning. We conduct a series of empirical
studies showing that overconfidence may not hurt final calibration performance
if post-hoc calibration is allowed, rather, the penalty of confident outputs will
compress the room of potential improvement in post-hoc calibration phase. Our
experimental findings point out a new direction to improve calibration of DNNs by
considering main training and post-hoc calibration as a unified framework.

1

Introduction

Modern over-parameterized deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to be very powerful
modeling tools for many prediction tasks involving complex input patterns [37]. In addition to
obtaining accurate predictions, it is also important to capture accurate quantification of prediction
uncertainty from deep neural networks in many real-world decision-making applications. A reliable
predictive model should be accurate when it is confident about its predictions and indicate high
uncertainty when it is likely to be inaccurate. However, modern DNNs trained with cross-entropy
(CE) loss, despite being highly accurate, have been recently found to predict poorly calibrated
probabilities, unlike traditional models trained with the same objective [4]. The overconfident
predictions of DNNs could cause undesired consequences in safety-critical applications such as
medical diagnosis and autonomous driving. Bayesian DNNs, which indirectly infer prediction
uncertainty through weight uncertainties, have innate abilities to represent the model uncertainty
[2, 16]. But training and inferring those bayesian models are computationally more expensive and
conceptually more complicated than non-bayesian models, and their performance depends on the
form of approximation made due to computational constraints. Therefore, the study on uncertainty
calibration of deterministic DNNs is important for both development practice and the perspective of
understanding DNNs.
Post-hoc calibration addresses the miscalibration problem by equipping a given neural network with
an additional parameterized calibration component, which can be tuned with a hold-out validation
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

