CCVS: Context-aware Controllable Video Synthesis

1

Guillaume Le Moing1, ∗
Jean Ponce1, 2
Cordelia Schmid1
Inria and Department of Computer Science, ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University
2
Center for Data Science, New York University

Abstract
This presentation introduces a self-supervised learning approach to the synthesis
of new video clips from old ones, with several new key elements for improved
spatial resolution and realism: It conditions the synthesis process on contextual
information for temporal continuity and ancillary information for fine control. The
prediction model is doubly autoregressive, in the latent space of an autoencoder
for forecasting, and in image space for updating contextual information, which
is also used to enforce spatio-temporal consistency through a learnable optical
flow module. Adversarial training of the autoencoder in the appearance and
temporal domains is used to further improve the realism of its output. A quantizer
inserted between the encoder and the transformer in charge of forecasting future
frames in latent space (and its inverse inserted between the transformer and the
decoder) adds even more flexibility by affording simple mechanisms for handling
multimodal ancillary information for controlling the synthesis process (e.g., a few
sample frames, an audio track, a trajectory in image space) and taking into account
the intrinsically uncertain nature of the future by allowing multiple predictions.
Experiments with an implementation of the proposed approach give very good
qualitative and quantitative results on multiple tasks and standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Feeding machines with extensive video content, and teaching them to create new samples on their own,
may deepen their understanding of both the physical and social worlds. Video synthesis has numerous
applications from content creation (e.g., deblurring, slow motion) to human-robot interaction (e.g.,
motion prediction). Despite the photo-realistic results of modern image synthesis models [38], video
synthesis is still lagging behind due to the increased complexity of the additional temporal dimension.
An emerging trend is to use autoregressive models, for example transformer architectures [68], for
their simplicity, and their ability to model long-range dependencies and learn from large volumes of
data [4, 16]. First introduced for natural language processing (NLP) and then succesfully applied
to visual data [18], the strength of transformers is grounded in a self-attention mechanism which
considers all pairwise interactions within the data. The price to pay is a computational complexity
which grows quadratically with the data size, which itself depends linearly on the temporal dimension
and quadratically on the spatial resolution in the image domain. Although there have been some efforts
to reduce the complexity of self-attention [11, 39, 50], using such methods directly on visual data is
still limited to low resolutions and impractical without considerable computational power [9, 79].
Some recent works [20, 53] address this problem by using an autoencoder to compress the visual data,
and apply the autoregressive model in the latent space. This greatly reduces the memory footprint and
computational cost, yet, the greater the compression, the harder it is to faithfully reconstruct frames.
The corresponding trade-offs may undermine the practical usability of these approaches. GANs [26]
mitigate this issue by “hallucinating” plausible local details in image synthesis [20]. But latent video
∗

corresponding author: guillaume.le-moing@inria.fr

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

