Escape saddle points by a simple gradient-descent
based algorithm

1

Chenyi Zhang1
Tongyang Li2,3,4⇤
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
2
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University, China
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
4
Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA

Abstract
Escaping saddle points is a central research topic in nonconvex optimization. In
this paper, we propose a simple gradient-based algorithm such that for a smooth
function f : Rn ! R, it outputs an ✏-approximate second-order stationary point in
Õ(log n/✏1.75 ) iterations. Compared to the previous state-of-the-art algorithms by
Jin et al. with Õ(log4 n/✏2 ) or Õ(log6 n/✏1.75 ) iterations, our algorithm is polynomially better in terms of log n and matches their complexities in terms of 1/✏.
For the stochastic setting, our algorithm outputs an ✏-approximate second-order
stationary point in Õ(log2 n/✏4 ) iterations. Technically, our main contribution
is an idea of implementing a robust Hessian power method using only gradients,
which can find negative curvature near saddle points and achieve the polynomial
speedup in log n compared to the perturbed gradient descent methods. Finally, we
also perform numerical experiments that support our results.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex optimization is a central research area in optimization theory, since lots of modern machine learning problems can be formulated in models with nonconvex loss functions, including deep
neural networks, principal component analysis, tensor decomposition, etc. In general, finding a
global minimum of a nonconvex function is NP-hard in the worst case. Instead, many theoretical
works focus on finding a local minimum instead of a global one, because recent works (both empirical and theoretical) suggested that local minima are nearly as good as global minima for a significant
amount of well-studied machine learning problems; see e.g. [4, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18]. On the other
hand, saddle points are major obstacles for solving these problems, not only because they are ubiquitous in high-dimensional settings where the directions for escaping may be few (see e.g. [5, 8, 11]),
but also saddle points can correspond to highly suboptimal solutions (see e.g. [19, 28]).
Hence, one of the most important topics in nonconvex optimization is to escape saddle points.
Specifically, we consider a twice-differentiable function f : Rn ! R such that
• f is `-smooth: krf (x1 ) rf (x2 )k  `kx1 x2 k 8x1 , x2 2 Rn ,
• f is ⇢-Hessian Lipschitz: kH(x1 ) H(x2 )k  ⇢kx1 x2 k 8x1 , x2 2 Rn ;

here H is the Hessian of f . The goal is to find an ✏-approximate second-order stationary point x✏ :1
p
krf (x✏ )k  ✏,
⇢✏.
(1)
min (H(x✏ ))
⇤

Corresponding author. Email: tongyangli@pku.edu.cn
We can ask for an (✏1 , ✏2 )-approx. second-order stationary point s.t. krf (x)k  ✏1 and min (r2 f (x))
✏2 in general. The scaling in (1) was adopted as a standard in literature [1, 6, 10, 20, 21, 22, 26, 29, 30, 31].
1

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

