Beyond Value-Function Gaps: Improved
Instance-Dependent Regret Bounds for Episodic
Reinforcement Learning

Teodor V. Marinov∗
Google Research
tvmarinov@google.com

Chris Dann
Google Research
chrisdann@google.com
Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research
mohri@google.com

Julian Zimmert
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
We provide improved gap-dependent regret bounds for reinforcement learning in
finite episodic Markov decision processes. Compared to prior work, our bounds
depend on alternative definitions of gaps. These definitions are based on the insight
that, in order to achieve a favorable regret, an algorithm does not need to learn how
to behave optimally in states that are not reached by an optimal policy. We prove
tighter upper regret bounds for optimistic algorithms and accompany them with
new information-theoretic lower bounds for a large class of MDPs. Our results
show that optimistic algorithms can not achieve the information-theoretic lower
bounds even in deterministic MDPs unless there is a unique optimal policy.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a general scenario where agents interact with the environment to
achieve some goal. The environment and an agent’s interactions are typically modeled as a Markov
decision process (MDP) [29], which can represent a rich variety of tasks. But, for which MDPs can
an agent or an RL algorithm succeed? This requires a theoretical analysis of the complexity of an
MDP. This paper studies this question in the tabular episodic setting, where an agent interacts with
the environment in episodes of fixed length H and where the size of the state and action space is
finite (S and A respectively).
While the performance of RL algorithms in tabular Markov decision processes has been the subject
of many studies in the past [e.g. 11, 22, 28, 7, 4, 20, 34, 6], the vast majority of existing analyses
focuses on worst-case problem-independent regret bounds, which only take into account the size of
the MDP, the horizon H and the number of episodes K.
Recently, however, some significant progress has been achieved towards deriving more optimistic
(problem-dependent) guarantees. This includes more refined regret bounds for the tabular episodic
setting that depend on structural properties of the specific MDP considered [30, 25, 21, 13, 17].
Motivated by instance-dependent analyses
[24], these analyses derive gapP in multi-armed bandits

H log(K)
dependent regret-bounds of the form O
,
where
the sum is over state-actions
(s,a)∈S×A gap(s,a)
pairs (s, a) and where the gap notion is defined as the difference of the optimal value function V ∗
of the Bellman optimal policy π ∗ and the Q-function of π ∗ at a sub-optimal action: gap(s, a) =
∗

Author was at Johns Hopkins University during part of this work.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

