Encoding Spatial Distribution of Convolutional
Features for Texture Representation

1

Yong Xu1,2 , Feng Li1 , Zhile Chen1 , Jinxiu Liang1 , Yuhui Quan1∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
yxu@scut.edu.cn, csfengli@mail.scut.edu.cn, cszhilechen@mail.scut.edu.cn,
cssherryliang@mail.scut.edu.cn, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing convolutional neural networks (CNNs) often use global average pooling
(GAP) to aggregate feature maps into a single representation. However, GAP
cannot well characterize complex distributive patterns of spatial features while
such patterns play an important role in texture-oriented applications, e.g., material
recognition and ground terrain classification. In the context of texture representation, this paper addressed the issue by proposing Fractal Encoding (FE), a feature
encoding module grounded by multi-fractal geometry. Considering a CNN feature
map as a union of level sets of points lying in the 2D space, FE characterizes their
spatial layout via a local-global hierarchical fractal analysis which examines the
multi-scale power behavior on each level set. This enables a CNN to encode the
regularity on the spatial arrangement of image features, leading to a robust yet
discriminative spectrum descriptor. In addition, FE has trainable parameters for
data adaptivity and can be easily incorporated into existing CNNs for end-to-end
training. We applied FE to ResNet-based texture classification and retrieval, and
demonstrated its effectiveness on several benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Ideal image descriptors for classification are capable of characterizing both local features and global
patterns of an image. Local features are about the local singularities or fine details of an image, such
as edges and corners. Global patterns are about the distributions and spatial layouts of local image
features. While local features are critical for visual recognition, global image patterns also play an
important role in many scenarios, such as material recognition [1], ground terrain classification [2]
and dynamics recognition [3].
Typical convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image classification connect convolutional layers
with fully-connected (FC) layers. The FC layers encode the spatial layouts of feature maps and act
as a classifier. Such a structure fails to produce a robust global representation, as FC layers capture
spatial layouts based on “absolute” locations and their outputs are not invariant to spatial transforms
such as translation, rotation and scaling, that often occur in real scenarios.
To achieve the robustness to spatial transforms in CNN-based representation, many existing studies
(e.g. [4, 5, 6]) apply global average pooling (GAP) to feature maps, which averages all entries in a
feature channel so as to eliminate the dependency on spatial locations. However, the naive averaging
operation totally disregards the spatial layout of a feature map. As a result, when dealing with images
of complex distributive patterns, GAP cannot encode sufficiently discriminative information.
∗

Corresponding author: Yuhui Quan

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

