Deep Learning Through the Lens of Example
Difficulty

Robert J. N. Baldock∗
Google Research, Brain Team
rjnbaldock@gmail.com

Hartmut Maennel
Google Research, Brain Team
hartmutm@google.com

Behnam Neyshabur
Google Research, Blueshift Team
neyshabur@google.com

Abstract
Existing work on understanding deep learning often employs measures that compress all data-dependent information into a few numbers. In this work, we adopt a
perspective based on the role of individual examples. We introduce a measure of
the computational difficulty of making a prediction for a given input: the (effective)
prediction depth. Our extensive investigation reveals surprising yet simple relationships between the prediction depth of a given input and the model’s uncertainty,
confidence, accuracy and speed of learning for that data point. We further categorize difficult examples into three interpretable groups, demonstrate how these
groups are processed differently inside deep models and showcase how this understanding allows us to improve prediction accuracy. Insights from our study lead to
a coherent view of a number of separately reported phenomena in the literature:
early layers generalize while later layers memorize; early layers converge faster
and networks learn easy data and simple functions first.

1

Introduction

Much of the existing work on understanding deep learning “integrates out” the data, viewing the
inductive bias of the model, or the properties of the optimizer as central to the success of the approach.
Examples of such work include studies of eigenvalues of the Hessian and the geometry of the loss
landscape (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020; Sagun et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018; Pennington
and Bahri, 2017; Sagun et al., 2018), studies of margin and effective generalization measures (Long
and Sedghi, 2019; Unterthiner et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020, 2018; Kawaguchi et al., 2017) and
mean-field studies of stochastic optimization (Smith et al., 2021; Stephan et al., 2017; Smith and Le,
2018). However, in practice, we are rarely concerned with only the average behavior of a model.
One pathway to understanding the principles that govern how deep models process data is to study the
properties of deep models for data points with different “amounts” or “types” of example difficulty.
There are a number of definitions of example difficulty in the literature (E.g. see Carlini et al.
(2019); Hooker et al. (2019); Lalor et al. (2018); Agarwal and Hooker (2020)). Two are particularly
relevant to this work. Firstly, the probability of predicting the ground truth label for an example,
when that example is omitted from the training set (Jiang et al., 2021), which represents a statistical
view of example difficulty. Secondly, the difficulty of learning an example, parameterized by the
earliest training iteration after which the model predicts the ground truth class for that example in
all subsequent iterations (Toneva et al., 2019). This measure represents a learning view of example
difficulty 2 .
∗
2

Work completed as part of the Google AI Residency Program
We expand on other notions of example difficulty in Appendix B.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

