Luna: Linear Unified Nested Attention
Xuezhe Ma∗
ISI, USC
xuezhema@isi.edu
Chunting Zhou
LTI, CMU
chuntinz@cs.cmu.edu

Xiang Kong∗
LTI, CMU
xiangk@cs.cmu.edu
Jonathan May
ISI, USC
jonmay@isi.edu

Sinong Wang∗
Facebook AI
sinongwang@fb.com
Hao Ma, Luke Zettlemoyer
Facebook AI
{haom, lsz}@fb.com

Abstract
The quadratic computational and memory complexities of the Transformer’s attention mechanism have limited its scalability for modeling long sequences. In
this paper, we propose Luna, a linear unified nested attention mechanism that
approximates softmax attention with two nested linear attention functions, yielding
only linear (as opposed to quadratic) time and space complexity. As compared to
a more traditional attention mechanism, Luna introduces an additional sequence
with a fixed length as input and an additional corresponding output, which allows
Luna to perform attention operation linearly, while also storing adequate contextual
information. We perform extensive evaluations on three benchmarks of sequence
modeling tasks: long-context sequence modeling, neural machine translation and
masked language modeling for large-scale pretraining. Competitive or even better
experimental results demonstrate both the effectiveness and efficiency of Luna
compared to a variety of strong baseline methods including the full-rank attention
and other efficient sparse and dense attention methods. The implementation of our
model is available at https://github.com/XuezheMax/fairseq-apollo.

1

59

Introduction

57

Luna-256
Luna-128
Luna-16

Avg. LRA Score (w/o Retrieval)

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are surprisingly
Transformer
55
versatile models that preform well on a wide range
BigBird
of language and vision tasks, including machine
53
Synthesizer
translation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Ott et al., 2018),
Sinkhorn Linformer
language understanding (Devlin et al., 2019), im51
Performer
Reformer
age recognition (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and bioinLinear Transformer
49
formatics (Madani et al., 2020). Attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015) provides the key mechanism that
47
captures contextual information from the entire sequence by modeling pairwise interactions between
45
Local Attention
the inputs at every timestep. However, a common
weakness of Transformers is their quadratic time
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
and memory complexity within the attention mechRelative Speed Comparision
anism w.r.t the length of the input sequence, which
prohibitively restricts their potential application to Figure 1: Trade-off between accuracy (y-axis),
tasks requiring longer input sequences.
speed (x-axis) and memory (cir-radius) on LRA.
A number of techniques have been recently introduced to improve the time and memory efficiency
of Transformer models (‘xformers’) (Tay et al., 2020b, 2021). One popular technique is using
sparsity to restrict the attention field range, such as local attention (Parmar et al., 2018), blockwise
attention (Qiu et al., 2019), strided attention patterns (Child et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2020),
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

