The Emergence of Objectness:
Learning Zero-Shot Segmentation from Videos

Runtao Liu1,2∗

Zhirong Wu1∗

Stella X. Yu3

Stephen Lin1

Microsoft Research Asia1
John Hopkins University2
UC Berkeley / ICSI3
runtao219@gmail.com stellayu@berkeley.edu {wuzhiron,stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Humans can easily segment moving objects without knowing what they are. That
objectness could emerge from continuous visual observations motivates us to
model segmentation and movement concurrently from unlabeled videos. Our
premise is that a video contains different views of the same scene related by
moving components, and the right region segmentation and region flow allow view
synthesis which can be checked on the data itself without any external supervision.
Our model first deconstructs video frames in two separate pathways: an appearance
pathway that outputs feature-based region segmentation for a single image, and
a motion pathway that outputs motion features for a pair of images. It then binds
them in a conjoint region flow feature representation and predicts segment flow that
provides a gross characterization of moving regions for the entire scene. By training
the model to minimize view synthesis errors based on segment flow, our appearance
and motion pathways learn region segmentation and flow estimation automatically
without building them up from low-level edges or optical flow respectively.
Our model demonstrates the surprising emergence of objectness in the appearance
pathway, surpassing prior works on 1) zero-shot object segmentation from a single
image, 2) moving object segmentation from a video with unsupervised test-time
adaptation, and 3) semantic image segmentation with supervised fine-tuning. Our
work is the first truly end-to-end learned zero-shot object segmentation model from
unlabeled videos. It not only develops generic objectness for segmentation and
tracking, but also outperforms image-based contrastive representation learning
without augmentation engineering.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning [1–3] has recently become a powerful method for obtaining high-level visual
representations from images [4]. While these representations are shown to be more generalizing,
there remain two practical limitations: 1) Hand-crafted augmentations such as image cropping and
color jittering [5] are critical for achieving invariant recognition, and yet they fall short of capturing
more complex object deformations and 3D viewpoint changes. 2) Additional labeled data are required
at the downstream for representation fine-tuning, preventing standalone applications.
Our goal here is to overcome these limitations of contrastive representation learning by developing
object segmentation models automatically from unlabeled videos without any supervision. Unlike
single static images, videos contain sequences of dynamic images that could reveal not only moving
objects from their backgrounds, but also their internal part organizations with articulated movements.
Once figure-ground segregation occurs automatically in raw videos, object semantics can be readily
discovered from those foreground segmentations.
∗

Equal contribution. Work done when Runtao was a StarBridge intern at MSRA.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

