The Value of Information
When Deciding What to Learn

Dilip Arumugam
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
dilip@cs.stanford.edu

Benjamin Van Roy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
All sequential decision-making agents explore so as to acquire knowledge about
a particular target. It is often the responsibility of the agent designer to construct
this target which, in rich and complex environments, constitutes a onerous burden;
without full knowledge of the environment itself, a designer may forge a suboptimal learning target that poorly balances the amount of information an agent
must acquire to identify the target against the target’s associated performance
shortfall. While recent work has developed a connection between learning targets
and rate-distortion theory to address this challenge and empower agents that decide
what to learn in an automated fashion, the proposed algorithm does not optimally
tackle the equally important challenge of efficient information acquisition. In this
work, building upon the seminal design principle of information-directed sampling
[Russo and Van Roy, 2014], we address this shortcoming directly to couple optimal
information acquisition with the optimal design of learning targets. Along the way,
we offer new insights into learning targets from the literature on rate-distortion
theory before turning to empirical results that confirm the value of information
when deciding what to learn.

1

Introduction

Information acquisition is a fundamental consideration in the design of sequential decision-making
agents. Indeed, the literature over recent years has unequivocally demonstrated its theoretical [Russo
and Van Roy, 2016, 2014, 2018a] and empirical [Osband et al., 2016a,b, Nikolov et al., 2018]
importance in addressing the challenge of exploration in sequential decision-making problems.
Despite this significance, a strategy for information acquisition, however efficient, is only as good
as the information it uncovers. An agent that displays remarkable efficiency in seeking immaterial
information offers little utility to its designer. Similarly, when faced with the rich complexity of
real-world tasks, a computationally-bounded agent aspiring to learn that which is well beyond its
constrained resources is equally ineffective. As a concrete example of the latter scenario, consider
learning the optimal policy for the game of Go [Silver et al., 2017] solely relying on the hardware
of a mobile device. While not an entirely infeasible task, the amount of time needed to complete
such an endeavor may force the agent designer into settling for a small fraction of the optimal policy
performance in exchange for a substantial reduction in the difficulty of the learning problem.
Recent work has developed a connection between rate-distortion theory [Shannon, 1959, Berger,
1971] and the problem of deciding what an agent should learn [Arumugam and Van Roy, 2021],
optimally balancing between the requisite information needed by any agent to identify a learning target
and the corresponding performance shortfall associated with this target. Intuitively, the complexity
of a learning problem can be quantified by the bits of information an agent must acquire from the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

