Regime Switching Bandits

Xiang Zhou ∗† Yi Xiong ‡ Ningyuan Chen § Xuefeng Gao¶

Abstract
We study a multi-armed bandit problem where the rewards exhibit regime switching.
Specifically, the distributions of the random rewards generated from all arms are
modulated by a common underlying state modeled as a finite-state Markov chain.
The agent does not observe the underlying state and has to learn the transition
matrix and the reward distributions. We propose a learning algorithm for this
problem, building on spectral method-of-moments estimations for hidden Markov
models, belief error control in partially observable Markov decision processes
and upper-confidence-bound
methods for online learning. We also establish an
√
upper bound O(T 2/3 log T ) for the proposed learning algorithm where T is the
learning horizon. Finally, we conduct proof-of-concept experiments to illustrate
the performance of the learning algorithm.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a popular model for sequential decision making with
unknown information: the decision maker makes decisions repeatedly among I different options, or
arms. After each decision she receives a random reward having an unknown probability distribution
that depends on the chosen arm. The objective is to maximize the expected total reward over a
finite horizon of T periods. The MAB problem has been extensively studied in various fields and
applications including Internet advertising, dynamic pricing, recommender systems, clinical trials
and medicine [12, 13, 43]. In the classical MAB problem, it is typically assumed that the random
reward of each arm is i.i.d. (independently and identically distributed) over time and independent of
the rewards from other arms. However, these assumptions do not necessarily hold in practice [10].
To address the drawback, a growing body of literature studies MAB problems with non-stationary
rewards to capture temporal changes in the reward distributions in applications, see e.g. [11, 16, 20].
In this paper, we study a non-stationary MAB model with Markovian regime-switching rewards. We
assume that the random rewards associated with all the arms are modulated by a common unobserved
state (or regime) {Mt : t = 1, 2, . . .} modeled as a finite-state discrete-time Markov chain. This chain
makes a transition at each period regardless of which arm is pulled and its transition probabilities are
independent of the action chosen. Given Mt = m, the reward of arm i is i.i.d., whose distribution
is denoted Q(·|m, i). Such structural change of the environment is usually referred to as regime
switching in finance [33]. The agent doesn’t observe or control the underlying state Mt , and has to
learn the transition probability matrix P of {Mt } as well as the distribution of reward of each arm
Q(·|m, i), based on the observed historical rewards. The goal of the agent is to design a learning
policy that decides which arm to pull in each period to minimize the expected regret over T periods.
∗

The first two authors (Xiang Zhou and Yi Xiong) have equal contribution.
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong;
1911606962@qq.com
‡
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong;
yxiong@se.cuhk.edu.hk
§
The Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto; ningyuan.chen@utoronto.ca
¶
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong;
xfgao@se.cuhk.edu.hk
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

