On the interplay between data structure and loss
function in classification problems
Stéphane d’Ascoli
Facebook AI Research, Paris
Department of Physics, École Normale Supérieure, Paris
stephane.dascoli@ens.fr
Marylou Gabrié
New York University, New York
Flatiron Institute, New York
mgabrie@nyu.edu
Levent Sagun
Facebook AI Research, Paris

Giulio Biroli
Department of Physics, École Normale Supérieure, Paris

Abstract
One of the central puzzles in modern machine learning is the ability of heavily overparametrized models to generalize well. Although the low-dimensional
structure of typical datasets is key to this behavior, most theoretical studies of
overparametrization focus on isotropic inputs. In this work, we instead consider
an analytically tractable model of structured data, where the input covariance is
built from independent blocks allowing us to tune the saliency of low-dimensional
structures and their alignment with respect to the target function.
Using methods from statistical physics, we derive a precise asymptotic expression
for the train and test error achieved by random feature models trained to classify
such data, which is valid for any convex loss function. We study in detail how
the data structure affects the double descent curve, and show that in the overparametrized regime, its impact is greater for logistic loss than for mean-squared
loss: the easier the task, the wider the gap in performance at the advantage of the
logistic loss. Our insights are confirmed by numerical experiments on MNIST and
CIFAR10.

1

Introduction

Classical wisdom teaches us that a learning model should have just the right number of parameters
to learn from a dataset without overfitting it. However, recent years have seen the emergence
of massively over-parametrized models which manage to generalize well on high-dimensional
tasks [1, 2], somehow avoiding both the curse of dimensionality and the pitfall of overfitting. This
generalization capacity in the over-parametrized regime continues to puzzle rigorous understanding,
in particular for deep neural networks [3, 4, 5], despite their remarkable achievements over the past
decade [6, 7, 8, 9]. Various works have given evidence of a double descent curve [5, 10, 11, 12, 13],
whereby the test error first decreases as the number of parameters increases, then peaks, then decreases
again monotonically. The overfitting peak occurs at the interpolation threshold where training error
vanishes, a well-studied phenomenon in the statistical physics literature [14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

