General Low-rank Matrix Optimization:
Geometric Analysis and Sharper Bounds

Haixiang Zhang
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
haixiang_zhang@berkeley.edu

Yingjie Bi
Department of IEOR
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
yingjiebi@berkeley.edu

Javad Lavaei
Department of IEOR
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
lavaei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the global geometry of general low-rank minimization problems via the Burer-Monteiro factorization approach. For the rank-1 case, we prove
that there is no spurious second-order critical point for both symmetric and asymmetric problems if the rank-2 RIP constant δ is less than 1/2. Combining with
a counterexample with δ = 1/2, we show that the derived bound is the sharpest
possible. For the arbitrary rank-r case, the same property is established when
the rank-2r RIP constant δ is at most 1/3. We design a counterexample to show
that the non-existence of spurious second-order critical points may not hold if
δ is at least 1/2. In addition, for any problem with δ between 1/3 and 1/2, we
prove that all second-order critical points have a positive correlation to the ground
truth. Finally, the strict saddle property, which can lead to the polynomial-time
global convergence of various algorithms, is established for both the symmetric
and asymmetric problems when the rank-2r RIP constant δ is less than 1/3. The
results of this paper significantly extend several existing bounds in the literature.

1

Introduction

Given the natural numbers n, m and r, consider the low-rank matrix optimization problems
min

M ∈Rn×n

s.t. rank(M ) ≤ r,

fs (M )

M T = M,

M 0

(1)

and
min

M ∈Rn×m

fa (M )

s.t. rank(M ) ≤ r,

(2)

where the functions fs (·) and fa (·) are twice continuously differentiable. Problems (1)-(2) are
referred to as the symmetric and the asymmetric problems, respectively. In addition, we call these
problems linear if the objective function is induced by a linear measurement operator, i.e.,
f (M ) = 12 kA(M ) − bk2F
for some vector b ∈ Rp and linear operator A mapping each matrix M to a vector in Rp , where
f (M ) denotes either fs (M ) or fa (M ). Those problems not fitting into the above model are called
nonlinear. One common example with non-linearity is the one-bit matrix sensing problem; please
see Zhu et al. (2018); Li et al. (2019); Zhu et al. (2021) for more concrete discussions. Low-rank
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

