Robust and Fully-Dynamic Coreset for
Continuous-and-Bounded Learning (With Outliers)
Problems
Zixiu Wang1∗ Yiwen Guo2

Hu Ding1†

1

School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
ByteDance AI Lab
wzx2014@mail.ustc.edu.cn, guoyiwen89@gmail.com, huding@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In many machine learning tasks, a common approach for dealing with large-scale
data is to build a small summary, e.g., coreset, that can efﬁciently represent the
original input. However, real-world datasets usually contain outliers and most existing coreset construction methods are not resilient against outliers (in particular,
an outlier can be located arbitrarily in the space by an adversarial attacker). In this
paper, we propose a novel robust coreset method for the continuous-and-bounded
learning problems (with outliers) which includes a broad range of popular optimization objectives in machine learning, e.g., logistic regression and k-means
clustering. Moreover, our robust coreset can be efﬁciently maintained in fullydynamic environment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst robust and
fully-dynamic coreset construction method for these optimization problems. Another highlight is that our coreset size can depend on the doubling dimension of
the parameter space, rather than the VC dimension of the objective function which
could be very large or even challenging to compute. Finally, we conduct the experiments on real-world datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed robust
coreset method.

1

Introduction

As the rapid increasing of data volume in this big data era, we often need to develop low-complexity
(e.g., linear or even sublinear) algorithms for machine learning tasks. Moreover, our dataset is often
maintained in a dynamic environment so that we have to consider the issues like data insertion and
deletion. For example, as mentioned in the recent article [20], Ginart et al. discussed the scenario
that some sensitive training data have to be deleted due to the reason of privacy preserving. Obviously, it is prohibitive to re-train our model when the training data is changed dynamically, if the
data size is extremely large. To remedy these issues, a natural way is to construct a small-sized
summary of the training data so that we can run existing algorithms on the summary rather than
the whole data. Coreset [18], which was originally studied in the community of computational
geometry [1], has become a widely used data summary for many large-scale machine learning problems [7, 27, 34, 38, 36, 25]. As a succinct data compression technique, coreset also enjoys several
nice properties. For instance, coreset is usually composable and thus can be applied in the environment like distributed computing [28]. Also, it is usually able to obtain small coresets for streaming
algorithms [23, 15] and fully-dynamic algorithms with data insertion and deletion [10, 24].
∗

Part of this work was done when Zixiu Wang was an intern under the supervision of Yiwen Guo at
ByteDance.
†
Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

