Statistically and Computationally Efficient Linear
Meta-representation Learning

Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil† , Prateek Jain‡ , Praneeth Netrapalli¶ , Sewoong Oh± ∗
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ‡ Google Research India,
¶
Microsoft Research India, ± University of Washington, Seattle

Abstract
In typical few-shot learning, each task is not equipped with enough data to be
learned in isolation. To cope with such data scarcity, meta-representation learning methods train across many related tasks to find a shared (lower-dimensional)
representation of the data where all tasks can be solved accurately. It is hypothesized that any new arriving tasks can be rapidly trained on this low-dimensional
representation using only a few samples. Despite the practical successes of this
approach, its statistical and computational properties are less understood. Recent
theoretical studies either provide a highly suboptimal statistical error, or require
many samples for every task, which is infeasible in the few-shot learning setting.
Moreover, the prescribed algorithms in these studies have little resemblance to
those used in practice or they are computationally intractable. To understand and
explain the success of popular meta-representation learning approaches such as
ANIL [43], MetaOptNet [36], R2D2 [9], and OML [33], we study a alternating
gradient-descent minimization (AltMinGD) method (and its variant alternating minimization (AltMin) in the Appendix) which underlies the aforementioned methods.
For a simple but canonical setting of shared linear representations, we show that
AltMinGD achieves nearly-optimal estimation error, requiring only Ω(polylog d)
samples per task. This agrees with the observed efficacy of this algorithm in the
practical few-shot learning scenarios.

1

Introduction

Common real world tasks follow a long tailed distribution where most of the tasks only have a small
number of labeled examples [51]. Collecting more clean labels is often costly (e.g., medical imaging).
As each task does not have enough examples to be learned in isolation under this few-shot learning
scenario, meta-learning attempts to jointly learn across a large number of tasks to exploit some
structural similarities among those tasks.
One popular approach is to learn a shared representation, where new arriving tasks can be solved
accurately [45]. The premise is that (i) there is a shared low-dimensional representation fU (x) ∈ Rr
represented by a task-independent meta-parameter U and (ii) a simple linear model of hvi , fU (x)i can
make accurate prediction on the i-th task with a task-specific parameter vi . Once the representation
fU has been learnt, we can rapidly adapt to new arriving tasks as the representation dimension r
is much smaller than the dimension d of the input data. This approach is becoming increasingly
popular with a growing list of recent applications [33, 36, 9, 42, 43, 27, 47, 14, 13, 18] and has
been empirically shown to achieve the state-of-the-art performances on benchmark few-shot learning
datasets [47, 14, 43].
∗†
thekump2@illinois.edu, ‡ prajain@google.com, ¶ pnetrapalli@google.com (Part of the work was done
while at Google Research India), and ± sewoong@cs.washington.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

