The Many Faces of Adversarial Risk

Muni Sreenivas Pydi
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
pydi@wisc.edu

Varun Jog
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
vj270@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Adversarial risk quantifies the performance of classifiers on adversarially perturbed
data. Numerous definitions of adversarial risk—not all mathematically rigorous and
differing subtly in the details—have appeared in the literature. In this paper, we revisit these definitions, make them rigorous, and critically examine their similarities
and differences. Our technical tools derive from optimal transport, robust statistics,
functional analysis, and game theory. Our contributions include the following:
generalizing Strassen’s theorem to the unbalanced optimal transport setting with applications to adversarial classification with unequal priors; showing an equivalence
between adversarial robustness and robust hypothesis testing with ∞-Wasserstein
uncertainty sets; proving the existence of a pure Nash equilibrium in the two-player
game between the adversary and the algorithm; and characterizing adversarial
risk by the minimum Bayes error between a pair of distributions belonging to
the ∞-Wasserstein uncertainty sets. Our results generalize and deepen recently
discovered connections between optimal transport and adversarial robustness and
reveal new connections to Choquet capacities and game theory.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which are imperceptible perturbations to input data that maximize loss [38, 15, 5]. Developing algorithms resistant to such
attacks has received considerable attention in recent years [8, 28, 24, 20], motivated by safety-critical
applications such as autonomous driving [18, 27], medical imaging [17, 23, 22] and law [21, 6].
A classification algorithm with high accuracy (low risk) in the absence of an adversary may have poor
accuracy (high risk) when an adversary is present. Thus, a modified notion known as adversarial risk
is used to quantify the adversarial robustness of algorithms. Algorithms that minimize adversarial risk
are deemed robust. Procedures for finding them have been effective in practice [24, 41, 28], spurring
numerous theoretical investigations into adversarial risk and its minimizers.
There is no universally agreed upon definition of adversarial risk. Even the simplest setting of
binary classification in Rd with an `2 adversary admits various definitions involving set expansions
[9, 16], transport maps [29], Markov kernels [31], and couplings [26]. These works broadly interpret
adversarial risk as a measure of robustness to small perturbations, but their definitions differ in subtle
details such as the class of adversaries and algorithms considered, budget constraints placed on the
adversary, assumptions on the loss function, and the geometry of decision boundaries.
Optimal adversarial risk is most commonly defined as the minimax risk under adversarial contamination [24, 33]. Other notable characterizations include an optimal transport cost between data
generating distributions in [30, 2, 10, 11], the optimal value of a distributionally robust optimization
problem [36, 35, 40], and the value of a two-player zero-sum game [26, 29, 3, 4].
The diversity of definitions for adversarial risk makes it challenging to compare approaches. Moreover,
not all approaches are rigorous. For instance, the classes of adversarial strategies and classifier
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

