Generalized Jensen-Shannon Divergence Loss
for Learning with Noisy Labels

Erik Englesson
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
engless@kth.se

Hossein Azizpour
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
azizpour@kth.se

Abstract
Prior works have found it beneficial to combine provably noise-robust loss functions
e.g., mean absolute error (MAE) with standard categorical loss function e.g. cross
entropy (CE) to improve their learnability. Here, we propose to use Jensen-Shannon
divergence as a noise-robust loss function and show that it interestingly interpolate
between CE and MAE with a controllable mixing parameter. Furthermore, we
make a crucial observation that CE exhibits lower consistency around noisy data
points. Based on this observation, we adopt a generalized version of the JensenShannon divergence for multiple distributions to encourage consistency around
data points. Using this loss function, we show state-of-the-art results on both
synthetic (CIFAR), and real-world (e.g. WebVision) noise with varying noise rates.

1

Introduction

Labeled datasets, even the systematically annotated ones, contain noisy labels [1]. Therefore,
designing noise-robust learning algorithms are crucial for the real-world tasks. An important avenue
to tackle noisy labels is to devise noise-robust loss functions [2, 3, 4, 5]. Similarly, in this work, we
propose two new noise-robust loss functions based on two central observations as follows.
Observation I: Provably-robust loss functions can underfit the training data [2, 3, 4, 5].
Observation II: Standard networks show low consistency around noisy data points 1, see Figure 1.
We first propose to use Jensen-Shannon divergence (JS) as a loss function, which we crucially show
interpolates between the noise-robust mean absolute error (MAE) and the cross entropy (CE) that
better fits the data through faster convergence. Figure 2 illustrates the CE-MAE interpolation.
Regarding Observation II, we adopt the generalized version of Jensen-Shannon divergence (GJS) to
encourage predictions on perturbed inputs to be consistent, see Figure 3. Notably, Jensen-Shannon
divergence has previously shown promise for test-time robustness to domain shift [6], here we further
argue for its training-time robustness to label noise. The key contributions of this work2 are:
• We make a novel observation that a network predictions’ consistency is reduced for noisylabeled data when overfitting to noise, which motivates the use of consistency regularization.
• We propose using Jensen-Shannon divergence (JS) and its multi-distribution generalization (GJS) as loss functions for learning with noisy labels. We relate JS to loss functions that
are based on the noise-robustness theory of Ghosh et al. [2]. In particular, we prove that JS
generalizes CE and MAE. Furthermore, we prove that GJS generalizes JS by incorporating
consistency regularization in a single principled loss function.
• We provide an extensive set of empirical evidences on several datasets, noise types and rates.
They show state-of-the-art results and give in-depth studies of the proposed losses.
1
2

we call a network consistent around a sample (x) if it predicts the same class for x and its perturbations (x̃).
implementation available at https://github.com/ErikEnglesson/GJS

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

