Online Meta-Learning via Learning with
Layer-Distributed Memory

Sudarshan Babu
TTI-C
sudarshan@ttic.edu

Pedro Savarese
TTI-C
savarese@ttic.edu

Michael Maire
University of Chicago
mmaire@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate that efficient meta-learning can be achieved via end-to-end training
of deep neural networks with memory distributed across layers. The persistent state
of this memory assumes the entire burden of guiding task adaptation. Moreover, its
distributed nature is instrumental in orchestrating adaptation. Ablation experiments
demonstrate that providing relevant feedback to memory units distributed across
the depth of the network enables them to guide adaptation throughout the entire
network. Our results show that this is a successful strategy for simplifying metalearning – often cast as a bi-level optimization problem – to standard end-to-end
training, while outperforming gradient-based, prototype-based, and other memorybased meta-learning strategies. Additionally, our adaptation strategy naturally
handles online learning scenarios with a significant delay between observing a
sample and its corresponding label – a setting in which other approaches struggle.
Adaptation via distributed memory is effective across a wide range of learning
tasks, ranging from classification to online few-shot semantic segmentation.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning or learning-to-learn is a paradigm that enables models to generalize to a distribution of
tasks rather than specialize to just one task [1, 2]. When encountering examples from a new task,
we would like the model to adapt to the new task after seeing just a few samples. This is commonly
achieved via episodic training of deep neural networks, where, in each episode, the network is exposed
to a variety of inputs from the same distribution [3, 4], and the distribution shifts over episodes. The
ability of deep networks to adapt to a new task within just a few samples or iterations is central to the
application of meta-learning methods in few-shot and online learning scenarios [5, 6].
A recent surge of interest directed towards meta-learning using neural networks has spurred development of a variety of methods [7–9]. In a standard episodic training framework, a network must adapt
to a sampled task (or collection of tasks) and incurs a generalization loss for that task (or collection);
this generalization loss is backpropagated to update the network weights. Methods differ in the
underlying architecture and mechanisms they use to support adaptation. Strategies include using
gradient descent in an inner loop, storing and updating prototypes, parameterizing update rules by
another neural network, and employing neural memory [3, 10–12]. Section 2 provides an overview.
We focus on memory-based meta-learning, and specifically investigate the organization of neural
memory for meta-learning. Motivating this focus is the generality and flexibility of memory-based
approaches. Relying on memory for adaptation allows one to cast meta-learning as merely a learning
problem using a straightforward loss formulation (viewing entire episodes as examples) and standard
optimization techniques. The actual burden of adaptation becomes an implicit responsibility of the
memory subsystem: the network must learn to use its persistent memory in a manner that facilitates
task adaptation. This contrasts with explicit adaptation mechanisms such as stored prototypes.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

