Mastering Atari Games with Limited Data

Weirui Ye∗ Shaohuai Liu∗ Thanard Kurutach† Pieter Abbeel† Yang Gao∗‡
∗
Tsinghua University, † UC Berkeley, ‡ Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has achieved great success in many applications. However,
sample efficiency remains a key challenge, with prominent methods requiring
millions (or even billions) of environment steps to train. Recently, there has
been significant progress in sample efficient image-based RL algorithms; however,
consistent human-level performance on the Atari game benchmark remains an
elusive goal. We propose a sample efficient model-based visual RL algorithm
built on MuZero, which we name EfficientZero. Our method achieves 190.4%
mean human performance and 116.0% median performance on the Atari 100k
benchmark with only two hours of real-time game experience and outperforms
the state SAC in some tasks on the DMControl 100k benchmark. This is the first
time an algorithm achieves super-human performance on Atari games with such
little data. EfficientZero’s performance is also close to DQN’s performance at 200
million frames while we consume 500 times less data. EfficientZero’s low sample
complexity and high performance can bring RL closer to real-world applicability.
We implement our algorithm in an easy-to-understand manner and it is available
at https://github.com/YeWR/EfficientZero. We hope it will accelerate the
research of MCTS-based RL algorithms in the wider community.

Figure 1: Our proposed method EfficientZero is 170% and 180% better than the previous SoTA
performance in mean and median human normalized score and is the first to outperform the average
human performance on the Atari 100k benchmark. The high sample efficiency and performance of
EfficientZero can bring RL closer to the real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has achieved great success on many challenging problems. Notable work
includes DQN [24], AlphaGo [33] and OpenAI Five [5]. However, most of these works come at
the cost of a large number of environmental interactions. For example, AlphaZero [34] needs to
play 21 million games at training time. On the contrary, a professional human player can only
play around 5 games per day, meaning it would take a human player 11,500 years to achieve the
same amount of experience. The sample complexity might be less of an issue when applying RL
algorithms in simulation and games. However, when it comes to real-world problems, such as robotic
∗
†

{ywr20, liush20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn
{thanard.kurutach, pabbeel}@berkeley.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

