Boost Neural Networks by Checkpoints

Feng Wang1 , Guoyizhe Wei1 , Qiao Liu2 , Jinxiang Ou1 , Xian Wei3 , Hairong Lv1,4 ∗
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Statistics, Stanford University
3
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University
4
Fuzhou Institute of Data Technology
{wangf19, wgyz19, ojx19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liuqiao@stanford.edu, xian.wei@tum.de
lvhairong@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Training multiple deep neural networks (DNNs) and averaging their outputs is a
simple way to improve the predictive performance. Nevertheless, the multiplied
training cost prevents this ensemble method to be practical and efficient. Several
recent works attempt to save and ensemble the checkpoints of DNNs, which only
requires the same computational cost as training a single network. However,
these methods suffer from either marginal accuracy improvements due to the low
diversity of checkpoints or high risk of divergence due to the cyclical learning
rates they adopted. In this paper, we propose a novel method to ensemble the
checkpoints, where a boosting scheme is utilized to accelerate model convergence
and maximize the checkpoint diversity. We theoretically prove that it converges by
reducing exponential loss. The empirical evaluation also indicates our proposed
ensemble outperforms single model and existing ensembles in terms of accuracy
and efficiency. With the same training budget, our method achieves 4.16% lower
error on Cifar-100 and 6.96% on Tiny-ImageNet with ResNet-110 architecture.
Moreover, the adaptive sample weights in our method make it an effective solution
to address the imbalanced class distribution. In the experiments, it yields up to
5.02% higher accuracy over single EfficientNet-B0 on the imbalanced datasets.

1

Introduction

DNN ensembles often outperform individual networks in either accuracy or robustness [Hansen and
Salamon, 1990, Zhou et al., 2002]. Particularly, in the cases when memory is restricted, or complex
models are difficult to deploy, ensembling light-weight networks is a good alternative to achieve
the performance comparable with deep models. However, since training DNNs is computationally
expensive, straightforwardly ensembling multiple networks is not acceptable in many real-world
scenarios.
A trick to avoid the exorbitant computational cost is to fully utilize the middle stages — or so-called
checkpoints — in one training process, instead of training additional networks. Here we refer to this
technique as Checkpoint Ensemble (CPE). Despite its merit of no additional training computation, an
obvious problem of CPE is that the checkpoints sampled from one training process are often very
similar, which violates the consensus that we desire the base models in an ensemble are accurate but
sufficiently diverse. To enhance the diversity, conventional ensembles often differ the base models
from initialization, objective function, or hyperparameters [Breiman, 1996, Freund and Schapire,
1997, Zhou et al., 2002], whilst the recent CPE methods try to achieve this goal by cyclical learning
∗

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

