Large-Scale Wasserstein Gradient Flows

Petr Mokrov∗
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Moscow, Russia
petr.mokrov@skoltech.ru

Alexander Korotin*
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
a.korotin@skoltech.ru

Lingxiao Li
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
lingxiao@mit.edu

Aude Genevay
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
aude.genevay@gmail.com

Justin Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
jsolomon@mit.edu

Evgeny Burnaev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Wasserstein gradient flows provide a powerful means of understanding and solving
many diffusion equations. Specifically, Fokker-Planck equations, which model
the diffusion of probability measures, can be understood as gradient descent over
entropy functionals in Wasserstein space. This equivalence, introduced by Jordan,
Kinderlehrer and Otto, inspired the so-called JKO scheme to approximate these
diffusion processes via an implicit discretization of the gradient flow in Wasserstein
space. Solving the optimization problem associated to each JKO step, however,
presents serious computational challenges. We introduce a scalable method to
approximate Wasserstein gradient flows, targeted to machine learning applications.
Our approach relies on input-convex neural networks (ICNNs) to discretize the
JKO steps, which can be optimized by stochastic gradient descent. Unlike previous
work, our method does not require domain discretization or particle simulation.
As a result, we can sample from the measure at each time step of the diffusion
and compute its probability density. We demonstrate our algorithm’s performance
by computing diffusions following the Fokker-Planck equation and apply it to
unnormalized density sampling as well as nonlinear filtering.

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) are used to model the evolution of random diffusion processes
across time, with applications in physics [63], finance [22, 52], and population dynamics [35]. In
machine learning, diffusion processes also arise in applications filtering [34, 21] and unnormalized
posterior sampling via a discretization of the Langevin diffusion [70].
The time-evolving probability density ρt of these diffusion processes is governed by the FokkerPlanck equation. Jordan, Kinderlehrer, and Otto [32] showed that the Fokker-Planck equation is
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

