Support vector machines and linear regression
coincide with very high-dimensional features

Navid Ardeshir*
Dept. of Statistics
Columbia University
na2844@columbia.edu

Clayton Sanford*
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
clayton@cs.columbia.edu

Daniel Hsu
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The support vector machine (SVM) and minimum Euclidean norm least squares
regression are two fundamentally different approaches to fitting linear models,
but they have recently been connected in models for very high-dimensional data
through a phenomenon of support vector proliferation, where every training example used to fit an SVM becomes a support vector. In this paper, we explore the
generality of this phenomenon and make the following contributions. First, we
prove a super-linear lower bound on the dimension (in terms of sample size) required for support vector proliferation in independent feature models, matching the
upper bounds from previous works. We further identify a sharp phase transition in
Gaussian feature models, bound the width of this transition, and give experimental
support for its universality. Finally, we hypothesize that this phase transition occurs
only in much higher-dimensional settings in the ℓ1 variant of the SVM, and we
present a new geometric characterization of the problem that may elucidate this
phenomenon for the general ℓp case.

1

Introduction

The support vector machine (SVM) and ordinary least squares (OLS) are well-weathered approaches
to fitting linear models, but they are associated with different learning tasks: classification and
regression. In this paper, we study the case in which the models return exactly the same hypothesis
for sufficiently high-dimensional data.
The hard-margin SVM is a linear classification model that finds the separating hyperplane
that maximizes the minimum margin of error for every training sample. If the training data
(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ) ∈ Rd × {±1} are linearly separable, then the resulting linear classifier is
x 7→ sign (xT wSVM ), where wSVM is the solution to the following optimization problem:
wSVM = arg min ∥w∥2 such that yi wT xi ≥ 1, ∀i ∈ [n].
(1)
w∈Rd

An example xi is a support vector if the corresponding constraint is satisfied with equality, and the
optimal solution wSVM is a linear combination of these support vectors.
Ordinary least squares regression finds the linear function that best fits the training data
(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ) ∈ Rd × R according to the sum of squared errors. When the solution is
not unique, it is natural to take the solution of minimum Euclidean norm; this is the convention we
adopt. Taking X := [x1 | . . . |xn ]T ∈ Rn×d and y := (y1 , . . . , yn ), the solution is the hypothesis
T
x 7→ wOLS
x where wOLS is the solution to the following: wOLS = arg minw∈Rd ∥w∥2 such that
T
X Xw = XT y. In many high-dimensional settings (e.g., where X has full row rank), the solution
may in fact interpolate the training data, i.e.,
wOLS = arg min ∥w∥2 such that wT xi = yi , ∀i ∈ [n].
(2)
w∈Rd

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

