Exploring Social Posterior Collapse in Variational
Autoencoder for Interaction Modeling

Chen Tang
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA
chen_tang@berkeley.edu

Wei Zhan
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA
wzhan@berkeley.edu

Masayoshi Tomizuka
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA
tomizuka@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent behavior modeling and trajectory forecasting are crucial for the safe
navigation of autonomous agents in interactive scenarios. Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) has been widely applied in multi-agent interaction modeling to generate
diverse behavior and learn a low-dimensional representation for interacting systems.
However, existing literature did not formally discuss if a VAE-based model can
properly encode interaction into its latent space. In this work, we argue that one of
the typical formulations of VAEs in multi-agent modeling suffers from an issue we
refer to as social posterior collapse, i.e., the model is prone to ignoring historical
social context when predicting the future trajectory of an agent. It could cause
significant prediction errors and poor generalization performance. We analyze the
reason behind this under-explored phenomenon and propose several measures to
tackle it. Afterward, we implement the proposed framework and experiment on
real-world datasets for multi-agent trajectory prediction. In particular, we propose
a novel sparse graph attention message-passing (sparse-GAMP) layer, which helps
us detect social posterior collapse in our experiments. In the experiments, we
verify that social posterior collapse indeed occurs. Also, the proposed measures are
effective in alleviating the issue. As a result, the model attains better generalization
performance when historical social context is informative for prediction.

1

Introduction

Modeling the behavior of intelligent agents is an essential subject for autonomous systems. Safe
operations of autonomous agents require accurate prediction of other agents’ future motions. In
particular, social interaction among agents should be modeled, so that downstream planning and
decision-making modules can safely navigate the robots through interactive scenarios. Generative
latent variable models are popular modeling options for their ability to generate diverse and naturalistic
behavior [1, 2, 3, 4]. In this work, we focus on one category of generative models, Variational
Autoencoder (VAE) [5], which has been widely used in multi-agent behavior modeling and trajectory
prediction [1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9]. It is desirable as it learns a low-dimensional representation of the original
high-dimensional data.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

