C OCKPIT: A Practical Debugging Tool
for the Training of Deep Neural Networks

Frank Schneider∗
University of Tübingen
Maria-von-Linden-Straße 6
Tübingen, Germany

Felix Dangel∗
University of Tübingen
Maria-von-Linden-Straße 6
Tübingen, Germany

f.schneider@uni-tuebingen.de

f.dangel@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen &
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
When engineers train deep learning models, they are very much “flying blind”.
Commonly used methods for real-time training diagnostics, such as monitoring the
train/test loss, are limited. Assessing a network’s training process solely through
these performance indicators is akin to debugging software without access to internal states through a debugger. To address this, we present C OCKPIT, a collection of
instruments that enable a closer look into the inner workings of a learning machine,
and a more informative and meaningful status report for practitioners. It facilitates
the identification of learning phases and failure modes, like ill-chosen hyperparameters. These instruments leverage novel higher-order information about the gradient
distribution and curvature, which has only recently become efficiently accessible.
We believe that such a debugging tool, which we open-source for P Y T ORCH, is a
valuable help in troubleshooting the training process. By revealing new insights, it
also more generally contributes to explainability and interpretability of deep nets.

1

Introduction and motivation

Deep learning represents a new programming paradigm: instead of deterministic programs, users
design models and “simply” train them with data. In this metaphor, deep learning is a metaprogramming form, where coding is replaced by training. Here, we ponder the question how we can
provide more insight into this process by building a debugger specifically designed for deep learning.
Debuggers are crucial for traditional software development. When things fail, they provide access to
the internal workings of the code, allowing a look “into the box”. This is much more efficient than
re-running the program with different inputs. And yet, deep learning is arguably closer to the latter.
If the attempt to train a deep net fails, a machine learning engineer faces various options: Should they
change the training hyperparameters (how?); the optimizer (to which one?); the model (how?); or just
re-run with a different seed? Machine learning toolboxes provide scant help to guide these decisions.
Of course, traditional debuggers can be applied to deep learning. They will give access to every single
weight of a neural net, or the individual pixels of its training data. But this rarely yields insights
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

