CO-PILOT: COllaborative Planning and
reInforcement Learning On sub-Task curriculum

Shuang Ao1 , Tianyi Zhou2,3 , Guodong Long1 , Qinghua Lu4 , Liming Zhu4 , Jing Jiang1
University of Technology Sydney1 ;
University of Washington, Seattle2 ; University of Maryland, College Park3 ;
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia4
shuang.ao@student.uts.edu.au, tianyizh@uw.edu,
{guodong.long, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au,
{qinghua.lu, liming.zhu}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) usually suffers from sparse reward
and inefficient exploration in long-horizon tasks. Planning can find the shortest
path to a distant goal that provides dense reward/guidance but is inaccurate without
a precise environment model. We show that RL and planning can collaboratively
learn from each other to overcome their own drawbacks. In “CO-PILOT”, a
learnable path-planner and an RL agent produce dense feedback to train each
other on a curriculum of tree-structured sub-tasks. Firstly, the planner recursively
decomposes a long-horizon task to a tree of sub-tasks in a top-down manner,
whose layers construct coarse-to-fine sub-task sequences as plans to complete the
original task. The planning policy is trained to minimize the RL agent’s cost of
completing the sequence in each layer from top to bottom layers, which gradually
increases the sub-tasks and thus forms an easy-to-hard curriculum for the planner.
Next, a bottom-up traversal of the tree trains the RL agent from easier sub-tasks
with denser rewards on bottom layers to harder ones on top layers and collects
its cost on each sub-task train the planner in the next episode. CO-PILOT repeats
this mutual training for multiple episodes before switching to a new task, so
the RL agent and planner are fully optimized to facilitate each other’s training.
We compare CO-PILOT with RL (SAC, HER, PPO), planning (RRT*, NEXT,
SGT), and their combination (SoRB) on navigation and continuous control tasks.
CO-PILOT significantly improves the success rate and sample efficiency. Our code
is available at https://github.com/Shuang-AO/CO-PILOT.

1

Introduction

Although AI can surpass humans on certain tasks, humans still perform much better in making sequential decisions via learning from interactions with the environment. Reinforcement learning (RL) [50]
aims to bridge this gap by learning to optimize the trajectories of agents (e.g., controllers, robots, game
players, self-driving cars, etc) to achieve the maximal return. However, in complicated long-horizon
tasks, RL usually suffers from poor sample efficiency and costly data collection. Moreover, the data
quality is often low due to sparse rewards when rollouts fail and cannot provide informative feedback.
Model-based RL and off-policy RL improve the sample complexity with the price of extra biases,
causing unstable and brittle optimization. Instead of reaching a single goal, goal-conditioned RL [27]
learns one model for any given goal input to its model(s). However, it needs to be trained to reach
many possible goals, and the resulted model’s performance still degrades drastically for distant goals.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

