Towards Robust Bisimulation Metric Learning

Mete Kemertas∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
kemertas@cs.toronto.edu

Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
taumen@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Learned representations in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) have to extract taskrelevant information from complex observations, balancing between robustness
to distraction and informativeness to the policy. Such stable and rich representations, often learned via modern function approximation techniques, can enable
practical application of the policy improvement theorem, even in high-dimensional
continuous state-action spaces. Bisimulation metrics offer one solution to this
representation learning problem, by collapsing functionally similar states together
in representation space, which promotes invariance to noise and distractors. In
this work, we generalize value function approximation bounds for on-policy bisimulation metrics to non-optimal policies and approximate environment dynamics.
Our theoretical results help us identify embedding pathologies that may occur in
practical use. In particular, we find that these issues stem from an underconstrained
dynamics model and an unstable dependence of the embedding norm on the reward
signal in environments with sparse rewards. Further, we propose a set of practical
remedies: (i) a norm constraint on the representation space, and (ii) an extension
of prior approaches with intrinsic rewards and latent space regularization. Finally,
we provide evidence that the resulting method is not only more robust to sparse
reward functions, but also able to solve challenging continuous control tasks with
observational distractions, where prior methods fail.

1

Introduction

Complex reinforcement learning (RL) problems require the agent to infer a useful representation of
the world state from observations. The utility of this representation can be measured by how readily
it can be used to learn and enact a policy that solves a specific task. As an example, consider a robot
using visual perception to pour a cup of coffee. The clutter on the counter and the colour of the walls
have little effect on the correct action; even more pertinent aspects, such as two mugs with slightly
different patterns and shapes, should be treated nearly the same by the policy. In other words, many
states are equivalent for a given task, with their differences being task-irrelevant distractors. Thus, a
natural approach to generalization across environmental changes is constructing a representation that
is invariant to such nuisance variables – effectively “grouping” such equivalent states together.
One method of obtaining such a representation uses the notion of a bisimulation metric (BSM)
[13, 14]. The goal is to abstract the states into a new metric space, which groups “behaviourally”
similar states in a task-dependent manner. In particular, bisimilar states (i.e., in this case, those close
under the BSM) should yield similar stochastic reward sequences, given the same action sequence. In
a recursive sense, this requires bisimilar states to have similar (i) immediate rewards and (ii) transition
distributions in the BSM space (e.g., see Eq. 1). Thus, ideally, the resulting representation space
contains the information necessary to help the policy maximize return and little else.
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

