Domain Invariant Representation Learning with
Domain Density Transformations

A. Tuan Nguyen
University of Oxford; VinAI Research
Oxford, United Kingdom
tuan@robots.ox.ac.uk
Yarin Gal
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
yarin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Toan Tran
VinAI Research
Hanoi, Vietnam
v.toantm3@vinai.io
Atilim Gunes Baydin
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
gunes@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Domain generalization refers to the problem where we aim to train a model on
data from a set of source domains so that the model can generalize to unseen target
domains. Naively training a model on the aggregate set of data (pooled from all
source domains) has been shown to perform suboptimally, since the information
learned by that model might be domain-specific and generalize imperfectly to target
domains. To tackle this problem, a predominant domain generalization approach
is to learn some domain-invariant information for the prediction task, aiming at
a good generalization across domains. In this paper, we propose a theoretically
grounded method to learn a domain-invariant representation by enforcing the
representation network to be invariant under all transformation functions among
domains. We next introduce the use of generative adversarial networks to learn such
domain transformations in a possible implementation of our method in practice.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on several widely used datasets for
the domain generalization problem, on all of which we achieve competitive results
with state-of-the-art models.

1

Introduction

Domain generalization refers to the machine learning scenario where the model is trained on multiple
source domains so that it is expected to generalize well to unseen target domains. The key difference
between domain generalization [25, 37, 18] and domain adaptation [49, 48, 14, 45] is that, in domain
generalization, the learner does not have access to data of the target domain, making the problem much
more challenging. One of the most common domain generalization approaches is to learn an invariant
representation across domains, aiming at a good generalization performance on target domains. For
instance, in the representation learning framework, the prediction function y = f (x), where x is
data and y is a label, is obtained as a composition y = h ◦ g(x) of a deep representation network
z = g(x), where z is a learned representation of data x, and a smaller classifier y = h(z), predicting
label y given representation z, both of which are shared across domains. With this framework, we
can aim to learn an “invariant” representation z across the source domains with the “hope” of a better
generalization to the target domain.
Most existing “domain-invariance”-based methods in domain generalization focus on the marginal
distribution alignment [37, 1, 44, 43, 32], which are still prone to distributional shifts when the
conditional data distribution is not stable. In particular, the marginal alignment refers to making the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

