Neural optimal feedback control
with local learning rules

Johannes Friedrich 1
Alexander Genkin 5

Siavash Golkar 1

Anirvan M. Sengupta 2,3,4

Shiva Farashahi 1
Dmitri B. Chklovskii 1,5

1

Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute
3
Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute
4
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University
5
Neuroscience Institute, NYU Medical Center
2

{jfriedrich,sgolkar,sfarashahi,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org
{alexander.genkin,anirvans.physics}@gmail.com

Abstract
A major problem in motor control is understanding how the brain plans and executes
proper movements in the face of delayed and noisy stimuli. A prominent framework
for addressing such control problems is Optimal Feedback Control (OFC). OFC
generates control actions that optimize behaviorally relevant criteria by integrating
noisy sensory stimuli and the predictions of an internal model using the Kalman
filter or its extensions. However, a satisfactory neural model of Kalman filtering
and control is lacking because existing proposals have the following limitations:
not considering the delay of sensory feedback, training in alternating phases, and
requiring knowledge of the noise covariance matrices, as well as that of systems
dynamics. Moreover, the majority of these studies considered Kalman filtering
in isolation, and not jointly with control. To address these shortcomings, we
introduce a novel online algorithm which combines adaptive Kalman filtering with
a model free control approach (i.e., policy gradient algorithm). We implement this
algorithm in a biologically plausible neural network with local synaptic plasticity
rules. This network performs system identification and Kalman filtering, without
the need for multiple phases with distinct update rules or the knowledge of the
noise covariances. It can perform state estimation with delayed sensory feedback,
with the help of an internal model. It learns the control policy without requiring
any knowledge of the dynamics, thus avoiding the need for weight transport. In
this way, our implementation of OFC solves the credit assignment problem needed
to produce the appropriate sensory-motor control in the presence of stimulus delay.

1

Introduction

The sensorimotor control system has exceptional abilities to perform fast and accurate movements
in a variety of situations. To achieve such skillful control, this system faces two key challenges: (i)
sensory stimuli are noisy, making estimation of current state of the system difficult, and (ii) sensory
stimuli is often delayed, which if unaccounted, results in movements that are inaccurate and unstable
[1]. Optimal Feedback Control (OFC) has been proposed as a solution to this control problem [2, 3].
OFC approaches these problems by building an internal model of the system dynamics, and using
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

