Explaining heterogeneity in medial entorhinal cortex
with task-driven neural networks
Aran Nayebi1,* , Alexander Attinger2 , Malcolm G. Campbell2 , Kiah Hardcastle2 , Isabel I.C.
Low1,2,7 , Caitlin S. Mallory2 , Gabriel C. Mel1 , Ben Sorscher4 , Alex H. Williams6,7 , Surya
Ganguli4,7,8 , Lisa M. Giocomo2,7 , and Daniel L.K. Yamins3,5,7
1

Neurosciences Ph.D. Program, Stanford University
Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
4
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
5
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
6
Department of Statistics, Stanford University
7
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University
8
Facebook AI Research, Facebook, Inc.
*
Correspondence: anayebi@stanford.edu
2

Abstract
Medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) supports a wide range of navigational and memory
related behaviors. Well-known experimental results have revealed specialized
cell types in MEC — e.g. grid, border, and head-direction cells — whose highly
stereotypical response profiles are suggestive of the role they might play in supporting MEC functionality. However, the majority of MEC neurons do not exhibit
stereotypical firing patterns. How should the response profiles of these more “heterogeneous” cells be described, and how do they contribute to behavior? In this
work, we took a computational approach to addressing these questions. We first
performed a statistical analysis that shows that heterogeneous MEC cells are just
as reliable in their response patterns as the more stereotypical cell types, suggesting that they have a coherent functional role. Next, we evaluated a spectrum of
candidate models in terms of their ability to describe the response profiles of both
stereotypical and heterogeneous MEC cells. We found that recently developed
task-optimized neural network models are substantially better than traditional grid
cell-centric models at matching most MEC neuronal response profiles — including
those of grid cells themselves — despite not being explicitly trained for this purpose. Specific choices of network architecture (such as gated nonlinearities and
an explicit intermediate place cell representation) have an important effect on the
ability of the model to generalize to novel scenarios, with the best of these models
closely approaching the noise ceiling of the data itself. We then performed in silico
experiments on this model to address questions involving the relative functional
relevance of various cell types, finding that heterogeneous cells are likely to be
just as involved in downstream functional outcomes (such as path integration) as
grid and border cells. Finally, inspired by recent data showing that, going beyond
their spatial response selectivity, MEC cells are also responsive to non-spatial
rewards, we introduce a new MEC model that performs reward-modulated path
integration. We find that this unified model matches neural recordings across all
variable-reward conditions. Taken together, our results point toward a conceptually
principled goal-driven modeling approach for moving future experimental and
computational efforts beyond overly-simplistic single-cell stereotypes.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

