Local Signal Adaptivity: Provable Feature Learning
in Neural Networks Beyond Kernels

Stefani Karp
Carnegie Mellon University and Google Research
shkarp@cs.cmu.edu
Yuanzhi Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@cs.cmu.edu

Ezra Winston
Carnegie Mellon University
ewinston@cs.cmu.edu
Aarti Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
aarti@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Neural networks have been shown to outperform kernel methods in practice (including neural tangent kernels). Most theoretical explanations of this performance gap
focus on learning a complex hypothesis class; in some cases, it is unclear whether
this hypothesis class captures realistic data. In this work, we propose a related, but
alternative, explanation for this performance gap in the image classification setting,
based on finding a sparse signal in the presence of noise. Specifically, we prove
that, for a simple data distribution with sparse signal amidst high-variance noise,
a simple convolutional neural network trained using stochastic gradient descent
simultaneously learns to threshold out the noise and find the signal. On the other
hand, the corresponding neural tangent kernel, with a fixed set of predetermined
features, is unable to adapt to the signal in this manner. We supplement our theoretical results by demonstrating this phenomenon empirically: in CIFAR-10 and
MNIST images with various backgrounds, as the background noise increases in
intensity, a CNN’s performance stays relatively robust, whereas its corresponding
neural tangent kernel sees a notable drop in performance. We therefore propose the
local signal adaptivity (LSA) phenomenon as one explanation for the superiority of
neural networks over kernel methods.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning (using multi-layer, non-linear neural networks) has demonstrated superior
performance over traditional linear learners in many machine learning tasks. These achievements
have bred much theoretical investigation into whether neural networks are, in fact, superior - and
why. On the one hand, the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) and derivative works show that, under
certain (limiting) conditions, a gradient-descent-trained neural network reduces to a kernel method
with a specific architecture- and initialization-determined kernel [Jacot et al., 2018, Du et al., 2019].
However, this does not seem to be the full story, as it fails to capture the feature learning aspect of
neural network training. This distinction between a fixed feature representation and a data-adaptive
feature representation has been studied from a variety of perspectives, including the lazy vs. active
regime framework [Chizat et al., 2019, Woodworth et al., 2020, Moroshko et al., 2020, Geiger
et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2020]. Building on these insights, there has been increasing interest in
now showing a provable gap between the performance of neural networks and kernel methods in
various settings [Ghorbani et al., 2019, 2020, Allen-Zhu and Li, 2019, 2020, Li et al., 2020b, Malach
et al., 2021, Kamath et al., 2020, Refinetti et al., 2021, Daniely and Malach, 2020, Chen et al., 2020,
Domingo-Enrich et al., 2021].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

