Random Noise Defense Against Query-Based
Black-Box Attacks

1

Zeyu Qin1 Yanbo Fan2 Hongyuan Zha1 Baoyuan Wu1†
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Tencent AI Lab
zeyuqin@link.cuhk.edu.cn, fanyanbo0124@gmail.com,
zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn, wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
The query-based black-box attacks have raised serious threats to machine learning
models in many real applications. In this work, we study a lightweight defense
method, dubbed Random Noise Defense (RND), which adds proper Gaussian noise
to each query. We conduct the theoretical analysis about the effectiveness of RND
against query-based black-box attacks and the corresponding adaptive attacks. Our
theoretical results reveal that the defense performance of RND is determined by
the magnitude ratio between the noise induced by RND and the noise added by the
attackers for gradient estimation or local search. The large magnitude ratio leads
to the stronger defense performance of RND, and it’s also critical for mitigating
adaptive attacks. Based on our analysis, we further propose to combine RND with
a plausible Gaussian augmentation Fine-tuning (RND-GF). It enables RND to add
larger noise to each query while maintaining the clean accuracy to obtain a better
trade-off between clean accuracy and defense performance. Additionally, RND
can be flexibly combined with the existing defense methods to further boost the
adversarial robustness, such as adversarial training (AT). Extensive experiments on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet verify our theoretical findings and the effectiveness of
RND and RND-GF.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied in many safety-critical tasks, such as
autonomous driving, face recognition and verification, etc. However, it has been shown that DNN
models are vulnerable to adversarial examples [18, 21, 26, 29, 48], which are indistinguishable from
natural examples but make a model produce erroneous predictions. For real-world applications, the
DNN model as well as the training dataset, are often hidden from users. Instead, only the model
feedback for each query (e.g., labels or confidence scores) is accessible. In this case, the product
providers mainly face severe threats from query-based black-box attacks, which don’t require any
knowledge about the attacked models.
In this work, we focus on efficient defense techniques against query-based black-box attacks, of which
the main challenges are 1) the defender should not significantly influence the model’s feedback to
normal queries, but it is difficult to know whether a query is normal or malicious; 2) the defender has
no information about what kinds of black-box attack strategies adopted by the attacker. Considerable
efforts have been devoted to improving the adversarial robustness of DNNs [13, 34, 49, 50]. Among
them, adversarial training (AT) is considered as the most effective defense techniques [3, 49].
However, the improved robustness from AT is often accompanied by significant degradation of the
†

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

