N EURO MLR: Robust & Reliable Route
Recommendation on Road Networks
Jayant Jain∗, Vrittika Bagadia∗, Sahil Manchanda, Sayan Ranu
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
{jayantjain100,vrittikabagadia}@gmail.com
{sahil.manchanda,sayanranu}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Predicting the most likely route from a source location to a destination is a core
functionality in mapping services. Although the problem has been studied in the
literature, two key limitations remain to be addressed. First, our study reveals
that a significant portion of the routes recommended by existing methods fail to
reach the destination. Second, existing techniques are transductive in nature; hence,
they fail to recommend routes if unseen roads are encountered at inference time.
In this paper, we address these limitations through an inductive algorithm called
N EURO MLR. N EURO MLR learns a generative model from historical trajectories
by conditioning on three explanatory factors: the current location, the destination,
and real-time traffic conditions. The conditional distributions are learned through a
novel combination of Lipschitz embeddings with Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCN) using historical trajectory data. Through in-depth experiments on realworld datasets, we establish that N EURO MLR imparts significant improvement
in accuracy over the state of the art. More importantly, N EURO MLR generalizes
dramatically better to unseen data and the recommended routes reach the destination
with much higher likelihood than existing techniques.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Given historical trajectory data, we study the problem of predicting the most likely route from a
source node to a destination node in a road network. This problem has two prominent applications:
route recommendation and route recovery. Route recommendation is one of the core functionalities in
GPS-aided mapping applications. They are routinely used in the cab and food-delivery industry [26,
7, 34, 6], as well as by common people through navigation systems when they are unfamiliar with
their surroundings [30]. Route recovery, as the name suggests, focuses on recovering the actual
traversed route from a partially observed GPS trajectory [9]. Due to various reasons, for instance,
limiting the power consumption of GPS devices, trajectories are often recorded at low sampling rate.
1.1 Existing work
The simplest approach is to predict the shortest or the quickest path (route) between the source
and destination. However, several studies have shown that human beings rarely travel in shortest
paths [21]. Rather, the probability of a path being taken is a complex mixture of several latent
factors such as road quality [5, 22], road scenery [21, 14], pollution levels [23], presence of road
tolls, etc. Furthermore, it has also been shown that human beings systematically misperceive travel
time[20]. Modeling these complex factors is challenging. Consequently, a large body of work exists
on predicting the most likely route [1, 28, 33, 4, 10, 27], with D EEP S T [10] and C SS R NN [27] being
the best performing algorithms. C SS R NN models the trajectory patterns through a Recurrent Neural
Network and exploits the topological constraints presented by the road network. D EEP S T learns
representations for the trajectories, destination and traffic conditions using variational autoencoders.
∗

denotes equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

