Self-Diagnosing GAN: Diagnosing Underrepresented
Samples in Generative Adversarial Networks

Jinhee Lee∗
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
jin.lee@kaist.ac.kr

Haeri Kim∗†
Samsung Research
Samsung Electronics
haeri.kim@samsung.com

Youngkyu Hong∗†
NAVER AI Lab
NAVER
youngkyu.hong@navercorp.com

Hye Won Chung‡
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
hwchung@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite remarkable performance in producing realistic samples, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) often produce low-quality samples near low-density
regions of the data manifold, e.g., samples of minor groups. Many techniques
have been developed to improve the quality of generated samples, either by postprocessing generated samples or by pre-processing the empirical data distribution,
but at the cost of reduced diversity. To promote diversity in sample generation
without degrading the overall quality, we propose a simple yet effective method to
diagnose and emphasize underrepresented samples during training of a GAN. The
main idea is to use the statistics of the discrepancy between the data distribution
and the model distribution at each data instance. Based on the observation that the
underrepresented samples have a high average discrepancy or high variability in
discrepancy, we propose a method to emphasize those samples during training of a
GAN. Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method improves
GAN performance on various datasets, and it is especially effective in improving
the quality and diversity of sample generation for minor groups.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have achieved remarkable performance in producing
realistic samples for complex generation tasks, including image/video synthesis [5, 22], style transfer [45, 14], and data augmentation [29]. However, GANs often fail to cover sparse regions of data
manifold [16, 9], leading to the underrepresentation of minor groups in the dataset [43]. In particular,
GANs generate samples of minor groups with low fidelity or even fail to generate such samples,
exhibiting the mode collapse [43].
Many of previous techniques have focused on improving the overall sample quality of GANs, either
by pre-processing the training dataset or by post-processing generated samples. The pre-processing
aims to remove instances that cannot be well-represented by GANs even before the training starts and
gains fidelity on the focused samples [9]. A similar idea has been used to truncate the latent space
by resampling or moving samples that fall outside of some acceptable range during training [16, 6].
∗

Equal contribution.

†

This work was done as a student at KAIST.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

‡

Corresponding author.

