Automated Discovery of Adaptive Attacks on
Adversarial Defenses
Chengyuan Yao
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
chengyuan.yao@inf.ethz.ch

Pavol Bielik
LatticeFlow
Switzerland
pavol@latticeflow.ai

Petar Tsankov
LatticeFlow
Switzerland
petar@latticeflow.ai

Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
martin.vechev@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Reliable evaluation of adversarial defenses is a challenging task, currently limited
to an expert who manually crafts attacks that exploit the defenses inner workings
or approaches based on an ensemble of fixed attacks, none of which may be
effective for the specific defense at hand. Our key observation is that adaptive
attacks are composed of reusable building blocks that can be formalized in a
search space and used to automatically discover attacks for unknown defenses. We
evaluated our approach on 24 adversarial defenses and show that it outperforms
AutoAttack (Croce & Hein, 2020b), the current state-of-the-art tool for reliable
evaluation of adversarial defenses: our tool discovered significantly stronger attacks
by producing 3.0%-50.8% additional adversarial examples for 10 models, while
obtaining attacks with slightly stronger or similar strength for the remaining models.

1

Introduction

The issue of adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015), i.e., crafting small input perturbations that lead to mispredictions, is an important problem with a large body of recent work.
Unfortunately, reliable evaluation of proposed defenses is an elusive and challenging task: many defenses seem to initially be effective, only to be circumvented later by new attacks designed specifically
with that defense in mind (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al., 2018; Tramer et al., 2020).
To address this challenge, two recent works approach the problem from different perspectives. Tramer
et al. (2020) outlines an approach for manually crafting adaptive attacks that exploit the weak points
of each defense. Here, a domain expert starts with an existing attack, such as PGD (Madry et al.,
2018) (denoted as • in Figure 1), and adapts it based on knowledge of the defense’s inner workings.
Common modifications include: (i) tuning attack parameters (e.g., number of steps), (ii) replacing
network components to simplify the attack (e.g., removing randomization or non-differentiable
components), and (iii) replacing the loss function optimized by the attack. This approach was
demonstrated to be effective in breaking all of the considered 13 defenses. However, a downside is
that it requires substantial manual effort and is limited by the domain knowledge of the expert – for
instance, each of the 13 defenses came with an adaptive attack which was insufficient, in retrospect.
At the same time, Croce & Hein (2020b) proposed to assess adversarial robustness using an ensemble
of four attacks illustrated in Figure 1 (b) – APGDCE with cross-entropy loss (Croce & Hein, 2020b),
APGDDLR with difference in logit ratio loss, FAB (Croce & Hein, 2020a), and SQR (Andriushchenko
et al., 2020). While these do not require manual effort and have been shown to improve the robustness
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

