NeRS: Neural Reflectance Surfaces
for Sparse-view 3D Reconstruction in the Wild

Jason Y. Zhang

Gengshan Yang
Shubham Tulsiani∗
Deva Ramanan∗
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Recent history has seen a tremendous growth of work exploring implicit representations of geometry and radiance, popularized through Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF). Such works are fundamentally based on a (implicit) volumetric representation of occupancy, allowing them to model diverse scene structure including
translucent objects and atmospheric obscurants. But because the vast majority of
real-world scenes are composed of well-defined surfaces, we introduce a surface
analog of such implicit models called Neural Reflectance Surfaces (NeRS). NeRS
learns a neural shape representation of a closed surface that is diffeomorphic to a
sphere, guaranteeing water-tight reconstructions. Even more importantly, surface
parameterizations allow NeRS to learn (neural) bidirectional surface reflectance
functions (BRDFs) that factorize view-dependent appearance into environmental
illumination, diffuse color (albedo), and specular “shininess.” Finally, rather than
illustrating our results on synthetic scenes or controlled in-the-lab capture, we
assemble a novel dataset of multi-view images from online marketplaces for selling
goods. Such “in-the-wild” multi-view image sets pose a number of challenges,
including a small number of views with unknown/rough camera estimates. We
demonstrate that surface-based neural reconstructions enable learning from such
data, outperforming volumetric neural rendering-based reconstructions. We hope
that NeRS serves as a first step toward building scalable, high-quality libraries
of real-world shape, materials, and illumination. The project page with code and
video visualizations can be found at jasonyzhang.com/ners.

Input Images

Initial Mesh

Recovered Shape
and Cameras

Novel Views
Output

Texture

Illumination

Diverse 3D Reconstructions

Figure 1: 3D view synthesis in the wild. From several multi-view internet images of a truck and a coarse initial
mesh (top left), we recover the camera poses, 3D shape, texture, and illumination (top right). We demonstrate
the scalability of our approach on a wide variety of indoor and outdoor object categories (second row). [Video]
∗

denotes equal coding. Corresponding email: jasonyzhang@cmu.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

