Structural Credit Assignment in Neural Networks
using Reinforcement Learning

Dhawal Gupta, Gabor Mihucz, Matthew K. Schlegel
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
University of Alberta
{dhawal,mihucz,mkschleg}@ualberta.ca
James E. Kostas, Philip S. Thomas
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
{jekostas,pthomas}@cs.umass.edu

Martha White
Department of Computing Science
CIFAR AI Chair, Amii
University of Alberta
whitem@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Structural credit assignment in neural networks is a long-standing problem, with
a variety of alternatives to backpropagation proposed to allow for local training
of nodes. One of the early strategies was to treat each node as an agent and
use a reinforcement learning method called REINFORCE to update each node
locally with only a global reward signal. In this work, we revisit this approach
and investigate if we can leverage other reinforcement learning approaches to
improve learning. We first formalize training a neural network as a finite-horizon
reinforcement learning problem and discuss how this facilitates using ideas from
reinforcement learning like off-policy learning. We show that the standard on-policy
REINFORCE approach, even with a variety of variance reduction approaches,
learns suboptimal solutions. We introduce an off-policy approach, to facilitate
reasoning about the greedy action for other agents and help overcome stochasticity
in other agents. We conclude by showing that these networks of agents can be
more robust to correlated samples when learning online.

1

Introduction

Training neural networks involves structural credit assignment: attributing credit (or blame) to nodes
in the network for correct (or incorrect) predictions. The output from a node early in the network
impacts all the outputs downstream and finally the prediction outputted at the end of the network.
Our goal is to adjust the weights that produced the output for this node, so that the prediction would
have been more accurate. The most widely used solution for the structural credit assignment problem
is backpropagation [44], namely gradient descent on the loss for the outputs.
Moving beyond backprop provides more flexibility in training neural networks. Backprop requires
differentiability of activations and losses for the network, as well as synchronicity for computing the
gradient and updating the weights. To update a node internal to the network, a full feedforward and
backward pass needs to be computed, with global gradient information sweeping backwards from the
output. Ideally, for online agents operating real-time, with computational constraints, we would have
nodes that update each step, locally and asynchronously.
To make progress towards this lofty goal, we revisit an old idea: treating each node as an agent. Work
in reinforcement learning (RL), including ideas like eligibility traces, were in fact inspired by Klopf
[23] and the hedonistic neuron. It is not surprising that the idea of using an RL agent for each node is
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

