Pessimism Meets Invariance: Provably Efficient
Offline Mean-Field Multi-Agent RL⇤
Minshuo Chen1 Yan Li1 Ethan Wang1 Zhuoran Yang2 Zhaoran Wang3 Tuo Zhao1
1
Georgia Tech 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Northwestern University

Abstract
Mean-Field Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MF-MARL) is attractive in the
applications involving a large population of homogeneous agents, as it exploits
the permutation invariance of agents and avoids the curse of many agents. Most
existing results only focus on online settings, in which agents can interact with
the environment during training. In some applications such as social welfare
optimization, however, the interaction during training can be prohibitive or even
unethical in the societal systems. To bridge such a gap, we propose a SAFARI
(peSsimistic meAn-Field vAlue iteRatIon) algorithm for off-line MF-MARL, which
only requires a handful of pre-collected experience data. Theoretically, under a
weak coverage assumption that the experience dataset contains enough information
about the optimal policy, we prove that for an episodic mean-field MDP with
a horizon H and
p N training trajectories, SAFARI attains a sub-optimality gap
of O(H 2 de↵ / N ), where de↵ is the effective dimension of the function class
for parameterizing the value function, but independent on the number of agents.
Numerical experiments are provided.

1

Introduction

Significant progress has been made towards multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) for many
prominent sequential decision making problems, such as social welfare optimization (Leibo et al.,
2017), fleet control of autonomous vehicles (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016) and playing multiplayer
online battle arena (MOBA) games (Berner et al., 2019). As the joint state and action space scales
exponentially with the number of agents, however, MARL becomes computationally expensive. One
remedy is the mean-field regime when an extremely large number of homogenous agents are involved,
e.g., social welfare optimization. The effect of each agent on the overall multi-agent system can
become infinitesimal, and therefore all agents can be considered interchangeable/indistinguishable
(Yang et al., 2018; Carmona et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021). Accordingly, the interaction among agents
can be captured by some mean-field quantity such as the empirical distribution of states, and therefore
each agent only needs to find the best response to the so-called “mean-field state”, which avoids the
curse of many agents.
Most existing results on mean-field MARL (MF-MARL) are for the online setting (Yang et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2019), where the agents can interact with the environment during training. However,
such interaction during training can be prohibitive for some important applications (Leibo et al., 2017;
Mandel et al., 2014; Jaques et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020). Taking social welfare optimization as
an example, repeatedly conducting social experiments on human being can be unaffordable or even
unethical in the societal systems. Therefore, we can only consider the offline settings, i.e., we learn
the optimal policy based on some pre-collected experience data (Levine et al., 2020). Unfortunately,
⇤

Extension to online setting is provided in a longer technical report version, which is available upon request.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

