A novel notion of barycenter for probability
distributions based on optimal weak mass transport

Elsa Cazelles
IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS
elsa.cazelles@irit.fr

Felipe Tobar
IDIA & CMM, Universidad de Chile
ftobar@dim.uchile.cl

Joaquin Fontbona
CMM, Universidad de Chile
fontbona@dim.uchile.cl

Abstract
We introduce weak barycenters of a family of probability distributions, based on
the recently developed notion of optimal weak transport of mass [26], [9]. We
provide a theoretical analysis of this object and discuss its interpretation in the
light of convex ordering between probability measures. In particular, we show that,
rather than averaging the input distributions in a geometric way (as the Wasserstein barycenter based on classic optimal transport does) weak barycenters extract
common geometric information shared by all the input distributions, encoded as
a latent random variable that underlies all of them. We also provide an iterative
algorithm to compute a weak barycenter for a finite family of input distributions,
and a stochastic algorithm that computes them for arbitrary populations of laws.
The latter approach is particularly well suited for the streaming setting, i.e., when
distributions are observed sequentially. The notion of weak barycenter and our
approaches to compute it are illustrated on synthetic examples, validated on 2D
real-world data and compared to standard Wasserstein barycenters.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) [41] has had a tremendous impact in the machine learning (ML) community
recently, as it provides meaningful and implementable distances between probability distributions
[34], thus advancing many aspects in the field, see e.g. [7, 43, 33]. The space of probability measures
on Rd with finite second moment can be metrised with the Wasserstein-2 distance, the computation
of which amounts to finding a transport plan that minimises the quadratic average cost of transporting
mass from a source probability measure onto a target one. In this context, a natural method for
averaging a finite family of probability measures is to compute their Fréchet mean, with respect to
the Wasserstein-2 distance, which corresponds to the Wasserstein barycenter introduced in [1].
The goal of the present work is to explore theoretical features and potential applications to ML of
barycenters of probability measures analogously defined in terms of optimal weak transport (OWT,
see [26]) or more precisely quadratic barycentric transport costs. In a nutshell, for a source measure µ
and a target measure ν, the OWT problem aims to transport mass so that the conditional spatial mean
of target support points y, given their source support points x, is close to x in average. This amounts
to finding an intermediate measure η, possibly more concentrated than ν in the sense of convex
ordering of probability measures, which is close to µ with respect to the Wasserstein-2 distance.
The main motivation of our work is to investigate the effect and meaning of combining a family of
probability measures using OWT instead of OT. To that end, we will define the weak barycenter of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

