Program Synthesis Guided Reinforcement Learning
for Partially Observed Environments

Yichen David Yang∗
MIT EECS & CSAIL

Jeevana Priya Inala
Microsoft Research

Yewen Pu
Autodesk Research

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT EECS & CSAIL

Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
Martin Rinard
MIT EECS & CSAIL

Abstract
A key challenge for reinforcement learning is solving long-horizon planning problems. Recent work has leveraged programs to guide reinforcement learning in
these settings. However, these approaches impose a high manual burden on the
user since they must provide a guiding program for every new task. Partially observed environments further complicate the programming task because the program
must implement a strategy that correctly, and ideally optimally, handles every
possible configuration of the hidden regions of the environment. We propose a
new approach, model predictive program synthesis (MPPS), that uses program
synthesis to automatically generate the guiding programs. It trains a generative
model to predict the unobserved portions of the world, and then synthesizes a
program based on samples from this model in a way that is robust to its uncertainty. In our experiments, we show that our approach significantly outperforms
non-program-guided approaches on a set of challenging benchmarks, including
a 2D Minecraft-inspired environment where the agent must complete a complex
sequence of subtasks to achieve its goal, and achieves a similar performance as
using handcrafted programs to guide the agent. Our results demonstrate that our
approach can obtain the benefits of program-guided reinforcement learning without
requiring the user to provide a new guiding program for every new task.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is a prominent technique for solving challenging planning and control
problems [50, 4]. Despite significant recent progress, solving long-horizon problems remains a
significant challenge due to the combinatorial explosion of possible strategies. One promising
approach to addressing these issues is to leverage programs to guide the behavior of the agents [3, 62,
39]. The approaches in this paradigm typically involve three key elements:
• Domain-specific language (DSL): For a given domain, the user defines a set of components
c that correspond to intermediate subgoals that are useful for that domain (e.g., “get wood”
or “build bridge”), but leaves out how exactly to achieve these subgoals.
• Task-specific program: For every new task in the domain, the user provides a sequence of
components (i.e. a program written in the DSL) that, if followed, enable the agent to achieve
its goal in the task (e.g., [“get wood”; “build bridge”; “get gem”]).
• Low-level neural policy: For a given domain, the reinforcement learning algorithm learns
an option [63] that implements each component (i.e., achieves the subgoal specified by that
component). Typically a neural policy is learned as each option.
∗

Correspondence to yicheny@csail.mit.edu

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

