Learning Equilibria in Matching Markets from
Bandit Feedback
Meena Jagadeesan†
UC Berkeley

Alexander Wei†
UC Berkeley

mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu

awei@berkeley.edu

Yixin Wang
UC Berkeley

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley

ywang@eecs.berkeley.edu

jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large-scale, two-sided matching platforms must find market outcomes that align
with user preferences while simultaneously learning these preferences from data.
But since preferences are inherently uncertain during learning, the classical notion
of stability (Gale and Shapley, 1962; Shapley and Shubik, 1971) is unattainable
in these settings. To bridge this gap, we develop a framework and algorithms for
learning stable market outcomes under uncertainty. Our primary setting is matching
with transferable utilities, where the platform both matches agents and sets monetary transfers between them. We design an incentive-aware learning objective that
captures the distance of a market outcome from equilibrium. Using this objective,
we analyze the complexity of learning as a function of preference structure, casting
learning as a stochastic multi-armed bandit problem. Algorithmically, we show
that “optimism in the face of uncertainty,” the principle underlying many bandit
algorithms, applies to a primal-dual formulation of matching with transfers and
leads to near-optimal regret bounds. Our work takes a first step toward elucidating
when and how stable matchings arise in large, data-driven marketplaces.1

1

Introduction

Data-driven marketplaces face the simultaneous challenges of learning agent preferences and aligning
market outcomes with the incentives induced by these preferences. Consider, for instance, online
platforms that match two sides of a market to each other (e.g., Lyft, TaskRabbit, and Airbnb). On
these platforms, customers are matched to service providers and pay for the service they receive. If
agents on either side are not offered desirable matches at fair prices, they would have an incentive
to leave the platform and switch to a competing platform. Agent preferences, however, are often
unknown to the platform and must be learned. When faced with uncertainty about agent preferences
(and thus incentives), when can a marketplace efficiently explore and learn market outcomes that
align with agent incentives?
We center our investigation around a model called matching with transferable utilities, proposed
by Shapley and Shubik [32]. In this model, there is a two-sided market of customers and service
providers. Each customer has a utility that they derive from being matched to a given provider and
vice versa. The platform selects a matching between the two sides and assigns a monetary transfer
between each pair of matched agents. Transfers are a salient feature of most real-world matching
†
1

Equal contribution.
A full version of this paper (referenced as [18]) is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08843.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

