Practical Large-Scale Linear Programming using
Primal-Dual Hybrid Gradient

David Applegate
Google Research
dapplegate@google.com

Mateo Díaz
California Institute of Technology∗
mateodd@caltech.edu

Haihao Lu
University of Chicago†
haihao.lu@chicagobooth.edu

Miles Lubin
Google Research
mlubin@google.com

Oliver Hinder
Google Research
University of Pittsburgh
ohinder@pitt.edu

Brendan O’Donoghue
DeepMind
bodonoghue@deepmind.com

Warren Schudy
Google Research
wschudy@google.com

Abstract
We present PDLP, a practical first-order method for linear programming (LP)
that can solve to the high levels of accuracy that are expected in traditional LP
applications. In addition, it can scale to very large problems because its core
operation is matrix-vector multiplications. PDLP is derived by applying the primaldual hybrid gradient (PDHG) method, popularized by Chambolle and Pock (2011),
to a saddle-point formulation of LP. PDLP enhances PDHG for LP by combining
several new techniques with older tricks from the literature; the enhancements
include diagonal preconditioning, presolving, adaptive step sizes, and adaptive
restarting. PDLP improves the state of the art for first-order methods applied to
LP. We compare PDLP with SCS, an ADMM-based solver, on a set of 383 LP
instances derived from MIPLIB 2017. With a target of 10−8 relative accuracy
and 1 hour time limit, PDLP achieves a 6.3x reduction in the geometric mean of
solve times and a 4.6x reduction in the number of instances unsolved (from 227
to 49). Furthermore, we highlight standard benchmark instances and a large-scale
application (PageRank) where our open-source prototype of PDLP, written in Julia,
outperforms a commercial LP solver.

1

Introduction

First-order methods (FOMs), which use gradient and not Hessian information, are now applied as
standard practice in many areas of optimization [12]. A known weakness of FOMs is the tailing-off
effect, where FOMs quickly find moderately accurate solutions, but progress towards an optimal
solution slows down over time. While moderately accurate solutions are often sufficient for large
machine learning applications, other applications traditionally demand higher precision. One such
area is Linear Programming (LP), the focus of this work.
LP is a fundamental class of optimization problems in applied mathematics, operations research,
and computer science with a huge range of applications, including mixed-integer programming,
scheduling, network flow, chip design, budget allocation, and many others [17, 22, 65, 69]. Software
∗
†

Part of the work was done at Cornell and Google Research.
Part of the work was done at Google Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

