PTR: A Benchmark for Part-based
Conceptual, Relational, and Physical Reasoning

Yining Hong ∗
UCLA

Li Yi
Stanford University

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
A critical aspect of human visual perception is the ability to parse visual scenes
into individual objects and further into object parts, forming part-whole hierarchies. Such composite structures could induce a rich set of semantic concepts
and relations, thus playing an important role in the interpretation and organization of visual signals as well as for the generalization of visual perception and
reasoning. However, existing visual reasoning benchmarks mostly focus on objects rather than parts. Visual reasoning based on the full part-whole hierarchy is
much more challenging than object-centric reasoning due to finer-grained concepts,
richer geometry relations, and more complex physics. Therefore, to better serve
for part-based conceptual, relational and physical reasoning, we introduce a new
large-scale diagnostic visual reasoning dataset named PTR. PTR contains around
70k RGBD synthetic images with ground truth object and part level annotations
regarding semantic instance segmentation, color attributes, spatial and geometric
relationships, and certain physical properties such as stability. These images are
paired with 700k machine-generated questions covering various types of reasoning
types, making them a good testbed for visual reasoning models. We examine
several state-of-the-art visual reasoning models on this dataset and observe that
they still make many surprising mistakes in situations where humans can easily
infer the correct answer. We believe this dataset will open up new opportunities for
part-based reasoning. PTR dataset and baseline models are publicly available 2 .

1

Introduction

A long-standing challenge in the field of artificial intelligence is to enable machines to reason and
answer questions about visual scenes. Several datasets [64, 16, 29, 49, 57] have been proposed to
tackle this challenge. They mostly focus on object-level features without emphasizing much on
detailed part-level understanding. However, there is strong psychological evidence that human beings
parse visual scenes into part-whole hierarchies (e.g., from a scene to the objects, from an object to its
parts), which are currently missing from existing datasets.
Inspired by Aristotle’s quote “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts”, there has been a long
history of research in psychology concerning how parts and wholes are related, beginning with the
Gestalt psychologists [47]. There have also been recent efforts on how to represent such part-whole
hierarchies using neural networks [19]. Introducing part-whole hierarchies into visual reasoning
∗
2

The work was done while Yining Hong was a research intern at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.
Project page: http://ptr.csail.mit.edu/

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

