Supercharging Imbalanced Data Learning With
Energy-based Contrastive Representation Transfer
Junya Chen1∗, Zidi Xiu1∗ , Benjamin Goldstein1 , Ricardo Henao1 ,
Lawrence Carin2 , and Chenyang Tao1
1

Duke University 2 KAUST
{junya.chen, zidi.xiu, chenyang.tao}@duke.edu

Abstract
Dealing with severe class imbalance poses a major challenge for many real-world
applications, especially when the accurate classification and generalization of
minority classes are of primary interest. In computer vision and NLP, learning
from datasets with long-tail behavior is a recurring theme, especially for naturally
occurring labels. Existing solutions mostly appeal to sampling or weighting adjustments to alleviate the extreme imbalance, or impose inductive bias to prioritize
generalizable associations. Here we take a novel perspective to promote sample
efficiency and model generalization based on the invariance principles of causality.
Our contribution posits a meta-distributional scenario, where the causal generating
mechanism for label-conditional features is invariant across different labels. Such
causal assumption enables efficient knowledge transfer from the dominant classes
to their under-represented counterparts, even if their feature distributions show apparent disparities. This allows us to leverage a causal data augmentation procedure
to enlarge the representation of minority classes. Our development is orthogonal to
the existing imbalanced data learning techniques thus can be seamlessly integrated.
The proposed approach is validated on an extensive set of synthetic and real-world
tasks against state-of-the-art solutions.

1

Introduction

Learning with imbalanced datasets is a common yet still very challenging scenario in many machine
learning applications. Typical scenarios include: (i) rare events, where the event prevalence is
extremely low while their implications are of high cost, e.g., severe risks that people seek to avert
[56]; (ii) emerging objects in a dynamic environment, which call for quick adaptation of an agent to
identify new cases with only a handful target examples and plentiful past experience [31]. A typical
scenario in natural datasets is that the occurrence of different objects follows a power law distribution.
And in many situations, the accurate identification of those rarer instances bears more significant
social-economic values, e.g., fraud detection [24], driving safety [27], nature conservation [50], social
fairness [17], and public health [63, 92].
Notably, severe class imbalance and lack of minority labels are the two major difficulties in this setting,
which render standard learning strategies unsuitable [57]. Without explicit statistical adjustments,
the imbalance induces bias towards the majority classes. On the other hand, the lack of minority
representations prevents the identification of stable correlations that generalize in predictive settings.
In addition, due to technological advancements, more and higher dimensional data are routinely
collected for analysis. This also inadvertently exacerbates the issue of minority modeling as there is
an excess of predictors relative to the limited occurrence of minority samples.
∗

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

