Local policy search with Bayesian optimization

Sarah Müller∗1,4

Alexander von Rohr∗1,2,3

Sebastian Trimpe 1,2

1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Stuttgart, Germany
Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Germany
3
IAV GmbH, Gifhorn, Germany
4
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
sar.mueller@uni-tuebingen.de
{vonrohr, trimpe}@dsme.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find an optimal policy by interaction with an
environment. Consequently, learning complex behavior requires a vast number of
samples, which can be prohibitive in practice. Nevertheless, instead of systematically reasoning and actively choosing informative samples, policy gradients for
local search are often obtained from random perturbations. These random samples yield high variance estimates and hence are sub-optimal in terms of sample
complexity. Actively selecting informative samples is at the core of Bayesian
optimization, which constructs a probabilistic surrogate of the objective from past
samples to reason about informative subsequent ones. In this paper, we propose
to join both worlds. We develop an algorithm utilizing a probabilistic model of
the objective function and its gradient. Based on the model, the algorithm decides
where to query a noisy zeroth-order oracle to improve the gradient estimates. The
resulting algorithm is a novel type of policy search method, which we compare to
existing black-box algorithms. The comparison reveals improved sample complexity and reduced variance in extensive empirical evaluations on synthetic objectives.
Further, we highlight the benefits of active sampling on popular RL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a notoriously data-hungry machine learning problem, where state-ofthe-art methods easily require tens of thousands of data points to learn a given task [1]. For every
data point, the agent has to carry out potentially complex interactions with its environment, either
in simulation or in the physical world. This expensive data collection motivates the development of
sample-efficient algorithms. Herein, we consider policy search problems, a type of RL technique
where we directly optimize the parameters of a policy with respect to the cumulative reward over a
finite episode. The collected data is utilized to estimate the direction of local policy improvement,
enabling the use of powerful optimization techniques such as stochastic gradient descent. Policy
gradient methods (e.g., [2–5]) usually rely on random perturbations for data generation, e.g., in
the form of exploration noise in the action space or stochastic policies, and do not reason about
uncertainty in their gradient estimation. However, innate in the RL setting is the ability to actively
generate data, allowing the agent to decide on informative queries, thereby potentially reducing the
amount of data needed to find a (local) optimum. Active sampling has the potential to allow those
algorithms to improve sample complexity, reducing the number of environment interactions.
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

