Learning to Execute: Efficiently Learning Universal
Plan-Conditioned Policies in Robotics
Ingmar Schubert1 , Danny Driess1 , Ozgur S. Oguz2 , and Marc Toussaint1
1
Learning and Intelligent Systems Group, TU Berlin, Germany
2
Machine Learning and Robotics Lab, University of Stuttgart, Germany
{ingmar.schubert@,danny.driess@campus.,toussaint@}tu-berlin.de
ozgur.oguz@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract
Applications of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in robotics are often limited by high
data demand. On the other hand, approximate models are readily available in many
robotics scenarios, making model-based approaches like planning a data-efficient
alternative. Still, the performance of these methods suffers if the model is imprecise
or wrong. In this sense, the respective strengths and weaknesses of RL and modelbased planners are complementary. In the present work, we investigate how both
approaches can be integrated into one framework that combines their strengths.
We introduce Learning to Execute (L2E), which leverages information contained
in approximate plans to learn universal policies that are conditioned on plans. In
our robotic manipulation experiments, L2E exhibits increased performance when
compared to pure RL, pure planning, or baseline methods combining learning and
planning.

1

Introduction

A central goal of robotics research is to design intelligent machines that can solve arbitrary and
formerly unseen tasks while interacting with the physical world. Reinforcement Learning (RL)
(Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a generic framework to automatically learn such intelligent behavior
with little human engineering. Still, teaching an RL agent to actually exhibit general-purpose
problem-solving behavior is, while possible in principle, prohibitive in practice. This is due to
practical restrictions including limited computational resources and limited data availability. The
latter limitation is particularly dramatic in robotics, where interaction with the physical world is
costly.
On the other hand, for many robotics scenarios, there is a rough model of the environment available. This can be exploited, e.g., using model-based planning approaches (Mordatch et al., 2012;
Kuindersma et al., 2016; Toussaint et al., 2018). Model-based planners potentially offer a more
data-efficient way to reason about an agent’s interaction with the world. Model-based planners have
been used in many areas of robotics, such as for indoor and aerial robots (Faust et al., 2018), visual
manipulation (Jeong et al., 2020), or humanoid walking (Mordatch et al., 2015). Still, if the model
does not account for stochasticity or contains systematic errors, directly following the resulting plan
will not be successful.
The present work starts from the observation that both pure RL approaches and pure planning
approaches have strengths and limitations that are fairly complementary. RL makes no assumptions
about the environment but is data-hungry, and model-based planning generally implies model
simplifications but is data-efficient. For robotic manipulation tasks, it seems natural to try and
integrate both approaches into one framework that combines the strengths of both. In the present
work we seek to add an additional perspective to the open question of how this can be achieved best.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

