Subgraph Federated Learning with
Missing Neighbor Generation

1

Ke Zhang1,4 , Carl Yang1∗, Xiaoxiao Li2 , Lichao Sun3 , Siu Ming Yiu4
Emory University, 2 University of British Columbia, 3 Lehigh University, 4 University of Hong Kong
kzhang2@cs.hku.hk, j.carlyang@emory.edu,
xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca, lis221@lehigh.edu, smyiu@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Graphs have been widely used in data mining and machine learning due to their
unique representation of real-world objects and their interactions. As graphs
are getting bigger and bigger nowadays, it is common to see their subgraphs
separately collected and stored in multiple local systems. Therefore, it is natural to
consider the subgraph federated learning setting, where each local system holds
a small subgraph that may be biased from the distribution of the whole graph.
Hence, the subgraph federated learning aims to collaboratively train a powerful
and generalizable graph mining model without directly sharing their graph data. In
this work, towards the novel yet realistic setting of subgraph federated learning, we
propose two major techniques: (1) FedSage, which trains a GraphSage model based
on FedAvg to integrate node features, link structures, and task labels on multiple
local subgraphs; (2) FedSage+, which trains a missing neighbor generator along
FedSage to deal with missing links across local subgraphs. Empirical results on four
real-world graph datasets with synthesized subgraph federated learning settings
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed techniques. At the
same time, consistent theoretical implications are made towards their generalization
ability on the global graphs.

1

Introduction

Graph mining leverages links among connected nodes in graphs to conduct inference. Recently, graph
neural networks (GNNs) have gained applause with impressing performance and generalizability in
many graph mining tasks [29, 11, 16, 20, 32]. Similar to machine learning tasks in other domains,
attaining a well-performed GNN model requires its training data to not only be sufficient but also follow the similar distribution as general queries. While in reality, data owners often collect limited and
biased graphs and cannot observe the global distribution. With heterogeneous subgraphs separately
stored in local data owners, accomplishing a globally applicable GNN requires collaboration.
Federated learning (FL) [17, 35], targeting at training machine learning models with data distributed in
multiple local systems to resolve the information-silo problem, has shown its advantage in enhancing
the performance and generalizability of the collaboratively trained models without the need of sharing
any actual data. For example, FL has been devised in computer vision (CV) and natural language
processing (NLP) to allow the joint training of powerful and generalizable deep convolutional neural
networks and language models on separately stored datasets of images and texts [19, 6, 18, 39, 13].
Motivating Scenario. Taking the healthcare system as an example, as shown in Fig. 1, residents of
a city may go to different hospitals for various reasons. As a result, their healthcare data, such as
demographics and living conditions, as well as patient interactions, such as co-staying in a sickroom
and co-diagnosis of a disease, are stored only within the hospitals they visit. When any healthcare
problem is to be studied in the whole city, e.g., the prediction of infections when a pandemic occurs,
∗

Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

