Invariance Principle Meets Information Bottleneck
for Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Kartik Ahuja†

Ethan Caballero∗ †

Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet †

Dinghuai Zhang∗ †

Yoshua Bengio †

Ioannis Mitliagkas†

Irina Rish†

Abstract
The invariance principle from causality is at the heart of notable approaches such
as invariant risk minimization (IRM) that seek to address out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization failures. Despite the promising theory, invariance principle-based
approaches fail in common classification tasks, where invariant (causal) features
capture all the information about the label. Are these failures due to the methods
failing to capture the invariance? Or is the invariance principle itself insufficient? To
answer these questions, we revisit the fundamental assumptions in linear regression
tasks, where invariance-based approaches were shown to provably generalize OOD.
In contrast to the linear regression tasks, we show that for linear classification
tasks we need much stronger restrictions on the distribution shifts, or otherwise
OOD generalization is impossible. Furthermore, even with appropriate restrictions
on distribution shifts in place, we show that the invariance principle alone is
insufficient. We prove that a form of the information bottleneck constraint along
with invariance helps address key failures when invariant features capture all the
information about the label and also retains the existing success when they do not.
We propose an approach that incorporates both of these principles and demonstrate
its effectiveness in several experiments.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed an explosion of examples showing deep learning models are prone to
exploiting shortcuts (spurious features) (Geirhos et al., 2020; Pezeshki et al., 2020) which make
them fail to generalize out-of-distribution (OOD). In Beery et al. (2018), a convolutional neural
network was trained to classify camels from cows; however, it was found that the model relied on the
background color (e.g., green pastures for cows) and not on the properties of the animals (e.g., shape).
These examples become very concerning when they occur in real-life applications (e.g., COVID-19
detection (DeGrave et al., 2020)).
To address these out-of-distribution generalization failures, invariant risk minimization (Arjovsky
et al., 2019) and several other works were proposed (Ahuja et al., 2020; Pezeshki et al., 2020; Krueger
et al., 2020; Robey et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). The invariance principle from causality (Peters
et al., 2015; Pearl, 1995) is at the heart of these works. The principle distinguishes predictors that
only rely on the causes of the label from those that do not. The optimal predictor that only focuses on
the causes is invariant and min-max optimal (Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018; Koyama and Yamaguchi,
2020; Ahuja et al., 2021) under many distribution shifts but the same is not true for other predictors.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: kartik.ahuja@mila.quebec.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

