Dimension-Free Empirical Entropy Estimation
Doron Cohen
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
doronv@post.bgu.ac.il

Aryeh Kontorovich
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
karyeh@cs.bgu.ac.il

Aaron Koolyk
Department of Computer Science
Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel
aaron.koolyk@mail.huji.ac.il

Geoffrey Wolfer
JSPS International Research Fellow
Department of Computer
and Information Sciences
Tokyo University of Agriculture
and Technology
Tokyo, Japan ∗
geo-wolfer@m2.tuat.ac.jp

Abstract
We seek an entropy estimator for discrete distributions with fully empirical accuracy
bounds. As stated, this goal is infeasible without some prior assumptions on the
distribution. We discover that a certain information moment assumption renders
the problem feasible. We argue that the moment assumption is natural and, in
some sense, minimalistic — weaker than finite support or tail decay conditions.
Under the moment assumption, we provide the first finite-sample entropy estimates
for infinite alphabets, nearly recovering the known minimax rates. Moreover, we
demonstrate that our empirical bounds are significantly sharper than the state-ofthe-art bounds, for various natural distributions and non-trivial sample regimes.
Along the way, we give a dimension-free analogue of the Cover-Thomas result
on entropy continuity (with respect to total variation distance) for finite alphabets,
which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Estimating the entropy of a discrete distribution based on a finite iid sample is a classic problem with
theoretical and practical ramifications. Considerable progress has been made in the case of a finite
alphabet, and the countably infinite case has also attracted a fair amount of attention in recent years.
A less-addressed issue is one of empirical accuracy estimates: data-dependent bounds adaptive to the
particular distribution being sampled.
Our point of departure is the simpler (to analyze) problem of estimating a discrete distribution µ in
total variation norm k·kTV = 12 k·k1 , where the most recent advance was made by Cohen et al. [2020];
see therein for a literature review. If µ is a distribution on N and µ̂n is its empirical realization based
on a sample of size n, then Theorem 2.1 of Cohen et al. states that with probability at least 1 − δ,
r
2 Xp
log(2/δ)
.
(1)
kµ − µ̂n k1 ≤ √
µ̂n (j) + 6
2n
n
j∈N

∗

A major part of this research was conducted when the author was graduate student at Ben-Gurion University
of The Negev, Israel.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

