Collaborating with Humans without Human Data
DJ Strouse⇤, Kevin R. McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, Richard Everett⇤
DeepMind
{strouse, kevinrmckee, botvinick, edwardhughes, reverett}@deepmind.com

Abstract
Collaborating with humans requires rapidly adapting to their individual strengths,
weaknesses, and preferences. Unfortunately, most standard multi-agent reinforcement learning techniques, such as self-play (SP) or population play (PP), produce
agents that overfit to their training partners and do not generalize well to humans.
Alternatively, researchers can collect human data, train a human model using behavioral cloning, and then use that model to train “human-aware” agents (“behavioral
cloning play”, or BCP). While such an approach can improve the generalization
of agents to new human co-players, it involves the onerous and expensive step of
collecting large amounts of human data first. Here, we study the problem of how
to train agents that collaborate well with human partners without using human data.
We argue that the crux of the problem is to produce a diverse set of training partners. Drawing inspiration from successful multi-agent approaches in competitive
domains, we find that a surprisingly simple approach is highly effective. We train
our agent partner as the best response to a population of self-play agents and their
past checkpoints taken throughout training, a method we call Fictitious Co-Play
(FCP). Our experiments focus on a two-player collaborative cooking simulator that
has recently been proposed as a challenge problem for coordination with humans.
We find that FCP agents score significantly higher than SP, PP, and BCP when
paired with novel agent and human partners. Furthermore, humans also report a
strong subjective preference to partnering with FCP agents over all baselines.

1

Introduction

Generating agents which collaborate with novel partners is a longstanding challenge for Artificial
Intelligence (AI) [4, 16, 37, 52]. Achieving ad-hoc, zero-shot coordination [31, 66] is especially
important in situations where an AI must generalize to novel human partners [6, 61]. Many successful
approaches have employed human models, either constructed explicitly [14, 35, 53] or learnt implicitly
[12, 60]. By contrast, recent work in competitive domains has shown that it is possible to reach humanlevel using model-free reinforcement learning (RL) without human data, via self-play [8, 9, 63, 64].
This begs the question: Can model-free RL without human data generate agents that can collaborate
with novel humans?
We seek an answer to this question in the space of common-payoff games, where all agents work
towards a shared goal and receive the same reward. Self-play (SP), in which an agent learns from
repeated games played against copies of itself, does not produce agents that generalize well to novel
co-players [10, 11, 21, 44]. Intuitively, this is because agents trained in self-play only ever need to
coordinate with themselves, and so make for brittle and stubborn collaborators with new partners
who act differently. Population play (PP) trains a population of agents, all of whom interact with each
other [39]. While PP can generate agents capable of cooperation with humans in competitive team
games [34], it still fails to produce robust partners for novel humans in pure common-payoff settings
⇤

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

