Fast Minimum-norm Adversarial Attacks through
Adaptive Norm Constraints

Maura Pintor

Fabio Roli

University of Cagliari, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
maura.pintor@unica.it

University of Cagliari, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
roli@unica.it

Wieland Brendel

Battista Biggio

Tübingen AI Center,
University of Tübingen, Germany
wieland.brendel@uni-tuebingen.de

University of Cagliari, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
battista.biggio@unica.it

Abstract
Evaluating adversarial robustness amounts to finding the minimum perturbation
needed to have an input sample misclassified. The inherent complexity of the
underlying optimization requires current gradient-based attacks to be carefully
tuned, initialized, and possibly executed for many computationally-demanding
iterations, even if specialized to a given perturbation model. In this work, we
overcome these limitations by proposing a fast minimum-norm (FMN) attack
that works with different `p -norm perturbation models (p = 0, 1, 2, ∞), is robust to hyperparameter choices, does not require adversarial starting points, and
converges within few lightweight steps. It works by iteratively finding the sample misclassified with maximum confidence within an `p -norm constraint of
size , while adapting  to minimize the distance of the current sample to the
decision boundary. Extensive experiments show that FMN significantly outperforms existing `0 , `1 , and `∞ -norm attacks in terms of perturbation size,
convergence speed and computation time, while reporting comparable performances with state-of-the-art `2 -norm attacks. Our open-source code is available at:
https://github.com/pralab/Fast-Minimum-Norm-FMN-Attack.

1

Introduction

Learning algorithms are vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e., intentionally-perturbed inputs aimed
to mislead classification at test time [24, 3]. While adversarial examples have received much attention,
evaluating the robustness of deep networks against them remains a challenge. Adversarial attacks
solve a non-convex optimization problem and are thus prone to finding suboptimal solutions; in
particular, all attacks make certain assumptions about the underlying geometry and properties of the
optimization problem which, if violated, can derail the attack and may lead to premature conclusions
regarding model robustness. That is why the vast majority of defenses published in recent years have
later shown to be ineffective against more powerful white-box attacks [5, 1]. Having an arsenal of
diverse attacks that can be adapted to specific defenses is one of the most promising avenues for
increasing confidence in white-box robustness evaluations [6, 25]. While it may seem that the number
of attacks is already large, most of them are just small variations of the same technique, make similar
underlying assumptions and thus tend to fail jointly (see, e.g., [25], in which projected-gradient
attacks all fail similarly against the “Ensemble Diversity” defense).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

