Distilling Robust and Non-Robust Features in
Adversarial Examples by Information Bottleneck
Junho Kim∗, Byung-Kwan Lee∗, Yong Man Ro†
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{arkimjh, leebk, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial examples, generated by carefully crafted perturbation, have attracted
considerable attention in research fields. Recent works have argued that the existence of the robust and non-robust features is a primary cause of the adversarial
examples, and investigated their internal interactions in the feature space. In this
paper, we propose a way of explicitly distilling feature representation into the robust and non-robust features, using Information Bottleneck. Specifically, we inject
noise variation to each feature unit and evaluate the information flow in the feature
representation to dichotomize feature units either robust or non-robust, based on the
noise variation magnitude. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate
that the distilled features are highly correlated with adversarial prediction, and they
have human-perceptible semantic information by themselves. Furthermore, we
present an attack mechanism intensifying the gradient of non-robust features that
is directly related to the model prediction, and validate its effectiveness of breaking
model robustness.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable performances in a wide variety of machine
learning tasks. Despite the breakthrough outcomes, DNNs are easily fooled from adversarial attacks,
with crafted perturbations [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. These perturbations are imperceptible to human eyes,
but simply adding them to clean images (i.e., adversarial examples) can effectively deceive classifiers.
Such a vulnerability affects security problems [8, 9, 10, 11], bringing in the weak reliability of DNNs.
Previous works have broadly investigated the reason for the widespread of such adversarial examples.
Goodfellow et al. [2] have argued that adversarial vulnerability is induced from the excessive linearity
nature of DNNs in high-dimensional spaces. Several works [1, 12] have regarded the primary cause
of the adversarial examples as statistical variation with aberrations in data manifold. Schmidt et
al. [13] have suggested that the pervasiveness of the examples should not be considered as a drawback
of training methods for DNNs, since the available dataset may not be large enough to train them
robustly.
In recent years, Tsipras et al. [14] have suggested an intriguing analysis that the disagreement
between standard and adversarial accuracy stems from differently trained feature representation. In
this literature, Ilyas et al. [15] further have demonstrated the adversarial examples are inevitable
results of standard supervised training and arisen from well-generalized features in the dataset. They
have analyzed the adversarial examples are originated from brittle and unintelligible features (i.e.,
non-robust features) that are arbitrarily manipulated with the imperceptible noise, and shown that the
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

