MAU: A Motion-Aware Unit for Video Prediction and
Beyond

Zheng Chang
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
changzheng18@mails.ucas.ac.cn
Xinfeng Zhang
School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
xfzhang@ucas.ac.cn

Shanshe Wang ∗
Institute of Digital Media,
Peking University
sswang@pku.edu.cn

Siwei Ma
Institute of Digital Media,
Information Technology R&D Innovation Center,
Peking University
swma@pku.edu.cn

Yan Ye
Alibaba Group
yan.ye@alibaba-inc.com

Xinguang Xiang
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
xgxiang@njust.edu.cn

Wen Gao
Institute of Digital Media,
Peking University
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wgao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurately predicting inter-frame motion information plays a key role in video
prediction tasks. In this paper, we propose a Motion-Aware Unit (MAU) to capture
reliable inter-frame motion information by broadening the temporal receptive field
of the predictive units. The MAU consists of two modules, the attention module
and the fusion module. The attention module aims to learn an attention map based
on the correlations between the current spatial state and the historical spatial states.
Based on the learned attention map, the historical temporal states are aggregated
to an augmented motion information (AMI). In this way, the predictive unit can
perceive more temporal dynamics from a wider receptive field. Then, the fusion
module is utilized to further aggregate the augmented motion information (AMI)
and current appearance information (current spatial state) to the final predicted
frame. The computation load of MAU is relatively low, and the proposed unit can
be easily applied to other predictive models. Moreover, an information recalling
scheme is employed into the encoders and decoders to help preserve the visual
details of the predictions. We evaluate the MAU on both video prediction and early
action recognition tasks. Experimental results show that the MAU outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on both tasks.

∗

Corresponding author: Shanshe Wang.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

