Overlapping Spaces for Compact
Graph Representations

Kirill Shevkunov
Yandex, MIPT
Moscow, Russia
shevkunov.ks@phystech.edu

Liudmila Prokhorenkova
Yandex Research, MIPT, HSE University
Moscow, Russia
ostroumova-la@yandex.ru

Abstract
Various non-trivial spaces are becoming popular for embedding structured data
such as graphs, texts, or images. Following spherical and hyperbolic spaces, more
general product spaces have been proposed. However, searching for the best configuration of a product space is a resource-intensive procedure, which reduces the
practical applicability of the idea. We generalize the concept of product space and
introduce an overlapping space that does not have the configuration search problem.
The main idea is to allow subsets of coordinates to be shared between spaces of
different types (Euclidean, hyperbolic, spherical). As a result, we often need fewer
coordinates to store the objects. Additionally, we propose an optimization algorithm that automatically learns the optimal configuration. Our experiments confirm
that overlapping spaces outperform the competitors in graph embedding tasks with
different evaluation metrics. We also perform an empirical analysis in a realistic
information retrieval setup, where we compare all spaces by incorporating them
into DSSM. In this case, the proposed overlapping space consistently achieves
nearly optimal results without any configuration tuning. This allows for reducing
training time, which can be essential in large-scale applications.

1

Introduction

Building vector representations of various objects is one of the central tasks of machine learning.
Word embeddings such as Glove [22] and Word2Vec [19] are widely used in natural language
processing; a similar Prod2Vec [7] approach is used in recommendation systems. There are many
algorithms proposed for graph embeddings, e.g., Node2Vec [8] and DeepWalk [23]. Recommendation
systems often construct embeddings of a bipartite graph that describes interactions between users and
items [10].
For a long time, embeddings were considered exclusively in Rn . However, the hyperbolic space
was shown to be more suitable for graph, word, and image representations due to the underlying
hierarchical structure [12, 20, 21, 26]. Going beyond spaces of constant curvature, a recent study [9]
proposed product spaces, which combine several copies of Euclidean, spherical, and hyperbolic
spaces. While these spaces demonstrate promising results, the optimal signature (types of combined
spaces and their dimensions) has to be chosen via brute force, which may not be acceptable in
large-scale applications.
In this paper, we propose a more general metric space called overlapping space (OS) together with
an optimization algorithm that trains signature simultaneously with embedding allowing us to avoid
brute-forcing. The main idea is to allow coordinates to be shared between different spaces, which
significantly reduces the number of coordinates needed.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

