Revisit Multimodal Meta-Learning
through the Lens of Multi-Task Learning

Milad Abdollahzadeh, Touba Malekzadeh, Ngai-Man Cheung
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{milad_abdollahzadeh, touba_malekzadeh, ngaiman_cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Multimodal meta-learning is a recent problem that extends conventional few-shot
meta-learning by generalizing its setup to diverse multimodal task distributions.
This setup makes a step towards mimicking how humans make use of a diverse set
of prior skills to learn new skills. Previous work has achieved encouraging performance. In particular, in spite of the diversity of the multimodal tasks, previous
work claims that a single meta-learner trained on a multimodal distribution can
sometimes outperform multiple specialized meta-learners trained on individual unimodal distributions. The improvement is attributed to knowledge transfer between
different modes of task distributions. However, there is no deep investigation to
verify and understand the knowledge transfer between multimodal tasks. Our work
makes two contributions to multimodal meta-learning. First, we propose a method
to quantify knowledge transfer between tasks of different modes at a micro-level.
Our quantitative, task-level analysis is inspired by the recent transference idea
from multi-task learning. Second, inspired by hard parameter sharing in multi-task
learning and a new interpretation of related work, we propose a new multimodal
meta-learner that outperforms existing work by considerable margins. While the
major focus is on multimodal meta-learning, our work also attempts to shed light
on task interaction in conventional meta-learning. The code for this project is
available at https://miladabd.github.io/KML.

1

Introduction

Multimodal meta-learning was recently proposed as an extension of conventional few-shot metalearning. In [1], it is defined as a meta-learning problem that involves classification tasks from
multiple different input and label domains. An example in their work is a 3-mode few-shot image
classification which includes tasks to classify characters (Omniglot) and natural objects of different
characteristics (FC100, mini-ImageNet). The multimodal extension of meta-learning is proposed
with two objectives. First, it generalizes the conventional meta-learning setup for more diverse
task distributions. Second, it makes a step towards mimicking humans’ ability to acquire a new
skill via prior knowledge of a set of diverse skills. For example, humans can quickly learn a novel
snowboarding trick by exploiting not only fundamental snowboarding knowledge but also skiing and
skateboarding experience [1].
Multimodal Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MMAML) [1] proposes a framework to better handle
multimodal task distributions and achieves encouraging performance. As one of the most intriguing
findings, MMAML claims that a single meta-learner trained on a multimodal distribution can
sometimes outperform multiple specialized meta-learners trained on individual unimodal distributions.
This was observed in spite of the diversity of the multimodal tasks. In [1], this observation is attributed
to knowledge transfer across different modes of multimodal task distribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

