Variational Diffusion Models
Diederik P. Kingma⇤ , Tim Salimans⇤ , Ben Poole, Jonathan Ho
Google Research

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have demonstrated a capacity for perceptually
impressive synthesis, but can they also be great likelihood-based models? We
answer this in the affirmative, and introduce a family of diffusion-based generative
models that obtain state-of-the-art likelihoods on standard image density estimation
benchmarks. Unlike other diffusion-based models, our method allows for efficient
optimization of the noise schedule jointly with the rest of the model. We show
that the variational lower bound (VLB) simplifies to a remarkably short expression
in terms of the signal-to-noise ratio of the diffused data, thereby improving our
theoretical understanding of this model class. Using this insight, we prove an
equivalence between several models proposed in the literature. In addition, we
show that the continuous-time VLB is invariant to the noise schedule, except
for the signal-to-noise ratio at its endpoints. This enables us to learn a noise
schedule that minimizes the variance of the resulting VLB estimator, leading to
faster optimization. Combining these advances with architectural improvements,
we obtain state-of-the-art likelihoods on image density estimation benchmarks,
outperforming autoregressive models that have dominated these benchmarks for
many years, with often significantly faster optimization. In addition, we show
how to use the model as part of a bits-back compression scheme, and demonstrate
lossless compression rates close to the theoretical optimum.

1

Introduction

Likelihood-based generative modeling is a central task in machine learning that is the basis for a wide
range of applications ranging from speech synthesis [Oord et al., 2016], to translation [Sutskever
et al., 2014], to compression [MacKay, 2003], to many others. Autoregressive models have long been
the dominant model class on this task due to their tractable likelihood and expressivity, as shown in
Figure 1. Diffusion models have recently shown impressive results in image [Ho et al., 2020, Song
et al., 2021b, Nichol and Dhariwal, 2021] and audio generation [Kong et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020]
in terms of perceptual quality, but have yet to match autoregressive models on density estimation
benchmarks. In this paper we make several technical contributions that allow diffusion models to
challenge the dominance of autoregressive models in this domain. Our main contributions are as
follows:
• We introduce a flexible family of diffusion-based generative models that achieve new stateof-the-art log-likelihoods on standard image density estimation benchmarks (CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet). This is enabled by incorporating Fourier features into the diffusion model and
using a learnable specification of the diffusion process, among other modeling innovations.
• We improve our theoretical understanding of density modeling using diffusion models by
analyzing their variational lower bound (VLB), deriving a remarkably simple expression in
terms of the signal-to-noise ratio of the diffusion process. This result delivers new insight
* Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

