Improving Computational Efficiency in Visual
Reinforcement Learning via Stored Embeddings

Lili Chen1

Kimin Lee1
Aravind Srinivas2
1
UC Berkeley 2 OpenAI

Pieter Abbeel1

Abstract
Recent advances in off-policy deep reinforcement learning (RL) have led to impressive success in complex tasks from visual observations. Experience replay
improves sample-efficiency by reusing experiences from the past, and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) process high-dimensional inputs effectively. However,
such techniques demand high memory and computational bandwidth. In this paper,
we present Stored Embeddings for Efficient Reinforcement Learning (SEER), a
simple modification of existing off-policy RL methods, to address these computational and memory requirements. To reduce the computational overhead of gradient
updates in CNNs, we freeze the lower layers of CNN encoders early in training
due to early convergence of their parameters. Additionally, we reduce memory
requirements by storing the low-dimensional latent vectors for experience replay
instead of high-dimensional images, enabling an adaptive increase in the replay
buffer capacity, a useful technique in constrained-memory settings. In our experiments, we show that SEER does not degrade the performance of RL agents while
significantly saving computation and memory across a diverse set of DeepMind
Control environments and Atari games.

1

Introduction

Success stories of deep reinforcement learning (RL) from high dimensional inputs such as pixels
or large spatial layouts include achieving superhuman performance on Atari games [30, 37, 1],
grandmaster level in Starcraft II [50] and grasping a diverse set of objects with impressive success
rates and generalization with robots in the real world [21]. Modern off-policy RL algorithms [30,
15, 11, 12, 39, 22, 24] have improved the sample-efficiency of agents that process high-dimensional
pixel inputs with convolutional neural networks (CNNs; LeCun et al. 25) using past experiential data
that is typically stored as raw observations in a replay buffer [28]. However, these methods demand
high memory and computational bandwidth, which makes deep RL inaccessible in several scenarios,
such as learning with much lighter on-device computation (e.g. mobile phones or other light-weight
edge devices).
For compute- and memory-efficient deep learning, several strategies, such as network pruning [13,
8], quantization [13, 17] and freezing [53, 36] have been proposed in supervised learning and
unsupervised learning for various purposes (see Section 2 for more details). In computer vision,
Raghu et al. [36] and Brock et al. [5] showed that the computational cost of updating CNNs can be
reduced by freezing lower layers earlier in training, and Han et al. [13] introduced a deep compression,
which reduces the memory requirement of neural networks by producing a sparse network. In natural
language processing, several approaches [46, 42] have studied improving the computational efficiency
of Transformers [49]. In deep RL, however, developing compute- and memory-efficient techniques
has received relatively little attention despite their serious impact on the practicality of RL algorithms.
In this paper, we propose Stored Embeddings for Efficient Reinforcement Learning (SEER), a simple
technique to reduce computational overhead and memory requirements that is compatible with various
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

