Sparse Quadratic Optimisation over the
Stiefel Manifold with Application to
Permutation Synchronisation

Florian Bernard
TU Munich, University of Bonn

Daniel Cremers
TU Munich

Johan Thunberg
Halmstad University

Abstract
We address the non-convex optimisation problem of finding a sparse matrix on the
Stiefel manifold (matrices with mutually orthogonal columns of unit length) that
maximises (or minimises) a quadratic objective function. Optimisation problems on
the Stiefel manifold occur for example in spectral relaxations of various combinatorial problems, such as graph matching, clustering, or permutation synchronisation.
Although sparsity is a desirable property in such settings, it is mostly neglected
in spectral formulations since existing solvers, e.g. based on eigenvalue decomposition, are unable to account for sparsity while at the same time maintaining
global optimality guarantees. We fill this gap and propose a simple yet effective
sparsity-promoting modification of the Orthogonal Iteration algorithm for finding
the dominant eigenspace of a matrix. By doing so, we can guarantee that our
method finds a Stiefel matrix that is globally optimal with respect to the quadratic
objective function, while in addition being sparse. As a motivating application we
consider the task of permutation synchronisation, which can be understood as a
constrained clustering problem that has particular relevance for matching multiple
images or 3D shapes in computer vision, computer graphics, and beyond. We
demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms previous methods in this
domain.

1

Introduction

We are interested in optimisation problems of the form
arg max f (U ) with f (U ) = tr(U T W U ) and St(m, d) := {X ∈ Rm×d : X T X = Id } , (1)
U ∈St(m,d)

where Id is the identity matrix of dimension d, W ∈ Rm×m and the set St(m, d) denotes the
Stiefel manifold (m ≥ d). Throughout the paper, w.l.o.g. we consider a maximisation formulation
and we assume that W is a symmetric and positive semidefinite matrix (see Lemma 1 in Sec. 2).
Despite the non-convexity of Problem (1), problems of this form can be solved to global optimality
based on the eigenvalue decomposition, i.e. by setting U ∗ = Vd , where Vd ∈ Rm×d denotes an
orthogonal basis of eigenvectors corresponding to the d largest eigenvalues of W , see Lemma 2.
The fact that we can efficiently find global optima of Problem (1) makes it a popular relaxation
formulation of various difficult combinatorial problems. This includes spectral relaxations [43, 26, 17]
of the NP-hard quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [35], spectral clustering [33, 44], or spectral
permutation synchronisation [34, 39, 31]. Yet, a major difficulty of such approaches is to discretise the
(relaxed) continuous solution in order to obtain a feasible solution of the original (discrete) problem.
For example, in the QAP one optimises over the set of permutation matrices, in clustering one
optimises over the set of matrices with rows comprising canonical basis vectors, and in permutation
synchronisation one optimises over multiple permutation matrices that are stacked into a large block
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

