Residual Pathway Priors for Soft Equivariance
Constraints
Marc Finzi∗
New York University

Greg Benton∗
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Abstract
Models such as convolutional neural networks restrict the hypothesis space to a
set of functions satisfying equivariance constraints, and improve generalization in
problems by capturing relevant symmetries. However, symmetries are often only
partially respected, preventing models with restriction biases from fitting the data.
We introduce Residual Pathway Priors (RPPs) as a method for converting hard architectural constraints into soft priors, guiding models towards structured solutions
while retaining the ability to capture additional complexity. RPPs are resilient to
approximate or misspecified symmetries, and are as effective as fully constrained
models even when symmetries are exact. We show that RPPs provide compelling
performance on both model-free and model-based reinforcement learning problems,
where contact forces and directional rewards violate the assumptions of equivariant
networks. Finally, we demonstrate that RPPs have broad applicability, including
dynamical systems, regression, and classification.

1

Introduction

Central to the expanding application of deep learning to structured data like images, text, audio,
sets, graphs, point clouds, and dynamical systems, has been a search for finding the appropriate set
of inductive biases to match the model to the data. These inductive biases, such as recurrence [43],
local connectivity [29], equivariance [10], or differential equations [8], reduce the set of explored
hypotheses and improve generalization. Equivariance in particular has had a large impact as it allows
ruling out a large class of meaningless shortcut features in many distinct domains, such as the ordering
of the nodes in graphs and sets or the coordinate system chosen for an image.
A disadvantage of hard coding these restrictions is that this prior knowledge may not match reality.
A scene may have long range non-local interactions, rotation equivariance may be violated by a
preferred camera angle, or a dynamical system may occasionally have discontinuous transitions.
In particular, symmetries are delicate. A small perturbation like adding wind breaks the rotational
symmetry of a pendulum, and bumpy or tilted terrain could break the translation symmetry for
locomotion. In these cases we would like to incorporate our prior knowledge in a way that admits
our own ignorance, and allows for the possibility that the world is more complex than we imagined.
We aim to develop an approach that is more general, and can be applied when symmetries are exact,
approximate, or non-existent.
The Bayesian framework provides a mechanism for expressing such knowledge through priors. In
much of the past work on Bayesian neural networks, the relationship between the prior distribution
and the functions preferred by the prior is not transparent. While it is easy to specify different
variances for different channels, or to use heavy tailed distributions, it is hard know how high level
properties meaningfully translate into these low level attributes. Ultimately priors should represent our
prior beliefs, and those beliefs we have are about high level concepts like the locality, independence,
and symmetries of the data.
∗

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

