End-to-end reconstruction meets data-driven
regularization for inverse problems

Subhadip Mukherjee∗1 , Marcello Carioni∗1 , Ozan Öktem2 , and Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb1
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK
2
Department of Mathematics, KTH–Royal institute of Technology, Sweden
∗
Equal contribution authors
Emails: {sm2467, mc2250, cbs31}@cam.ac.uk, ozan@kth.se

Abstract
We propose a new approach for learning end-to-end reconstruction operators based
on unpaired training data for ill-posed inverse problems. The proposed method
combines the classical variational framework with iterative unrolling and essentially seeks to minimize a weighted combination of the expected distortion in the
measurement space and the Wasserstein-1 distance between the distributions of
the reconstruction and the ground-truth. More specifically, the regularizer in the
variational setting is parametrized by a deep neural network and learned simultaneously with the unrolled reconstruction operator. The variational problem is then
initialized with the output of the reconstruction network and solved iteratively till
convergence. Notably, it takes significantly fewer iterations to converge as compared to variational methods, thanks to the excellent initialization obtained via the
unrolled operator. The resulting approach combines the computational efficiency
of end-to-end unrolled reconstruction with the well-posedness and noise-stability
guarantees of the variational setting. Moreover, we demonstrate with the example
of image reconstruction in X-ray computed tomography (CT) that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods and that it outperforms or is at
least on par with state-of-the-art supervised data-driven reconstruction approaches.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems are ubiquitous in imaging applications, wherein one seeks to recover an unknown
model parameter x ∈ X from its incomplete and noisy measurement, given by
y δ = A(x) + e ∈ Y.
Here, the forward operator A : X → Y models the measurement process in the absence of noise, and
e, with kek2 ≤ δ, denotes the measurement noise. For example, in computed tomography (CT), the
forward operator computes line integrals of x over a predetermined set of lines in R3 and the goal
is to reconstruct x from its projections along these lines. Without any further information about x,
inverse problems are typically ill-posed, meaning that there could be several possible reconstructions
that are consistent with the measured data, even without any noise.
The variational framework circumvents ill-posedness by encoding prior knowledge about x via a
regularization functional R : X → R. In the variational setting, one solves
min LY (y δ , A(x)) + λ R(x),
x∈X

(1)

where LY : Y × Y → R+ measures data-fidelity and R penalizes undesirable or unlikely solutions.
The penalty λ > 0 balances the regularization strength with the fidelity of the reconstruction. The
variational problem (1) is said to be well-posed if it has a unique solution varying continuously in y δ .
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

