SIMONe: View-Invariant, Temporally-Abstracted
Object Representations via Unsupervised Video
Decomposition

Rishabh Kabra1 , Daniel Zoran1 , Goker Erdogan1 , Loic Matthey1
Antonia Creswell1 , Matthew Botvinick1 , Alexander Lerchner1 , Christopher P. Burgess2∗
1
DeepMind, 2 Wayve, ∗ Work done at DeepMind
{rkabra, danielzoran, gokererdogan, lmatthey,
tonicreswell, botvinick, lerchner}@deepmind.com, chrisburgess@wayve.ai

Abstract
To help agents reason about scenes in terms of their building blocks, we wish
to extract the compositional structure of any given scene (in particular, the configuration and characteristics of objects comprising the scene). This problem is
especially difficult when scene structure needs to be inferred while also estimating
the agent’s location/viewpoint, as the two variables jointly give rise to the agent’s
observations. We present an unsupervised variational approach to this problem.
Leveraging the shared structure that exists across different scenes, our model learns
to infer two sets of latent representations from RGB video input: a set of "object"
latents, corresponding to the time-invariant, object-level contents of the scene, as
well as a set of "frame" latents, corresponding to global time-varying elements such
as viewpoint. This factorization of latents allows our model, SIMONe, to represent
object attributes in an allocentric manner which does not depend on viewpoint.
Moreover, it allows us to disentangle object dynamics and summarize their trajectories as time-abstracted, view-invariant, per-object properties. We demonstrate
these capabilities, as well as the model’s performance in terms of view synthesis
and instance segmentation, across three procedurally generated video datasets.

1

Introduction

The problem of unsupervised visual scene understanding has become an increasingly central topic
in machine learning [1, 2]. The attention is merited by potential gains to reasoning, autonomous
navigation, and myriad tasks. However, within the current literature, different studies frame the
problem in different ways. One approach aims to decompose images into component objects and
object features, supporting (among other things) generation of alternative data that permits insertion,
deletion, or repositioning of individual objects [3–6]. Another approach aims at a very different
form of decomposition—between allocentric scene structure and a variable viewpoint—supporting
generation of views of a scene from new vantage points [7–9] and, if not supplied as input, estimation
of camera pose [10]. Although there is work pursuing both of these approaches concurrently in
the supervised setting [11–13], very few previous studies have approached the combined challenge
in the unsupervised case. In this work, we introduce the Sequence-Integrating Multi-Object Net
(SIMONe), a model which pursues that goal of object-level and viewpoint-level scene decomposition
and synthesis without supervision. SIMONe is designed to handle these challenges without privileged
information concerning camera pose, and in dynamic scenes.
Given a video of a scene our model is able to decouple scene structure from viewpoint information
(see Figure 1). To do so, it utilizes video-based cues, and a structured latent space which separates
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

