Deconvolutional Networks on Graph Data

Jia Li1 , Jiajin Li2 , Yang Liu1 , Jianwei Yu2 , Yueting Li2 , Hong Cheng2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jialee@ust.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we consider an inverse problem in graph learning domain – “given
the graph representations smoothed by Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), how
can we reconstruct the input graph signal?" We propose Graph Deconvolutional
Network (GDN) and motivate the design of GDN via a combination of inverse
filters in spectral domain and de-noising layers in wavelet domain, as the inverse
operation results in a high frequency amplifier and may amplify the noise. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on several tasks including
graph feature imputation and graph structure generation.

1

Introduction

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [6, 20] have been widely used to transform an input graph
structure A and feature matrix X into graph representations H, which can be taken as a mapping
function f : (A, X) → H. In this paper, we consider its inverse problem g : (A, H) → X, i.e.,
given the graph representations smoothed by GCNs, how can we reconstruct the input graph signal?
More specifically, we initiate a systematic study of Graph Deconvolutional Networks (GDNs), to
reconstruct the signals smoothed by GCNs. A good GDN component could benefit many applications
such as reconstruction [44] and generation [19]. For examples in computer vision, several studies [45,
29] have demonstrated that the performance of autoencoders on reconstruction and generation can
be further improved by encoding with Convolutional Networks and decoding with Deconvolutional
Networks [46]. However, extending this symmetric autoencoder framework to graph-structured data
requires graph deconvolutional operations, which remains open-ended and hasn’t been well studied
as opposed to the large body of solutions that have already been proposed for GCNs.
Most GCNs proposed by prior works, e.g., Cheby-GCN [6] and GCN [20], exploit spectral graph
convolutions [33] and Chebyshev polynomials [15] to retain coarse-grained information and avoid
explicit eigen-decomposition of the graph Laplacian. Until recently, [39] and [8] have noticed that
GCN [20] acts as a low pass filter in spectral domain and retains smoothed representations. Inspired
by prior works in the domain of signal deconvolution [22, 9, 13], we are motivated to design a
GDN by an inverse operation of the low pass filters embodied in GCNs. Furthermore, we observe
directly reversing a low pass filter results in a high frequency amplifier in spectral domain and may
amplify the noise. In this regard, we introduce a spectral-wavelet GDN to decode the smoothed
representations into the input graph signals. The proposed spectral-wavelet GDN employs spectral
graph convolutions with an inverse filter to obtain inversed signals and then de-noises the inversed
signals in wavelet domain. In addition, we apply Maclaurin series as a fast approximation technique
to compute both inverse filters and wavelet kernels [8].
We evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed GDN with two tasks: graph feature imputation [35, 44]
and graph structure generation [19, 14]. For the former task, we further propose a graph autoencoder
(GAE) framework that resembles the symmetric fashion of architectures [29]. The proposed GAE
outperforms the state-of-the-arts on six benchmarks. For the latter task, our proposed GDN can
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

