Deep Markov Factor Analysis:
Towards Concurrent Temporal and Spatial Analysis
of fMRI Data
Amirreza Farnoosh
Augmented Cognition Lab (ACLab)
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
farnoosh.a@northeastern.edu
Sarah Ostadabbas
Augmented Cognition Lab (ACLab)
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
ostadabbas@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Factor analysis methods have been widely used in neuroimaging to transfer high
dimensional imaging data into low dimensional, ideally interpretable representations. However, most of these methods overlook the highly nonlinear and complex
temporal dynamics of neural processes when factorizing their imaging data. In
this paper, we present deep Markov factor analysis (DMFA), a generative model
that employs Markov property in a chain of low dimensional temporal embeddings
together with spatial inductive assumptions, all related through neural networks,
to capture temporal dynamics in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data, and tackle their high spatial dimensionality, respectively. Augmented with a
discrete latent, DMFA is able to cluster fMRI data in its low dimensional temporal
embedding with regard to subject and cognitive state variability, therefore, enables
validation of a variety of fMRI-driven neuroscientific hypotheses. Experimental
results on both synthetic and real fMRI data demonstrate the capacity of DMFA in
revealing interpretable clusters and capturing nonlinear temporal dependencies in
these high dimensional imaging data.

1

Introduction

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been extensively used in cognitive neuroscience
to study brain structures and their interactions at rest or during a cognitive task [Glover, 2011]. fMRI
also provides insights into how brain’s functional connectivity changes during different experimental
conditions [Preti et al., 2017, Azari et al., 2020]. However, due to high dimensional nature of fMRI
data (tens of thousands of voxels in few seconds-long sessions), analyzing functional connectivity of
brain could get very challenging [Turk-Browne, 2013]. Most classical methods employ region of
interest (ROI)-based approaches to reduce size of data for processing [Poldrack, 2007, Etzel et al.,
2009, Farnoosh and Soltanian-Zadeh, 2017, Gadgil et al., 2020]. However, averaging across many
voxels within each region could wash out signals from small number of task-relevant voxels with
noise from non-activated voxels, therefore results in a loss of information [Poldrack, 2007].
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

