Discovery of Options via Meta-Learned Subgoals

Vivek Veeriah∗
University of Michigan
Iurii Kemaev
DeepMind

Tom Zahavy
DeepMind

Hado van Hasselt
DeepMind

Matteo Hessel
DeepMind
David Silver
DeepMind

Zhongwen Xu†
DeepMind

Junhyuk Oh
DeepMind

Satinder Singh
University of Michigan, DeepMind

Abstract
Temporal abstractions in the form of options have been shown to help reinforcement learning (RL) agents learn faster. However, despite prior work on this topic,
the problem of discovering options through interaction with an environment remains a challenge. In this paper, we introduce a novel meta-gradient approach
for discovering useful options in multi-task RL environments. Our approach is
based on a manager-worker decomposition of the RL agent, in which a manager
maximises rewards from the environment by learning a task-dependent policy
over both a set of task-independent discovered-options and primitive actions. The
option-reward and termination functions that define a subgoal for each option are
parameterised as neural networks and trained via meta-gradients to maximise their
usefulness. Empirical analysis on gridworld and DeepMind Lab tasks show that:
(1) our approach can discover meaningful and diverse temporally-extended options
in multi-task RL domains, (2) the discovered options are frequently used by the
agent while learning to solve the training tasks, and (3) that the discovered options
help a randomly initialised manager learn faster in completely new tasks.
Reinforcement learning (RL) problems involve learning about temporally-extended actions at multiple
time scales. In RL, the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999) provides a well-defined formalisation for the notion of temporally-extended actions. Options that achieve specific subgoals can be
useful in reinforcement learning (RL) in at least two ways: in model-based RL, they provide faster
rates of convergence through longer-backups of value functions within planning updates (Silver &
Ciosek, 2012; Mann & Mannor, 2014; Brunskill & Li, 2014), while in model-free RL, temporallyextended actions commit agents to intentional multi-step behaviours, which can translate into better
exploration (Machado & Bowling, 2016; Nachum et al., 2019; Osband et al., 2019).
We consider a scenario where an agent learns to solve a distribution over tasks. In such cases having
carefully designed temporal abstractions can greatly reduce the overall sample complexity of learning
for an RL agent that is trying to master those tasks. The agent can produce faster learning mainly
by reusing those abstractions across multiple tasks (Sutton et al., 1999; Solway et al., 2014). Many
recent approaches have empirically validated this by demonstrating that hand-designed temporal
abstractions can often lead to improved learning performance on a variety of challenging multitask RL domains (Imazeki & Maeno, 2003; Kulkarni et al., 2016; Nachum et al., 2018; Riedmiller
et al., 2018). However, if the agent has abstractions that are not useful to a downstream task, it can
significantly hurt the performance by making exploration harder (Jong et al., 2008), emphasising
the challenge involved in carefully hand-designing abstractions that are useful in general, across
many domains and tasks. Thus, the automated discovery of temporal abstractions from experience
without extensive domain-specific knowledge remains an important open problem for reducing
sample complexity in RL.
∗
†

Corresponding Author. Email: vveeriah@umich.edu
Now at Sea AI Lab

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

