Post-Contextual-Bandit Inference
Aurélien Bibaut
Netflix
abibaut@netflix.com

Maria Dimakopoulou
Netflix
mdimakopoulou@netflix.com

Antoine Chambaz
Université de Paris
antoine.chambaz@u-paris.fr

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University and Netflix
kallus@cornell.edu

Mark van der Laan
University of California, Berkeley
laan@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Contextual bandit algorithms are increasingly replacing non-adaptive A/B tests in
e-commerce, healthcare, and policymaking because they can both improve outcomes for study participants and increase the chance of identifying good or even
best policies. To support credible inference on novel interventions at the end of
the study, nonetheless, we still want to construct valid confidence intervals on average treatment effects, subgroup effects, or value of new policies. The adaptive
nature of the data collected by contextual bandit algorithms, however, makes this
difficult: standard estimators are no longer asymptotically normally distributed
and classic confidence intervals fail to provide correct coverage. While this has
been addressed in non-contextual settings by using stabilized estimators, variancestabilized estimators in the contextual setting pose unique challenges that we
tackle for the first time in this paper. We propose the Contextual Adaptive Doubly
Robust (CADR) estimator, a novel estimator for policy value that is asymptotically
normal under contextual adaptive data collection. The main technical challenge
in constructing CADR is designing adaptive and consistent conditional standard
deviation estimators for stabilization. Extensive numerical experiments using 57
OpenML datasets demonstrate that confidence intervals based on CADR uniquely
provide correct coverage.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits, where personalized decisions are made sequentially and simultaneously with
data collection, are increasingly used to address important decision-making problems where data is
limited and/or expensive to collect, with applications in product recommendation [Li et al., 2010],
revenue management [Kallus and Udell, 2020, Qiang and Bayati, 2016], and personalized medicine
[Tewari and Murphy, 2017]. Adaptive experiments, whether based on bandit algorithms or Bayesian
optimization, are increasingly being considered in place of classic randomized trials in order to
improve both the outcomes for study participants and the chance of identifying the best treatment
allocations [Athey et al., 2018, Quinn et al., 2019, Kasy and Sautmann, 2021, Bakshy et al., 2018].
But, at the end of the study, we still want to construct valid confidence intervals on average treatment
effects, subgroup effects, or the value of new personalized interventions. Such confidence intervals
are, for example, crucial for enabling credible inference on the presence or absence of improvement of novel policies. However, due to the adaptive nature of the data collection, unlike classic
randomized trials, standard estimates and their confidence intervals actually fail to provide correct
coverage, that is, contain the true parameter with the desired confidence probability (e.g., 95%). A
variety of recent work has recognized this and offered remedies [Hadad et al., 2019, Luedtke and
van der Laan, 2016], but only for the case of non-contextual adaptive data collection. Like classic
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

