Outcome-Driven Reinforcement Learning via
Variational Inference
Tim G. J. Rudner∗ †
University of Oxford
Rowan McAllister
University of California, Berkeley

Vitchyr H. Pong∗†
University of California, Berkeley
Yarin Gal
University of Oxford

Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
While reinforcement learning algorithms provide automated acquisition of optimal
policies, practical application of such methods requires a number of design decisions, such as manually designing reward functions that not only define the task,
but also provide sufficient shaping to accomplish it. In this paper, we view reinforcement learning as inferring policies that achieve desired outcomes, rather than
as a problem of maximizing rewards. To solve this inference problem, we establish
a novel variational inference formulation that allows us to derive a well-shaped
reward function which can be learned directly from environment interactions. From
the corresponding variational objective, we also derive a new probabilistic Bellman
backup operator and use it to develop an off-policy algorithm to solve goal-directed
tasks. We empirically demonstrate that this method eliminates the need to handcraft reward functions for a suite of diverse manipulation and locomotion tasks and
leads to effective goal-directed behaviors.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides an appealing formalism for automated learning of behavioral
skills, but requires considerable care and manual design to use in practice. One particularly delicate
decision is the design of the reward function, which has a significant impact on the resulting policy
but is largely heuristic in practice, often lacks theoretical grounding, can make effective learning
difficult, and may lead to reward mis-specification.
To avoid these shortcomings, we propose to circumvent the process of manually specifying a reward
function altogether: Instead of framing the reinforcement learning problem as finding a policy that
maximizes a heuristically-defined reward function, we express it probabilistically, as inferring a
state–action trajectory distribution conditioned on a desired future outcome. By building off of
prior work on probabilistic perspectives on RL [10, 23, 35, 46, 47, 58] and goal-directed RL in
particular [3, 6, 19, 48], we derive a tractable variational objective, an temporal-difference algorithm
that provides a shaping-like effect for effective learning, as well as a reward function that captures the
semantics of the underlying decision problem and facilitates effective learning.
We demonstrate that unlike prior works that proposed inference methods for finding policies that
achieve desired outcomes [3, 11, 19, 48], the resulting algorithm, Outcome-Driven Actor–Critic
(ODAC), is amenable to off-policy learning and applicable to complex, high-dimensional continuous
control tasks over finite and infinite horizons. The resulting variational algorithm can be interpreted
as an automatic shaping method, where each iteration learns a reward function that automatically provides dense rewards, as we visualize in Figure 1. In tabular settings, ODAC is guaranteed to converge
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors: tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk and vitchyr@berkeley.edu.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

