Ensembling Graph Predictions for AMR Parsing

Hoang Thanh Lam1 , Gabriele Picco1 , Yufang Hou1 , Young-Suk Lee2 ,
Lam M. Nguyen2 , Dzung T. Phan2 , Vanessa López1 , Ramon Fernandez Astudillo2
1
IBM Research, Dublin, Ireland
2
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA
t.l.hoang@ie.ibm.com, gabriele.picco@ibm.com, yhou@ie.ibm.com,
ysuklee@us.ibm.com, LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com, phandu@us.ibm.com,
vanlopez@ie.ibm.com, ramon.astudillo@ibm.com

Abstract
In many machine learning tasks, models are trained to predict structure data such
as graphs. For example, in natural language processing, it is very common to parse
texts into dependency trees or abstract meaning representation (AMR) graphs. On
the other hand, ensemble methods combine predictions from multiple models to
create a new one that is more robust and accurate than individual predictions. In
the literature, there are many ensembling techniques proposed for classification
or regression problems, however, ensemble graph prediction has not been studied
thoroughly. In this work, we formalize this problem as mining the largest graph
that is the most supported by a collection of graph predictions. As the problem is
NP-Hard, we propose an efficient heuristic algorithm to approximate the optimal
solution. To validate our approach, we carried out experiments in AMR parsing
problems. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach can
combine the strength of state-of-the-art AMR parsers to create new predictions that
are more accurate than any individual models in five standard benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Ensemble learning is a popular machine learning practice, in which predictions from multiple models
are blended to create a new one that is usually more robust and accurate. Indeed, ensemble methods
like XGBOOST are the winning solution in many machine learning and data science competitions
[Chen and Guestrin, 2016]. A key reason behind the successes of the ensemble methods is that they
can combine the strength of different models to reduce the variance and bias in the final prediction
[Domingos, 2000, Valentini and Dietterich, 2004]. Research in ensemble methods mostly focuses on
regression or classification problems [Dong et al., 2020]. Recently, in many machine learning tasks
prediction outputs are provided in a form of graphs. For instance, in Abstract Meaning Representation
(AMR) parsing [Banarescu et al., 2013], the input is a fragment of text and the output is a rooted,
labeled, directed, acyclic graph (DAG). It abstracts away from syntactic representations, in the sense
that sentences with similar meaning should have the same AMR. Figure 1 shows an AMR graph for
the sentence You told me to wash the dog where nodes are concepts and edges are relations.
AMR parsing is an important problem in natural language processing (NLP) research and it has a
broad application in downstream tasks such as question answering [Kapanipathi et al., 2020] and
common sense reasoning [Lim et al., 2020]. Recent approaches for AMR parsing leverage the
advances from pretrained language models [Bevilacqua et al., 2021] and numerous deep neural
network architectures [Cai and Lam, 2020a, Zhou et al., 2021].
Unlike methods for ensembling numerical or categorical values for regression or classification
problems where the mean value or majority votes are used respectively, the problem of graph
ensemble is more complicated. For instance, Figure 2 show three graphs g1 , g2 , g3 with different
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

