Learning from Inside: Self-driven Siamese Sampling
and Reasoning for Video Question Answering

Weijiang Yu1 , Haoteng Zheng1 , Mengfei Li1 , Lei Ji2 , Lijun Wu2 , Nong Xiao1∗, Nan Duan2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Microsoft Reasearch Asia
weijiangyu8@gmail.com, xiaon6@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{zhenght5, limf33}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{leiji, lijun.wu, nanduan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent advances in the video question answering (i.e., VideoQA) task have
achieved strong success by following the paradigm of fine-tuning each clip-text pair
independently on the pretrained transformer-based model via supervised learning.
Intuitively, multiple samples (i.e., clips) should be interdependent to capture similar
visual and key semantic information in the same video. To consider the interdependent knowledge between contextual clips into the network inference, we propose
a Siamese Sampling and Reasoning (SiaSamRea) approach, which consists of a
siamese sampling mechanism to generate sparse and similar clips (i.e., siamese
clips) from the same video, and a novel reasoning strategy for integrating the interdependent knowledge between contextual clips into the network. The reasoning
strategy contains two modules: (1) siamese knowledge generation to learn the
inter-relationship among clips; (2) siamese knowledge reasoning to produce the
refined soft label by propagating the weights of inter-relationship to the predicted
candidates of all clips. Finally, our SiaSamRea can endow the current multimodal
reasoning paradigm with the ability of learning from inside via the guidance of
soft labels. Extensive experiments demonstrate our SiaSamRea achieves state-ofthe-art performance on five VideoQA benchmarks, e.g., a significant +2.1% gain
on MSRVTT-QA, +2.9% on MSVD-QA, +1.0% on ActivityNet-QA, +1.8% on
How2QA and +4.3% (action) on TGIF-QA.

1

Introduction

By inferring the correct answers for video-based
questions, video question answering (VideoQA)
has attracted increasing research attention due
to its huge application potential, as a fundamental technique for vision-to-language reasoning.
The task involves acquisition and manipulation
of spatio-temporal visual representations guided
by the compositional semantics of the linguistic
clues [32, 15, 21, 34]. Existing works can roughly
be divided into two aspects. One aspect is to explore a powerful multimodal transformer-based network [22, 2, 34, 45] trained on large-scale datasets
(e.g., COCO Captions [3] and HowTo100M [29]).
∗

Dense Clip

(a) Dense Sampling

Sparse Clip

Siamese Clips

(b) Sparse Sampling (c) Siamese Sampling

Figure 1: Different sampling mechanisms for
video frames. (a) Traditional methods use dense
clip features from full-length videos. (b) A recent approach [22] suggests sparsely sampled
clips for end-to-end learning. (c) Our siamese
sampling to generate similar semantic clips .

Corresponding Author: xiaon6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

