Fast Pure Exploration via Frank-Wolfe

Po-An Wang
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
wang9@kth.se

Ruo-Chun Tzeng
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
rctzeng@kth.se

Alexandre Proutiere
EECS and Digital Futures
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
We study the problem of active pure exploration with fixed confidence in generic
stochastic bandit environments. The goal of the learner is to answer a query about
the environment with a given level of certainty while minimizing her sampling
budget. For this problem, instance-specific lower bounds on the expected sample
complexity reveal the optimal proportions of arm draws an Oracle algorithm would
apply. These proportions solve an optimization problem whose tractability strongly
depends on the structural properties of the environment, but may be instrumental in
the design of efficient learning algorithms. We devise Frank-Wolfe-based Sampling
(FWS), a simple algorithm whose sample complexity matches the lower bounds
for a wide class of pure exploration problems. The algorithm is computationally
efficient as, to learn and track the optimal proportion of arm draws, it relies on a
single iteration of Frank-Wolfe algorithm applied to the lower-bound optimization
problem. We apply FWS to various pure exploration tasks, including best arm
identification in unstructured, thresholded, linear, and Lipschitz bandits. Despite
its simplicity, FWS is competitive compared to state-of-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Pure exploration in stochastic bandits [24] refers to the task of answering a given question about the
reward distributions of the different arms, using as few arm pulls (or samples) as possible. The task
may correspond to identifying the best arm [13], the top-m arms [37], all -good arms [27], a set of
arms whose expected rewards exceed a given threshold [26], etc. To reduce the sample complexity of
such a task, the learner needs to leverage as much as possible the information available about reward
distributions, which typically comes as known structural properties of the set of their expected rewards.
Exploiting particular structures (e.g., unimodal, Lipschitz, convex, linear) has been thoroughly studied
in the regret minimization setting (see [6], and references therein), but less in the pure exploration
framework, where most efforts have focused on linear structures [35, 20, 39, 36, 10, 18, 9].
In this paper, we investigate a generic learning problem proposed in [8] and covering the aforementioned pure exploration tasks with or without structure. Consider K arms whose reward distributions (ν1 , . . . , νK ) come from a one-dimensional exponential family and are of unknown means
µ = (µ1 , . . . , µK ). The parameter µ is known to belong to Λ ⊂ RK , the set of possible instances.
For each µ ∈ Λ, we assume that there is a unique true answer i? (µ) that belongs to the finite set I of
possible answers1 (e.g., for the best arm identification task, i? (µ) = arg maxk µk ). We consider pure
1

Scenarios with several correct answers require a more involved analysis, see [7].

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

