Self-Supervised Multi-Object Tracking
with Cross-Input Consistency

Favyen Bastani
MIT CSAIL
favyen@csail.mit.edu

Songtao He
MIT CSAIL
songtao@csail.mit.edu

Sam Madden
MIT CSAIL
madden@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised learning procedure for training a robust
multi-object tracking (MOT) model given only unlabeled video. While several
self-supervisory learning signals have been proposed in prior work on single-object
tracking, such as color propagation and cycle-consistency, these signals cannot be
directly applied for training RNN models, which are needed to achieve accurate
MOT: they yield degenerate models that, for instance, always match new detections
to tracks with the closest initial detections. We propose a novel self-supervisory
signal that we call cross-input consistency: we construct two distinct inputs for
the same sequence of video, by hiding different information about the sequence
in each input. We then compute tracks in that sequence by applying an RNN
model independently on each input, and train the model to produce consistent
tracks across the two inputs. We evaluate our unsupervised method on MOT17 and
KITTI — remarkably, we find that, despite training only on unlabeled video, our
unsupervised approach outperforms four supervised methods published in the last
1–2 years, including Tracktor++ [1], FAMNet [5], GSM [18], and mmMOT [29].

1

Introduction

Multi-object trackers identify all instances of a particular object type in video, and track each instance
through the segment of video in which it is visible in the camera frame. Annotating training data
for multi-object tracking is tedious and costly; for example, annotation of pedestrian tracks in just
six minutes of video in the training set of the MOT15 Challenge [14] requires an estimated 22
hours [20] of human labeling time using LabelMe [28]. While unsupervised, heuristic detect-to-track
methods [2, 4] have been proposed that group detections into tracks by estimating motion using a
combination of spatial and visual cues, these methods suffer low-accuracy in scenarios with frequent
occlusion where heuristics are insufficient.
Recent work has proposed applying self-supervised learning for training single-object tracking
models on unlabeled video [24, 25]. These approaches train a model to propagate instance labels
from a reference frame through the rest of a video sequence. In contrast to work on self-supervised
representation learning from video, these fully unsupervised approaches do not require fine-tuning to
apply the model for single-object tracking.
However, a significant limitation in prior work is that the model independently compares pairs of
frames at a time. In multi-object tracking, a key challenge is robustly re-localizing tracks across
potentially long occlusions, especially when an object instance is occluded by other instances of the
same object type. Pairwise frame comparisons are thus insufficient for high-accuracy multi-object
tracking; instead, learning recurrent features that encode the history of a track is crucial for enabling
robust re-localization. However, extending prior work to learn RNN parameters is challenging. For
example, Wang et al. [25] propose training using forward-backward consistency: from a patch in an
initial frame, after tracking forwards through video and then backwards to return to the initial frame,
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

