Federated Expectation Maximization with
heterogeneity mitigation and variance reduction
Aymeric Dieuleveut
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
Ecole Polytechnique, France
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
aymeric.dieuleveut@polytechnique.edu

Gersende Fort
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse
Université de Toulouse; CNRS
UPS, Toulouse, France
gersende.fort@math.univ-toulouse.fr

Eric Moulines
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
Ecole Polytechnique, France
CS Dpt, HSE University, Russian Federation
eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu

Geneviève Robin
Laboratoire de Mathématiques
et Modélisation d’Évry
Université d’Évry Val d’Essonne; CNRS
Évry-Courcouronnes, France
genevieve.robin@cnrs.fr

Abstract
The Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm is the default algorithm for inference in latent variable models. As in any other field of machine learning, applications of latent variable models to very large datasets makes the use of advanced
parallel and distributed architectures mandatory. This paper introduces FedEM,
which is the first extension of the EM algorithm to the federated learning context.
FedEM is a new communication efficient method, which handles partial participation of local devices, and is robust to heterogeneous distributions of the datasets.
To alleviate the communication bottleneck, FedEM compresses appropriately defined complete data sufficient statistics. We also develop and analyze an extension
of FedEM to further incorporate a variance reduction scheme. In all cases, we derive finite-time complexity bounds for smooth non-convex problems. Numerical
results are presented to support our theoretical findings, as well as an application
to federated missing values imputation for biodiversity monitoring.

1

Introduction

The Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm is the most popular approach for inference in latent
variable models. The EM algorithm, a special instance of the Majorize/Minimize algorithm [24],
was formalized by [8] and is without doubt one of the fundamental algorithms in machine learning.
Applications include among many others finite mixture analysis, latent factor models inference, and
missing data imputation; see [38, 29, 26, 13] and the references therein. As in any other field of
machine learning, training latent variable models on very large datasets make the use of advanced
parallel and distributed architectures mandatory. Federated Learning (FL) [22, 39], which exploits
the computation power of a large number of edge devices to perform distributed machine learning,
is a powerful framework to achieve this goal.
The conventional EM algorithm is not suitable for FL settings. We propose several new distributed
versions of the EM algorithm supporting compressed communication. More precisely, our objective
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

