Improved Coresets and Sublinear Algorithms for
Power Means in Euclidean Spaces

Vincent Cohen-Addad∗
Google Research, Zurich.

David Saulpic∗
Sorbonne Université, Paris

Chris Schwiegelshohn∗
Aarhus University

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of finding high dimensional power means:
given a set A of n points in Rd , find the point m that minimizes the sum of Euclidean distance, raised to the power z, over all input points. Special cases of
problem include the well-known Fermat-Weber problem – or geometric median
problem – where z = 1, the mean or centroid where z = 2, and the Minimum
Enclosing Ball problem, where z = ∞.
We consider these problem in the big data regime. Here, we are interested in
sampling as few points as possible such that we can accurately estimate m. More
specifically, we consider sublinear algorithms as well as coresets for these problems. Sublinear algorithms have a random query access to the set Aand the goal
e ε−z−3 samples are
is to minimize the number of queries. Here, we show that O
sufficient to achieve a (1+ε)-approximation, generalizing the results from Cohen,
Lee, Miller, Pachocki, and Sidford [STOC ’16] and Inaba, Katoh, and Imai [SoCG
’94] to arbitrary z. Moreover, we 
show that this bound is nearly optimal, as any
algorithm requires at least Ω ε−z+1 queries to achieve said approximation.
The second contribution are coresets for these problems, where we aim to find find
a small, weighted subset of the points which approximates cost ofevery candidate
e ε−2 points are sufpoint c ∈ Rd up to a (1 ± ε) factor. Here, we show that O

e dε−2 bound by Feldman and Langberg [STOC ’11]
ficient, improving on the O

−4
e ε
and the O
bound by Braverman, Jiang, Krauthgamer, and Wu [SODA 21].

1

Introduction

Large data sets have shifted the focus of algorithm design. In the past, an algorithm might have been
deemed feasible if its running time was polynomial in the input size and so a textbook fast algorithm
can have time complexity for example quadratic. For truly gargantuan data sets, even linear time
or nearly linear time algorithms could be considered too slow or requiring too much memory. This
led to the emergence of the field of sublinear algorithms: How well can we solve a problem without
reading the entire input?
Except for trivial problems, deterministic time sublinear algorithms do not exist. Our primary tool
in designing sublinear algorithms is thus the following basic approach:
• Take a uniform sample of the input.
• Run an algorithm on the sample.
Hence, the performance of a sublinear algorithm is often measured in terms of its query complexity,
i.e. the number of samples required such that we can extract a high quality solution in the second
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

