Nearly-Tight and Oblivious Algorithms for
Explainable Clustering

Buddhima Gamlath∗
EPFL
buddhima.gamlath@epfl.ch

Xinrui Jia∗
EPFL
xinrui.jia@epfl.ch

Adam Polak∗
EPFL
adam.polak@epfl.ch

Ola Svensson∗
EPFL
ola.svensson@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the problem of explainable clustering in the setting first formalized by
Dasgupta, Frost, Moshkovitz, and Rashtchian (ICML 2020). A k-clustering is said
to be explainable if it is given by a decision tree where each internal node splits
data points with a threshold cut in a single dimension (feature), and each of the k
leaves corresponds to a cluster. We give an algorithm that outputs an explainable
clustering that loses at most a factor of O(log2 k) compared to an optimal (not
necessarily explainable) clustering for the k-medians objective, and a factor of
O(k log2 k) for the k-means objective. This improves over the previous best upper
bounds of O(k) and O(k 2 ), respectively, and nearly matches the previous Ω(log k)
lower bound for k-medians and our new Ω(k) lower bound for k-means. The
algorithm is remarkably simple. In particular, given an initial not necessarily
explainable clustering in Rd , it is oblivious to the data points and runs in time
O(dk log2 k), independent of the number of data points n. Our upper and lower
bounds also generalize to objectives given by higher `p -norms.

1

Introduction

An important topic in current machine learning research is understanding how models actually make
their decisions. For a recent overview on the subject of explainability and interpretability, see,
e.g., [13, 14]. Many good methods exist (e.g. [15]) for interpreting black-box models, so called
post-modeling explainability, but this approach has been criticized [16] for providing little insight
into the data. Currently, there is a shift towards designing models that are interpretable by design.
Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning. A common approach to clustering
is to minimize the k-medians or k-means objectives, e.g., with the celebrated Lloyd’s [11] or kmeans++ [2] algorithms. Both objectives are also widely studied from a theoretical perspective, and, in
particular, they admit constant-factor approximation algorithms running in polynomial time [1, 3, 4, 9].
In their recent paper [6], Dasgupta et al. were the first to study provable guarantees for explainable
clustering. They define a k-clustering to be explainable if it is given by a decision tree, where each
internal node splits data points with a threshold cut in a single dimension (feature), and each of the k
leaves corresponds to a cluster (see Figure 1).
∗

Equal contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

