Identifying and Benchmarking Natural
Out-of-Context Prediction Problems
Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Columbia University
zemel@cs.toronto.edu

David Madras
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
madras@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Deep learning systems frequently fail at out-of-context (OOC) prediction, the problem of making reliable predictions on uncommon or unusual inputs or subgroups
of the training distribution. To this end, a number of benchmarks for measuring
OOC performance have been recently introduced. In this work, we introduce a
framework unifying the literature on OOC performance measurement, and demonstrate how rich auxiliary information can be leveraged to identify candidate sets
of OOC examples in existing datasets. We present NOOC H: a suite of naturallyoccurring “challenge sets”, and show how varying notions of context can be used
to probe specific OOC failure modes. Experimentally, we explore the tradeoffs
between various learning approaches on these challenge sets and demonstrate how
the choices made in designing OOC benchmarks can yield varying conclusions.

1

Introduction

People often find context useful for prediction, both for improving accuracy and processing efficiency
[10]. However, deep learning systems frequently over-rely on context cues [18, 19, 38], which
can lead to poor performance on out-of-context (OOC) examples, when contextual information is
misleading. By OOC examples, we mean inputs which are uncommon or unusual with respect to
the training distribution; these can be thought of as sampled from under-represented subgroups, or
low (non-zero) density regions, of the training distribution. In safety-critical situations, this can be
problematic; as such, it is important to have reliable methods for measuring how well a model can
perform OOC. Furthermore, given the rise of larger models and datasets [31], there is a need for
scalable approaches to OOC evaluation — even if manual evaluation of “corner cases” by domain
experts may (always) be the gold standard.
A key pre-requisite task to evaluating OOC performance is identifying which examples should be
considered OOC. This identification task is a challenging one in and of itself: in a natural image,
“context” can be varied, complex and high-dimensional [6, 47, 59, 63]. Therefore, any evaluation
method intending to measure a model’s OOC performance must (implicitly) select a specific notion
of “OOC performance”. Indeed, since deep learning yields underspecified models [14], it is plausible
that different choices may yield different measurements. Common approaches include generating
semi-synthetic data to simulate the effect of a shift in some salient feature [32, 54, 63], or using some
auxiliary information to guide choices about what a reasonable OOC set should be [28, 33].
In this work, we develop a conceptual framework for identifying sets of OOC examples in existing
datasets. We show how our framework unifies and generalizes prior literature on OOC performance
measurement, and allows us to utilize more complex, structured annotated data to define various
notions of “OOC performance”. We demonstrate this framework’s effectiveness through uncovering
two OOC “challenge sets” [30] within an existing benchmark, each corresponding to differing notions
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

