Lower and Upper Bounds on the Pseudo-Dimension
of Tensor Network Models
Behnoush Khavari
DIRO & Mila
Université de Montréal
behnoush.khavari@umontreal.ca

Guillaume Rabusseau
DIRO & Mila, CIFAR AI Chair
Université de Montréal
grabus@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
Tensor network (TN) methods have been a key ingredient of advances in condensed
matter physics and have recently sparked interest in the machine learning community for their ability to compactly represent very high-dimensional objects. TN
methods can for example be used to efficiently learn linear models in exponentially large feature spaces [56]. In this work, we derive upper and lower bounds
on the VC-dimension and pseudo-dimension of a large class of TN models for
classification, regression and completion. Our upper bounds hold for linear models
parameterized by arbitrary TN structures, and we derive lower bounds for common
tensor decomposition models (CP, Tensor Train, Tensor Ring and Tucker) showing
the tightness of our general upper bound. These results are used to derive a generalization bound which can be applied to classification with low-rank matrices as
well as linear classifiers based on any of the commonly used tensor decomposition
models. As a corollary of our results, we obtain a bound on the VC-dimension of
the matrix product state classifier introduced in [56] as a function of the so-called
bond dimension (i.e. tensor train rank), which answers an open problem listed by
Cirac, Garre-Rubio and Pérez-García in [13].

1

Introduction

Tensor networks (TNs) have emerged in the quantum physics community as a mean to compactly
represent wave functions of large quantum systems [45, 5, 52]. Their introduction in physics can be
traced back to the work of Penrose [47] and Feynman [15]. Akin to matrix factorization, TN methods
rely on factorizing a high-order tensor into small factors and have recently gained interest from the
machine learning community for their ability to efficiently represent and perform operations on very
high-dimensional data and high-order tensors. They have been for example successfully used for
compressing models [43, 69, 42, 29, 70], developing new insights on the expressiveness of deep neural
networks [14, 31] and designing novel approaches to supervised [56, 18] and unsupervised [55, 25, 39]
learning. Most of these approaches leverage the fact that TN can be used to efficiently parameterize
high-dimensional linear maps, which is appealing from two perspectives: it makes it possible to learn
models in exponentially large feature spaces and it acts as a regularizer, controlling the capacity of
the class of hypotheses considered for learning.
While the expressive power of TN models has been studied recently [17, 2], the focus has mainly been
on the representation capacity of TN models, but not on their ability to generalize in the context of
supervised learning tasks. In this work, we study the generalization ability of TN models by deriving
lower and upper bounds on the VC-dimension and pseudo-dimension of TN models commonly used
for classification, completion and regression, from which bounds on the generalization gap of TN
models can be derived. Using the general framework of tensor networks, we derive a general upper
bound for models parameterized by arbitrary TN structures, which applies to all commonly used
tensor decomposition models [20] such as CP [27], Tucker [59] and tensor train (TT)) [46], as well
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

