ResT: An Efficient Transformer for Visual Recognition

Qing-Long Zhang, Yu-Bin Yang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 21023, China
wofmanaf@smail.nju.edu.cn, yangyubin@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents an efficient multi-scale vision Transformer, called ResT, that
capably served as a general-purpose backbone for image recognition. Unlike
existing Transformer methods, which employ standard Transformer blocks to
tackle raw images with a fixed resolution, our ResT have several advantages:
(1) A memory-efficient multi-head self-attention is built, which compresses the
memory by a simple depth-wise convolution, and projects the interaction across the
attention-heads dimension while keeping the diversity ability of multi-heads; (2)
Positional encoding is constructed as spatial attention, which is more flexible and
can tackle with input images of arbitrary size without interpolation or fine-tune;
(3) Instead of the straightforward tokenization at the beginning of each stage, we
design the patch embedding as a stack of overlapping convolution operation with
stride on the token map. We comprehensively validate ResT on image classification
and downstream tasks. Experimental results show that the proposed ResT can
outperform the recently state-of-the-art backbones by a large margin, demonstrating
the potential of ResT as strong backbones. The code and models will be made
publicly available at https://github.com/wofmanaf/ResT.

1

Introduction

Deep learning backbone architectures have been evolved for years and boost the performance of
computer vision tasks such as classification [5, 26, 33, 11], object detection [2, 41, 18, 25], and
instance segmentation [10, 24, 31], etc.
There are mainly two types of backbone architectures most commonly applied in computer vision:
convolutional network (CNN) architectures [11, 38] and Transformer ones [6, 5, 33, 39]. Both
of them capture feature information by stacking multiple blocks. The CNN block is generally a
bottleneck structure [11], which can be defined as a stack of 1 × 1, 3 × 3, and 1 × 1 convolution
layers with residual learning (shown in Figure 1a). The 1 × 1 layers are responsible for reducing and
then increasing channel dimensions, leaving the 3 × 3 layer a bottleneck with smaller input/output
channel dimensions. The CNN backbones are generally faster and require less inference time thanks
to parameter sharing, local information aggregation, and dimension reduction. However, due to
the limited and fixed receptive field, CNN blocks may be less effective in scenarios that require
modeling long-range dependencies. For example, in instance segmentation, being able to collect and
associate scene information from a large neighborhood can be useful in learning relationships across
objects [23].
To overcome these limitations, Transformer backbones are recently explored for their ability to
capture long-distance information [5, 33, 26, 19]. Unlike CNN backbones, the Transformer ones first
split an image into a sequence of patches (i.e., tokens), then sum these tokens with positional encoding
to represent coarse spatial information, and finally adopt a stack of Transformer blocks to capture
feature information. A standard Transformer block [28] comprises a multi-head self-attention (MSA)
that employs a query-key-value decomposition to model global relationships between sequence
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

