C RYP T EN: Secure Multi-Party Computation
Meets Machine Learning

Brian Knott
Shubho Sengupta

Shobha Venkataraman
Awni Hannun
Mark Ibrahim
Laurens van der Maaten
Facebook AI Research
{brianknott,shobha,awni,ssengupta,marksibrahim,lvdmaaten}@fb.com

Abstract
Secure multi-party computation (MPC) allows parties to perform computations
on data while keeping that data private. This capability has great potential for
machine-learning applications: it facilitates training of machine-learning models
on private data sets owned by different parties, evaluation of one party’s private
model using another party’s private data, etc. Although a range of studies implement machine-learning models via secure MPC, such implementations are not
yet mainstream. Adoption of secure MPC is hampered by the absence of flexible
software frameworks that “speak the language” of machine-learning researchers
and engineers. To foster adoption of secure MPC in machine learning, we present
C RYP T EN: a software framework that exposes popular secure MPC primitives via
abstractions that are common in modern machine-learning frameworks, such as
tensor computations, automatic differentiation, and modular neural networks. This
paper describes the design of C RYP T EN and measure its performance on state-ofthe-art models for text classification, speech recognition, and image classification.
Our benchmarks show that C RYP T EN’s GPU support and high-performance communication between (an arbitrary number of) parties allows it to perform efficient
private evaluation of modern machine-learning models under a semi-honest threat
model. For example, two parties using C RYP T EN can securely predict phonemes
in speech recordings using Wav2Letter [17] faster than real-time. We hope that
C RYP T EN will spur adoption of secure MPC in the machine-learning community.

1

Introduction

Secure multi-party computation (MPC; [30, 69]) allows parties to collaboratively perform computations on their combined data sets without revealing the data they possess to each other. This capability
of secure MPC has the potential to unlock a variety of machine-learning applications that are currently
infeasible because of data privacy concerns. For example, secure MPC can allow medical research
institutions to jointly train better diagnostic models without having to share their sensitive patient
data [27] or allow social scientists to analyze gender wage gap statistics without companies having
to share sensitive salary data [42]. The prospect of such applications of machine learning with
rigorous privacy and security guarantees has spurred a number of studies on machine learning via
secure MPC [38, 41, 48, 58, 63, 66, 67]. However, at present, adoption of secure MPC in machine
learning is still relatively limited considering its wide-ranging potential. One of the main obstacles to
widespread adoption is that the complexity of secure MPC techniques puts them out of reach for most
machine-learning researchers, who frequently lack in-depth knowledge of cryptographic techniques.
To foster the adoption of secure MPC techniques in machine learning, we present C RYP T EN: a
flexible software framework that aims to make modern secure MPC techniques accessible to machinelearning researchers and developers without a background in cryptography. Specifically, C RYP T EN
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

