Neighborhood Reconstructing Autoencoders

Yonghyeon Lee1 Hyeokjun Kwon1 Frank C. Park1,2
Seoul National University1 Saige Research2
{yhlee, hj.kwon}@robotics.snu.ac.kr fcp@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Vanilla autoencoders often produce manifolds that overfit to noisy training data,
or have the wrong local connectivity and geometry. Autoencoder regularization
techniques, e.g., the denoising autoencoder, have had some success in reducing
overfitting, whereas recent graph-based methods that exploit local connectivity
information provided by neighborhood graphs have had some success in mitigating
local connectivity errors. Neither of these two approaches satisfactorily reduce
both overfitting and connectivity errors; moreover, graph-based methods typically
involve considerable preprocessing and tuning. To simultaneously address the
two issues of overfitting and local connectivity, we propose a new graph-based
autoencoder, the Neighborhood Reconstructing Autoencoder (NRAE). Unlike
existing graph-based methods that attempt to encode the training data to some
prescribed latent space distribution – one consequence being that only the encoder
is the object of the regularization – NRAE merges local connectivity information
contained in the neighborhood graphs with local quadratic approximations of the
decoder function to formulate a new neighborhood reconstruction loss. Compared to existing graph-based methods, our new loss function is simple and easy to
implement, and the resulting algorithm is scalable and computationally efficient;
the only required preprocessing step is the construction of the neighborhood graph.
Extensive experiments with standard datasets demonstrate that, compared to existing methods, NRAE improves both overfitting and local connectivity in the learned
manifold, in some cases by significant margins. Code for NRAE is available at
https://github.com/Gabe-YHLee/NRAE-public.

1

Introduction

Autoencoders are widely used to identify, and to generate samples from, the underlying lowdimensional manifold structure of a given data distribution [14, 1]. It has been widely observed
that vanilla autoencoders quite often produce manifolds that (i) are highly sensitive to noisy training
data (see Figure 1(a)), or (ii) have the wrong local connectivity and geometry (see Figure 1(b)),
significantly impairing their performance. Regularization techniques have had some success in
mitigating the former, e.g., the Denoising Autoencoder [21], which uses deliberately corrupted inputs
to train the autoencoder, typically learns manifolds that are robust to noise, but not always with the
correct local geometry.
Recently, autoencoder regularization methods that use neighborhood graphs have had some success
in addressing the incorrect connectivity issue [16, 18, 10, 7]. Notwithstanding the additional computational overhead of constructing local neighborhood graphs, the local geometric information obtained
from these graphs can significantly reduce errors in the local geometry of the learned manifold, and
make learning more well-behaved and robust.
The underlying premise behind these methods is that since the local geometry and topology of the data
is captured in the latent space distribution, which is determined entirely by the encoder, regularizing
only the encoder should be sufficient; little if any consideration needs to be given to the decoder.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

