SOLQ: Segmenting Objects by Learning Queries

Bin Dong ∗

Fangao Zeng ∗

Tiancai Wang ∗
Xiangyu Zhang
MEGVII Technology

Yichen Wei

{dongbin,zengfangao,wangtiancai,zhangxiangyu,weiyichen}@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end framework for instance segmentation.
Based on the recently introduced DETR [1], our method, termed SOLQ, segments
objects by learning unified queries. In SOLQ, each query represents one object
and has multiple representations: class, location and mask. The object queries
learned perform classification, box regression and mask encoding simultaneously
in an unified vector form. During training phase, the mask vectors encoded are
supervised by the compression coding of raw spatial masks. In inference time,
mask vectors produced can be directly transformed to spatial masks by the inverse
process of compression coding. Experimental results show that SOLQ can achieve
state-of-the-art performance, surpassing most of existing approaches. Moreover,
the joint learning of unified query representation can greatly improve the detection
performance of DETR. We hope our SOLQ can serve as a strong baseline for the
Transformer-based instance segmentation. Code is available at https://github.
com/megvii-research/SOLQ.

1

Introduction

Instance segmentation, serving as one of visual detection tasks, not only locates instances of different
categories but also generates pixel-level mask for each instance. State-of-the-art instance segmentation
methods [2, 3, 4, 5] follow the two-stage paradigm, which first performs object detection and then
segments the masks within detected boxes by RoIAlign [2]. Those methods are relatively easy to be
optimized thanks to the deployment of mature object detectors [6, 7]. However, the segmentation
branch heavily relies on the detection branch, making it hard to achieve better joint learning of multiple
tasks. Some recent works [8, 9, 10, 11] build instance segmentation frameworks on top of anchorfree object detectors [12, 13] to remove the ROI-Cropping operation, reducing the effect of feature
misalignment. For example, CondInst [9] based on FCOS [12] employs dynamic convolutions [14] to
perform instance segmentation. YOLACT [8] models the instance segmentation as a combination of
prototypes weighted by learned mask coefficients for each anchor. However, the weights of dynamic
convolutions or the mask coefficients are still generated by instance proposals.
Regardless of the bounding boxes, SOLO [15] introduces the notion of "instance categories" and
segments objects by locations. SOLOv2 [16] further solves the problem of inefficient mask representation by introducing dynamic convolution and so-called matrix Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS).
Though SOLO directly outputs instance masks based on locations, hand-crafted post-processes, like
NMS, are still required to remove duplicated predictions. Also, the performance of small objects is
far from satisfactory due to the imbalance of location samples between the large and small objects.
Building an end-to-end instance segmentation framework is still a remaining problem.
Our work is inspired by DETR [1], which first proposes the end-to-end solution for object detection.
In DETR, object detection is regarded as a set prediction problem and objects are represented by
∗
Equal contribution. This work is supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of
China (No.2017YFA0700800) and Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

