Last iterate convergence of SGD for Least-Squares
in the Interpolation regime

Aditya Varre
EPFL
aditya.varre@epfl.ch

Loucas Pillaud-Vivien
EPFL
loucas.pillaud-vivien@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
Motivated by the recent successes of neural networks that have the ability to
fit the data perfectly and generalize well, we study the noiseless model in the
fundamental least-squares setup. We assume that an optimum predictor perfectly
fits the inputs and outputs hθ∗ , φ(X)i = Y , where φ(X) stands for a possibly
infinite dimensional non-linear feature map. To solve this problem, we consider
the estimator given by the last iterate of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
constant step-size. In this context, our contribution is twofold: (i) from a (stochastic)
optimization perspective, we exhibit an archetypal problem where we can show
explicitly the convergence of SGD final iterate for a non-strongly convex problem
with constant step-size whereas usual results use some form of average and (ii)
from a statistical perspective, we give explicit non-asymptotic convergence rates in
the over-parameterized setting and leverage a fine-grained parameterization of the
problem to exhibit polynomial rates that can be faster than O(1/T ). The link with
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces is established.

1

Introduction

As soon as large-scale statistics and optimization need to work together, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is the core algorithm everybody tries to build upon [7]. Its versatility, practicability and
adaptability make it the workhorse of almost every supervised machine learning problem. Yet, its
outstanding efficiency remains mysterious, or at least surprising on certain aspects. Furthermore, the
recent successes of deep neural networks (DNN) brought a new paradigm to the classical supervised
learning setting with the ability to fit the data perfectly and to generalize well [5]. Following this
idea, the old statistical modelling where the model suffers from problem-dependent noise has to be
revisited: there is a need of analyzing stochastic algorithms in this new light [18]. Whether we call it
over-parameterization to put emphasis on the large number of neurons needed in DNNs, interpolation
as in approximation theory or noiseless model to stress the absence of noise in this statistical model,
all these terminologies refer to the same idea. This regime brings with it new insights that reflect
better the current machine learning setup.
Hence, the main question: how would SGD profit from this noiseless model? At first glance, the story
seems clear: the old problem of variance at optimum making the SGD iterates oscillate asymptotically
now disappears. Thus, should also disappear techniques that prevent from this, namely, averaging
and decaying step sizes: one should be able to study the convergence of the SGD final iterate with
constant step-size.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

