Process for Adapting Language Models to
Society (PALMS) with Values-Targeted
Datasets
Irene Solaiman∗
Zillow Group
contact@irenesolaiman.com

Christy Dennison∗
MIT
christy@mit.edu

Abstract
Language models can generate harmful and biased outputs and exhibit undesirable behavior according to a given cultural context. We propose a
Process for Adapting Language Models to Society (PALMS) with ValuesTargeted Datasets, an iterative process to significantly change model behavior by crafting and fine-tuning on a dataset that reflects a predetermined set
of target values. We evaluate our process using three metrics: quantitative
metrics with human evaluations that score output adherence to a target
value, toxicity scoring on outputs; and qualitative metrics analyzing the
most common word associated with a given social category. Through each
iteration, we add additional training dataset examples based on observed
shortcomings from evaluations. PALMS performs significantly better on
all metrics compared to baseline and control models for a broad range of
GPT-3 language model sizes without compromising capability integrity. We
find that the effectiveness of PALMS increases with model size. We show
that significantly adjusting language model behavior is feasible with a small,
hand-curated dataset.

1

Introduction

Progress in scaling up generative language models has enabled impressive results on a wide
range of tasks, leading to novel research and industry applications. As language models
increase in size and impact, increasing attention is being given to the social impact and
cultural context of language models across research and industry organizations. The risks
and potential harms of language models are difficult to identify, measure, and mitigate, especially due to varied perspectives on desirable values and behavior. One potential harm
is undesirable behavior for a given social context: language model outputs exhibit harmful biases[5], such as outputting discriminatory racial text. However, there is no universal
standard for offensive or harmful content; language model behavior interpretation changes
depending on cultural factors. Therefore, a process for determining and adjusting appropriate model behavior should be feasible for many actors, especially those most harmed and
overlooked in model development. Similarly, model behavior should be evaluated in social
context and in a way that is inclusive of marginalized perspectives.[4]
Earlier analyses of harmful outputs in GPT-3 show negative race, gender[8], and religious[3]
associations in generated text. [4] describe GPT systems encoding harmful bias across identities, including abusive language patterns. We sought to determine if GPT-3’s performance
could be improved in the U.S. English language according U.S. and international human
∗

Both authors contributed equally. Work was conducted while at OpenAI.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

