Reinforcement learning for optimization of
variational quantum circuit architectures

Mateusz Ostaszewski,
Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics,
Polish Academy of Sciences,
Gliwice, Poland.
mm.ostaszewski@gmail.com
Wojciech Masarczyk,
Warsaw University of Technology,
Warsaw, Poland.
wojciech.masarczyk@gmail.com

Lea M. Trenkwalder,
Institute for Theoretical Physics,
University of Innsbruck
Innsbruck, Austria
lea.trenkwalder@uibk.ac.at
Eleanor Scerri,
Leiden University,
Leiden, The Netherlands.
scerri@lorentz.leidenuniv.nl

Vedran Dunjko,
Leiden University,
Leiden, The Netherlands.
v.dunjko@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract
The study of Variational Quantum Eigensolvers (VQEs) has been in the spotlight
in recent times as they may lead to real-world applications of near-term quantum devices. However, their performance depends on the structure of the used
variational ansatz, which requires balancing the depth and expressivity of the corresponding circuit. At the same time, near-term restrictions limit the depth of the
circuit we can expect to run. Thus, the optimization of the VQE ansatz requires
maximizing the expressivity of the circuit while maintaining low depth. In recent years, various methods for VQE structure optimization have been introduced
but the capacities of machine learning to aid with this problem have not yet been
extensively investigated. In this work, we propose a reinforcement learning algorithm that autonomously explores the space of possible ansatzes, identifying economic circuits which still yield accurate ground energy estimates. The algorithm
uses a feedback-driven curriculum learning method that autonomously adapts the
complexity of the learning problem to the current performance of the learning algorithm and it incrementally improves the accuracy of the result while minimizing
the circuit depth. We showcase the performance of our algorithm on the problem
of estimating the ground-state energy of lithium hydride (LiH) in various configurations. In this well-known benchmark problem, we achieve chemical accuracy
and state-of-the-art results in terms of circuit depth.

1

Introduction

As we are entering the so-called Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) [1] technology era, the
search for more suitable algorithms under NISQ restrictions is becoming ever more important. A
truly compatible NISQ application must first be amenable to architecture constraints and size limits.
Furthermore, to minimize the adverse effects of gate errors and decoherence, it is important that the
circuits are as gate-frugal and as shallow as possible.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

