DiBS: Differentiable Bayesian Structure Learning

Jonas Rothfuss
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
jonas.rothfuss@inf.ethz.ch

Lars Lorch
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
lars.lorch@inf.ethz.ch
Bernhard Schölkopf
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Bayesian structure learning allows inferring Bayesian network structure from data
while reasoning about the epistemic uncertainty—a key element towards enabling
active causal discovery and designing interventions in real world systems. In this
work, we propose a general, fully differentiable framework for Bayesian structure
learning (DiBS) that operates in the continuous space of a latent probabilistic graph
representation. Contrary to existing work, DiBS is agnostic to the form of the local
conditional distributions and allows for joint posterior inference of both the graph
structure and the conditional distribution parameters. This makes our formulation
directly applicable to posterior inference of complex Bayesian network models,
e.g., with nonlinear dependencies encoded by neural networks. Using DiBS, we
devise an efficient, general purpose variational inference method for approximating
distributions over structural models. In evaluations on simulated and real-world
data, our method significantly outperforms related approaches to joint posterior
inference.1

1

Introduction

Discovering the statistical and causal dependencies that underlie the variables of a data-generating
system is of central scientific interest. Bayesian networks (BNs) [1] and structural equation models are
commonly used for this purpose [2–5]. Structure learning, the task of learning a BN from observations
of its variables, is well-studied, but computationally very challenging due to the combinatorially large
number of candidate graphs and the constraint of graph acyclicity.
While structure learning methods arrive at a single plausible graph or its Markov equivalence class
(MEC), e.g., [6–9], Bayesian structure learning aims to infer a full posterior distribution over BNs
given the observations. A distribution over structures allows quantifying the epistemic uncertainty
and the degree of confidence in any given BN model, e.g., when the amount of data is small. Most
importantly, downstream tasks such as experimental design and active causal discovery rely on a
posterior distribution over BNs to quantify the information gain from specific interventions and
uncover the causal structure in a small number of experiments [10–15].
A key challenge in Bayesian structure learning is working with a posterior over BNs—a distribution
over the joint space of (discrete) directed acyclic graphs and (continuous) conditional distribution
parameters. Most of the practically viable approaches to Bayesian structure learning revolve around
1

Our Python JAX implementation of DiBS is available at: https://github.com/larslorch/dibs

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

