Self-Supervised Bug Detection and Repair

Miltiadis Allamanis, Henry Jackson-Flux∗, Marc Brockschmidt
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
{miallama, mabrocks}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Machine learning-based program analyses have recently shown the promise of
integrating formal and probabilistic reasoning towards aiding software development. However, in the absence of large annotated corpora, training these analyses
is challenging. Towards addressing this, we present B UG L AB, an approach for selfsupervised learning of bug detection and repair. B UG L AB co-trains two models:
(1) a detector model that learns to detect and repair bugs in code, (2) a selector
model that learns to create buggy code for the detector to use as training data. A
Python implementation of B UG L AB improves by up to 30% upon baseline methods on a test dataset of 2374 real-life bugs and finds 19 previously unknown bugs
in open-source software.

1

Introduction

Detecting and repairing bugs in source code requires strong reasoning skills over formal structures
(e.g. data and control flow) and ambiguous information (e.g. identifier names, coding idioms, and
comments). Traditional program analyses are able to detect critical bugs through formal reasoning
and combinatorial search, but need to be manually coded by experts. That is a lengthy and costly
process, which misses the opportunity to use ambiguous information pervasive within code.
Towards broadening the applicability of such methods, and utilizing ambiguous information, deep
learning-based bug detection methods are being investigated [22, 3, 13]. These methods have the
potential to further improve the engineering of software we rely on every day. However, many
challenges in the area remain open, such as creating robust bug detection and repair methods that
cover a wide range of common bugs in the absence of large supervised training corpora. Existing
work focuses on randomly inserted bugs [22, 13], Cloze test proxy tasks [3], corpora of small code
edits that may contain bugs [9] or build errors [28]. All these approaches rely on datasets of very
limited size or ones known not to be representative of the characteristics of bugs found in real code.
In this work, we propose B UG L AB, a self-supervised approach that trains robust bug detectors by
co-training a bug selector that learns to create hard-to-detect bugs (Sec. 2). For example, for a
given code snippet with two well-named variables, a variable misuse bug may be easy to detect
and repair, whereas an incorrect comparison operator might be significantly harder to identify. We
propose a neural architecture for B UG L AB (Sec. 3) and implement it for Python (Sec. 4). Our
implementation considers four broad classes of seemingly simple, yet hard-to-detect bugs and shows
improved performance over training with randomly-inserted bugs on P Y PIB UGS, a new, manually
curated test set of 2374 real-life bugs (Sec. 5). Furthermore, we tested our trained models on popular
open-source Python packages and identified 19 previously unreported bugs, though false positive
rates of ∼ 98% remain impractical. We hope that creating machine learning methods that can detect
these bugs early and assist developers will speed up software development and allow engineers
to deliver more robust software. We release PyPIBugs and our code at https://github.com/
microsoft/neurips21-self-supervised-bug-detection-and-repair.
∗

Work done while at Microsoft Research.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

