Optimizing Information-theoretical Generalization
Bounds via Anisotropic Noise in SGLD

Bohan Wang
University of Science & Technology of China
Microsoft Research Asia
Jieyu Zhang
University of Washington
Microsoft Research Asia

Qi Meng
Microsoft Research Asia

Huishuai Zhang∗
Microsoft Research Asia

Wei Chen∗
Microsoft Research Asia

Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Recently, the information-theoretical framework has been proven to be able to
obtain non-vacuous generalization bounds for large models trained by Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) with isotropic noise. In this paper, we optimize the information-theoretical generalization bound by manipulating the noise
structure in SGLD. We prove that with constraint to guarantee low empirical risk,
the optimal noise covariance is the square root of the expected gradient covariance
if both the prior and the posterior are jointly optimized. This validates that the
optimal noise is quite close to the empirical gradient covariance. Technically, we
develop a new information-theoretical bound that enables such an optimization analysis. We then apply matrix analysis to derive the form of optimal noise covariance.
Presented constraint and results are validated by the empirical observations.

1

Introduction

Generalization ability is one of the core questions in learning theory [4], but remains unclear for
deep learning models [17, 38]. Existing generalization bounds based on the capacity control become
vacuous for practical deep learning models due to the over-parameterization property [1, 26, 39].
From the information theoretical perspective, recent works [30, 37] bound the generalization error
by the mutual information between the dataset and the learned parameters. This result reveals
that good generalization occurs when the learned parameters do not depend on a specific dataset
too much, which is intuitively reasonable and closely related with the idea of algorithm stability
[6, 15, 19, 24, 20] and differential privacy [8, 10]. Meanwhile, based on information-theoretic
metrics, one can analyze general classes of updates and models, e.g., stochastic iterative algorithms
for non-convex objectives, hence applicable to deep learning. It has been shown that the information
theoretical bounds are non-vacuous and closely related with the real generalization error even in deep
learning [14, 26, 9, 39].
Notably, the information theoretical bound is realized in [28] via decomposing the mutual information
across iterations. This framework can perform a step-wise analysis of Stochastic Gradient Langevin
Dynamics (SGLD) [33, 29], by evaluating the mutual information conditional on the previous learned
∗

Corresponding Author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

