Learning to Schedule Heuristics in Branch and Bound

Antonia Chmiela
Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany
chmiela@zib.de
Ambros Gleixner
Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany
HTW Berlin, Germany
gleixner@zib.de

Elias B. Khalil
University of Toronto, Canada
khalil@mie.utoronto.ca
Andrea Lodi
CERC, Polytechnique Montréal, Canada
andrea.lodi@polymtl.ca

Sebastian Pokutta
Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany
Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
pokutta@zib.de

Abstract
Primal heuristics play a crucial role in exact solvers for Mixed Integer Programming
(MIP). While solvers are guaranteed to find optimal solutions given sufficient time,
real-world applications typically require finding good solutions early on in the
search to enable fast decision-making. While much of MIP research focuses
on designing effective heuristics, the question of how to manage multiple MIP
heuristics in a solver has not received equal attention. Generally, solvers follow
hard-coded rules derived from empirical testing on broad sets of instances. Since
the performance of heuristics is problem-dependent, using these general rules for a
particular problem might not yield the best performance. In this work, we propose
the first data-driven framework for scheduling heuristics in an exact MIP solver.
By learning from data describing the performance of primal heuristics, we obtain
a problem-specific schedule of heuristics that collectively find many solutions at
minimal cost. We formalize the learning task and propose an efficient algorithm for
computing such a schedule. Compared to the default settings of a state-of-the-art
academic MIP solver, we are able to reduce the average primal integral by up to
49% on two classes of challenging instances.

1

Introduction

Many decision-making problems arising from real-world applications can be formulated using Mixed
Integer Programming (MIP). The Branch and Bound (B&B) framework is a general approach to
solving MIPs to global optimality. Over the recent years, the idea of using machine learning (ML)
to improve optimization techniques has gained renewed interest. There exist various approaches to
tackle different aspects of the solving process using classical ML techniques. For instance, ML has
been used to find good parameter configurations for a solver (Hutter et al., 2009, 2011), improve
node (He et al., 2014), variable (Khalil et al., 2016; Gasse et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2020) or cut
(Baltean-Lugojan et al., 2019) selection strategies, and detect decomposable structures (Kruber et al.,
2017).
Even though exact MIP solvers aim for global optimality, finding good feasible solutions fast is at
least as important, especially in the presence of a time limit. The use of primal heuristics is crucial to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

