Scalable Intervention Target Estimation in Linear
Models
Burak Varıcı
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
varicb@rpi.edu
Prasanna Sattigeri
IBM Research AI
psattig@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
IBM Research AI
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com
Ali Tajer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
tajer@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of estimating the unknown intervention targets
in a causal directed acyclic graph from observational and interventional data. The
focus is on soft interventions in linear structural equation models (SEMs). Current
approaches to causal structure learning either work with known intervention targets
or use hypothesis testing to discover the unknown intervention targets even for
linear SEMs. This severely limits their scalability and sample complexity. This
paper proposes a scalable and efficient algorithm that consistently identifies all
intervention targets. The pivotal idea is to estimate the intervention sites from the
difference between the precision matrices associated with the observational and
interventional datasets. It involves repeatedly estimating such sites in different
subsets of variables. The proposed algorithm can be used to also update a given
observational Markov equivalence class into the interventional Markov equivalence
class. Consistency, Markov equivalency, and sample complexity are established analytically. Finally, simulation results on both real and synthetic data demonstrate the
gains of the proposed approach for scalable causal structure recovery. Implementation of the algorithm and the code to reproduce the simulation results are available
at https://github.com/bvarici/intervention-estimation.

1

Introduction

Directed acyclic graphs (DAG) are commonly used for encoding the cause-effect relationships among
random variables. Extensive research has been dedicated to learning the structure of DAGs from their
associated observational data. Structure learning from the observational data relies on uncovering
conditional independence (CI) among the random variables. Since structurally distinct DAGs can
encode the same set of CI relations, a DAG is identifiable only up to its Markov equivalence class
(MEC) from the observational data. Subsequently, interventional data can be used to further refine
the MEC obtained from the observational data and learn specific causal effects.
This paper is motivated by addressing two significant independent challenges in causal discovery.
First, most of the existing approaches for learning with interventional datasets require the intervention
target set to be known, which can be a strong assumption. For instance, gene-editing technologies are
known to perform cleavage at off-target genome sites [1]. Therefore, identifying the intervened nodes
alone is a critical problem in structure learning, and despite its significance, it remains uninvestigated.
Secondly, besides learning the structures of single DAGs, there exist application domains in which
the goal is learning the structural changes between two related networks and their associated DAGs,
or learning the sites of interventions. For instance, structural differences between the gene regulatory
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

