Evaluating Gradient Inversion Attacks and Defenses
in Federated Learning

Yangsibo Huang
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
yangsibo@princeton.edu

Samyak Gupta
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
samyakg@cs.princeton.edu

Kai Li
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
li@cs.princeton.edu

Zhao Song
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110
zsong@adobe.com

Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
arora@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Gradient inversion attack (or input recovery from gradient) is an emerging threat
to the security and privacy preservation of Federated learning, whereby malicious
eavesdroppers or participants in the protocol can recover (partially) the clients’
private data. This paper evaluates existing attacks and defenses. We find that some
attacks make strong assumptions about the setup. Relaxing such assumptions can
substantially weaken these attacks. We then evaluate the benefits of three proposed
defense mechanisms against gradient inversion attacks. We show the trade-offs of
privacy leakage and data utility of these defense methods, and find that combining
them in an appropriate manner makes the attack less effective, even under the
original strong assumptions. We also estimate the computation cost of end-to-end
recovery of a single image under each evaluated defense. Our findings suggest that
the state-of-the-art attacks can currently be defended against with minor data utility
loss, as summarized in a list of potential strategies.

1

Introduction

Federated learning [McMahan et al., 2016, Kairouz et al., 2021] is a framework that allows multiple
clients in a distributed environment to collaboratively train a neural network model at a central server,
without moving their data to the central server. At every training step, each client computes a model
update —i.e., gradient— on its local data using the latest copy of the global model, and then sends
the gradient to the central server. The server aggregates these updates (typically by averaging) to
construct a global model, and then sends the new model parameters to all clients. By allowing
clients to participate in training without directly sharing their data, such protocols align better with
data privacy regulations such as Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) [Act,
1996], California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [Legislature, 2018], and General Data Protection
Regulation [Commission, 2018].
While sharing gradients was thought to leak little information about the client’s private data, recent
papers [Zhu et al., 2019, Zhao et al., 2020, Geiping et al., 2020, Yin et al., 2021] developed a “gradient
inversion attack” by which an attacker eavesdropping on a client’s communications with the server
can begin to reconstruct the client’s private data. The attacker can also be a malicious participant
in the Federated Learning scheme, including a honest-but-curious server who wishes to reconstruct
private data of clients, or a honest-but-curious client who wishes to reconstruct private data of other
clients. These attacks have been shown to work with batch sizes only up to 100 but even so they have
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

