RL for Latent MDPs: Regret Guarantees and a
Lower Bound
Jeongyeol Kwon
The University of Texas at Austin
kwonchungli@utexas.edu

Yonathan Efroni
Microsoft Research, NYC
jonathan.efroni@gmail.com

Constantine Caramanis
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Shie Mannor
Technion, NVIDIA
shie@ee.technion.ac.il,
smannor@nvidia.com

Abstract
In this work, we consider the regret minimization problem for reinforcement learning
in latent Markov Decision Processes (LMDP). In an LMDP, an MDP is randomly
drawn from a set of M possible MDPs at the beginning of the interaction, but the
identity of the chosen MDP is not revealed to the agent. We first show that a general
instance of LMDPs requires at least Ω((SA)M ) episodes to even approximate the
optimal policy. Then, we consider sufficient assumptions under which learning
good policies requires polynomial number of episodes. We show that the key
link is a notion of separation between the MDP system dynamics. With sufficient
separation, we provide an efficient algorithm with local guarantee, i.e., providing
a sublinear regret guarantee when we are given a good initialization. Finally, if
we are given standard statistical sufficiency assumptions common in the Predictive
State Representation (PSR) literature (e.g., [6]) and a reachability assumption, we
show that the need for initialization can be removed.

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [42] give a general framework to describe
partially observable sequential decision problems. In POMDPs, the underlying dynamics satisfy
the Markovian property, but the observations give only partial information on the identity of the
underlying states. With the generality of this framework comes a high computational and statistical
price to pay: POMDPs are hard, primarily because optimal policies depend on the entire history of
the process. But for many important problems, this full generality can be overkill, and in particular,
does not have a way to leverage special structure. We are interested in settings where the hidden or
latent (unobserved) variables have slow dynamics or are even static in each episode. This model is
important for diverse applications, from serving a user in a dynamic web application [18], to medical
decision making [45], to transfer learning in different RL tasks [8]. Yet, as we explain below, even
this area remains little understood, and challenges abound.
Thus, in this work, we consider reinforcement learning (RL) for a special type of POMDP which we
call a latent Markov decision process (LMDP). LMDPs consist of some (perhaps large) number M of
MDPs with joint state space S and actions A. In episodic LMDPs with finite time-horizon H, the
static latent (hidden) variable that selects one of M MDPs is randomly chosen at the beginning of each
episode, yet is not revealed to the agent. The agent then interacts with the chosen MDP throughout
the episode (see Definition 1 for the formal description).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

