Few-Shot Data-Driven Algorithms
for Low Rank Approximation

Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Tal Wagner
Microsoft Research Redmond
tal.wagner@gmail.com

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently, data-driven and learning-based algorithms for low rank matrix approximation were shown to outperform classical data-oblivious algorithms by wide
margins in terms of accuracy. Those algorithms are based on the optimization of
sparse sketching matrices, which lead to large savings in time and memory during
testing. However, they require long training times on a large amount of existing
data, and rely on access to specialized hardware and software.
In this work, we develop new data-driven low rank approximation algorithms with
better computational efficiency in the training phase, alleviating these drawbacks.
Furthermore, our methods are interpretable: while previous algorithms choose the
sketching matrix either at random or by black-box learning, we show that it can
be set (or initialized) to clearly interpretable values extracted from the dataset.
Our experiments show that our algorithms, either by themselves or in combination
with previous methods, achieve significant empirical advantages over previous
work, improving training times by up to an order of magnitude toward achieving
the same target accuracy.

1

introduction

Low-rank approximation (LRA) of matrices is a fundamental operation in data analysis and machine
learning, forming the basis for many efficient algorithms that involve storing and analyzing large
matrices. Its importance has led to a large body of work on algorithms for computing LRA. While it
is well-known how to find an optimal LRA of a given matrix in polynomial time using the Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD), the degree of that polynomial makes the algorithm too slow for large
matrices, defeating the purpose of leveraging it to design fast and scalable algorithms. With this
motivation in mind, a long and prominent line of research has discovered fast approximate LRA
algorithms, laying the foundations for a rich and expansive theory of fast algorithms for numerical
linear algebra (e.g., [26, 51, 15, 16, 18, 24]). Due to their strong practical performance, these
algorithms have become standard and widely used tools in machine learning over massive datasets
(e.g., [57, 30, 43, 27, 13, 53]). See the surveys [41, 56, 42] for a comprehensive overview of this
area.
These algorithms are mostly based on sketching. In its most basic form, the input matrix A ∈ Rn×d
is left-multiplied by a carefully chosen sketching matrix S ∈ Rm×n , whose row dimension is much
smaller than that of A (i.e., m  n). Then, a good low rank approximation to A can be computed from SA. Reducing the row dimension from n to m improves the algorithmic efficiency in
multiple ways. First, SA can be stored using less space than A, which is important in the context of space-efficient streaming algorithms. Furthermore, the dimensionality reduction step can be
combined with other steps to obtain LRA algorithms with running time nearly linear in the size of
A. Identifying suitable sketching matrices is a highly non-trivial task, and by now there are several
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

