Unique sparse decomposition of low rank matrices

Dian Jin
Rutgers University
dj370@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Xin Bing
Cornell University
xb43@cornell.edu

Yuqian Zhang
Rutgers University
yqz.zhang@rutgers.edu

Abstract
The problem of finding the unique low dimensional decomposition of a
given matrix has been a fundamental and recurrent problem in many areas.
In this paper, we study the problem of seeking a unique decomposition of a
low rank matrix Y ∈ Rp×n that admits a sparse representation. Specifically,
we consider Y = AX ∈ Rp×n where the matrix A ∈ Rp×r has full column
rank, with r < min{n, p}, and the matrix X ∈ Rr×n is element-wise sparse.
We prove that this sparse decomposition of Y can be uniquely identified by
recovering ground-truth A column by column, up to some intrinsic signed
permutation. Our approach relies on solving a nonconvex optimization
problem constrained over the unit sphere. Our geometric analysis for the
nonconvex optimization landscape shows that any strict local solution is
close to the ground truth solution, and can be recovered by a simple datadriven initialization followed with any second order descent algorithm. At
last, we corroborate these theoretical results with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The problem of matrix decomposition has been a popular and fundamental topic under
extensive investigations across several disciplines, including signal processing, machine
learning, natural language processing [10, 11, 31, 46, 32, 8]. From the decomposition, one
can construct efficient representation of the original data matrix. However, for any matrix
Y ∈ Rp×n that can be factorized as a product of two matrices A ∈ Rp×r and X ∈ Rr×n ,
there exist infinitely many decompositions, simply because one can use any r × r invertible
matrix Q to construct A′ = AQ and X ′ = Q−1 X such that Y = AX = A′ X ′ , while
A′ 6= A and X ′ 6= X. Thus, in various applications, additional structures and priors are being exploited to find a preferred representation [22, 15]. For example, principal component
analysis (PCA) aims to find orthogonal representations which retain as much variations in
Y as possible [17, 23], whereas independent component analysis (ICA) targets the representations of statistically independent non-Gaussian signals [26].
In this paper, we are interested in finding a unique sparse low-dimensional representation
of Y . To this end, we study the decomposition of a low rank matrix Y ∈ Rp×n that satisfies
Y = AX,

(1.1)

where A ∈ Rp×r is an unknown deterministic matrix, with r < min{n, p}, and X ∈ Rr×n
is an unknown sparse matrix.
Formulation (1.1) is an important model problem in many applications. As columns of
Y are viewed as linear combinations of columns of A with X being the sparse coefficient,
(1.1) can be used to form overlapping clusters of the n columns of Y via the support of
X with columns of A being viewed as r cluster centers [12, 7]. When we form a p × r
low-dimensional representation of Y via sparse combinations, this greatly enhance the interpretability of the resulting representations [28, 21, 4], in the same spirit as the sparse
PCA, but (1.1) generalizes to the factorization of non-orthogonal matrices.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

