Offline Reinforcement Learning with Reverse
Model-based Imagination

Jianhao Wang∗ 1 , Wenzhe Li∗ 1 , Haozhe Jiang1 , Guangxiang Zhu2† , Siyuan Li1 ,
Chongjie Zhang1
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
2
Baidu Inc., China
{wjh19, lwz21, jianghz20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
guangxiangzhu@outlook.com
sy-li17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In offline reinforcement learning (offline RL), one of the main challenges is to deal
with the distributional shift between the learning policy and the given dataset. To
address this problem, recent offline RL methods attempt to introduce conservatism
bias to encourage learning in high-confidence areas. Model-free approaches directly
encode such bias into policy or value function learning using conservative regularizations or special network structures, but their constrained policy search limits the
generalization beyond the offline dataset. Model-based approaches learn forward
dynamics models with conservatism quantifications and then generate imaginary
trajectories to extend the offline datasets. However, due to limited samples in offline datasets, conservatism quantifications often suffer from overgeneralization in
out-of-support regions. The unreliable conservative measures will mislead forward
model-based imaginations to undesired areas, leading to overaggressive behaviors. To encourage more conservatism, we propose a novel model-based offline
RL framework, called Reverse Offline Model-based Imagination (ROMI). We
learn a reverse dynamics model in conjunction with a novel reverse policy, which
can generate rollouts leading to the target goal states within the offline dataset.
These reverse imaginations provide informed data augmentation for model-free
policy learning and enable conservative generalization beyond the offline dataset.
ROMI can effectively combine with off-the-shelf model-free algorithms to enable
model-based generalization with proper conservatism. Empirical results show that
our method can generate more conservative behaviors and achieve state-of-the-art
performance on offline RL benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved tremendous successes in a range of domains [1–3]
by utilizing a large number of interactions with the environment. However, in many real-world
applications, collecting sufficient exploratory interactions is usually impractical, because online
data collection can be costly or even dangerous, such as in healthcare [4] and autonomous driving
[5]. To address this challenge, offline RL [6, 7] develops a new learning paradigm that trains RL
agents only with pre-collected offline datasets and thus can abstract away from the cost of online
exploration [8–17]. For such offline settings, recent studies demonstrate that directly applying
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while Guangxiang was a Ph.D. student at Tsinghua University.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

