DeepSITH: Efficient Learning via Decomposition of
What and When Across Time Scales
Brandon G. Jacques
Department of Psychology
University Of Virginia
bgj5hk@virginia.edu

Zoran Tiganj
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University
ztiganj@iu.edu

Marc W. Howard
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Boston University
marc777@bu.edu

Per B. Sederberg
Department of Psychology
University of Virginia
pbs5u@virginia.edu

Abstract
Extracting temporal relationships over a range of scales is a hallmark of human
perception and cognition—and thus it is a critical feature of machine learning
applied to real-world problems. Neural networks are either plagued by the exploding/vanishing gradient problem in recurrent neural networks (RNNs) or must adjust
their parameters to learn the relevant time scales (e.g., in LSTMs). This paper introduces DeepSITH, a deep network comprising biologically-inspired Scale-Invariant
Temporal History (SITH) modules in series with dense connections between layers.
Each SITH module is simply a set of time cells coding what happened when with
a geometrically-spaced set of time lags. The dense connections between layers
change the definition of what from one layer to the next. The geometric series
of time lags implies that the network codes time on a logarithmic scale, enabling
DeepSITH network to learn problems requiring memory over a wide range of time
scales. We compare DeepSITH to LSTMs and other recent RNNs on several time
series prediction and decoding tasks. DeepSITH achieves results comparable to
state-of-the-art performance on these problems and continues to perform well even
as the delays are increased.

1

Introduction

The natural world contains structure at many different time scales. Natural learners can spontaneously
extract meaningful information from a range of nested time scales allowing a listener of music
to appreciate the structure of a concerto over time scales ranging from milliseconds to thousands
of seconds. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) enable information to persist over time and have
been proposed as models of natural memory in brain circuits [1]. For decades, long-range temporal
dependencies have been recognized as a serious challenge for RNNs [2]. This problem with RNNs
is fundamental, arising from the exploding/vanishing gradient problem [3, 4]. The importance of
long-range dependencies coupled with the difficulties with RNNs has led to a resurgence of interest
in long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) over the last several years.
LSTMs, however, are neurobiologically implausible and, as a practical matter, tend to fail when
time scales are very large [5, 6]. More recent approaches attempt to solve the problem of learning
across multiple scales by constructing a scale-invariant memory. For example, Legendre Memory
Units (LMU) are RNNs that utilize a specialized weight initialization technique that theoretically
guarantees the construction of long time-scale associations [7]. LMUs construct a memory for the
recent past using Legendre polynomials as basis functions. In a different approach, the Coupled
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

