Bridging the Gap Between Practice and PAC-Bayes
Theory in Few-Shot Meta-Learning

Nan Ding
Google Research
dingnan@google.com

Xi Chen
Google Research
chillxichen@google.com

Sebastian Goodman
Google Research
seabass@google.com

Tomer Levinboim
Google Research
tomerl@google.com

Radu Soricut
Google Research
rsoricut@google.com

Abstract
Despite recent advances in its theoretical understanding, there still remains a significant gap in the ability of existing PAC-Bayesian theories on meta-learning to
explain performance improvements in the few-shot learning setting, where the
number of training examples in the target tasks is severely limited. This gap originates from an assumption in the existing theories which supposes that the number
of training examples in the observed tasks and the number of training examples
in the target tasks follow the same distribution, an assumption that rarely holds
in practice. By relaxing this assumption, we develop two PAC-Bayesian bounds
tailored for the few-shot learning setting and show that two existing meta-learning
algorithms (MAML and Reptile) can be derived from our bounds, thereby bridging
the gap between practice and PAC-Bayesian theories. Furthermore, we derive a
new computationally-efficient PACMAML algorithm, and show it outperforms
existing meta-learning algorithms on several few-shot benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning and neural networks have resulted in effective but parameterbloated, data-hungry models. When the training data for a target task of interest is insufficient, such
overparameterized models may easily overfit to the training data and exhibit poor generalization
abilities. To address this problem, several research efforts have focused on designing a learning
strategy that can leverage the training data of other tasks for the sake of improving the performance
of some specific target task(s). Specifically, in the meta-learning (also called learning-to-learn or
lifelong-learning) setting [6, 21], a meta-learner first extracts knowledge from a set of observed (metatraining) tasks and subsequently, this knowledge enables a base-learner to better adapt to the new,
possibly data-limited target (meta-testing) task. The meta-learning framework has been successfully
applied and made significant practical impact on computer vision [23], language understanding [7],
reinforcement learning [9] and many other research fields.
In parallel to its impressive empirical success, a series of theoretical works [24, 18, 3, 22] study how
meta-learning utilizes the knowledge obtained from the observed task data and how it generalizes to
the unseen target task. Among the generalization bounds, PAC-Bayes bounds [15, 12] are considered
especially tight and have already been proposed for meta-learning [18, 3, 22]. However, there still
remains a gap between these existing PAC-Bayesian bounds and their practical application (especially
in the few-shot setting), which originates from the assumption that the observed task environment T̃
and the target task environment T are the same. In the PAC-Bayesian meta-learning setting, a task
environment T is a distribution from which (D, m) is drawn from, where D is the data distribution
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

