Learning Nonparametric Volterra Kernels with
Gaussian Processes
Michael T. Smith
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield, UK
m.t.smith@sheffield.ac.uk

Magnus Ross
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield, UK
mross1@sheffield.ac.uk

Mauricio A. Álvarez
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield, UK
mauricio.alvarez@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces a method for the nonparametric Bayesian learning of nonlinear operators, through the use of the Volterra series with kernels represented
using Gaussian processes (GPs), which we term the nonparametric Volterra kernels
model (NVKM). When the input function to the operator is unobserved and has a
GP prior, the NVKM constitutes a powerful method for both single and multiple
output regression, and can be viewed as a nonlinear and nonparametric latent force
model. When the input function is observed, the NVKM can be used to perform
Bayesian system identification. We use recent advances in efficient sampling of
explicit functions from GPs to map process realisations through the Volterra series
without resorting to numerical integration, allowing scalability through doubly
stochastic variational inference, and avoiding the need for Gaussian approximations
of the output processes. We demonstrate the performance of the model for both
multiple output regression and system identification using standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) constitute a general method for placing prior distributions over functions,
with the properties of samples from the distribution being controlled primarily by the form of the
covariance function [22]. Process convolutions (PCs) are one powerful method for building such
covariance functions [4, 13, 3]. In the PC framework, the function we wish to model is assumed to be
generated by the application of some convolution operator to a base GP with some simple covariance,
and since linear operators applied to GPs result in GPs, the result is another GP with a covariance we
deem desirable. PCs allow models for multiple correlated output functions to be built with ease, by
assuming each output is generated by a different operator applied to the same base function, or set of
functions [30, 13].
The PC framework unifies a number of different ideas in the GP literature. Latent force models
(LFMs) [1] use PCs to include physics based inductive biases in multiple output GP (MOGP) models
by using the Green’s function of a linear differential operator as the kernel of the convolution. This
leads to the interpretation of each output as having been generated by inputting a random latent force
into a linear system, with physical properties described by the differential operator. The Gaussian
process convolution model (GPCM) of Tobar et al. [29] treats the convolution kernel itself as an
unknown function to be inferred from data, and places a GP prior over it. Linear systems are entirely
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

