Universal Rate-Distortion-Perception Representations
for Lossy Compression

George Zhang
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto
gq.zhang@mail.utoronto.ca

Jingjing Qian
Electrical and Computer Engineering
McMaster University
qianj40@mcmaster.ca

Jun Chen
Electrical and Computer Engineering
McMaster University
chenjun@mcmaster.ca

Ashish Khisti
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto
akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
In the context of lossy compression, Blau & Michaeli [5] adopt a mathematical
notion of perceptual quality and define the information rate-distortion-perception
function, generalizing the classical rate-distortion tradeoff. We consider the notion
of universal representations in which one may fix an encoder and vary the decoder
to achieve any point within a collection of distortion and perception constraints.
We prove that the corresponding information-theoretic universal rate-distortionperception function is operationally achievable in an approximate sense. Under
MSE distortion, we show that the entire distortion-perception tradeoff of a Gaussian
source can be achieved by a single encoder of the same rate asymptotically. We then
characterize the achievable distortion-perception region for a fixed representation
in the case of arbitrary distributions, and identify conditions under which the
aforementioned results continue to hold approximately. This motivates the study of
practical constructions that are approximately universal across the RDP tradeoff,
thereby alleviating the need to design a new encoder for each objective. We provide
experimental results on MNIST and SVHN suggesting that on image compression
tasks, the operational tradeoffs achieved by machine learning models with a fixed
encoder suffer only a small penalty when compared to their variable encoder
counterparts.

1

Introduction

Unlike in lossless compression, the decoder in a lossy compression system has flexibility in how to
reconstruct the source. Conventionally, some measure of distortion such as mean squared error, PSNR
or SSIM/MS-SSIM [36, 37] is used as a quality measure. Accordingly, lossy compression algorithms
are analyzed through rate-distortion theory, wherein the objective is to minimize the amount of
distortion for a given rate. However, it has been observed that low distortion is not necessarily
synonymous with high perceptual quality; indeed, deep learning based image compression has
inspired works in which authors have noted that increased perceptual quality may come at the cost
of increased distortion [1, 4]. This culminated in the work of Blau & Michaeli [5] who propose the
rate-distortion-perception theoretical framework.
The main idea was to introduce a third perception axis which more closely mimics what humans
would deem to be visually pleasing. Unlike distortion, judgement of perceptual quality is taken to
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

