Hindsight Task Relabelling:
Experience Replay for Sparse Reward Meta-RL

Charles Packer
UC Berkeley

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Joseph E. Gonzalez
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) has proven to be a successful framework
for leveraging experience from prior tasks to rapidly learn new related tasks, however, current meta-RL approaches struggle to learn in sparse reward environments.
Although existing meta-RL algorithms can learn strategies for adapting to new
sparse reward tasks, the actual adaptation strategies are learned using hand-shaped
reward functions, or require simple environments where random exploration is
sufficient to encounter sparse reward. In this paper, we present a formulation of
hindsight relabeling for meta-RL, which relabels experience during meta-training
to enable learning to learn entirely using sparse reward. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a suite of challenging sparse reward goal-reaching
environments that previously required dense reward during meta-training to solve.
Our approach solves these environments using the true sparse reward function, with
performance comparable to training with a proxy dense reward function.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen tremendous success applied to challenging games (Mnih et al.,
2015; Silver et al., 2017) and robotic control (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016), driven by
advances in compute and the use of deep neural networks as powerful function approximators in
RL algorithms. However, agents trained using deep RL often struggle to meaningfully utilize past
experience to learn new tasks, even if the new tasks differ only slightly from tasks seen during training
(Zhang et al., 2018; Packer et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019). In contrast, humans are adept at utilizing
prior experience to rapidly acquire new skills and adapt to unseen environments.
Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) aims to address this limitation by extending the RL framework to explicitly consider structured distributions of tasks (Schmidhuber, 1987; Bengio et al., 1990;
Thrun & Pratt, 1998). Whereas conventional RL is concerned with learning a single task, meta-RL is
concerned with learning to learn, that is, learning how to quickly learn a new task by leveraging prior
experience on related tasks. Meta-RL methods generally utilize a limited amount of experience in a
new environment to estimate a latent task embedding which conditions the policy, or to compute a
policy gradient which is used to directly update the parameters of the policy.
A major challenge in both RL and meta-RL is learning with sparse rewards. When rewards are
sparse or delayed, the adaptation stage in meta-RL becomes extremely difficult: inferring the task at
hand requires receiving reward signal from the environment, which in the sparse reward setting only
happens after successfully completing the task. Due to this inherent incompatibility between meta-RL
and sparse rewards, existing meta-RL algorithms that consider the sparse reward setting either only
work in simple environments that do not require temporally-extended exploration strategies for
adaptation (Duan et al., 2016; Stadie et al., 2018), or train exclusively using dense reward functions
(Gupta et al., 2018b; Rakelly et al., 2019), which are designed to encourage an agent to learn
adaptation strategies that can be directly applied to the original sparse reward setting.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

