Similarity and Matching
of Neural Network Representations
Adrián Csiszárik†,◦ , Péter Kőrösi-Szabó† , Ákos K. Matszangosz†
Gergely Papp† , Dániel Varga†
†

Alfréd Rényi Insititute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary
◦
Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary

{csadrian, koszpe, matszang, gergopool, daniel}@renyi.hu

Abstract
We employ a toolset — dubbed Dr. Frankenstein — to analyse the similarity
of representations in deep neural networks. With this toolset, we aim to match
the activations on given layers of two trained neural networks by joining them
with a stitching layer. We demonstrate that the inner representations emerging
in deep convolutional neural networks with the same architecture but different
initializations can be matched with a surprisingly high degree of accuracy even
with a single, affine stitching layer. We choose the stitching layer from several
possible classes of linear transformations and investigate their performance and
properties. The task of matching representations is closely related to notions of
similarity. Using this toolset, we also provide a novel viewpoint on the current
line of research regarding similarity indices of neural network representations: the
perspective of the performance on a task.

1

Introduction

A central topic in the analysis of deep neural networks is the investigation of the learned representations. A good understanding of the features learned on inner layers provides means to analyse and
advance deep learning systems. A fundamental question in this line of inquiry is “when are two
representations similar?” We contribute to this line of research by introducing a novel approach
to study the above question. The key idea of our work is to ask the following, somewhat different
question: “in what way are two representations similar, once we know that they are similar?” In
this paper, we present a conceptual framework and a methodology that allows to meaningfully pose
and study this question. For this purpose, we will distinguish two approaches to define similarity:
representational similarity and functional similarity.
Representational similarity Representational similarity notions define similarity via computing
statistics on two different data embeddings that capture appropriate geometrical or statistical properties. There exist several statistical measures, [Raghu et al., 2017, Morcos et al., 2018, Kornblith
et al., 2019] each of which serves as a different notion of similarity. These measures have been used
successfully to obtain valuable insights about the inner workings of deep neural networks [Nguyen
et al., 2021, Mirzadeh et al., 2021, Neyshabur et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2020].
Functional similarity While representational similarity concerns the data embeddings, in contrast,
functional similarity concerns the functions that produce and process these embeddings, i.e., parts
of the function compositions that the neural networks realize. With these elements, we can ask new
types of questions that we were not able to ask using solely the data embeddings. For example, we
can ask the following: “can network B achieve its task using the representations of network A?”
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

