Demystifying and Generalizing BinaryConnect

Tim Dockhorn ∗
University of Waterloo

Yaoliang Yu
University of Waterloo

Mahdi Zolnouri
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Eyyüb Sari
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Vahid Partovi Nia
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
BinaryConnect (BC) and its many variations have become the de facto standard for
neural network quantization. However, our understanding of the inner workings
of BC is still quite limited. We attempt to close this gap in four different aspects:
(a) we show that existing quantization algorithms, including post-training quantization, are surprisingly similar to each other; (b) we argue for proximal maps
as a natural family of quantizers that is both easy to design and analyze; (c) we
refine the observation that BC is a special case of dual averaging, which itself is a
special case of the generalized conditional gradient algorithm; (d) consequently, we
propose ProxConnect (PC) as a generalization of BC and we prove its convergence
properties by exploiting the established connections. We conduct experiments on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, and verify that PC achieves competitive performance.

1

Introduction

Scaling up to extremely large datasets and models has been a main ingredient for the success of
deep learning. Indeed, with the availability of big data, more computing power, convenient software,
and a bag of training tricks as well as algorithmic innovations, the size of models that we routinely
train in order to achieve state-of-the-art performance has exploded, e.g., to billions of parameters in
recent language models [9]. However, high memory usage and computational cost at inference time
has made it difficult to deploy these models in real-time or on resource-limited devices [28]. The
environmental impact of training and deploying these large models has also been recognized [40].
A common approach to tackle these problems is to compress a large model through quantization,
i.e., replacing high-precision parameters with lower-precision ones. For example, we may constrain
a subset of the weights to be binary [1, 5, 11, 29, 33, 37, 45] or ternary [26, 53]. Quantization can
drastically decrease the carbon footprint of training and inference of neural networks, however, it
may come at the cost of increased bias [21].
One of the main methods to obtain quantized neural networks is to encourage quantized parameters
during gradient training using explicit or implicit regularization techniques, however, other methods
are possible [16–18, 20, 25, 32, 51]. Besides the memory benefits, the structure of the quantization
can speed up inference using, for example, faster matrix-vector products [18, 23]. Training and
inference can be made even more efficient by also quantizing the activations [37] or gradients
[52]. Impressive performance has been achieved with quantized networks, for example, on object
detection [44] and natural language processing [43] tasks. The theoretical underpinnings of quantized
neural networks, such as when and why their performance remains reasonably well, have been
actively studied [3, 13, 22, 41, 46].
∗

Work done during an internship
tim.dockhorn@uwaterloo.ca.

at

Huawei

Noah’s

Ark

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

Lab.

Correspondence

to

