Finite-Sample Analysis of Off-Policy TD-Learning via
Generalized Bellman Operators

Zaiwei Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology

Siva Theja Maguluri
Georgia Institute of Technology

Sanjay Shakkottai
The University of Texas at Austin

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
IBM Research NY

Abstract
In TD-learning, off-policy sampling is known to be more practical than on-policy
sampling, and by decoupling learning from data collection, it enables data reuse.
It is known that policy evaluation has the interpretation of solving a generalized
Bellman equation. In this paper, we derive finite-sample bounds for any general
off-policy TD-like stochastic approximation algorithm that solves for the fixedpoint of this generalized Bellman operator. Our key step is to show that the
generalized Bellman operator is simultaneously a contraction mapping with respect
to a weighted `p -norm for each p in [1, ∞), with a common contraction factor.
Off-policy TD-learning is known to suffer from high variance due to the product of
importance sampling ratios. A number of algorithms (e.g. Qπ (λ), Tree-Backup(λ),
Retrace(λ), and Q-trace) have been proposed in the literature to address this
issue. Our results immediately imply finite-sample bounds of these algorithms.
In particular, we provide first-known finite-sample guarantees for Qπ (λ), TreeBackup(λ), and Retrace(λ), and improve the best known bounds of Q-trace in
[19]. Moreover, we show the bias-variance trade-offs in each of these algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) demonstrated its success in learning effective policies for a variety of
decision making problems such as autonomous driving [25, 26], recommender systems [1, 41], and
game-related problems [23, 27, 39]. In RL, there is an important sub-problem – called the policy
evaluation problem – of estimating the expected long term reward of a given policy. Solving the
policy evaluation problem is usually an itermediate step in many existing RL algorithms to ultimately
find an optimal policy, such as approximate policy iteration and actor-critic framework.
The policy evaluation problem is usually solved with the TD-learning method [30]. A key ingredient
in TD-learning is the policy used to collect samples (called the behavior policy). Ideally, we want
to generate samples from the target policy whose value function we want to estimate, and this is
called on-policy sampling. However, in many cases such on-policy sampling is not possible due
to practical reasons [16, 40], and hence we need to work with historical data that is generated by a
possibly different policy (i.e., off-policy sampling). Although off-policy sampling is more practical
than on-policy sampling, it is more challenging to analyze and is known to have high variance
[15], which is a fundamental difficulty in off-policy learning. To overcome this difficulty, many
variants of off-policy TD-learning algorithms have been proposed in the literature, such as Qπ (λ)
[17], Tree-Backup(λ) (henceforth denoted by TB(λ)) [24], Retrace(λ) [22], and Q-trace [19], etc.
1.1

Main Contributions

In this work, we establish finite-sample bounds of a general n-step off-policy TD-learning algorithm
that also subsumes several algorithms presented in the literature. The key step is to show that such
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

