A Minimalist Approach to
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Scott Fujimoto1,2
Shixiang Shane Gu2
1
Mila, McGill University
2
Google Research, Brain Team
scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) defines the task of learning from a fixed batch
of data. Due to errors in value estimation from out-of-distribution actions, most
offline RL algorithms take the approach of constraining or regularizing the policy
with the actions contained in the dataset. Built on pre-existing RL algorithms,
modifications to make an RL algorithm work offline comes at the cost of additional
complexity. Offline RL algorithms introduce new hyperparameters and often
leverage secondary components such as generative models, while adjusting the
underlying RL algorithm. In this paper we aim to make a deep RL algorithm work
while making minimal changes. We find that we can match the performance of
state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms by simply adding a behavior cloning term
to the policy update of an online RL algorithm and normalizing the data. The
resulting algorithm is a simple to implement and tune baseline, while more than
halving the overall run time by removing the additional computational overheads
of previous methods.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, reinforcement learning (RL) is thought of as a paradigm for online learning, where the
interaction between the RL agent and its environment is of fundamental concern for how the agent
learns. In offline RL (historically known as batch RL), the agent learns from a fixed-sized dataset,
collected by some arbitrary and possibly unknown process [Lange et al., 2012]. Eliminating the need
to interact with the environment is noteworthy as data collection can often be expensive, risky, or
otherwise challenging, particularly in real-world applications. Consequently, offline RL enables the
use of previously logged data or leveraging an expert, such as a human operator, without any of the
risk associated with an untrained RL agent.
Unfortunately, the main benefit of offline RL, the lack of environment interaction, is also what
makes it a challenging task. While most off-policy RL algorithms are applicable in the offline
setting, they tend to under-perform due to “extrapolation error”: an error in policy evaluation, where
agents tend to poorly estimate the value of state-action pairs not contained in the dataset. This
in turn affects policy improvement, where agents learn to prefer out-of-distribution actions whose
value has been overestimated, resulting in poor performance [Fujimoto et al., 2019b]. The solution
class for this problem revolves around the idea that the learned policy should be kept close to the
data-generating process (or behavior policy), and has been given a variety of names (such as batchconstrained [Fujimoto et al., 2019b], KL-control [Jaques et al., 2019], behavior-regularized [Wu et al.,
2019], or policy constraint [Levine et al., 2020]) depending on how this “closeness” is chosen to be
implemented.
While there are many proposed approaches to offline RL, we remark that few are truly “simple”,
and even the algorithms which claim to work with minor additions to an underlying online RL
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

