V ID L AN KD: Improving Language Understanding via
Video-Distilled Knowledge Transfer

Zineng Tang

Jaemin Cho Hao Tan Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{terran, jmincho, haotan, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Since visual perception can give rich information beyond text descriptions for world
understanding, there has been increasing interest in leveraging visual grounding
for language learning. Recently, vokenization [68] has attracted attention by using
the predictions of a text-to-image retrieval model as labels for language model
supervision. Despite its success, the method suffers from approximation error of
using finite image labels and the lack of vocabulary diversity of a small image-text
dataset. To overcome these limitations, we present V ID L AN KD, a video-language
knowledge distillation method for improving language understanding. We train a
multi-modal teacher model on a video-text dataset, and then transfer its knowledge
to a student language model with a text dataset. To avoid approximation error,
we propose to use different knowledge distillation objectives. In addition, the use
of a large-scale video-text dataset helps learn diverse and richer vocabularies. In
our experiments, V ID L AN KD achieves consistent improvements over text-only
language models and vokenization models, on several downstream language understanding tasks including GLUE, SQuAD, and SWAG. We also demonstrate the
improved world knowledge, physical reasoning, and temporal reasoning capabilities of our model by evaluating on the GLUE-diagnostics, PIQA, and TRACIE
datasets. Lastly, we present comprehensive ablation studies as well as visualizations of the learned text-to-video grounding results of our teacher and student
language models.1

1

Introduction

Language learning can be aided by grounded visual cues, as they provide powerful signals for
modeling a vastness of experiences in the world that cannot be documented by text alone [5; 29; 4].
While the recent trend of large-scale language model pretraining indirectly provides some world
knowledge from text, most large text corpora (e.g., Wikipedia) do not provide enough multi-modal
grounding information. Previous works have explored multiple ways of grounding language to
visual information such as constructing a common vector space [38; 7] and supervising the model
with token-wise generated vision labels [68]. However, the widely-used image-text datasets (e.g.,
MS COCO [48]) are much smaller than text-only corpora in terms of word counts and vocabulary
diversity for language learning.
The recent method of ‘vokenization’ [68] is a promising initial step towards addressing this problem
by supervising language models with weakly-aligned vision-language groundings. Firstly, an imagetext matching model retrieves a corresponding image to each text token in a sentence. Then a language
model learns to predict the selected image (called ‘voken’) for each text token. This can be seen as
a knowledge distillation (KD) process [33] from a vision-language grounding model to a language
1

Code and models: https://github.com/zinengtang/VidLanKD

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), virtual.

