The Benefits of Implicit Regularization
from SGD in Least Squares Problems

Difan Zou∗
University of California, Los Angeles
knowzou@cs.ucla.edu

Jingfeng Wu∗
Johns Hopkins University
uuujf@jhu.edu

Quanquan Gu
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Vladimir Braverman
Johns Hopkins University
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Dean P. Foster
Amazon
dean@foster.net

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington & Microsoft Research
sham@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) exhibits strong algorithmic regularization effects in practice, which has been hypothesized to play an important role in the
generalization of modern machine learning approaches. In this work, we seek
to understand these issues in the simpler setting of linear regression (including
both underparameterized and overparameterized regimes), where our goal is to
make sharp instance-based comparisons of the implicit regularization afforded
by (unregularized) average SGD with the explicit regularization of ridge regression. For a broad class of least squares problem instances (that are natural in
high-dimensional settings), we show: (1) for every problem instance and for every ridge parameter, (unregularized) SGD, when provided with logarithmically
more samples than that provided to the ridge algorithm, generalizes no worse than
the ridge solution (provided SGD uses a tuned constant stepsize); (2) conversely,
there exist instances (in this wide problem class) where optimally-tuned ridge
regression requires quadratically more samples than SGD in order to have the
same generalization performance. Taken together, our results show that, up to the
logarithmic factors, the generalization performance of SGD is always no worse
than that of ridge regression in a wide range of overparameterized problems, and,
in fact, could be much better for some problem instances. More generally, our
results show how algorithmic regularization has important consequences even in
simpler (overparameterized) convex settings.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks often exhibit powerful generalization in numerous machine learning applications, despite being overparameterized. It has been conjectured that the optimization algorithm itself,
e.g., stochastic gradient descent (SGD), implicitly regularizes such overparameterized models [29];
here, (unregularized) overparameterized models could admit numerous global and local minima
(many of which generalize poorly [29, 21]), yet SGD tends to find solutions that generalize well, even
in the absence of explicit regularizers [22, 29, 19]. This regularizing effect due to the choice of the
optimization algorithm is often referred to as implicit regularization [22].
∗

Equal Contribution

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

