Knowledge-Adaptation Priors

Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan∗
RIKEN Center for AI Project
Tokyo, Japan
emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp

Siddharth Swaroop∗
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
ss2163@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Humans and animals have a natural ability to quickly adapt to their surroundings,
but machine-learning models, when subjected to changes, often require a complete
retraining from scratch. We present Knowledge-adaptation priors (K-priors) to
reduce the cost of retraining by enabling quick and accurate adaptation for a widevariety of tasks and models. This is made possible by a combination of weight and
function-space priors to reconstruct the gradients of the past, which recovers and
generalizes many existing, but seemingly-unrelated, adaptation strategies. Training
with simple first-order gradient methods can often recover the exact retrained model
to an arbitrary accuracy by choosing a sufficiently large memory of the past data.
Empirical results show that adaptation with K-priors achieves performance similar
to full retraining, but only requires training on a handful of past examples.

1

Introduction

Machine-Learning (ML) at production often requires constant model updating which can have
huge financial and environmental costs [19, 44]. The production pipeline is continuously evolving,
where new data are regularly pooled and labeled and old data become irrelevant. Regular tuning of
hyperparameters is required to handle drifts [19], and sometimes even the model class/architecture
may need to change. Due to this, the model is frequently retrained, retested, and redeployed, which
can be extremely costly, especially when the data and model sizes are large. The cost can be reduced
if, instead of repeated retraining, the system can quickly adapt to incremental changes. Humans
and animals can naturally use their prior knowledge to handle a wide-variety of changes in their
surroundings, but such quick, wide, and accurate adaptation has been difficult to achieve in ML.
In theory, this should be possible within a Bayesian framework where the posterior is used as the prior
for the future, but exact Bayes is computationally challenging and the design of generic Bayesian
priors has its own challenges [55, 39]. In ML, simpler mechanisms are more popular, for example,
in Support Vector Machines (SVMs) for adding/removing data [12, 58, 60], and in deep learning
for model compression [24]. Weight-priors are used in online learning [13], and more recently for
continual learning [30, 40, 47, 33, 62], but they are not suited for many other tasks, such as model
compression. In some settings, they also perform worse, for example, in continual learning when
compared to memory-based strategies [34, 46, 45, 9]. All these previous works apply to narrow,
specific settings, and designing generic adaptation-mechanisms remains an open challenge.
We present Knowledge-adaptation priors (K-priors) for the design of generic adaptation-mechanisms.
The general principle of adaptation is to combine the weight and function-space divergences to
faithfully reconstruct the gradient of the past. K-priors can handle a wide variety of adaptation tasks
(Fig. 1, left) and work for a range of models, such as generalized linear models, deep networks,
and their Bayesian extensions. The principle unifies and generalizes many seemingly-unrelated
existing works, for example, weight-priors [13], knowledge distillation [24], SVMs [12, 35, 58],
* Authors contributed equally.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

