A Normative and Biologically Plausible Algorithm for
Independent Component Analysis

Yanis Bahroun 1,2
Dmitri B. Chklovskii 1,4
Anirvan M. Sengupta 2,3,5
1
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
2
Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute
3
Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute
4
Neuroscience Institute, NYU Medical Center
5
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University
{ybahroun,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org anirvans.physics@gmail.com

Abstract
The brain effortlessly solves blind source separation (BSS) problems, but the
algorithm it uses remains elusive. In signal processing, linear BSS problems are
often solved by Independent Component Analysis (ICA). To serve as a model of a
biological circuit, the ICA neural network (NN) must satisfy at least the following
requirements: 1. The algorithm must operate in the online setting where data
samples are streamed one at a time, and the NN computes the sources on the fly
without storing any significant fraction of the data in memory. 2. The synaptic
weight update is local, i.e., it depends only on the biophysical variables present in
the vicinity of a synapse. Here, we propose a novel objective function for ICA from
which we derive a biologically plausible NN, including both the neural architecture
and the synaptic learning rules. Interestingly, our algorithm relies on modulating
synaptic plasticity by the total activity of the output neurons. In the brain, this could
be accomplished by neuromodulators, extracellular calcium, local field potential,
or nitric oxide.

1

Introduction

In the brain, visual, auditory, and olfactory systems effortlessly identify latent sources from their
mixtures [1, 2, 3, 4]. In unsupervised learning, such task is known as blind source separation (BSS) [5].
BSS is often solved by Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [6, 7], which assumes a generative
model, wherein the observed stimuli are linear combinations of independent sources. ICA algorithms
determine the linear transformation back from the observed stimuli into their original sources without
knowing how they were mixed in the first place.
Developing a biologically plausible ICA algorithm may provide critical insight into neural computational primitives because ICA may be implemented throughout the brain. In particular, receptive
fields of V1 neurons may be the result of performing ICA on natural images [8, 9]. Similarly, ICA
may account for the receptive fields in the auditory system [10]. Moreover, the neural computational
primitives used in the visual and the auditory cortex may be similar, as evidenced by anatomical
similarity and by developmental experiments where auditory cortex neurons acquire V1-like receptive
fields when visual inputs are redirected there [11]. Therefore, ICA may serve as a computational
primitive underlying learning throughout the neocortex.
The majority of existing ICA algorithms[5], for example, information-theoretic ones [12, 13, 14, 15,
16] do not meet our biological plausibility requirements. In this work, for the biological plausibility of
neural networks (NN), we require that i) they operate in the online (or streaming) setting, namely, the
input dataset is streamed one data vector at a time, and the corresponding output must be computed
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

