Beyond Pinball Loss: Quantile Methods for
Calibrated Uncertainty Quantification

Youngseog Chung
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
youngsec@cs.cmu.edu

Willie Neiswanger
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
neiswanger@cs.stanford.edu

Ian Char
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ichar@cs.cmu.edu

Jeff Schneider
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
schneide@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Among the many ways of quantifying uncertainty in a regression setting, specifying
the full quantile function is attractive, as quantiles are amenable to interpretation
and evaluation. A model that predicts the true conditional quantiles for each input,
at all quantile levels, presents a correct and efficient representation of the underlying uncertainty. To achieve this, many current quantile-based methods focus on
optimizing the pinball loss. However, this loss restricts the scope of applicable
regression models, limits the ability to target many desirable properties (e.g. calibration, sharpness, centered intervals), and may produce poor conditional quantiles.
In this work, we develop new quantile methods that address these shortcomings.
In particular, we propose methods that can apply to any class of regression model,
select an explicit balance between calibration and sharpness, optimize for calibration of centered intervals, and produce more accurate conditional quantiles. We
provide a thorough experimental evaluation of our methods, which includes a high
dimensional uncertainty quantification task in nuclear fusion.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) in machine learning typically refers to the task of quantifying the
confidence of a given prediction. This measure of certainty can be crucial in a variety of downstream
applications, including Bayesian optimization [36, 45, 54], model-based reinforcement learning
[64, 42, 10, 18], and in high-stakes predictions where mistakes incur large costs [52, 61].
While the common goal of UQ is to describe predictive distributions over outputs for given inputs,
the representation of the distributional prediction varies across methods. For example, some methods
assume a parametric distribution and return parameter estimates [65, 14, 37], while others return
density function estimates, as is common in Bayesian methods [41, 38, 24, 3, 33, 50]. Alternatively,
many methods represent predictive uncertainty with quantile estimates [15, 53, 58, 49, 27].
Quantiles provide an attractive representation for uncertainty because they can be used to model
complex distributions without parametric assumptions, are interpretable with units in the target output
space, allow for easy construction of prediction intervals, and can be used to efficiently sample from
the predictive distribution via inverse transform sampling [22, 32]. Learning the quantile for a single
Code is available at https://github.com/YoungseogChung/calibrated-quantile-uq.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

