NeuroLKH: Combining Deep Learning Model with
Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun Heuristic for Solving the
Traveling Salesman Problem

Liang Xin
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
XINL0003@e.ntu.edu.sg
Zhiguang Cao∗
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology
Singapore
zhiguangcao@outlook.com

Wen Song
Shandong Unviersity
Qingdao, China
wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn
Jie Zhang
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
jzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We present NeuroLKH, a novel algorithm that combines deep learning with the
strong traditional heuristic Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun (LKH) for solving Traveling
Salesman Problem. Specifically, we train a Sparse Graph Network (SGN) with
supervised learning for edge scores and unsupervised learning for node penalties,
both of which are critical for improving the performance of LKH. Based on
the output of SGN, NeuroLKH creates the edge candidate set and transforms
edge distances to guide the searching process of LKH. Extensive experiments
firmly demonstrate that, by training one model on a wide range of problem sizes,
NeuroLKH significantly outperforms LKH and generalizes well to much larger
sizes. Also, we show that NeuroLKH can be applied to other routing problems such
as Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP), Pickup and Delivery Problem
(PDP), and CVRP with Time Windows (CVRPTW).

1

Introduction

Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is an important NP-hard Combinatorial Optimization Problem
with extensive industrial applications in various domains. Exact methods have the exponential worstcase computational complexity, which renders them impractical for solving large-scale problems in
reality, even for highly optimized solvers such as Concorde. In contrast, although lacking optimality
guarantees and non-trivial theoretical analysis, heuristic solvers search for near-optimal solutions
with much lower complexity. They are usually desirable for real-life applications where statistically
better performance is the goal.
Traditional heuristic methods are manually designed based on expert knowledge which is usually
human-interpretable. However, supported by the recent development of deep learning technology,
modern methods train powerful deep neural networks to learn the complex patterns from the TSP
instances generated from some specific distributions [32, 1, 6, 21, 18, 34, 33, 35]. The performances
of deep learning models for solving TSP are constantly improved by these works, which unfortunately
are still far worse than the strong traditional heuristic solver and generally limited to relatively small
problem sizes.
∗

Zhiguang Cao is the corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

