Provably Strict Generalisation Benefit for Invariance
in Kernel Methods
Bryn Elesedy
University of Oxford
bryn@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
It is a commonly held belief that enforcing invariance improves generalisation.
Although this approach enjoys widespread popularity, it is only very recently that
a rigorous theoretical demonstration of this benefit has been established. In this
work we build on the function space perspective of Elesedy and Zaidi [8] to derive
a strictly non-zero generalisation benefit of incorporating invariance in kernel ridge
regression when the target is invariant to the action of a compact group. We study
invariance enforced by feature averaging and find that generalisation is governed
by a notion of effective dimension that arises from the interplay between the kernel
and the group. In building towards this result, we find that the action of the group
induces an orthogonal decomposition of both the reproducing kernel Hilbert space
and its kernel, which may be of interest in its own right.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been significant interest in models that are invariant to the action of a group
on their inputs. It is believed that engineering models in this way improves sample efficiency and
generalisation. Intuitively, if a task has an invariance, then a model that is constructed to be invariant
ahead of time should require fewer examples to generalise than one that must learn to be invariant.
Indeed, there are many application domains, such as fundamental physics or medical imaging, in
which the invariance is known a priori [29, 32]. Although this intuition is certainly not new (e.g. [33]),
it has inspired much recent work (for instance, see [36, 15]).
However, while implementations and practical applications abound, until very recently a rigorous
theoretical justification for invariance was missing. As pointed out in [8], many prior works such
as [28, 24] provide only worst-case guarantees on the performance of invariant algorithms. It follows
that these results do not rule out the possibility of modern training algorithms automatically favouring
invariant models, irrespective of the choice of architecture. Steps towards a more concrete theory of
the benefit of invariance have been taken by [8, 20] and our work is a continuation along the path set
by [8].
In this work we provide a precise characterisation of the generalisation benefit of invariance in
kernel ridge regression. In contrast to [28, 24], this proves a provably strict generalisation benefit for
invariant, feature-averaged models. In deriving this result, we provide insights into the structure of
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces in relation to invariant functions that we believe will be useful for
analysing invariance in other kernel algorithms.
The use of feature averaging to produce invariant predictors enjoys both theoretical and practical
success [17, 9]. For the purposes of this work, feature averaging is defined as training a model
as normal (according to any algorithm) and then transforming the learned model to be invariant.
This transformation is done by orbit-averaging, which means projecting the model on the space of
invariant functions using the operator O introduced in Section 2.3.
Kernel methods have a long been a mainstay of machine learning (see [30, Section 4.7] for a brief
historical overview). Kernels can be viewed as mapping the input data into a potentially infinite
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

