CentripetalText: An Efficient Text Instance
Representation for Scene Text Detection
Tao Sheng, Jie Chen, Zhouhui Lian⇤
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University, Beijing, China
{shengtao, jiechen01, lianzhouhui}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene text detection remains a grand challenge due to the variation in text curvatures, orientations, and aspect ratios. One of the hardest problems in this task is how
to represent text instances of arbitrary shapes. Although many methods have been
proposed to model irregular texts in a flexible manner, most of them lose simplicity
and robustness. Their complicated post-processings and the regression under Dirac
delta distribution undermine the detection performance and the generalization
ability. In this paper, we propose an efficient text instance representation named
CentripetalText (CT), which decomposes text instances into the combination of
text kernels and centripetal shifts. Specifically, we utilize the centripetal shifts to
implement pixel aggregation, guiding the external text pixels to the internal text
kernels. The relaxation operation is integrated into the dense regression for centripetal shifts, allowing the correct prediction in a range instead of a specific value.
The convenient reconstruction of text contours and the tolerance of prediction
errors in our method guarantee the high detection accuracy and the fast inference
speed, respectively. Besides, we shrink our text detector into a proposal generation
module, namely CentripetalText Proposal Network (CPN), replacing Segmentation
Proposal Network (SPN) in Mask TextSpotter v3 and producing more accurate
proposals. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct experiments
on several commonly used scene text benchmarks, including both curved and
multi-oriented text datasets. For the task of scene text detection, our approach
achieves superior or competitive performance compared to other existing methods,
e.g., F-measure of 86.3% at 40.0 FPS on Total-Text, F-measure of 86.1% at 34.8
FPS on MSRA-TD500, etc. For the task of end-to-end scene text recognition, our
method outperforms Mask TextSpotter v3 by 1.1% in F-measure on Total-Text.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, scene text detection has attracted increasing interests in the computer vision
community, as localizing the region of each text instance in natural images with high accuracy is an
essential prerequisite for many practical applications such as blind navigation, scene understanding,
and text retrieval. With the rapid development of object detection [29, 19, 7, 18] and segmentation [22,
46, 26, 50], many promising methods [51, 23, 37, 16, 38, 39] have been proposed to solve the
problem. However, scene text detection is still a challenging task due to the variety of text curvatures,
orientations, and aspect ratios.
How to represent text instances in real imagery is one of the major challenges for scene text detection,
and usually there are two strategies to solve the problem arising from this challenge. The first is
to treat text instances as a specific kind of object and use rotated rectangles or quadrangles for
⇤

Corresponding author

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

