Subgroup Generalization and Fairness of Graph
Neural Networks
Jiaqi Ma ∗†
jiaqima@umich.edu

Junwei Deng ∗†
junweid@umich.edu

Qiaozhu Mei∗‡
qmei@umich.edu

Abstract
Despite enormous successful applications of graph neural networks (GNNs), theoretical understanding of their generalization ability, especially for node-level tasks
where data are not independent and identically-distributed (IID), has been sparse.
The theoretical investigation of the generalization performance is beneficial for
understanding fundamental issues (such as fairness) of GNN models and designing
better learning methods. In this paper, we present a novel PAC-Bayesian analysis
for GNNs under a non-IID semi-supervised learning setup. Moreover, we analyze
the generalization performances on different subgroups of unlabeled nodes, which
allows us to further study an accuracy-(dis)parity-style (un)fairness of GNNs from
a theoretical perspective. Under reasonable assumptions, we demonstrate that the
distance between a test subgroup and the training set can be a key factor affecting
the GNN performance on that subgroup, which calls special attention to the training
node selection for fair learning. Experiments across multiple GNN models and
datasets support our theoretical results4 .

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [13, 35, 20] are a family of machine learning models that can
be used to model non-Euclidean data as well as inter-related samples in a flexible way. In recent
years, there have been enormous successful applications of GNNs in various areas, such as drug
discovery [18], computer vision [29], transportation forecasting [49], recommender systems [48],
etc. Depending on the type of prediction target, the application tasks can be roughly categorized into
node-level, edge-level, subgraph-level, and graph-level tasks [46].
In contrast to the marked empirical success, theoretical understanding of the generalization ability
of GNNs has been rather limited. Among the existing literature, some studies [9, 11, 25] focus on
the analysis of graph-level tasks where each sample is an entire graph and the samples of graphs are
IID. A very limited number of studies [36, 42] explore GNN generalization for node-level tasks but
they assume the nodes (and their associated neighborhoods) are IID samples, which does not align
with the commonly seen graph-based semi-supervised learning setups. Baranwal et al. [3] investigate
GNN generalization without IID assumptions but under a specific data generating mechanism.
In this work, our first contribution is to provide a novel PAC-Bayesian analysis for the generalization
ability of GNNs on node-level tasks with non-IID assumptions. In particular, we assume the node
features are fixed and the node labels are independently sampled from distributions conditioned on
the node features. We also assume the training set and the test set can be chosen as arbitrary subsets
of nodes on the graph. We first prove two general PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds (Theorem 1
∗

School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Equal contribution.
‡
Department of EECS, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
4
Code available at https://github.com/TheaperDeng/GNN-Generalization-Fairness.
†

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

