Fast Certified Robust Training with Short Warmup

1

Zhouxing Shi1* , Yihan Wang1* , Huan Zhang1,2 , Jinfeng Yi3 , Cho-Jui Hsieh1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 JD AI Research
zshi@cs.ucla.edu, yihanwang@cs.ucla.edu, huan@huan-zhang.com,
yijinfeng@jd.com, chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu
* Equal contribution

Abstract
Recently, bound propagation based certified robust training methods have been
proposed for training neural networks with certifiable robustness guarantees. Despite that state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods including interval bound propagation
(IBP) and CROWN-IBP have per-batch training complexity similar to standard
neural network training, they usually use a long warmup schedule with hundreds
or thousands epochs to reach SOTA performance and are thus still costly. In this
paper, we identify two important issues in existing methods, namely exploded
bounds at initialization, and the imbalance in ReLU activation states and improve
IBP training. These two issues make certified training difficult and unstable, and
thereby long warmup schedules were needed in prior works. To mitigate these
issues and conduct faster certified training with shorter warmup, we propose three
improvements based on IBP training: 1) We derive a new weight initialization
method for IBP training; 2) We propose to fully add Batch Normalization (BN)
to each layer in the model, since we find BN can reduce the imbalance in ReLU
activation states; 3) We also design regularization to explicitly tighten certified
bounds and balance ReLU activation states during wamrup. We are able to obtain
8
65.03% verified error on CIFAR-10 (✏ = 255
) and 82.36% verified error on Tiny1
ImageNet (✏ = 255 ) using very short training schedules (160 and 80 total epochs,
respectively), outperforming literature SOTA trained with hundreds or thousands
epochs under the same network architecture. The code is available at https:
//github.com/shizhouxing/Fast-Certified-Robust-Training.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks (DNNs) are successfully applied in various areas, its robustness problem
has attracted great attention since the discovery of adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013;
Goodfellow et al., 2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Kurakin et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017; Madry et al.,
2018; Su et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2019), which poses concerns in DNN applications especially the
safety-critical ones such as autonomous driving. Methods for improving the empirical robustness of
DNNs, such as adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018), provide no provable robustness guarantees,
and thus some recent works aim to pursue certified robustness. Specifically, the robustness is evaluated
in a certifiable manner using robustness verifiers (Katz et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018; Wong &
Kolter, 2018; Singh et al., 2018, 2019; Bunel et al., 2017; Raghunathan et al., 2018b; Wang et al.,
2018b; Xu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021), which verify whether the model is provably robust against
all possible input perturbations within the range. This is achieved usually by efficiently computing
the output bounds.
To improve certified robustness, certified robust training methods (also referred to as certified defense)
minimize a certified robust loss computed by a verifier, and the certified loss is an upper bound of the
worst-case loss given specified input perturbations. So far, Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) (Gowal
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

