Quantifying and Improving Transferability in
Domain Generalization
Guojun Zhang
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
guojun.zhang@uwaterloo.ca

Han Zhao
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
hanzhao@illinois.edu

Yaoliang Yu
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Pascal Poupart
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Out-of-distribution generalization is one of the key challenges when transferring
a model from the lab to the real world. Existing efforts mostly focus on building
invariant features among source and target domains. Based on invariant features,
a high-performing classifier on source domains could hopefully behave equally
well on a target domain. In other words, we hope the invariant features to be
transferable. However, in practice, there are no perfectly transferable features,
and some algorithms seem to learn “more transferable” features than others. How
can we understand and quantify such transferability? In this paper, we formally
define transferability that one can quantify and compute in domain generalization.
We point out the difference and connection with common discrepancy measures
between domains, such as total variation and Wasserstein distance. We then prove
that our transferability can be estimated with enough samples and give a new upper
bound for the target error based on our transferability. Empirically, we evaluate
the transferability of the feature embeddings learned by existing algorithms for
domain generalization. Surprisingly, we find that many algorithms are not quite
learning transferable features, although few could still survive. In light of this,
we propose a new algorithm for learning transferable features and test it over
various benchmark datasets, including RotatedMNIST, PACS, Office-Home and
WILDS-FMoW. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm achieves
consistent improvement over many state-of-the-art algorithms, corroborating our
theoretical findings.1

1

Introduction

One of the cornerstone assumptions underlying the recent success of deep learning models is that
the test data should share the same distribution as the training data. However, faced with ubiquitous
distribution shifts in various real-world applications, such assumption hardly holds in practice. For
example, a self-driving recognition system trained using data collected in the daytime may continually
degrade its performance during nightfall. The system may also encounter weather or traffic conditions
in a new city that never appear in the training set. In light of these potentially unseen scenarios, it is
1

Code available at https://github.com/Gordon-Guojun-Zhang/Transferability-NeurIPS2021.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

