Sparse Spiking Gradient Descent

Nicolas Perez-Nieves
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
nicolas.perez14@imperial.ac.uk

Dan F.M. Goodman
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
d.goodman@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
There is an increasing interest in emulating Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) on
neuromorphic computing devices due to their low energy consumption. Recent
advances have allowed training SNNs to a point where they start to compete with
traditional Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) in terms of accuracy, while at the
same time being energy efficient when run on neuromorphic hardware. However,
the process of training SNNs is still based on dense tensor operations originally
developed for ANNs which do not leverage the spatiotemporally sparse nature of
SNNs. We present here the first sparse SNN backpropagation algorithm which
achieves the same or better accuracy as current state of the art methods while being
significantly faster and more memory efficient. We show the effectiveness of our
method on real datasets of varying complexity (Fashion-MNIST, NeuromophicMNIST and Spiking Heidelberg Digits) achieving a speedup in the backward pass
of up to 150x, and 85% more memory efficient, without losing accuracy.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) have matched and occasionally surpassed
human-level performance on increasingly difficult auditory and visual recognition problems [1, 2, 3],
natural language processing tasks [4, 5] and games [6, 7, 8]. As these tasks become more challenging
the neural networks required to solve them grow larger and consequently their power efficiency
becomes more important [9, 10]. At the same time, the increasing interest in deploying these models
into embedded applications calls for faster, more efficient and less memory intensive networks
[11, 12].
The human brain manages to perform similar and even more complicated tasks while only consuming
about 20W [13] which contrasts with the hundreds of watts required for running ANNs [9]. Unlike
ANNs, biological neurons in the brain communicate through discrete events called spikes. A
biological neuron integrates incoming spikes from other neurons in its membrane potential and after
reaching a threshold emits a spike and resets its potential [14]. The spiking neuron, combined with
the sparse connectivity of the brain, results in a highly spatio-temporally sparse activity [15] which is
fundamental to achieve this level of energy efficiency.
Inspired by the extraordinary performance of the brain, neuromorphic computing aims to obtain
the same level of energy efficiency preferably while maintaining an accuracy standard on par with
ANNs by emulating spiking neural networks (SNNs) on specialised hardware [16, 17, 18, 19]. These
efforts go in two directions: emulating the SNNs and training the SNNs. While there is a growing
number of successful neuromorphic implementations for the former [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 17, 25, 26],
the latter has proven to be more challenging. Some neuromorphic chips implement local learning
rules [26, 27, 28] and recent advances have achieved to approximate backpropagation on-chip [29].
However, a full end-to-end supervised learning via error backpropagation requires off-chip training
[22, 23, 18]. This is usually achieved by simulating and training the entire SNN on a GPU and more
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

