Can Information Flows Suggest Targets
for Interventions in Neural Circuits?
Praveen Venkatesh1 *, Sanghamitra Dutta2 *† , Neil Mehta3† and Pulkit Grover4
Allen Institute, 1 University of Washington, Seattle; 2 JP Morgan Chase AI Research;
1–4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 4 Neuroscience Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University
1
praveen.venkatesh@alleninstitute.org, 2 sanghamitra2612@gmail.com,
3
neilashm@andrew.cmu.edu, 4 pulkit@cmu.edu

1

Abstract
Motivated by neuroscientific and clinical applications, we empirically examine
whether observational measures of information flow can suggest interventions. We
do so by performing experiments on artificial neural networks in the context of
fairness in machine learning, where the goal is to induce fairness in the system
through interventions. Using our recently developed M -information flow framework, we measure the flow of information about the true label (responsible for
accuracy, and hence desirable), and separately, the flow of information about a
protected attribute (responsible for bias, and hence undesirable) on the edges of a
trained neural network. We then compare the flow magnitudes against the effect
of intervening on those edges by pruning. We show that pruning edges that carry
larger information flows about the protected attribute reduces bias at the output
to a greater extent. This demonstrates that M -information flow can meaningfully
suggest targets for interventions, answering the title’s question in the affirmative.
We also evaluate bias-accuracy tradeoffs for different intervention strategies, to
analyze how one might use estimates of desirable and undesirable information
flows (here, accuracy and bias flows) to inform interventions that preserve the
former while reducing the latter.

1

Introduction

The “reward circuit” of the brain controls much of our behavior [1, 2]. It is believed that addiction is
characterized by a strong bias towards immediate rewards in the reward circuit [3], while a different
bias, called affective bias, in the same circuit, can lead to depression [4]. Broadly, such biases in
the output of the reward circuit control our behavior and responses to stimuli. Recent technological
advancements in neural probes and optogenetics [e.g., see 5, 6] are increasingly enabling us to record
neural circuits at a high resolution and alter the network by activating or suppressing nodes and links,
giving us powerful tools to understand and affect how this circuit processes information. Even a weak
understanding of the reward circuit is motivating clinical interventions for individuals suffering from
depression, addiction, obsessive compulsive disorder, obesity, etc.; patients are starting to receive
surgeries for long-term deep-brain electrode implantation in brain regions that are involved in the
reward circuit [7–10]. We identify a new and largely unexplored problem within this context: how do
we perform minimal interventions that “correct” undesirable biases without affecting other functions
of this important network as much as possible?
In this paper, we propose to use the M -information flow framework, a recent advancement of
ours, that enables tracking the information flow about specific messages within a computational
*This work was done while P. Venkatesh and S. Dutta were Ph.D. students at Carnegie Mellon University.
†
S. Dutta and N. Mehta contributed equally to this work.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

