Exploiting Opponents under Utility Constraints in
Sequential Games

Martino Bernasconi-de-Luca∗
Politecnico di Milano
martino.bernasconideluca@polimi.it

Federico Cacciamani∗
Politecnico di Milano
federico.cacciamani@polimi.it

Simone Fioravanti
Gran Sasso Science Institute
simone.fioravanti@gssi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Francesco Trovò
Politecnico di Milano
francesco1.trovo@polimi.it

Abstract
Recently, game-playing agents based on AI techniques have demonstrated superhuman performance in several sequential games, such as chess, Go, and poker. Surprisingly, the multi-agent learning techniques that allowed to reach these achievements do not take into account the actual behavior of the human player, potentially
leading to an impressive gap in performances. In this paper, we address the problem
of designing artificial agents that learn how to effectively exploit unknown human
opponents while playing repeatedly against them in an online fashion. We study
the case in which the agent’s strategy during each repetition of the game is subject
to constraints ensuring that the human’s expected utility is within some lower and
upper thresholds. Our framework encompasses several real-world problems, such
as human engagement in repeated game playing and human education by means of
serious games. As a first result, we formalize a set of linear inequalities encoding
the conditions that the agent’s strategy must satisfy at each iteration in order to
do not violate the given bounds for the human’s expected utility. Then, we use
such formulation in an upper confidence bound algorithm, and we prove that the
resulting procedure suffers from sublinear regret and guarantees that the constraints
are satisfied with high probability at each iteration. Finally, we empirically evaluate
the convergence of our algorithm on standard testbeds of sequential games.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic game theory and machine learning have recently contributed to groundbreaking achievements in artificial intelligence, leading to the deployment of artificial agents that defeated top human
professionals in several recreational games. See, for example, the well-known milestones achieved in
chess [Campbell et al., 2002], Go [Silver et al., 2016], and poker [Brown and Sandholm, 2018, 2019].
Surprisingly, multi-agent learning techniques that have been recently employed in such settings learn
how to defeat humans without taking into account their actual behavior. Indeed, they learn strategies
by simulating millions of plays in a self-play approach, without including any human player in the
learning process. A direct effect of this methodology is that the resulting artificial agents do not
∗

Equal contribution.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

