From Canonical Correlation Analysis to
Self-supervised Graph Neural Networks
Hengrui Zhang1⇤, Qitian Wu2 , Junchi Yan2 , David Wipf3 , Philip S. Yu1†
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
AWS Shanghai AI Lab
hzhan55@uic.edu, {echo740, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
daviwipf@amazon.com, psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
We introduce a conceptually simple yet effective model for self-supervised representation learning with graph data. It follows the previous methods that generate two
views of an input graph through data augmentation. However, unlike contrastive
methods that focus on instance-level discrimination, we optimize an innovative
feature-level objective inspired by classical Canonical Correlation Analysis. Compared with other works, our approach requires none of the parameterized mutual
information estimator, additional projector, asymmetric structures, and most importantly, negative samples which can be costly. We show that the new objective
essentially 1) aims at discarding augmentation-variant information by learning
invariant representations, and 2) can prevent degenerated solutions by decorrelating
features in different dimensions. Our theoretical analysis further provides an understanding for the new objective which can be equivalently seen as an instantiation
of the Information Bottleneck Principle under the self-supervised setting. Despite
its simplicity, our method performs competitively on seven public graph datasets.
The code is available at: https://github.com/hengruizhang98/CCA-SSG.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has been a promising paradigm for learning useful representations
without costly labels [7, 46, 5]. In general, it learns representations via a proxy objective between
inputs and self-defined signals, among which contrastive methods [46, 40, 16, 5, 12] have achieved
impressive performance on learning image representations by maximizing the mutual information of
two views (or augmentations) of the same input. Such methods can be interpreted as a discrimination
of a joint distribution (positive pairs) from the product of two marginal ones (negative pairs) [50].
Inspired by the success of contrastive learning in vision [17, 46, 40, 5, 16, 12, 6], similar methods
have been adapted to learning graph neural networks [48, 15, 33, 57, 58]. Although these models
have achieved impressive performance, they require complex designs and architectures. For example,
DGI [48] and MVGRL [15] rely on a parameterized mutual information estimator to discriminate
positive node-graph pairs from negative ones; GRACE [57] and GCA [58] harness an additional
MLP-projector to guarantee sufficient capacity. Moreover, negative pairs sampled or constructed from
data often play an indispensable role in providing effective contrastive signals and have a large impact
on performance. Selecting proper negative samples is often nontrivial for graph-structured data, not
to mention the extra storage cost for prohibitively large graphs. BGRL [39] is a recent endeavor on
⇤
†

This work was done during the author’s internship at AWS Shanghai AI Lab.
Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

