Implicit Deep Adaptive Design: Policy–Based
Experimental Design without Likelihoods

Desi R. Ivanova† Adam Foster† Steven Kleinegesse‡ Michael U. Gutmann‡ Tom Rainforth†
†
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
‡
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
desi.ivanova@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce implicit Deep Adaptive Design (iDAD), a new method for performing
adaptive experiments in real-time with implicit models. iDAD amortizes the cost
of Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED) by learning a design policy
network upfront, which can then be deployed quickly at the time of the experiment.
The iDAD network can be trained on any model which simulates differentiable
samples, unlike previous design policy work that requires a closed form likelihood
and conditionally independent experiments. At deployment, iDAD allows design
decisions to be made in milliseconds, in contrast to traditional BOED approaches
that require heavy computation during the experiment itself. We illustrate the
applicability of iDAD on a number of experiments, and show that it provides a fast
and effective mechanism for performing adaptive design with implicit models.

1

Introduction

Designing experiments to maximize the information gathered about an underlying process is a key
challenge in science and engineering. Most such experiments are naturally adaptive—we can design
later iterations on the basis of data already collected, refining our understanding of the process with
each step [36, 45, 51]. For example, suppose that a chemical contaminant has accidentally been
released and is rapidly spreading; we need to quickly discover its unknown source. To this end,
we measure the contaminant concentration level at locations ξ1 , . . . , ξT (our experimental designs),
obtaining observations y1 , . . . , yT . Provided we can perform the necessary computations sufficiently
quickly, we can design each ξt using data from steps 1, . . . , t − 1 to narrow in on the source.
Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED) [7, 32] is a principled model-based framework for
choosing designs optimally; it has been successfully adopted in a diverse range of scientific fields
[52, 58, 60]. In BOED, the unknown quantity of interest (e.g. contaminant location) is encapsulated
by a parameter θ, and our initial information about it by a prior p(θ). A simulator, or likelihood,
model y|θ, ξ describes the relationship between θ, our controllable design ξ, and the experimental
outcome y. To select designs optimally, the guiding principle is information maximization—we select
the design that maximizes the expected (Shannon) information gained about θ from the data y, or,
equivalently, that maximizes the mutual information between θ and y.
This naturally extends to adaptive settings by considering the conditional expected information gain
given previously collected data. The traditional approach, depicted in Figure 1a, is to fit a posterior
p(θ|ξ1:t−1 , y1:t−1 ) after each iteration, and then select ξt in a myopic fashion using the one-step
mutual information (see, e.g., [51] for a review). Unfortunately, this approach necessitates significant
computation at each t and does not lend itself to selecting optimal designs quickly and adaptively.
Recently, Foster et al. [17] proposed an exciting alternative approach, called Deep Adaptive Design
(DAD), that is based on learning design policies. DAD provides a way to avoid significant computation
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

