On the Value of Interaction and Function
Approximation in Imitation Learning

Nived Rajaraman
University of California, Berkeley
nived.rajaraman@berkeley.edu
Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Yanjun Han
University of California, Berkeley
yjhan@berkeley.edu
Jingbo Liu
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
jingbol@illinois.edu

Jiantao Jiao
University of California, Berkeley
jiantao@eecs.berkeley.edu

Kannan Ramchandran
University of California, Berkeley
kannanr@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the statistical guarantees for the Imitation Learning (IL) problem in
episodic MDPs. [22] show an information theoretic lower bound that in the worst
case, a learner which can even actively query the expert policy suffers from a
suboptimality growing quadratically in the length of the horizon, H. We study
imitation learning under the µ-recoverability assumption of [27] which assumes
that the difference in the Q-value under the expert policy across different actions in
a state do not deviate beyond µ from the maximum. We show that the reduction
proposed by [25] is statistically optimal: the resulting algorithm upon interacting
e (µ|S|H/N )
with the MDP for N episodes results in a suboptimality bound of O
which we show is optimal up to log-factors. In contrast, we show that any algorithm
which does not interact with the MDP and uses an offline dataset of N expert
trajectories must incur suboptimality growing as & |S|H 2 /N even under the µrecoverability assumption. This establishes a clear and provable separation of
the minimax rates between the active setting and the no-interaction setting. We
also study IL with linear function approximation. When the expert plays actions
according to a linear classifier of known state-action features, we use the reduction
to multi-class classification to show that with high probability, the suboptimality
of behavior cloning is e
O(dH 2 /N ) given N rollouts from the optimal policy. This
e
is optimal up to log-factors but can be improved to O(dH/N
) if we have a linear
expert with parameter-sharing across time steps. In contrast, when the MDP
transition structure is known to the learner such as in the case of simulators, we
demonstrate fundamental differences compared to the tabular setting in terms of
the performance of an optimal algorithm, M IMIC -MD (Rajaraman et al. [22])
when extended to the function approximation setting. Here, we introduce a new
problem called confidence set linear classification, that can be used to construct
sample-efficient IL algorithms.

1

Introduction

In many practical sequential decision making problems it is difficult to manually design reward
functions that capture the essence of carrying out the task “nicely”. Furthermore, many modern-day
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

