Sanity Checks for Lottery Tickets: Does Your
Winning Ticket Really Win the Jackpot?

Xiaolong Ma1,† , Geng Yuan1,† , Xuan Shen1 , Tianlong Chen2 , Xuxi Chen2 , Xiaohan Chen2 ,
Ning Liu3 , Minghai Qin, Sijia Liu4 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Yanzhi Wang1
1

Northeastern University, 2 University of Texas at Austin
3
Midea Group, 4 Michigan State University
{ma.xiaol,yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
There have been long-standing controversies and inconsistencies over the experiment setup and criteria for identifying the “winning ticket” in literature. To
reconcile such, we revisit the definition of lottery ticket hypothesis, with comprehensive and more rigorous conditions. Under our new definition, we show concrete
evidence to clarify whether the winning ticket exists across the major DNN architectures and/or applications. Through extensive experiments, we perform quantitative
analysis on the correlations between winning tickets and various experimental
factors, and empirically study the patterns of our observations. We find that the
key training hyperparameters, such as learning rate and training epochs, as well
as the architecture characteristics such as capacities and residual connections, are
all highly correlated with whether and when the winning tickets can be identified.
Based on our analysis, we summarize a guideline for parameter settings in regards
of specific architecture characteristics, which we hope to catalyze the research
progress on the topic of lottery ticket hypothesis. Our codes are publicly available
at: https://github.com/boone891214/sanity-check-LTH.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [1] has drawn great attention and thorough
research efforts. As an important study to investigate the initialization state and network topology of
the deep neural networks (DNNs), LTH claims the existence of a winning ticket (i.e., a properly pruned
subnetwork together with original weight initialization) that can achieve competitive performance to
the original dense network, which highlights great potential for efficient training and network design.
Unfortunately, among the various researches on the lottery ticket hypothesis [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
there are many inconsistencies regarding the settings of training recipe, and they further lead to the
controversies over the conditions for identifying winning tickets. We revisit and analyze the definition
of the original lottery ticket hypothesis and find that the quality of training recipe is a critical factor
for the network performance, which in fact, is largely missing in previous discussions.
In the standard LTH setup [1], key training hyperparameters such as learning rate and training epochs
were not scrutinized nor exhaustively tuned. The winning ticket can be identified in the case of small
learning rate, but can fail to emerge at higher initial learning rates especially in deeper networks. For
instance, in [1], the winning tickets can be identified only in the case of small learning rate 0.01,
with ResNet-20 and VGG-19 on CIFAR-10. At larger learning rates, however, [9] reveals that the
“winning ticket” has no accuracy advantage over the random reinitialization , which contradicts with
† Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

