PartialFed: Cross-Domain Personalized Federated
Learning via Partial Initialization

Benyuan Sun

Hongxing Huo

Yi Yang

Bo Bai

Media Technology Lab, Huawei
{sunbenyuan,huohongxing1,yangyi16,baibo3}@huawei.com

Abstract
The burst of applications empowered by massive data have aroused unprecedented
privacy concerns in AI society. Currently, data confidentiality protection has been
one core issue during deep model training. Federated Learning (FL), which enables
privacy-preserving training across multiple silos, gained rising popularity for its
parameter-only communication. However, previous works have shown that FL
revealed a significant performance drop if the data distributions are heterogeneous
among different clients, especially when the clients have cross-domain characteristic, such as traffic, aerial and in-door. To address this challenging problem,
we propose a novel idea, PartialFed, which loads a subset of the global model’s
parameters rather than loading the entire model used in most previous works. We
first validate our algorithm with manually decided loading strategies inspired by
various expert priors, named PartialFed-Fix. Then we develop PartialFed-Adaptive,
which automatically selects personalized loading strategy for each client. The
superiority of our algorithm is proved by demonstrating the new state-of-the-art
results on cross-domain federated classification and detection. In particular, solely
by initializing a small fraction of layers locally, we improve the performance of
FedAvg on Office-Home and UODB by 4.88% and 2.65%, respectively. Further
studies show that the adaptive strategy performs significantly better on domains
with large deviation, e.g. improves AP50 by 4.03% and 4.89% on aerial and
medical image detection compared to FedAvg.

1

Introduction

Endless collection of texts, images and videos for training data-hungry models increases potential
threats to the safety systems. Any attacks to these data centers could cause billions of information
leakage. A safer way is to keep the user data purely local on their devices. But this contradicts with
the widely adopted stochastic gradient descent (SGD) training procedure, which usually requires
data communication for random batch sampling. Federated Learning [12] develops a paradigm for
training large models under such situation. Locally trained models are aggregated using FedAvg [19]
and then served as initialization model for the next local iteration. The training data confidentiality is
achieved by only allowing transferring the model’s parameters (rather than the data) under different
cryptograph algorithms, which include differential privacy [7], homomorphic encryption [37], block
chain [22], etc.
However, recent studies [39, 26, 25] have shown that FedAvg does not provide satisfactory results
in the presence of data heterogeneity. A major problem is that all models are designed to fit an
“average client” [29], which is difficult when local and global distributions are deviated from each
other. This phenomenon is not uniquely observed. Researchers in multi-domain learning have also
discovered that directly fitting non-identical domains into a single feature extractor is suboptimal
[3]. The leading solution to this problem is to reconfigure the network into domain-agnostic and
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

