Fitting summary statistics of neural data with a
differentiable spiking network simulator
Guillaume Bellec∗, Shuqi Wang∗ , Alireza Modirshanechi, Johanni Brea , Wulfram Gerstner
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
first.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Fitting network models to neural activity is an important tool in neuroscience. A
popular approach is to model a brain area with a probabilistic recurrent spiking network whose parameters maximize the likelihood of the recorded activity. Although
this is widely used, we show that the resulting model does not produce realistic
neural activity. To correct for this, we suggest to augment the log-likelihood with
terms that measure the dissimilarity between simulated and recorded activity. This
dissimilarity is defined via summary statistics commonly used in neuroscience
and the optimization is efficient because it relies on back-propagation through the
stochastically simulated spike trains. We analyze this method theoretically and
show empirically that it generates more realistic activity statistics. We find that
it improves upon other fitting algorithms for spiking network models like GLMs
(Generalized Linear Models) which do not usually rely on back-propagation. This
new fitting algorithm also enables the consideration of hidden neurons which is
otherwise notoriously hard, and we show that it can be crucial when trying to infer
the network connectivity from spike recordings.

1

Introduction

Modelling neural recordings has been a fundamental tool to advance our understanding of the
brain. It is now possible to fit recurrent spiking neural networks (RSNNs) to recorded spiking
activity [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The resulting network models are used to study neural properties [6, 7, 8, 9] or
to reconstruct the anatomical circuitry of biological neural networks [4, 5, 10].
Traditionally a biological RSNN is modelled using a specific Generalized Linear Model [11] (GLM)
often referred to as the Spike Response Model (SRM) [12, 11, 13]. The parameters of this RSNN
model are fitted to data with the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE). The MLE is consistent,
meaning that if the amount of recorded data becomes infinite it converges to the true network
parameters when they exist. However, when fitting neural activity in practice the MLE solutions are
often reported to generate unrealistic activity [14, 15, 16] showing that this method is not perfect
despite it’s popularity in neuroscience. We also find that these unrealistic solution emerge more easily
when hidden neurons outside of the recorded units have a substantial impact on the recorded neurons.
This is particularly problematic because the likelihood is not tractable with hidden neurons and it
raises the need for new methods to tackle the problem.
To address this, we optimize sample-and-measure loss functions in addition to the likelihood: these
loss functions require sampling spiking data from the model and measuring the dissimilarity between
recorded and simulated data. To measure this dissimilarity we suggest to compare summary statistics
∗

Equal contributions.  Senior authors.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

