Why Do Pretrained Language Models Help in
Downstream Tasks? An Analysis of Head and Prompt
Tuning

Colin Wei

Sang Michael Xie

Tengyu Ma

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{colinwei,xie,tengyuma}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Pretrained language models have achieved state-of-the-art performance when
adapted to a downstream NLP task. However, theoretical analysis of these models is scarce and challenging since the pretraining and downstream tasks can be
very different. We propose an analysis framework that links the pretraining and
downstream tasks with an underlying latent variable generative model of text —
the downstream classifier must recover a function of the posterior distribution over
the latent variables. We analyze head tuning (learning a classifier on top of the
frozen pretrained model) and prompt tuning in this setting. The generative model
in our analysis is either a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) or an HMM augmented
with a latent memory component, motivated by long-term dependencies in natural language. We show that 1) under certain non-degeneracy conditions on the
HMM, simple classification heads can solve the downstream task, 2) prompt tuning
obtains downstream guarantees with weaker non-degeneracy conditions, and 3)
our recovery guarantees for the memory-augmented HMM are stronger than for
the vanilla HMM because task-relevant information is easier to recover from the
long-term memory. Experiments on synthetically generated data from HMMs back
our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) has been revolutionized by large-scale pretrained language
models such as BERT [4] and GPT [25], which are adapted to a variety of downstream NLP
tasks. Although a large body of empirical work seeks to understand the effectiveness of pretrained
models [7, 5, 12, 35, 34, 11, 27, 15], theoretical understanding is scarce. Theoretically analyzing the
relationship between the pretraining and downstream tasks is challenging because pretraining and
downstream settings can greatly differ.
The key starting point for our analysis is to link the pretraining and downstream settings through an
underlying generative model of the data. We model the data distribution as a latent variable model
and the downstream task as a function of the latent variables. Assuming that pretraining on a large
corpus allows us to learn the generative model, the conditional token probabilities predicted by the
pretrained model carry information about the hidden variables. In downstream adaptation, we aim to
recover this information to solve the downstream task.
Though full finetuning is the de facto empirical standard, analyzing it is challenging because it
requires characterizing the weights of the pretrained model. In this paper, we focus on head tuning
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

