Corruption Robust Active Learning

Yifang Chen, Simon S. Du, Kevin Jamieson
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle,WA
{yifangc, ssdu, jamieson }@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We conduct theoretical studies on streaming-based active learning for binary classification under unknown adversarial label corruptions. In this setting, every time
before the learner observes a sample, the adversary decides whether to corrupt the
label or not. First, we show that, in a benign corruption setting (which includes the
misspecification setting as a special case), with a slight enlargement on the hypothesis elimination threshold, the classical RobustCAL framework can (surprisingly)
achieve nearly the same label complexity guarantee as in the non-corrupted setting.
However, this algorithm can fail in the general corruption setting. To resolve this
drawback, we propose a new algorithm which is provably correct without any
assumptions on the presence of corruptions. Furthermore, this algorithm enjoys
the minimax label complexity in the non-corrupted setting (which is achieved by
RobustCAL) and only requires Õ(Ctotal ) additional labels in the corrupted setting
to achieve O(ε + Ctotal
n ), where ε is the target accuracy, Ctotal is the total number
of corruptions and n is the total number of unlabeled samples.

1

Introduction

An active learning algorithm for binary classification aims to obtain the best hypothesis (classifier)
from some given hypothesis set while requesting as few labels as possible. Under some favorable
conditions, active learning algorithms can require exponentially fewer labels then passive, random
sampling [Hanneke, 2014]. Active learning is ideally suited for applications where large datasets
are required for accurate inference, but the cost of paying human annotators to label a dataset is
prohibitively large [Joshi et al., 2009, Yang et al., 2015, Beluch et al., 2018]. A bit more formally,
for an example space X (such as a set of images) and label space {0, 1} (like whether the image
contains a human-made object or not), let H be a hypothesis class such that for each h ∈ H, we
have h : X → {0, 1}. After a certain number of labels are requested, the learner will output a target
hypothesis hout ∈ H. In this paper, we consider the streaming setting where at each time t nature
reveals xt ∼ DX and an active learning algorithm must make the real-time decision on whether to
request the corresponding label yt or not. Such a streaming setting of active learning is frequently
encountered in online environments such as learning a spam filter or fraud detection (i.e., mark as
spam/fraudulent and do not request the label, or send to inbox/expert to obtain a label).
This paper is interested in a setting when the requested label yt is potentially corrupted by an
adversary. That is, when requesting the label for some example xt ∈ X , if uncorrupted the learner
will receive a label drawn according to the “true” conditional label distribution, but if corrupted,
the learner will receive a label drawn from an arbitrary distribution decided by an adversary. This
setting is challenging because the learner has no a priori knowledge of when or how many corruptions
will occur. And if the learner is collecting data adaptively, he may easily be misled into becoming
confident in an incorrect belief, collect data based on that belief, and never recover to output an
accurate classifier even if the adversary eventually stops serving corrupted labels later. This greatly
contrasts with the passive setting (when all labels are observed) where as long as the number of
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

