Out-of-Distribution Generalization in Kernel
Regression
Abdulkadir Canatar
Department of Physics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
canatara@g.harvard.edu

Blake Bordelon
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
blake_bordelon@g.harvard.edu

Cengiz Pehlevan
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
cpehlevan@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
In real word applications, the data generating process for training a machine
learning model often differs from what the model encounters in the test stage.
Understanding how and whether machine learning models generalize under such
distributional shifts remains a theoretical challenge. Here, we study generalization
in kernel regression when the training and test distributions are different using
the replica method from statistical physics. We derive an analytical formula
for the out-of-distribution generalization error applicable to any kernel and real
datasets. We identify an overlap matrix that quantifies the mismatch between
distributions for a given kernel as a key determinant of generalization performance
under distribution shift. Using our analytical expressions we elucidate various
generalization phenomena including possible improvement in generalization when
there is a mismatch. We develop procedures for optimizing training and test
distributions for a given data budget to find best and worst case generalizations
under the shift. We present applications of our theory to real and synthetic datasets
and for many kernels. We compare results of our theory applied to Neural Tangent
Kernel with simulations of wide networks and show agreement. We analyze linear
regression in further depth.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are trained to accurately predict on previously unseen samples. A central
goal of machine learning theory has been to understand this generalization performance [1, 2].
While most of the theory in this domain focused on generalizing in-distribution, i.e. when the
training examples are sampled from the same distribution as that of the test examples, in real world
applications there is often a mismatch between the training and the test distributions [3]. Such
difference, even when small, may lead to large effects in generalization performance [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
In this paper, we provide a theory of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization for kernel regression
[9, 10, 11] applicable to any kernel and real datasets. Besides being a popular machine learning
method itself, kernel regression is recovered from an infinite width limit of neural networks [12],
making our results relevant to understanding OOD generalization in deep neural networks. Indeed, it
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

