Noisy Adaptation Generates Lévy Flights in
Attractor Neural Networks
Xingsi Dong1,2,3,∗ , Tianhao Chu1,2,3,∗ , Tiejun Huang4 , Zilong Ji1,2,3,† , Si Wu1,2,3,†
1, School of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, Peking Univerisity.
2, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Peking University.
3, PKU-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences,
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University.
4, School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University.
∗
: Equal contributions. † : Corresponding authors.
{dxs19980605,chutianhao,tjhuang,jizilong,siwu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Lévy flights describe a special class of random walks whose step sizes satisfy a
power-law tailed distribution. As being an efficient searching strategy in unknown
environments, Lévy flights are widely observed in animal foraging behaviors.
Recent studies further showed that human cognitive functions also exhibit the
characteristics of Lévy flights. Despite being a general phenomenon, the neural
mechanism at the circuit level for generating Lévy flights remains largely unclear.
Here, we investigate how Lévy flights can be achieved in attractor neural networks.
To elucidate the underlying mechanism clearly, we first study continuous attractor
neural networks (CANNs), and find that noisy neural adaptation, exemplified by
spike frequency adaptation (SFA) in this work, can generate Lévy flights representing transitions of the network state in the attractor space. Specifically, the strength
of SFA defines a travelling wave boundary, below which the network state displays
local Brownian motion, and above which the network state displays long-jump
motion. Noises in neural adaptation cause the network state to intermittently switch
between these two motion modes, manifesting the characteristics of Lévy flights.
We further extend the study to a general attractor neural network, and demonstrate that our model can explain the Lévy-flight phenomenon observed during
free memory retrieval of humans. We hope that this study will give us insight into
understanding the neural mechanism for optimal information processing in the
brain.

1

Introduction

Lévy flights, also termed anomalous diffusion or super diffusion, refer to a special class of random
walks whose step sizes follow a distribution with a long power-law tail. Mathematically, this
power-law tailed distribution is expressed as
p(x) ∼ x−1−α ,

(1)

where the step size x can be measured either in the spatial domain, e.g., the length of a movement,
or in the temporal domain, e.g., the time interval between successive events. The parameter α is
called the Lévy exponent satisfying 0 < α < 2. When α ≥ 2, the above process degenerates to
Brownian motion due to the Central Limit Theorem [1]. Compared to Brownian motion, whose step
sizes satisfy a Gaussian distribution, Lévy flights are much more likely to generate large step sizes.
Thus, it is often intuitively stated that Lévy flights are composed of frequent local motion (similar to
the Brownian motion) and intermittent long-jump motion (Fig. 1). In contrast to Brownian motion
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

