Learning Fast-Inference Bayesian Networks

Vaidyanathan Peruvemba Ramaswamy
Algorithms and Complexity Group
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
vaidyanathan@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Stefan Szeider
Algorithms and Complexity Group
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We propose new methods for learning Bayesian networks (BNs) that reliably support fast inference. We utilize maximum state space size as a more fine-grained
measure for the BN’s reasoning complexity than the standard treewidth measure,
thereby accommodating the possibility that variables range over domains of different sizes. Our methods combine heuristic BN structure learning algorithms with
the recently introduced MaxSAT-powered local improvement method (Peruvemba
Ramaswamy and Szeider, AAAI’21). Our experiments show that our new learning
methods produce BNs that support significantly faster exact probabilistic inference
than BNs learned with treewidth bounds.

1

Introduction

The time complexity of probabilistic reasoning on a Bayesian Network (BN) is dominated by the
maximum state space size of clusters (i.e., bags of the BN’s tree decomposition [Lauritzen and
Spiegelhalter, 1988, Dechter, 1999, Kask et al., 2011]; a bag’s state space size is the product of the
domain sizes of all the variables it contains). We propose algorithms for learning BNs from data,
keeping the state space size within a user-specified bound. This results in fast-inference BNs, i.e.,
BNs reliably admitting fast probabilistic reasoning. We compare our algorithms to the baseline of
state-of-the-art bounded treewidth BN learning algorithms, on real-world benchmark data sets, with
up to over a thousand variables. The results show a clear advantage for new bounded state space (bss)
algorithms.
It is common to encounter non-binary variables in real-world data. Moreover, during our preliminary
analysis, we noticed that even variables with domain sizes as small as 4 were sufficient to impact
the reasoning times significantly. This is in agreement with the fact that the reasoning time has an
exponential dependence on the domain sizes. For instance, consider some of the networks learned
for alarm and hepar2 having 37 and 70 variables, respectively. Both these datasets were learned
with small values of treewidth, and the maximum domain size of the variables is 4. Despite this, they
exhibited reasoning times in the order of magnitude of 2.5 seconds.
For our bss BN structure learning algorithms, we build upon recent work on bounded treewidth BN
structure learning, particularly on the heuristic algorithms k-greedy and k-MAX by Scanagatta et al.
[2016, 2018] as well BN-SLIM by Peruvemba Ramaswamy and Szeider [2021a]. The latter is a
post-processing algorithm that uses MaxSAT to improve BNs generated by the heuristics. All these
algorithms assume a user-specified upper bound k for the treewidth of the learned BN and optimize
the BN’s score under the given treewidth bound. The learning algorithms are highly optimized for
dealing with large instances, and so the generalization of treewidth bounds to state space bounds isn’t
straightforward. The main challenge for extending BN-SLIM to bss learning is to replace BN-SLIM’s
simple cardinality constraints with a MaxSAT encoding that bounds the state-space of a bag, i.e.,
a product of integers. We achieve this by switching to logarithms and bounding the sum of real
numbers, utilizing a MaxSAT encoding based on binary decision diagrams (BDDs).
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

