Finding Optimal Tangent Points for
Reducing Distortions of Hard-label Attacks

Chen Ma 1 Xiangyu Guo 2 Li Chen 1,∗ Jun-Hai Yong 1 Yisen Wang 3,4
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo NY, USA
3
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
machenstar@163.com, xiangyug@buffalo.edu
{chenlee,yongjh}@tsinghua.edu.cn, yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
One major problem in black-box adversarial attacks is the high query complexity
in the hard-label attack setting, where only the top-1 predicted label is available. In
this paper, we propose a novel geometric-based approach called Tangent Attack
(TA), which identifies an optimal tangent point of a virtual hemisphere located on
the decision boundary to reduce the distortion of the attack. Assuming the decision
boundary is locally flat, we theoretically prove that the minimum `2 distortion
can be obtained by reaching the decision boundary along the tangent line passing
through such tangent point in each iteration. To improve the robustness of our
method, we further propose a generalized method which replaces the hemisphere
with a semi-ellipsoid to adapt to curved decision boundaries. Our approach is free
of pre-training. Extensive experiments conducted on the ImageNet and CIFAR10 datasets demonstrate that our approach can consume only a small number of
queries to achieve the low-magnitude distortion. The implementation source code
is released online at https://github.com/machanic/TangentAttack.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks cause deep neural networks (DNNs) to make incorrect predictions by slightly
perturbing benign images during the test time. They can be divided into two main categories on the
basis of the amount of information exposed by the target model, namely white-box and black-box
attacks. Many white-box attacks [6, 29, 32] have been proposed, and they can compute the gradients
w.r.t. the target model’s input images to generate adversarial examples with the first-order optimization
techniques. In contrast, black-box attacks are more practical because they craft adversarial examples
without requiring the target model’s gradients.
Over the past years, the community has made considerable efforts in developing black-box attacks,
and the proposed methods can be divided into transfer- and query-based attacks. Transfer-based
attacks [25, 37, 38] generate adversarial examples by using a white-box attack method against a
surrogate model to fool the target model. Although there is no need to query the target model in
these attacks, the attack success rate can not be guaranteed, especially in the case of targeted attacks.
To achieve satisfactory attack success rates, the query-based attacks use elaborate queries to obtain
the feedback of the target model for crafting adversarial examples. In the score-based setting, the
query-based attacks [2, 12, 22, 28] estimate approximate gradients by querying the predicted scores
of the target model at multiple points. However, in most real-world scenarios, the score-based setting
∗

Corresponding author.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

