Learning Gaussian Mixtures with Generalised Linear
Models: Precise Asymptotics in High-dimensions

Bruno Loureiro
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Gabriele Sicuro
Department of Mathematics
King’s College London

Cédric Gerbelot
Laboratoire de Physique de l’École Normale Supérieure
Florent Krzakala
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Alessandro Pacco
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Lenka Zdeborová
SPOC, EPFL, Lausanne

Abstract
Generalised linear models for multi-class classification problems are one of the
fundamental building blocks of modern machine learning tasks. In this manuscript,
we characterise the learning of a mixture of K Gaussians with generic means
and covariances via empirical risk minimisation (ERM) with any convex loss and
regularisation. In particular, we prove exact asymptotics characterising the ERM
estimator in high-dimensions, extending several previous results about Gaussian
mixture classification in the literature. We exemplify our result in two tasks of
interest in statistical learning: a) classification for a mixture with sparse means,
where we study the efficiency of `1 penalty with respect to `2 ; b) max-margin multiclass classification, where we characterise the phase transition on the existence
of the multi-class logistic maximum likelihood estimator for K > 2. Finally, we
discuss how our theory can be applied beyond the scope of synthetic data, showing
that in different cases Gaussian mixtures capture closely the learning curve of
classification tasks in real data sets.

1

Introduction

A recurring observation in modern deep learning practice is that neural networks often defy the
standard wisdom of classical statistical theory. For instance, deep neural networks typically achieve
good generalisation performances at a regime in which it interpolates the data, a fact at odds with the
intuitive bias-variance trade-off picture stemming from classical theory [1–3]. Surprisingly, many
of the “exotic” behaviours encountered in deep neural networks have recently been shown to be
shared by models as simple as overparametrised linear classifiers [4, 5], e.g., the aforementioned
benign over-fitting [6]. Therefore, understanding the generalisation properties of simple models in
high-dimensions has proven to be a fertile ground for elucidating some of the challenging statistical
questions posed by modern machine learning practice [7–16].
In this manuscript, we pursue this enterprise in the context of a commonly used model for highdimensional classification problems: the Gaussian mixture. Indeed, it has been recently argued
that the features learned by deep neural networks trained on the cross-entropy loss “collapse” in a
mixture of well-separated clusters, with the last layer acting as a simple linear classifier [17]. Another
observation put forward in [18] is that data obtained using generative adversarial networks behave
as Gaussian mixtures. Here, we derive an exact asymptotic formula characterising the performance
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

