SWAD: Domain Generalization
by Seeking Flat Minima

Junbum Cha1†
Sanghyuk Chun2∗
Kyungjae Lee3∗
4
4
Han-Cheol Cho
Seunghyun Park
Yunsung Lee5 Sungrae Park6†
1
4

Kakao Brain
NAVER Clova

2

NAVER AI Lab 3 Chung-Ang University
Korea University 6 Upstage AI Research

5

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) methods aim to achieve generalizability to an unseen
target domain by using only training data from the source domains. Although a
variety of DG methods have been proposed, a recent study shows that under a fair
evaluation protocol, called DomainBed, the simple empirical risk minimization
(ERM) approach works comparable to or even outperforms previous methods. Unfortunately, simply solving ERM on a complex, non-convex loss function can easily
lead to sub-optimal generalizability by seeking sharp minima. In this paper, we
theoretically show that finding flat minima results in a smaller domain generalization gap. We also propose a simple yet effective method, named Stochastic Weight
Averaging Densely (SWAD), to find flat minima. SWAD finds flatter minima and
suffers less from overfitting than does the vanilla SWA by a dense and overfit-aware
stochastic weight sampling strategy. SWAD shows state-of-the-art performances
on five DG benchmarks, namely PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome, TerraIncognita,
and DomainNet, with consistent and large margins of +1.6% averagely on outof-domain accuracy. We also compare SWAD with conventional generalization
methods, such as data augmentation and consistency regularization methods, to verify that the remarkable performance improvements are originated from by seeking
flat minima, not from better in-domain generalizability. Last but not least, SWAD
is readily adaptable to existing DG methods without modification; the combination
of SWAD and an existing DG method further improves DG performances. Source
code is available at https://github.com/khanrc/swad.

1

Introduction

Independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) condition is the underlying assumption of machine
learning experiments. However, this assumption may not hold in real-world scenarios, i.e., the
training and the test data distribution may differ significantly by distribution shifts. For example, a
self-driving car should adapt to adverse weather or day-to-night shifts [1, 2]. Even in a simple image
recognition scenario, systems rely on wrong cues for their prediction, e.g., geographic distribution [3],
demographic statistics [4], texture [5], or backgrounds [6]. Consequently, a practical system should
require generalizability to distribution shift, which is yet often failed by traditional approaches.
Domain generalization (DG) aims to address domain shift simulated by training and evaluating
on different domains. DG tasks assume that both task labels and domain labels are accessible.
For example, PACS dataset [7] has seven task labels (e.g., “dog”, “horse”) and four domain labels
(e.g., “photo”, “sketch”). Previous approaches explicitly reduced domain gaps in the latent space [8–
∗
Equal contribution † Part of work done while at NAVER Clova
Correspondence to: Junbum Cha <junbum.cha@kakaobrain.com>, Sungrae Park <sungrae.park@upstage.ai>

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

