A Closer Look at the Worst-case Behavior of
Multi-armed Bandit Algorithms
Anand Kalvit1 and Assaf Zeevi2
Columbia University
New York, USA
{1 akalvit22,2 assaf}@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
One of the key drivers of complexity in the classical (stochastic) multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problem is the difference between mean rewards in the top two arms, also
known as the instance gap. The celebrated Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) policy
is among the simplest optimism-based MAB algorithms that naturally adapts to
this gap: for a horizon of play n, it achieves
p optimal O (log n) regret in instances
with “large” gaps, and a near-optimal O n log n minimax regret when the gap
can be arbitrarily “small.” This paper provides new results on the arm-sampling
behavior of UCB, leading to several important insights. Among these, it is shown
that arm-sampling rates under UCB are asymptotically deterministic, regardless of
the problem complexity. This discovery
facilitates new sharp asymptotics and a
p
novel alternative proof for the O n log n minimax regret of UCB. Furthermore,
the paper also provides the first complete process-level characterization of the
MAB problem under UCB in the conventional diffusion scaling. Among other
things, the “small” gap worst-case lens adopted in this paper also reveals profound
distinctions between the behavior of UCB and Thompson Sampling, such as an
incomplete learning phenomenon characteristic of the latter.

1

Introduction

Background and motivation. The MAB paradigm provides a succinct abstraction of the quintessential exploration vs. exploitation trade-offs inherent in many sequential decision making problems.
This has origns in clinical trial studies dating back to 1933 [30] which gave rise to the earliest known
MAB heuristic, Thompson Sampling [1]. Today, the MAB problem manifests itself in various forms
with applications ranging from dynamic pricing and online auctions to packet routing, scheduling,
e-commerce and matching markets among others (see [9] for a comprehensive survey of different
formulations). In the canonical stochastic MAB problem, a decision maker (DM) pulls one of K
arms sequentially at each time t 2 {1, 2, ...}, and receives a random payoff drawn according to an
arm-dependent distribution. The DM, oblivious to the statistical properties of the arms, must balance
exploring new arms and exploiting the best arm played thus far in order to maximize her cumulative
payoff over the horizon of play. This objective is equivalent to minimizing the regret relative to an
oracle with perfect ex ante knowledge of the optimal arm (the one with
⇣ the highest mean
⌘ reward).
The classical stochastic MAB problem is fully specified by the tuple (Pi )16i6K , n , where Pi
denotes the distribution of rewards associated with the ith arm, and n the horizon of play.

The statistical complexity of regret minimization in the stochastic MAB problem is governed by a
key primitive called the gap, denoted by , which accounts for the difference between the top two
arm mean rewards in the problem. For a “well-separated” or “large gap” instance, i.e., a fixed
bounded away from 0, the seminal paper [22] showed that the order of the smallest achievable regret
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

