SPANN: Highly-efficient Billion-scale Approximate
Nearest Neighbor Search

Qi Chen1, ∗ Bing Zhao1, 2, † Haidong Wang1 Mingqin Li1 Chuanjie Liu1, 3, †
Zengzhong Li1 Mao Yang1 Jingdong Wang1, 4, ∗, †
1
2
3
4
Microsoft
Peking University
Tencent
Baidu
1
{cheqi, haidwa, mingqli, jasol, maoyang}@microsoft.com
2
its.bingzhao@pku.edu.cn 3 liu.chuanjie@outlook.com 4 wangjingdong@outlook.com

Abstract
The in-memory algorithms for approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) have
achieved great success for fast high-recall search, but are extremely expensive
when handling very large scale database. Thus, there is an increasing request for
the hybrid ANNS solutions with small memory and inexpensive solid-state drive
(SSD). In this paper, we present a simple but efficient memory-disk hybrid indexing
and search system, named SPANN, that follows the inverted index methodology. It
stores the centroid points of the posting lists in the memory and the large posting
lists in the disk. We guarantee both disk-access efficiency (low latency) and
high recall by effectively reducing the disk-access number and retrieving highquality posting lists. In the index-building stage, we adopt a hierarchical balanced
clustering algorithm to balance the length of posting lists and augment the posting
list by adding the points in the closure of the corresponding clusters. In the search
stage, we use a query-aware scheme to dynamically prune the access of unnecessary
posting lists. Experiment results demonstrate that SPANN is 2× faster than the
state-of-the-art ANNS solution DiskANN to reach the same recall quality 90%
with same memory cost in three billion-scale datasets. It can reach 90% recall@1
and recall@10 in just around one millisecond with only about 10% of original
memory cost. Code is available at: https://github.com/microsoft/SPTAG.
billion-scale, vector search, inverted index solution

1

Introduction

Vector nearest neighbor search has played an important role in information retrieval area, such
as multimedia search and web search, which provides relevant results by searching vectors with
minimum distance to the query vector. Exact solutions for K-nearest neighbor search [49, 40] are not
applicable in big data scenario due to substantial computation cost and high query latency. Therefore,
researchers have proposed many kinds of approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) algorithms in
the literature [11, 18, 38, 10, 14, 31, 34, 13, 29, 21, 16, 26, 43, 42, 33, 44, 37, 32, 19, 27, 9, 12, 39,
50, 20, 36]. However, most of the algorithms mainly focus on how to do low latency and high recall
search all in memory with offline pre-built indexes. When targeting to the super large scale vector
search scenarios, such as web search, the memory cost will become extremely expensive. There is an
increasing request for the hybrid ANNS solutions that use small memory and inexpensive disk to
serve the large scale datasets.
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Work done while at Microsoft.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

