The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Entity-Masked Graph Diffusion Model for Histopathological Image
Representation Learning
Zhenfeng Zhuang1 * , Min Cen2 * , Yanfeng Li1 * , Fangyu Zhou1 , Lequan Yu3 , Baptiste Magnier4,5 ,
Liansheng Wang1†
2

1
Department of Computer Science at School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
3
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
EuroMov Digital Health in Motion, Univ Montpellier, IMT Mines Ales, Ales, France
5
Service de Medecine Nucleaire, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nimes, Universite de Montpellier, Nimes, France
{zhuangzhenfeng, liyanfeng, lswang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, cenmin0127@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Significant disparities between the features of natural images and those inherent to histopathological images make it
challenging to directly apply and transfer pre-trained models from natural images to histopathology tasks. Moreover,
the frequent lack of annotations in histopathology patch
images has driven researchers to explore self-supervised
learning methods like mask reconstruction for learning representations from large amounts of unlabeled data. Crucially, previous mask-based efforts in self-supervised learning have often overlooked the spatial interactions among entities, which are essential for constructing accurate representations of pathological entities. To address these challenges, constructing graphs of entities is a promising approach. In addition, the diffusion reconstruction strategy
has recently shown superior performance through its random intensity noise addition technique to enhance the robust
learned representation. Therefore, we introduce H-MGDM,
a novel self-supervised Histopathology image representation
learning method through the Dynamic Entity-Masked Graph
Diffusion Model. Specifically, we propose to use complementary subgraphs as latent diffusion conditions and selfsupervised targets respectively during pre-training. We note
that the graph can embed entities’ topological relationships
and enhance representation. Dynamic conditions and targets
can improve pathological fine reconstruction. Our model has
conducted pretraining experiments on three large histopathological datasets. The advanced predictive performance and interpretability of H-MGDM are clearly evaluated on comprehensive downstream tasks such as classification and survival
analysis on six datasets.

Sectioning

Thumbnail

Tissue Region

(a) Pathology Patch

(b) MAE

(c) DiffMAE

Tissue Extraction

Noisy Tissue

Entity Graph

(d) H-MGDM(Ours)

Figure 1: Pathological slide inspection process from the
overall view to details. Unlike comparison methods, HMGDM focuses on masked pathological tissue regions
rather than grid tiles in patches, constructing the masked
subgraph with varying intensities and noise for reconstruction by complementary conditional subgraph.

Code — https://github.com/centurion-crawler/H-MGDM

Introduction
Achieving concise and informative histopathology patch
image representation is the cornerstone for solving many
tasks in the field of computational histopathology analysis, such as cancer diagnosis, grading, segmentation, and

prognosis tasks within whole Slide Image (WSI) (Panayides
et al. 2020). There are many extensive investigations on pretraining features for pathology images, which can help alleviate the time-consuming and tedious task of manual slide
inspection by pathologists (Song et al. 2023). Today, the
representation of pathology image patches relies heavily on
transfer learning methods (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Sharmay

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11058

