The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Noise-Resilient Symbolic Regression with Dynamic Gating Reinforcement
Learning
Chenglu Sun1 , Shuo Shen1 , Wenzhi Tao1 , Deyi Xue1 , Zixia Zhou2 *
1

Cooperation Product Department, Interactive Entertainment Group, Tencent
2
Stanford University
{clivesun, svenshen, simontao, davexue}@tencent.com, zixia@stanford.edu

Abstract

With the rise of electronic information technology, we have
easy access to abundant data for acquisition, processing, and
analysis. Extracting meaningful relationships from data is
crucial for AI design, scientific discovery, and identifying
core factors, et al. Deep learning (DL) has emerged as a
powerful tool for data mining (Shu and Ye 2023; Sorscher
et al. 2022), enabling neural networks to tackle a wide array
of scientific tasks, such as regression and classification problems (Muthukumar et al. 2021). For instance, given a dataset
(X, y), where each point Xi ∈ Rn and yi ∈ R, DL methods
can train a network to approximate yi ≈ F (Xi ), with F representing the learned network. However, as a black-box system (Buhrmester, Münch, and Arens 2021), the relationships
established by the network between data and targets are often opaque, making fine-grained control of the system and
understand the information contained in the data challenging. Therefore, improving model interpretability and controllability has gradually become a key research direction
in the current AI field.

Symbolic regression (SR) stands out as a promising technology, aiming to discover the correct symbolic expression
for an unknown function f that best fits the dataset with
yi = f (Xi ). SR has the potential to explain black-box systems with simple, accurate, intelligible expressions, enhancing the development of data-driven AI systems (Udrescu and
Tegmark 2020; Oliveira et al. 2018; Jiang and Xue 2023;
Udrescu et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2020; Petersen et al. 2021;
Kamienny et al. 2022, 2023). Despite its promise, SR is difficult due to the exponentially large combinatorial space of
symbolic expressions. Traditional SR methods are usually
based on genetic programming (GP) (Schmidt and Lipson
2009; Searson, Leahy, and Willis 2010; De Melo 2014).
While GP-based SR method achieve good performance, they
are slow, and struggle to scale to larger problems and are
highly sensitive to hyperparameter settings (Mundhenk et al.
2021b). Recent advances have seen a pivot towards DL approaches for SR, leveraging networks to represent and learn
the semantics of symbols (Kamienny et al. 2022; Kim et al.
2020; d’Ascoli et al. 2022). However, DL-based methods
often encounter difficulties in achieving satisfactory regression performance or need specific revisions on the network
and search space. Some DL-based methods pre-train an
encoder-decoder network to learn the expression representations within a given dataset (Valipour et al. 2021; Holt, Qian,
and van der Schaar 2023). These methods sample function f
using the pre-trained network, thereby achieving low complexity at inference process. But the pre-trained model may
lead to sub-optimal solutions and fail to discover highly
complex equations (Holt, Qian, and van der Schaar 2023).
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Wang et al. 2022; Nguyen,
Nguyen, and Nahavandi 2020; Crochepierre, BoudjeloudAssala, and Barbesant 2022; Landajuela et al. 2021a) applied to SR combines the benefits of GP with environmental
feedback and the representation power of neural networks.
This combination has contributed to a growing trend in research adopting RL for SR tasks (Mundhenk et al. 2021a;
Petersen et al. 2021; Landajuela et al. 2022; Zhang and
Zhou 2021). However, a significant portion of real-world
data is characterized by high-noisy1 , often containing abundant noisy information or irrelevant data. Performing SR on

* Corresponding Author: Zixia Zhou
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, “noises” refers to irrelevant variables within a
dataset.

Symbolic regression (SR) has emerged as a pivotal technique
for uncovering the intrinsic information within data and enhancing the interpretability of AI models. However, current
state-of-the-art (sota) SR methods struggle to perform correct recovery of symbolic expressions from high-noise data.
To address this issue, we introduce a novel noise-resilient
SR (NRSR) method capable of recovering expressions from
high-noise data. Our method leverages a novel reinforcement
learning (RL) approach in conjunction with a designed noiseresilient gating module (NGM) to learn symbolic selection
policies. The gating module can dynamically filter the meaningless information from high-noise data, thereby demonstrating a high noise-resilient capability for the SR process.
And we also design a mixed path entropy (MPE) bonus term
in the RL process to increase the exploration capabilities of
the policy. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms several popular baselines on benchmarks with high-noise data. Furthermore, our method also
can achieve sota performance on benchmarks with clean data,
showcasing its robustness and efficacy in SR tasks.

Introduction

20690

