The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MRBTP: Efficient Multi-Robot Behavior Tree Planning and Collaboration
Yishuai Cai* , Xinglin Chen* , Zhongxuan Cai† , Yunxin Mao,
Minglong Li† , Wenjing Yang, Ji Wang
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
{caiyishuai, chenxinglin, caizhongxuan, maoyunxin, liminglong10, wenjing.yang, wj}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-robot task planning and collaboration are critical challenges in robotics. While Behavior Trees (BTs) have been established as a popular control architecture and are plannable
for a single robot, the development of effective multi-robot
BT planning algorithms remains challenging due to the complexity of coordinating diverse action spaces. We propose the
Multi-Robot Behavior Tree Planning (MRBTP) algorithm,
with theoretical guarantees of both soundness and completeness. MRBTP features cross-tree expansion to coordinate
heterogeneous actions across different BTs to achieve the
team’s goal. For homogeneous actions, we retain backup
structures among BTs to ensure robustness and prevent redundant execution through intention sharing. While MRBTP
is capable of generating BTs for both homogeneous and heterogeneous robot teams, its efficiency can be further improved. We then propose an optional plugin for MRBTP
when Large Language Models (LLMs) are available to reason goal-related actions for each robot. These relevant actions can be pre-planned to form long-horizon subtrees, significantly enhancing the planning speed and collaboration efficiency of MRBTP. We evaluate our algorithm in warehouse
management and everyday service scenarios. Results demonstrate MRBTP’s robustness and execution efficiency under
varying settings, as well as the ability of the pre-trained LLM
to generate effective task-specific subtrees for MRBTP.

Figure 1: An example of two BTs planned by MRBTP:
(1) Cross-tree expansion, (2) Intention sharing, (3) Optional
plugin: subtree pre-planning.
chise et al. 2016). As the potential of BTs gains more attention, various methods for automatically generating BTs have
been proposed, including evolutionary computing (Neupane
and Goodrich 2019; Colledanchise, Parasuraman, and Ögren
2019), reinforcement learning (Banerjee 2018; Pereira and
Engel 2015), and BT synthesis (Tadewos, Newaz, and Karimoddini 2022; Neupane and Goodrich 2023). Among these
methods, BT planning (Chen et al. 2024a,b; Cai et al. 2021;
Colledanchise, Almeida, and Ogren 2019) has advantages
in leveraging interpretable action models and producing reliable BTs to achieve goals, which make it a promising approach to generate BTs for autonomous robot systems.
However, current BT planning focuses primarily on a single robot, and the development of effective multi-robot BT
planning algorithms remains challenging. The challenges
mainly arise from two aspects:
• For heterogeneous actions, how to coordinate them
across different BTs to accomplish the team’s goal.
• For homogeneous actions, how to use them to improve
fault tolerance without redundant execution.
In this paper, we propose Multi-Robot Behavior Tree
Planning (MRBTP), the first sound and complete algorithm
for generating reliable and robust BTs for MRS. MRBTP

Code — https://github.com/DIDS-EI/MRBTP

Introduction
Multi-robot systems (MRS) that involve robots with diverse capabilities offer the potential for improved performance and fault tolerance compared to single-robot solutions (Colledanchise et al. 2016). Developing an autonomous MRS requires an efficient and robust control architecture, along with methods to adapt them for specific
tasks. Behavior Trees (BTs) have emerged as a popular control architecture due to their modularity, interpretability, reactivity, and robustness, making them well-suited for both
single- and multi-robot systems (Heppner et al. 2024; Heppnerl et al. 2023; Neupane and Goodrich 2019; Colledan* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14548

