The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Responsibility-aware Strategic Reasoning in Probabilistic Multi-Agent Systems
Chunyan Mu1 , Muhammad Najib2 , Nir Oren1
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen
Department of Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University
Chunyan.Mu@abdn.ac.uk, M.Najib@hw.ac.uk, N.Oren@abdn.ac.uk
2

Abstract

and Halpern 2004; Parker, Grandi, and Lorini 2023), which
captures the impact of an agent’s or coalition’s actions, or
inaction, on outcomes. Analysing causal responsibility enables a balanced distribution of rewards or penalties among
agents based on their contribution to outcomes1 . This provides a way for ensuring fairness among agents. For example, consider a scenario where two agents are involved
in carrying out a plan (i.e., a joint strategy) assigned by a
principal. If both agents share the same degree of responsibility for the execution of this plan, they should receive a
fair share of reward (e.g., each receives the same amount of
money). Moreover, agents may pursue different plans based
on their preferences, meaning that individual agents may deviate from an overarching plan. Inspired by the concept of
equilibria for multi-agent planning (Bowling, Jensen, and
Veloso 2003), we utilise the Nash equilibrium (NE) as the
solution concept to compute stable plans. If a plan is a NE,
then no agent can benefit from unilaterally deviating from
the plan.

Responsibility plays a key role in the development and deployment of trustworthy autonomous systems. In this paper,
we focus on the problem of strategic reasoning in probabilistic multi-agent systems with responsibility-aware agents.
We introduce PATL+R, a variant of Probabilistic Alternatingtime Temporal Logic. PATL+R’s novelty lies in its incorporation of modalities for causal responsibility, providing a framework for responsibility-aware multi-agent strategic reasoning. We present an approach to synthesise joint strategies that
satisfy an outcome specified in PATL+R while optimising the
share of expected causal responsibility and reward. This provides a notion of balanced distribution of responsibility and
reward gain among agents. To this end, we utilise the Nash
equilibrium as the solution concept for our strategic reasoning problem and demonstrate how to compute responsibilityaware Nash equilibrium strategies via a reduction to parametric model checking of concurrent stochastic multi-player
games.

Introduction

Contributions. This paper focuses on the strategic reasoning problem with step-bounded temporal properties, where
agents have access to randomised memoryless strategies and
seek to optimise the balance between responsibility and reward (i.e., agents are responsibility-aware). We present a
parametric model that captures both the uncertainty and
strategic interactions in multi-agent systems of such a setting. We then introduce the PATL+R logic as a language for
specifying properties that encompass responsibility and temporal objectives. By utilising the approach from the parametric model checking paradigm, we demonstrate how to
model check PATL+R formulae against our proposed model.
We show that such a model checking problem can be solved
in PSPACE. We further demonstrate how we can utilise the
parametric model to compute NE strategies/plans with respect to agents’ utility functions that consider both reward
and responsibility. These NE strategies/plans are in a sense
optimal for each agent, considering trade-offs between responsibility and reward. We show that such a computation
can also be done in PSPACE. Omitted proofs can be found
in supplementary material.

Strategic decision-making and reasoning in multi-agent systems (MASs) operating in a dynamic and uncertain environment is a challenging research problem. Formalisms
such as ATL (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002) and
PATL (Chen and Lu 2007) provide important frameworks
for reasoning about strategic decision making in MASs.
These formalisms have also found notable applications
in the field of multi-agent planning (Van Der Hoek and
Wooldridge 2002; Jamroga 2004; Schnoor 2010; Demri
and Fervari 2023; Chrpa and Karpas 2024). Recently there
has been a surge in research focused on the trustworthiness of autonomous systems, highlighting the importance
of responsibility as a crucial element of AI systems (Kaur
et al. 2022; Dignum 2020). Consequently, the notion of a
responsibility-aware agent has emerged (Yazdanpanah et al.
2023; Kobayashi, Bondu, and Ishikawa 2023; Cosner et al.
2023). Such an agent must consider not only its own reward
but also its responsibility with respect to the tasks assigned
to it.
This paper explores the problem of strategic reasoning
where agents are aware of causal responsibility (Chockler

1

In particular, when combined with norms (Henne et al. 2021),
although we emphasise that the study of normative systems is beyond the scope of this paper.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23258

