The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-Validated Off-Policy Evaluation
Matej Cief1,2 , Branislav Kveton3 , Michal Kompan2
1

2

Brno University of Technology
Kempelen Institute of Intelligent Technologies
3
Adobe Research*

Abstract
We study estimator selection and hyper-parameter tuning in
off-policy evaluation. Although cross-validation is the most
popular method for model selection in supervised learning,
off-policy evaluation relies mostly on theory, which provides
only limited guidance to practitioners. We show how to use
cross-validation for off-policy evaluation. This challenges a
popular belief that cross-validation in off-policy evaluation is
not feasible. We evaluate our method empirically and show
that it addresses a variety of use cases.

Code — https://github.com/navarog/cross-validated-ope
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15332

1

Introduction

Off-policy evaluation (OPE, Li et al. 2010) is a framework
for estimating the performance of a policy without deploying
it online. It is useful in domains where online A/B testing is
costly or too dangerous. For example, deploying an untested
algorithm in recommender systems or advertising can lead to
a loss of revenue (Li et al. 2010; Silver et al. 2013), and in
medical treatments, it may have a detrimental effect on the
patient’s health (Hauskrecht and Fraser 2000). A popular approach to off-policy evaluation is inverse propensity scoring
(IPS, Robins, Rotnitzky, and Zhao 1994). As this method is
unbiased, it approaches a true policy value with more data.
However, when the data logging policy has a low probability of choosing some actions, IPS-based estimates have
a high variance and often require a large amount of data to
be useful in practice (Dudik et al. 2014). Therefore, other
lower-variance methods have emerged. These methods often
have hyper-parameters, such as a clipping constant to truncate
large propensity weights (Ionides 2008). Some works provide theoretical insights (Ionides 2008; Metelli, Russo, and
Restelli 2021) for choosing hyper-parameters, while there are
none for many others.
In supervised learning, data-driven techniques for hyperparameter tuning, such as cross-validation, are more popular
than theory-based techniques, such as the Akaike information criterion (Bishop 2006). The reason is that they perform
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* The work was done at AWS AI Labs.

16073

better on large datasets, which are standard today. Unlike in
supervised learning, the ground truth value of the target policy
is unknown in off-policy evaluation. A common assumption
is that standard machine learning approaches for model selection would fail because there is no unbiased and low-variance
approach to compare estimators (Su, Srinath, and Krishnamurthy 2020). Therefore, only a few works studied estimator
selection for off-policy evaluation, and no general solution
exists (Saito et al. 2021; Udagawa et al. 2023).
Despite common beliefs, we show that cross-validation in
off-policy evaluation can be done comparably to supervised
learning. In supervised learning, we do not know the true data
distribution, but we are given samples from it. Each sample
is an unbiased and high-variance representation of this distribution. Nevertheless, we can still get an accurate estimate
of true generalization when averaging the model error over
these samples in cross-validation. Similarly, we do not know
the true reward distribution in off-policy evaluation, but we
are given high-variance samples from it. The difference is
that these samples are biased because they are collected by a
different policy. However, we can use an unbiased estimator,
such as IPS, on a held-out validation set to get an unbiased
estimate of any policy value. Then, as with supervised learning, we get an estimate of the estimator’s performance. Our
contributions are:
• We propose an easy-to-use estimator selection procedure
for off-policy evaluation based on cross-validation that
requires only data collected by a single policy.
• We analyze the loss of our procedure and how it relates to
the true loss if the ground truth policy value was known.
We use this insight to reduce its variance.
• We empirically evaluate the procedure on estimator selection and hyper-parameter tuning problems using nine
real-world datasets. The procedure is more accurate than
prior techniques and computationally efficient.

2

Off-Policy Evaluation

A contextual bandit (Langford, Strehl, and Wortman 2008)
is a popular model of an agent interacting with an unknown
environment. The interaction in round i starts with the agent
observing a context xi ∈ X , which is drawn i.i.d. from an
unknown distribution p, where X is the context set. Then
the agent takes an action ai ∼ π(· | xi ) from the action set

