The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Optimal Transport-based Latent Mixer for Robust Multi-modal Learning
Fengjiao Gong1 , Angxiao Yue1 , Hongteng Xu1,2 *
1

2

Gaoling School of Artifical Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
gongfengjiao2021@ruc.edu.cn, angxiaoyue@ruc.edu.cn, hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

Guo et al. 2014). However, this learning paradigm requires
well-aligned multi-modal data and assumes different modalities to share the same latent space, which are questionable
even unavailable in practical applications, especially in those
distributed scenarios. In particular, as shown in Figure 1(a),
real-world multi-modal data are often scattered to different
local agents, and each agent can only access the data in a
single modality. Due to privacy protection and data security,
sharing data directly across different agents is forbidden in
many applications. What is worse, for some agents, the data
associated with its modality may be insufficient for downstream tasks because the number of the data can be limited
and the features can be not informative enough for representation learning. Take healthcare records as an example. Different hospitals might have different modalities of patients
data in various formats, which are not supposed to be shared
directly due to legal regulations, private information leakage
risks, and financial considerations (Vepakomma et al. 2018).
The precise diagnose of diseases and the development of efficient drugs urgently demand plenty of patients data with
complementary modalities, especially when the number of
patients are rare and distributed across various places. Besides, raw data from different modalities are likely unaligned
since patients can choose medical tests autonomously dependent on their symptoms. Therefore, the multi-modal data
in practice are often unaligned and distributed, and thus a
robust multi-modal learning framework is required to learn
representation models based on such data.

Multi-modal learning aims to learn predictive models based
on the data from different modalities. However, due to the requirement of data security and privacy protection, real-world
multi-modal data are often scattered to different agents and
cannot be shared across the agents, which limits the application of existing multi-modal learning methods. To achieve robust multi-modal learning in such a challenging scenario, we
propose a novel optimal transport-based mixer (OTM), which
works as an effective latent code alignment and augmentation method for unaligned and distributed multi-modal data.
In particular, we train a Wasserstein autoencoder (WAE) for
each agent, which encodes its single modal samples in a latent
space. Through a central server, the proposed OTM computes
a stochastic fused Gromov-Wasserstein barycenter (FGWB)
to mix different modalities’ latent codes, so that each agent
applies the barycenter to reconstruct its samples. This method
neither requires well-aligned multi-modal data nor assumes
the data to share the same latent distribution, and each agent
can learn a specific model based on multi-modal data while
achieving inference based on its local modality. Experiments
on multi-modal clustering and classification demonstrate that
the models learned with the OTM method outperform the corresponding baselines.

Introduction
Real-world data, such as healthcare records and multimedia signals, are multimodal in general, consisting of multiple modalities describing different aspects of the same object (Sharma and Giannakos 2020). Multi-modal learning
aims to obtain a comprehensive representation across all
modalities within the data, uncovering and fusing the highlevel semantics lying in different modalities (Baltrušaitis,
Ahuja, and Morency 2018) for downstream tasks. This
learning task is important for many applications, e.g., diagnosing diseases based on heterogeneous clinical records
and test results (Zhang et al. 2019), fraud detection based on
various social behaviors (Abilov et al. 2021), and so on.
The common approach to represent all modalities simultaneously is to fuse them together to get an unified representation in a latent space through supervised or unsupervised learning (de Cheveigné et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2015;

In this study, we propose a novel optimal transport-based
mixer (OTM) for achieving robust multi-modal learning
based on unaligned and distributed multi-modal data. As
illustrated in Figure 1(b), our method leverages a multihead Wasserstein auto-encoder (MWAE) (Tolstikhin et al.
2018) to map different modalities’ samples to the common
latent space, in which each WAE head is deployed locally
in an agent. A central server receives latent codes from
the agents and fuses them by solving a stochastic fused
Gromov-Wasserstein barycenter (FGWB) problem, leading
to the proposed OT-based mixer module. The central server
pushes the learned barycenter forward to different modalities, and the agents receive the pushforward results and
reconstruct the corresponding modalities’ samples accordingly. The MWAE model is learned by minimizing the reconstruction loss of each modality and regularizing the la-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16826

