The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Discovering Symmetries of ODEs by Symbolic Regression
Paul Kahlmeyer, Niklas Merk, Joachim Giesen
Friedrich Schiller University Jena
paul.kahlmeyer@uni-jena.de, niklas.merk@uni-jena.de, joachim.giesen@uni-jena.de

4

Solving systems of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) is
essential when it comes to understanding the behavior of dynamical systems. Yet, automated solving remains challenging, in particular for nonlinear systems. Computer algebra
systems (CASs) provide support for solving ODEs by first
simplifying them, in particular through the use of Lie point
symmetries. Finding these symmetries is, however, itself a
difficult problem for CASs. Recent works in symbolic regression have shown promising results for recovering symbolic
expressions from data. Here, we adapt search-based symbolic
regression to the task of finding generators of Lie point symmetries. With this approach, we can find symmetries of ODEs
that existing CASs cannot find.

2
y2

Abstract

0
2
4
4

3

2

y1

1

0

1

2

Figure 1: Three numerical solutions for the example ODEs
y ′ = [−y2 , y1 ] in state space. Time steps are equally spaced
between two adjacent points of a single trajectory.

Introduction
The study of dynamical systems plays a key role in
all natural sciences (Strogatz 2000), as well as in economics (Lorenz 1993) and in the social sciences (Richardson and Dale 2014). Describing the state of dynamical systems explicitly as a function over time, that is, in integral
form, is usually difficult. It is often much easier to describe
the system by the change of its state over time, that is, in
differential form. Systems of ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) are such a description in differential form. Systems
of ODEs are a key mathematical concept for modeling and
understanding dynamical systems (Hirsch and Smale 1974;
Tenenbaum and Pollard 1985). Transforming the differential
form into integral form means solving an ODE system, that
is, finding an explicit function that satisfies the ODE. Solving ODEs is crucial for predicting system behavior and for
analyzing its dynamics. A large part of research has been
devoted to finding solutions to ODEs by numerical or analytical methods. Numerical solutions involve simulating the
system from a specific initial condition, offering effective
solutions for a wide range of ODEs, but lacking the interpretability of analytical solutions.
For an example, consider a system, where we observe a
quantity y = [y1 , y2 ] over time t. The dynamics of the system is such that the change of the first component y1 is negatively correlated with the magnitude of the second component y2 , whereas the change of the second component is

positively correlated with the magnitude of the first component. This simple system can be modeled by the following
system of two linear ODEs
y1′ = −y2
y2′ = y1
where yi′ is the derivative of the time-dependent function yi .
Three numerical solutions for the example system are shown
in Figure 1. Note that these solutions consist only of sample
points. The system is simple enough that we can also provide
an analytical solution
y1 (t) = a · cos(t + b)
y2 (t) = a · sin(t + b)
for some constants a and b. The three numerical solutions in
Figure 1 correspond to different choices of the constants a
and b.
Many natural phenomena, however, are described by nonlinear systems of ODEs, for instance chaotic systems. Nonlinear ODEs are typically much more difficult to solve analytically. Solutions are known only in special cases, when
the nonlinearities can be resolved by transforming the system into an equivalent system of linear ODEs, such as Riccati or Bernoulli differential equations. Sophus Lie (Lie
1888) proposed a fundamental and unifying framework for
the analysis of systems of ODEs using symmetries. A symmetry of an ODE system describes a mapping from one

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17715

