The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Measuring Human and AI Values Based on Generative Psychometrics with Large
Language Models
Haoran Ye* 1 , Yuhang Xie* 2 , Yuanyi Ren* 1 , Hanjun Fang3 , Xin Zhang4 , Guojie Song† 1 5
1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
3
Department of Sociology, Peking University
4
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University
5
PKU-Wuhan Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{hrye, yuhangxie}@stu.pku.edu.cn {yyren, hjfang, zhang.x, gjsong}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Traditional psychometrics often measure human values
through self-report questionnaires, where participants rate
the importance of various values in their lives. However,
these tools are limited by response biases, resource demands, inaccuracies in capturing authentic behaviors, and
inability to handle historical or subjective data (Ponizovskiy
et al. 2020). Therefore, data-driven tools have been developed to infer values from textual data, such as social media posts (Shen, Wilson, and Mihalcea 2019). These tools
can reveal personal values without relying on explicit selfreporting, but they are mostly dictionary-based, matching
text to predefined value lexicons. Consequently, they often
fail to grasp the nuanced semantics and context-dependent
value expressions. Additionally, these tools are inherently
static and inflexible, relying on expert-defined lexicons that
are not easily adaptable to new or evolving values.
The rise of large language models (LLMs), with their remarkable ability to understand semantic nuances, presents
new possibilities for data-driven value measurement. Recent studies have demonstrated that LLMs can effectively
approximate annotators’ and even psychologists’ judgments
on value-related tasks (Sorensen et al. 2024; Ren et al.
2024). Building on these advancements, this work introduces Generative Psychometrics for Values (GPV), an LLMbased, data-driven value measurement paradigm grounded
in the theory of text-revealed selective perceptions (Postman, Bruner, and McGinnies 1948; Shen, Wilson, and Mihalcea 2019). Perceptions are the way individuals interpret
and evaluate the world around them, and are servants of interests, needs, and, values (Postman, Bruner, and McGinnies 1948). Such perceptions are revealed in self-expressing
texts, such as blog posts, and are utilized as atomic value
measurement units in GPV. The core idea of GPV is to extract contextualized and value-laden perceptions (e.g., ”I
believe that everyone deserves equal rights and opportunities.”) from unstructured texts, decode underlying values
(e.g., Universalism) for arbitrary value systems, and aggregate the results to measure individual values.
The perceptions in GPV function similarly to the static
psychometric items (stimuli) in self-report questionnaires,
which support or oppose specific values (Schwartz 1992).

Human values and their measurement are long-standing interdisciplinary inquiry. Recent advances in AI have sparked
renewed interest in this area, with large language models
(LLMs) emerging as both tools and subjects of value measurement. This work introduces Generative Psychometrics
for Values (GPV), an LLM-based, data-driven value measurement paradigm, theoretically grounded in text-revealed selective perceptions. The core idea is to dynamically parse unstructured texts into perceptions akin to static stimuli in traditional psychometrics, measure the value orientations they
reveal, and aggregate the results. Applying GPV to humanauthored blogs, we demonstrate its stability, validity, and
superiority over prior psychological tools. Then, extending
GPV to LLM value measurement, we advance the current
art with 1) a psychometric methodology that measures LLM
values based on their scalable and free-form outputs, enabling context-specific measurement; 2) a comparative analysis of measurement paradigms, indicating response biases of
prior methods; and 3) an attempt to bridge LLM values and
their safety, revealing the predictive power of different value
systems and the impacts of various values on LLM safety.
Through interdisciplinary efforts, we aim to leverage AI for
next-generation psychometrics and psychometrics for valuealigned AI.

Code — https://github.com/Value4AI/gpv
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12106

1

Introduction

Human values, a cornerstone of philosophical inquiry, are
the fundamental guiding principles behind individual and
collective decision-making (Rokeach 1973; Sagiv et al.
2017). Value measurement is a long-standing interdisciplinary endeavor for elucidating how specific values underpin and justify the worth of actions, objects, and concepts
(Schwartz 1992; Klingefjord, Lowe, and Edelman 2024).
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26400

