The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VisRec: A Semi-Supervised Approach to
Visibility Data Reconstruction in Radio Astronomy
Ruoqi Wang1 , Haitao Wang2 , Qiong Luo* 1, 3 , Feng Wang4 , Hejun Wu2
1

2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Guangzhou University
rwang280@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, wanght39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
luo@ust.hk, fengwang@gzhu.edu.cn, wuhejun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Dirty Image

Abstract
Imaging

Radio telescopes produce visibility data about celestial objects, but these data are sparse and noisy. As a result, images created on raw visibility data are of low quality. Recent
studies have used deep learning models to reconstruct visibility data to get cleaner images. However, these methods rely
on a substantial amount of labeled training data, which requires significant labeling effort from radio astronomers. Addressing this challenge, we propose VisRec, a model-agnostic
semi-supervised learning approach to visibility data reconstruction in radio astronomy. Specifically, VisRec consists of
both a supervised learning module and an unsupervised learning module. In the supervised learning module, we introduce
a set of data augmentation functions to produce diverse visibility examples. In comparison, the unsupervised learning
module in VisRec augments unlabeled data and uses reconstructions from non-augmented visibility as pseudo-labels for
training. This hybrid approach allows VisRec to effectively
leverage both labeled and unlabeled data. This way, VisRec
performs well even when labeled data is scarce. Our evaluation results show that VisRec is applicable to various models,
and outperforms all baseline methods in terms of reconstruction quality, robustness, and generalizability.

Collect
Reconstruction
Sparse Visibility

Imaging
Clean Image

Dense Inpainting

Figure 1: Illustration of radio interferometric data processing.

Traditional methods usually transfer the sparse visibility
data into dirty images and then reconstruct the dirty images
to clean images (Högbom 1974; Ables 1974; Bouman et al.
2016; Sun and Bouman 2021; Connor et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2023). In contrast, some recent deep-learning-based
studies (Schmidt et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2024) have proposed to first do sparse-to-dense inpainting
on the visibility data and then perform imaging to obtain the
clean image, showing better performance. In this paper, we
adopt the reconstruction-and-imaging processing flow and
focus on the sparse-to-dense visibility reconstruction task.
Figure 1 illustrates the workflow.
Existing visibility reconstruction research (Schmidt et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024) use supervised
learning methods in which the reconstruction error between
the predicted results and the reference labels is minimized
(Jia et al. 2022). However, these learning-based methods are
highly dependent on a great amount of ground truth (labels)
for model training, and obtaining ground truth data is difficult. In contrast to natural or medical image reconstruction,
where long-time scanning can produce fully-sampled (labeled) training data, obtaining a fully-sampled sky measurement dataset via radio telescopes is impractical due to observational constraints. Furthermore, it takes expertise and human labor to get a ground truth clean image. As such, techniques that can leverage information from unlabeled datasets
are indispensable where ground-truth images are scarce.
Another problem that often comes with the scarcity of
labeled data is limited robustness and generalizability in

Code — https://github.com/RapidsAtHKUST/VisRec

Introduction
In radio astronomy, a radio interferometer consists of an array of antennas, all observing the same area of the sky, forming a single, unified telescope. The visibility refers to the signal obtained by cross-correlating pairs of antennas, which is
in the frequency domain. Visibility data are then used to construct images of the celestial objects being observed (Dagli
2023). Due to the incompleteness and noise in the visibility
data, the resultant images, known as dirty images, are often dominated by artifacts (Schmidt et al. 2022). As a result,
radio interferometric data must be reconstructed before being used in scientific analysis. In this paper, we introduce a
semi-supervised method to reconstruct the visibility.
* Qiong Luo is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

852

