The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DM-Adapter: Domain-Aware Mixture-of-Adapters
for Text-Based Person Retrieval
Yating Liu12 , Zimo Liu2 , Xiangyuan Lan 24 , Wenming Yang1 , Yaowei Li23 * , Qingmin Liao1* ,
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, China
3
School of ECE, Peking University, China
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), China
liuyatin21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liuzm, lanxy}@pcl.ac.cn,
yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, ywl@stu.pku.edu.cn, liaoqm@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Image
Backbone
Text
Backbone

Fine-tuned

Text
Backbone

Image
Backbone

Text-based person retrieval (TPR) has gained significant attention as a fine-grained and challenging task that closely
aligns with practical applications. Tailoring CLIP to person domain is now a emerging research topic due to the
abundant knowledge of vision-language pretraining, but challenges still remain during fine-tuning: (i) Previous full-model
fine-tuning in TPR is computationally expensive and prone to
overfitting.(ii) Existing parameter-efficient transfer learning
(PETL) for TPR lacks of fine-grained feature extraction. To
address these issues, we propose Domain-Aware Mixture-ofAdapters (DM-Adapter), which unifies Mixture-of-Experts
(MOE) and PETL to enhance fine-grained feature representations while maintaining efficiency. Specifically, Sparse
Mixture-of-Adapters is designed in parallel to MLP layers
in both vision and language branches, where different experts
specialize in distinct aspects of person knowledge to handle
features more finely. To promote the router to exploit domain information effectively and alleviate the routing imbalance, Domain-Aware Router is then developed by building
a novel gating function and injecting learnable domain-aware
prompts. Extensive experiments show that our DM-Adapter
achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming previous methods by a significant margin.

Frozen

Router
Adapter
1

2

Adapter
Mixture of Adapters

A paper bag

(a) Full-model Fine-tuning

(b) Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning

Figure 1: Evolution of CLIP-based paradigms for text-based
person retrieval. (a) The FFT-based method unfreezes and
trains the entire model. (b) The recent PETL-based method
freezes CLIP and uses a single adapter on the input token as
shown in the left. Our mixture-of-adapters achieves the finegrained knowledge transferring with MOE in the right.

and Ye 2023) and CFine (Yan et al. 2023), train the entire
model and leverage CLIP’s original knowledge only during initialization. These methods typically employ complex
fine-grained modules to enhance performance. In contrast,
the PETL-based mechanism like CSKT (Liu et al. 2024a)
freezes the whole backbone of CLIP and introduces effective
components such as bidirectional vision-language prompts
to fine-tune a small number of parameters, which achieves
comparable results while significantly reducing training and
storage costs.
However, existing approaches still face two primary challenges: (i) FFT-based methods, despite their fine-grained
transfer capabilities, require enormous time and computational consumption, and have a risk of overfitting on relatively small-scale person datasets. (ii) Recent PETL-based
method CSKT, while efficient in trainable parameters, lacks
of more fine-grained and specialized considerations for the
specific domain of person retrieval, leading to a decline in
overall performance. Meanwhile, the success of mixtureof-experts (MOE) models (Jiang et al. 2024) in foundation models that expands a feedforward block into multiple
blocks, offers the potential of designing fine-grained PETL-

Introduction
Text-based Person Retrieval (TPR) (Li et al. 2017) is a crossmodal task that aims to retrieve persons from a large-scale
image pool based on textual descriptions instead of images,
which is crucial in intelligent transportation and security
scenarios, especially when witnesses can only provide textual descriptions without any target images.
Due to the remarkable generalization in cross-modal understanding, Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) models
(Zhang et al. 2024) have garnered extensive interest from
both academia and industry. Among these, the most representative work is Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021), which was pretrained on
a large-scale dataset of 400 million image-text pairs. FFT
(Fully Fine-Tuning)-based methods, such as IRRA (Jiang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5703

