The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unleashing the Power of Visual Foundation Models for Generalizable
Semantic Segmentation
PeiYuan Tang1 , Xiaodong Zhang2,3 * , Chunze Yang1 , Haoran Yuan4 ,
Jun Sun5 , Danfeng Shan1 , Zijiang James Yang4,6 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
3
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Network and System Security, Xidian University
4
Synkrotron, Inc.
5
Singapore Management University
6
University of Science and Technology of China
tangpeiyuan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, Zhangxiaodong@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract
Deep learning models often suffer from performance degradation in unseen domains, posing a risk for safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving. To tackle this problem, recent studies have leveraged pre-trained Visual Foundation Models (VFMs) to enhance generalization. However,
exsiting works mainly focus on designing intricate networks
for VFMs, neglecting their inherent strong generalization potential. Moreover, these methods typically perform inference
on low-resolution images. The loss of detail hinders accurate predictions in unseen domains, especially for small objects. In this paper, we argue that simply fine-tuning VFMs
and leveraging high-resolution images unleash the power of
VFMs for generalizable semantic segmentation. Therefore,
we design a VFM-based segmentation network (VFMNet)
that adapts VFMs to this task with minimal fine-tuning, preserving their generalizable knowledge. Then, to fully utilize
high-resolution images, we train a Mask-guided Refinement
Network (MGRNet) to refine VFMNet’s predictions combining detailed image features. Furthermore, we adopt a twostage coarse-to-fine inference approach. MGRNet is used to
refine the low-confidence regions predicted by VFMNet to
obtain fine-grained results. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, outperforming stateof-the-art methods by 3.3% on the average mIoU in syntheticto-real domain generalization.

Input Image

Low-Resolution
Prediction

High-Resolution
Prediction

Figure 1: Comparison of predictions using VFMs at low and
high resolutions. When inferring on low-resolution images,
VFMs often struggle with exact boundaries and small objects in the distance. High-resolution inference using a sliding window approach produces fine-grained results.

to solve this problems, but it often requires a significant
amount of time and money. Therefore, Domain Generalization (Yang, Gu, and Sun 2023; Fan et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023b) has been widely investigated to enhance model generalization ability. It aims to train models on labeled data
from source domains (e.g., synthetic data) such that it performs well on unseen domains (e.g., real-world data).
In the field of Domain Generalization Semantic Segmentation (DGSS), existing works mainly focus on domaininvariant feature learning (Xu et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2022)
and data augmentation techniques (Peng et al. 2021; Zhong
et al. 2022) to prevent overfitting to the source domains.
In recent years, Visual Foundation Models (VFMs) have
demonstrated remarkable performance across various computer vision tasks (Radford et al. 2021; Kirillov et al. 2023;
Oquab et al. 2023). Through pre-training on large-scale image data, VFMs acquire universal visual representations that
can be transfered to other domains. Their strong image understanding and generalization ability make them ideal for
developing generalizable models.
Previous works (Wei et al. 2024; Hümmer et al. 2023)
have leveraged VFMs for DGSS by employing their encoders as the feature extractor and then training a complex

Code — https://github.com/tpy001/VFMSeg

Introduction
Deep learning has significantly advanced computer vision
tasks like semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2017; Xie et al.
2021; Cheng et al. 2022). These successes ususally rely on
the basic assumption that the training and testing data should
come from the same distribution. When models are deployed
in the real world, they might encounter unseen scenarios
outside of their training data. This may lead to significant
performance drops, posing a threat to safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving. Collecting and labeling data for all possible scenarios is the most effective way
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20823

