The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LPCG: A Self-conditional Architecture for Labeled Point Cloud Generation
Dongshuo Huang1 * , Xiaoshui Huang2,3 * , Chengdong Zhang2 , Yilei Shi1†
1
School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University
School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
3
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Huaihua University
huangdongshuo@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yilei shi@nwpu.edu.cn, huangxiaoshui@163.com, zhangcd@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

data; 3) providing high-quality label of the generated point
cloud for future use. Though massive explorations have been
carried out, it is still challenging to build a model to meet all
above criteria.
Generally speaking, existing research on 3D point cloud
generation mainly falls into two categories. The first category is conditional generation (Fan, Su, and Guibas 2017;
Kurenkov et al. 2018), which guides point cloud generation
by specific conditions. Though conditional methods generally achieve a better performance, they usually require additional conditions to be attached to the point cloud training datasets. The second category is unconditional generation (Achlioptas et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019). Instead of
relying on the labels, unconditional methods leverage the internal features of the point cloud for modeling and generation. Unfortunately, when dealing with multi-category generation tasks, these methods can only generate complete
point clouds and cannot distinguish the category to which
the point cloud belongs. Besides, so far the generation quality is also dominated by conditional generation methods.
In this paper, we are inspired by RCG (Li, Katabi, and He
2023) model and consider the above two-category methods,
and then propose a self-conditional 3D point cloud generation architecture, which is capable of generating point cloud
with annotation, as shown in Figure 1.
Our approach harnesses the multimodal fused features
within raw unlabeled data to train the generative model, circumventing the labor-intensive task of data annotation. We
integrate the geometric feature and view features of the point
cloud data to get the fused features. Our method not only
elevates the quality of the produced point clouds but also
employs CLIP to process view features, thereby furnishing
annotated labels for the generated point clouds. Specifically,
we first use a pre-trained self-supervised point cloud model
and CLIP to extract geometric and view features of the point
cloud, and then integrate them by feature fusion module for
a substitute for label embedding. Secondly, we train the feature diffusion modules by adding and removing noise on the
previously extracted feature to provide diverse conditions
for the following point cloud generator. Finally, we train the
point cloud generator conditioned on the extracted fused features and provide two sampling methods during inference:
one based on feature diffusion and the other on the training
dataset. Simultaneously, we use CLIP to handle the sampled

Recently, there has been considerable exploration of methods
for generating 3D point clouds, which is crucial for numerous 3D vision applications. Though conditional generation
methods show promising performance, it depends on the additional paired label. On the other hand, unconditional generation methods usually fail to annotate the generated 3D point
cloud. In this paper, we introduce a novel self-conditional architecture that trains on unlabeled data and then generates
high-quality labeled 3D point clouds. Specifically, we design
a module to extract geometry and view features, and then use
a feature fusion module to integrate them as a substitute for
label embedding in conditional point cloud generation. Then
the point cloud generator is trained using the fused features.
LPCG also harnesses CLIP to handle the view features of
point clouds for generating label information. Besides, we
train two feature diffusion modules to capture the essence of
multimodal features and obtain diverse fused features for use
as conditions in generating point clouds. Experiments on the
ShapeNet dataset demonstrate that LPCG achieves state-ofthe-art performance for single class generation. Our experimental results show that the accuracy of our generated label
annotations reaches around 97.44% for a two-class generation task.

Introduction
Point cloud data finds extensive applications across diverse
fields like autonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality, and virtual reality. Nevertheless, acquiring point cloud
data necessitates researchers to transport a range of sensors,
gather diverse data, and subsequently annotate the point
cloud data with corresponding labels, demanding substantial
human effort. Thus, exploration of better generative models (Wu et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2023) for obtaining or augmenting high-fidelity 3D point cloud has become an active research topic in recent years. We believe that an ideal
3D point cloud generation model should have the following
functionalities: 1) capable of generating high-quality point
clouds based on merely existing 3D data; 2) allowing users
to utilize a single model to learn the representation of various categories, and then generate corresponding point cloud
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3635

