The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Q-MAML: Quantum Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Variational Quantum
Algorithms
Junyong Lee1 * , Jeihee Cho2 * , Shiho Kim2
1

BK21 Graduate Program in Intelligent Semiconductor Technology, Yonsei University, Korea
2
Yonsei University, Korea
jjunilee@yonsei.ac.kr, jeiheec@gmail.com, shiho@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
In the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era, using variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) to solve optimization problems has become a key application. However,
these algorithms face significant challenges, such as choosing an effective initial set of parameters and the limited quantum processing time that restricts the number of optimization iterations. In this study, we introduce a new framework
for optimizing parameterized quantum circuits (PQCs) that
employs a classical optimizer, inspired by Model-Agnostic
Meta-Learning (MAML) technique. This approach aim to
achieve better parameter initialization that ensures fast convergence. Our framework features a classical neural network,
called Learner, which interacts with a PQC using the output
of Learner as an initial parameter. During the pre-training
phase, Learner is trained with a meta-objective based on
the quantum circuit cost function. In the adaptation phase,
the framework requires only a few PQC updates to converge to a more accurate value, while the learner remains unchanged. This method is highly adaptable and is effectively
extended to various Hamiltonian optimization problems. We
validate our approach through experiments, including distribution function mapping and optimization of the Heisenberg
XYZ Hamiltonian. The result implies that the Learner successfully estimates initial parameters that generalize across
the problem space, enabling fast adaptation.

Figure 1: Illustration of the multiple individual optimization
landscapes
P (∇l1 , ∇l2 , ∇l3 ) combine to form a single landscape ( ∇li ). The model trained using the combined landscape can capture the general properties of various tasks,
which results in the improvement of convergence in the optimization as in the MAML.

Clean et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021; Holmes et al. 2022).
Lack of meaningful gradient value leads to failure of the
learning, resulting in slow or non-convergence of the optimization process. BP is especially problematic as it scales
unfavorably with the size of the quantum system, making it
a crucial problem to solve for future advancement and usage
of quantum computing (Ragone et al. 2023).
Even with techniques designed to overcome the challenges posed by the optimization landscape, the iterative nature of quantum algorithms demands significant quantum
computing resources. This makes the optimization process
both time-consuming and costly, which can also be a burden for near-term quantum hardware. Therefore, achieving
rapid convergence becomes essential to minimize computational expenses. A key strategy to enhance the performance
and efficiency of PQC is identifying good initial parameters (Friedrich and Maziero 2022). Properly selected initial
parameters can help mitigate the BP, facilitate more effective
optimization, and ultimately improve the algorithms’ ability
to find meaningful solutions.

Introduction
In the past decade, quantum computing has seen remarkable advancements, leading to the development of variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) that utilize parameterized quantum circuits (PQC), where gradient-based optimization methods are applied to gain optimal parameters (Cerezo et al. 2021). The popularity of this paradigm
is due to its flexibility, widening the area of quantum applications and approaches (Havlı́ček et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2021). However, these methods face significant challenges
due to the unfavorable characteristics of the optimization
landscape.
One example is the Barren Plateau (BP), which occurs
when the gradient of the cost function becomes exponentially small, caused by a flat optimization landscape (Mc* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18137

