The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Computing Game Symmetries and Equilibria That Respect Them
Emanuel Tewolde1,2 , Brian Hu Zhang1 , Caspar Oesterheld1,2
Tuomas Sandholm1,3,4,5 , Vincent Conitzer1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
Foundations of Cooperative AI Lab (FOCAL)
3
Strategy Robot, Inc.
4
Strategic Machine, Inc.
5
Optimized Markets, Inc.
{etewolde, bhzhang, coesterh, sandholm, conitzer}@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract
Strategic interactions can be represented more concisely, and
analyzed and solved more efficiently, if we are aware of the
symmetries within the multiagent system. Symmetries also
have conceptual implications, for example for equilibrium
selection. We study the computational complexity of identifying and using symmetries. Using the classical framework
of normal-form games, we consider game symmetries that
can be across some or all players and/or actions. We find a
strong connection between game symmetries and graph automorphisms, yielding graph automorphism and graph isomorphism completeness results for characterizing the symmetries
present in a game. On the other hand, we also show that the
problem becomes polynomial-time solvable when we restrict
the consideration of actions in one of two ways.
Next, we investigate when exactly game symmetries can be
successfully leveraged for Nash equilibrium computation. We
show that finding a Nash equilibrium that respects a given
set of symmetries is PPAD- and CLS-complete in generalsum and team games respectively—that is, exactly as hard
as Brouwer fixed point and gradient descent problems. Finally, we present polynomial-time methods for the special
cases where we are aware of a vast number of symmetries, or
where the game is two-player zero-sum and we do not even
know the symmetries.

1

Figure 1: A two-player coordination game. If both players
pick the same color, they each receive the associated utility
points. If they miscoordinate, both receive 0 points. Without
knowing who you are playing with, what color would you
choose?

game where each player has two actions {0, 1}. If both players play the same action, player 1 wins, otherwise, player 2
wins.” This is oftentimes leveraged in games where we design the outcome and reward structures, such as in social
choice (Brandt et al. 2015) and mechanism design (Moulin
2004) via anonymity, neutrality, and fairness axioms.
Indeed, notions of fairness have been connected to the
premise that any participant of the game might be assigned
to any player identity in the game, which creates a symmetry across participants (Gale, Kuhn, and Tucker 1952). For
the sake of fairness, one would then like the player identities to be equally strong (cf. the Matching Pennies game,
and the “veil of ignorance” philosophy (Rawls 1971)). Ham
(2021), and references therein, give a formal treatment of
this in terms of game symmetries.
This symmetry idea that any participant (AIs, humans,
etc.) might take on any player identity in the game (e.g.,
black versus white in chess) also reappears when reasoning about other agents of which we do not have a prior:
since the beginnings of machine learning, it has been popular to learn good strategies in self-play (Samuel 1959), that
is, to assume that other players would use the same strategy as oneself. Self-play continues to be a core contributor
to AIs that can learn with no or limited access to human
data, and reach super-human performance in domains such

Introduction

In AI and decision making, we appreciate the presence of
symmetries, and they are of utmost importance in game theory and multiagent systems. For one, central concepts such
as cooperation, conflict, and coordination are usually presented most simply on totally symmetric games1 , such as
the Prisoner’s Dilemma, Chicken, and Stag Hunt. The classic and performant Lemke-Howson algorithm for finding
Nash equilibria is frequently (and without loss of generality) presented for totally symmetric games (Nisan et al.
2007)[Section 2.3] for the sake of clarity. Furthermore, we
may find that interactions with symmetries can be described
more concisely in comparison to enumerating the full outcome payoff functions: “Matching Pennies is a two-player
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
To be defined later; informally, games in which players have
the same strategy options and take on the same “role” in the game.

14148

