The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Few-Shot Neural Architecture Search
by Counting the Number of Nonlinear Functions
Youngmin Oh1 , Hyunju Lee1 , and Bumsub Ham1,2 *
1

Yonsei University
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{youngmin.oh, hyunjulee, bumsub.ham}@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Search space

Abstract

Splitting Time

Neural architecture search (NAS) enables finding the bestperforming architecture from a search space automatically.
Most NAS methods exploit an over-parameterized network
(i.e., a supernet) containing all possible architectures (i.e.,
subnets) in the search space. However, the subnets that share
the same set of parameters are likely to have different characteristics, interfering with each other during training. To address this, few-shot NAS methods have been proposed that
divide the space into a few subspaces and employ a separate
supernet for each subspace to limit the extent of weight sharing. They achieve state-of-the-art performance, but the computational cost increases accordingly. We introduce in this paper a novel few-shot NAS method that exploits the number of
nonlinear functions to split the search space. To be specific,
our method divides the space such that each subspace consists
of subnets with the same number of nonlinear functions. Our
splitting criterion is efficient, since it does not require comparing gradients of a supernet to split the space. In addition,
we have found that dividing the space allows us to reduce
the channel dimensions required for each supernet, which
enables training multiple supernets in an efficient manner.
We also introduce a supernet-balanced sampling (SBS) technique, sampling several subnets at each training step, to train
different supernets evenly within a limited number of training
steps. Extensive experiments on standard NAS benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Figure 1: Illustration of search space splitting strategies. Individual supernets are highlighted in different colors. Subnets with similar characteristics are Method
marked by the same
shape. Left: FS-NAS (Zhao et al. 2021) splits the space randomly. Although the random splitting strategy is efficient,
each supernet could contain subnets that are likely to conflict
with each other. Middle: GM-NAS (Hu et al. 2022) compares gradients of a supernet to split the space, better grouping subnets. This however incurs a lot of computational cost.
Right: We propose to count the number of nonlinear functions within a subnet such that each subspace contains subnets with the same number of nonlinear functions only. Our
splitting criterion incurs negligible overheads, while separating the space effectively. Best viewed in color.

Code — https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/EFS-NAS
this problem, one-shot NAS approaches (Liu, Simonyan,
and Yang 2019; Guo et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Chu, Zhang,
and Xu 2021; Cai, Zhu, and Han 2019) adopt a weightsharing technique (Pham et al. 2018), where they train a
single supernet that consists of all possible network architectures (i.e., subnets) in a given search space. The trained
supernet can act as a performance estimator for various subnets, sampled from the supernet, indicating that each subnet
does not need to be trained from scratch to predict its performance. Although one-shot NAS methods are efficient, they
are limited in that the performance of the subnet estimated
from the supernet is less correlated with the one obtained
from training the subnet from scratch. The major reason is
that the parameters of the supernet suffer from conflicts between subnets during training. To address this problem, fewshot NAS methods (Zhao et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2022; Su et al.
2021) propose to exploit multiple supernets. They typically

Introduction
Manually designing network architectures is a laborintensive and time-consuming process. Neural architecture
search (NAS) helps to automate the designing process, and
provides optimal network architectures for various hardware
configurations (e.g., FLOPs). Early NAS methods (Zoph
et al. 2018; Baker et al. 2017; Zoph and Le 2017) adopt
reinforcement learning (Williams 1992) with policy networks (i.e., controllers), which requires training deep neural networks from scratch, taking lots of computational
costs (e.g., typically thousands of GPU hours). To overcome
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19740

