The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SLACE: A Monotone and Balance-Sensitive Loss Function for Ordinal Regression
Inbar Nachmani1 , Bar Genossar1 , Coral Scharf1 , Roee Shraga2 , Avigdor Gal1
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
2
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
{inbar.nac, sbargen, coralscharf}@campus.technion.ac.il, rshraga@wpi.edu, avigal@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Ordinal regression classifies an object to a class out of a
given set of possible classes, where labels possess a natural order. It is relevant to a wide array of domains including
risk assessment, sentiment analysis, image ranking, and recommender systems. Like common classification, the primary
goal of ordinal regression is accuracy. Yet, in this context,
the severity of prediction errors varies, e.g., in risk assessment, Critical Risk is more urgent than High risk and significantly more urgent than No risk. This leads to a modified
objective of ensuring that the model’s output is as close as
possible to the correct class, considering the order of labels.
Therefore, ordinal regression models should use ordinalityaware loss for training. In this work, we focus on two properties of ordinality-aware losses, namely monotonicity and balance sensitivity. We show that existing ordinal loss functions
lack these properties and introduce SLACE (Soft Labels Accumulating Cross Entropy), a novel loss function that provably satisfies said properties. We demonstrate empirically that
SLACE outperforms the state-of-the-art ordinal loss functions on most tabular ordinal regression benchmarks.

Figure 1: Child maltreatment classification system example.

by itself may not suffice, and the severity of diverging from
the correct answer may depend on where divergence occurs
on the ordinal scale.
As an illustrative example, consider a child maltreatment
classification system, assessing children’s risk at home on a
five-scale classification of No risk (1), Low risk (2), Moderate risk (3), High risk (4) and Critical risk (5). For this setup,
it is clear that a Critical risk is more urgent than High risk
and significantly more urgent than No risk and associated
classes confirm that. Figure 1 shows a possible classifier output as softmax probability, where Moderate risk is the true
class. While classifiers mostly care about the argmax result,
ordinal regression is also affected by the distribution around
the chosen class. In this case, classes 2 and 4, which are
closer to class 3, have a higher probability than 1 and 5.
In recent years, numerous works dealt with ordinal regression (Diaz and Marathe 2019; Castagnos, Mihelich, and
Dognin 2022; Albuquerque, Cruz, and Cardoso 2021; Kasa
et al. 2024), typically assuming a constant distance between
classes, which may not accurately reflect real-world scenarios. For instance, in the child mistreatment example, Moderate risk may be closer to Low risk in terms of informational content compared to No risk is to Low risk. Consequently, misclassifying an assessment as Moderate risk
rather than Low risk may be less acute than misclassifying it as No risk, which may result in dropping a child’s
case altogether. Referring to Figure 1, since Moderate risk
is the true class, a distribution with higher probability as-

Code, Datasets, Extended version —
https://github.com/inbarnachmani/SLACE

Introduction
Ordinal regression (also known as ordinal classification (Gutiérrez et al. 2015)) classifies an object to a class
out of a given set of possible classes, where labels possess
a natural order. It is of interest in the research community at
large, with applications in risk assessment (Alicioglu, Sun,
and Ho 2020), sentiment analysis (Saad and Yang 2019), image ranking (Liu et al. 2011), and closely related fields such
as recommender systems (Koren and Sill 2011).
Ordinal regression can be positioned as a classification
problem, yet it differs from multi-class classification. In particular, the distance between the model answer and the correct answer matters. It also differs from ranking since we
care about concrete class assignments. In addition, while the
distance between answers matters, ordinal regression differs
from value prediction (regression) since the class is taken
from a fixed and discrete set of classes. Specifically, distance
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19598

