The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Alignment of CNN and Human Judgments of Geometric and Topological Concepts
Neha Upadhyay1 , Vijay Marupudi1 , Kamala Varma2 , Sashank Varma1
1

2

Georgia Institute of Technology
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract

convexity, rotation, and translation (Chiandetti and Vallortigara 2008; Hung et al. 2005; Pasupathy and Connor 1999).
A dominant view is that many GT concepts are “intuitive”
and that learning plays a minor role in human sensitivity
to them (although this sensitivity may come online at different times during development). These can be seen as a
modern version of the classical argument from Plato’s dialogue, Meno, which states that humans do not “learn” GT
concepts through experience and instruction, but rather already “know” them, and must merely “recollect” them (Hohol 2019).
Here, we evaluate an opposing view: that many GT concepts are learned through visual experience in the world. We
do so by asking if convolutional neural network (CNN) models of computer vision learn human-like sensitivity to GT
concepts. If they do, then it is more parsimonious to assume
that this sensitivity is acquired through visual experience in
the world rather than to posit that people possess core knowledge of these concepts (Spelke and Kinzler 2007).
CNNs are typically trained on large datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). Given a new image (e.g., of a
robin), they can learn to classify what is depicted (e.g., as a
bird or a robin). The process of training a CNN to perform
image classification differs from how humans and other animals develop vision. And yet, there are surprising correspondences between the solutions offered by CNNs and the
human visual system. For example, CNNs show typicality
gradients similar to those of humans when categorizing exemplars, e.g., finding that robins are “better” examples of the
bird category than penguins (Battleday, Peterson, and Griffiths 2020; Vemuri, Shah, and Varma 2024). To take an example from mathematical cognition, CNNs are sensitive to
the numerosity (i.e., number of items) of an image. Their
latent representations are consistent with the “mental number line” documented in humans (Nasr, Viswanathan, and
Nieder 2019; Upadhyay and Varma 2023). At the neural
level, the layers of CNNs can be mapped to areas of the ventral visual stream. Patterns of activation on these layers are
correlated with activation levels in these areas as measured
by fMRI when CNNs and people process the same image
(Kriegeskorte 2015; Yamins and DiCarlo 2016).
Here, we explore whether the intuitiveness of GT concepts for humans is less a matter of “core knowledge” and
more accurately explained as a consequence of learning

AI and ML are poised to provide new insights into mathematical cognition and development. Here, we focus on the
domains of geometry and topology (GT). According to one
prominent developmental perspective, infants possess core
knowledge of GT concepts, presumably underwritten by dedicated neural circuitry. We use the alignment between human
cognition and computer vision models to evaluate an alternate
proposal: that these concepts are learned “for free” through
experience with the visual world. Specifically, we measure
the sensitivity of five convolutional neural network (CNN)
models to 43 GT concepts that aggregate into seven classes.
We focus on CNNs over other architectures (e.g., vision transformers) because their neural plausibility has been established through studies mapping their layers to areas of the
brain’s ventral visual stream. We find evidence that the CNNs
are sensitive to some classes (e.g., Euclidean Geometry) but
not others (e.g., Geometric Transformations). The models’
sensitivity is generally lower at lower layers and maximal
at the final fully-connected layer. Experiments with models
from the ResNet family show that increasing model depth
does not necessarily increase sensitivity to GT concepts. The
models’ profiles of sensitivity to the seven classes roughly
align with the profile shown by humans, with ResNet-18 corresponding best to Western adults and DenseNet to Western children ages 3 – 6 years. This case study shows how
CNNs can provide evidence for the learnability of mathematical concepts and thus inform theoretical debates in cognitive
and developmental science. These findings set the stage for
future experiments with other vision model architectures.

Introduction
Humans and many other animals are sensitive to geometric and topological (GT) concepts. This may be because
the environment has spatial structure (Gibson 1979; Shepard 2001) and navigating this structure is important for survival (Vallortigara 2017). Thus, evolutionary processes may
have ensured that understanding of GT concepts is part of
infants’ “core knowledge” (Spelke and Kinzler 2007). Cognitive science research has investigated understanding of
GT concepts in human adults and children, non-human primates, and other animals. These studies have found evidence
of sensitivity to shape (e.g., quadrilateral vs. circle), angle,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1556

