The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Subgraph Aggregation for Out-of-Distribution Generalization on Graphs
Bowen Liu 1,2 , Haoyang Li 3 , Shuning Wang 2 , Shuo Nie 2 , Shanghang Zhang 1 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University
2021211039@stu.hit.edu.cn, hal4032@med.cornell.edu, shuw65218@gmail.com, 2021211040@stu.hit.edu.cn,
shanghang@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization in Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) has gained significant attention due to its
critical importance in graph-based predictions in real-world
scenarios. Existing methods primarily focus on extracting a
single causal subgraph from the input graph to achieve generalizable predictions. However, relying on a single subgraph can
lead to susceptibility to spurious correlations and is insufficient
for learning invariant patterns behind graph data. Moreover,
in many real-world applications, such as molecular property
prediction, multiple critical subgraphs may influence the target label property. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel framework, SubGraph Aggregation (SuGAr), designed
to learn a diverse set of subgraphs that are crucial for OOD generalization on graphs. Specifically, SuGAr employs a tailored
subgraph sampler and diversity regularizer to extract a diverse
set of invariant subgraphs. These invariant subgraphs are then
aggregated by averaging their representations, which enriches
the subgraph signals and enhances coverage of the underlying
causal structures, thereby improving OOD generalization. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate that SuGAr outperforms state-of-the-art methods,
achieving up to a 24% improvement in OOD generalization on
graphs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
study graph OOD generalization by learning multiple invariant
subgraphs.

Figure 1: The molecule graph, Aspirin, contains two functional groups: -COOH (denoted with blue lines) and -COO(denoted with red lines). If model can only capture one functional group as the invariant subgraph, either -COOH or COO-, which will lead to suboptimal OOD generalization
ability. However, SuGAr can capture all such functional
groups in Aspirin molecule graph for promising performance.

Introduction
Graph representation learning with graph neural networks
(GNNs) has achieved significant success in addressing a variety of tasks involving structural data. However, most existing approaches operate under the in-distribution assumption,
which posits that the training and testing graphs are sampled
from the same distribution. This assumption is often unrealistic and frequently violated in many real-world scenarios.
Consequently, GNN models often exhibit a marked decline
in performance when confronted with shifts in graph distributions. Addressing the challenge of Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) generalization in such cases is therefore both urgent
and critical.
To mitigate the failure of OOD generalization, there has been
a growing interest in incorporating the invariance principle
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18763

from causality into GNNs (Peters, Bühlmann, and Meinshausen 2015; Chen et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2022; Li et al.
2022a; Wu et al. 2022b; Miao, Liu, and Li 2022a). The core
idea of these graph invariant learning approaches is to identify the invariant subgraph within the input graph, which
establishes an invariant relation with target labels across various graph distributions from different environments (Peters,
Bühlmann, and Meinshausen 2015). Despite their success, a
significant limitation of these methods is their focus on learning only a single causal subgraph, while in practical applications, multiple causal subgraphs widely exist. For instance,
the activity of the molecule Aspirin (C9H8O4) is determined
by both the carboxyl (-COOH) and ester (-COO-) functional
groups. Concentrating solely on a single subgraph will inevitably result in the model capturing spurious subgraphs
due to the expressivity of GNNs. This limitation underscores
the necessity of learning multiple diverse causal subgraphs
within the input graph. Therefore, the challenge remains: how
to effectively capture multiple subgraphs to make OOD generalized predictions?
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework,

