The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TPCH: Tensor-interacted Projection and Cooperative Hashing for
Multi-view Clustering
Zhongwen Wang1 , Xingfeng Li1 * , Yinghui Sun2† , Quansen Sun1 ,
Yuan Sun3 , Han Ling1 , Jian Dai4 , Zhenwen Ren5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
4
Southwest Automation Research Institute, China South Industries Group Corporation
5
School of National Defence Science and Technology, Southwest University of Science and Technology
jankinwang@njust.edu.cn, lixingfeng@njust.edu.cn, sunyh@seu.edu.cn, sunquansen@njust.edu.cn, sunyuan work@163.com,
321106010190@njust.edu.cn, daijian1000@163.com, rzw@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

such as multi-view classification (Liu et al. 2024a; Han
et al. 2022), multi-view feature aggregation (Hu et al. 2024b;
Yang et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2024a), incomplete multi-view
clustering (Wen et al. 2023a,b) and so on. Among them,
Multi-View Clustering (MVC) is an unsupervised method in
multi-view learning (Li et al. 2023, 2024c,b). Compared to
supervised methods, multi-view clustering does not require
data to be labeled in advance, making it more efficient in
explosive data growth. In practical applications, multi-view
clustering has been widely used in computer vision, natural language processing, medical image analysis, and other
fields (Fang et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2023c; Zhang et al. 2021).
In the context of large-scale data, multi-view clustering faces
challenges in computation and storage, known as the problem of Large-scale Multi-view Clustering (IMVC).

In recent years, anchor and hash-based multi-view clustering
methods have gained attention for their efficiency and simplicity in handling large-scale data. However, existing methods often overlook the interactions among multi-view data
and higher-order cooperative relationships during projection,
negatively impacting the quality of hash representation in
low-dimensional spaces, clustering performance, and sensitivity to noise. To address this issue, we propose a novel
approach named Tensor-Interacted Projection and Cooperative Hashing for Multi-View Clustering(TPCH). TPCH stacks
multiple projection matrices into a tensor, taking into account the synergies and communications during the projection process. By capturing higher-order multi-view information through dual projection and Hamming space, TPCH
employs an enhanced tensor nuclear norm to learn more
compact and distinguishable hash representations, promoting
communication within and between views. Experimental results demonstrate that this refined method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in clustering on five largescale multi-view datasets. Moreover, in terms of CPU time,
TPCH achieves substantial acceleration compared to the most
advanced current methods.

To solve the problem of large-scale multi-view clustering,
early attempts involve reducing the number of matrix multiplications by seeking approximations of multi-view data
matrices, thus reducing computational overhead (Wang et al.
2011; Zhang and Lu 2016). In recent years, the method of selecting or generating a representative set of data from multiview data, known as ”anchors,” has been widely adopted
(Nie et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2024b; Wang et al. 2022a; Zhang,
Nie, and Li 2023). This approach significantly reduces computational complexity and memory requirements by selecting a small subset of anchor points to represent the entire
dataset. Moreover, anchor-based methods establish bridges
between different views through these anchor points, enhancing the exploration of consistent information between
views. In large-scale clustering tasks, traditional multi-view
learning methods that operate directly on the raw data incur
high computational and storage costs. The emergence of Binary Multi-View Clustering (BMVC) (Zhang et al. 2018b)
methods has alleviated this issue. BMVC maps data to a
low-dimensional binary Hamming space and performs clustering analysis in this lower-dimensional space, accelerating
computational and storage efficiency in handling large-scale
multi-view data. Furthermore, existing hash-based methods
typically project multi-view data from the original space to
a shared Hamming representation space to enhance the ex-

Code — https://github.com/jankin-wang/TPCH

Introduction
In recent years, advanced information-gathering technologies allow us to obtain multi-view data from the same object,
enabling a more in-depth and comprehensive description of
the object (Lu et al. 2023a; Qin, Pu, and Wu 2024; Sun et al.
2023b; Wu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2024; Sun
et al. 2023a, 2024). For example, in the field of action recognition, different views such as RGB, optical flow, and skeletal data can be used to describe actions (Hu et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2022b). With the widespread application of multi-view
data, a series of multi-view learning tasks have emerged,
* Corresponding authors.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21420

