The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Graph Condensation with Information Bottleneck Principles
Bo Yan1,2 , Sihao He1 , Cheng Yang1 , Shang Liu3 , Yang Cao2 , Chuan Shi1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Institute of Science Tokyo
3
China University of Mining and Technology
{boyan, sihaohe, yangcheng, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, shang@cumt.edu.cn, cao@c.titech.ac.jp

Graph condensation (GC), which reduces the size of a largescale graph by synthesizing a small-scale condensed graph
as its substitution, has benefited various graph learning tasks.
However, existing GC methods rely on centralized data storage, which is unfeasible for real-world decentralized data distribution, and overlook data holders’ privacy-preserving requirements. To bridge this gap, we propose and study the
novel problem of federated graph condensation (FGC) for
graph neural networks (GNNs). Specifically, we first propose a general framework for FGC, where we decouple the
typical gradient matching process for GC into client-side
gradient calculation and server-side gradient matching, integrating knowledge from multiple clients’ subgraphs into one
smaller condensed graph. Nevertheless, our empirical studies
show that under the federated setting, the condensed graph
will consistently leak data membership privacy, i.e., the condensed graph during federated training can be utilized to steal
training data under the membership inference attack (MIA).
To tackle this issue, we innovatively incorporate information
bottleneck principles into the FGC, which only needs to extract partial node features in one local pre-training step and
utilize the features during federated training. Theoretical and
experimental analyses demonstrate that our framework consistently protects membership privacy during training. Meanwhile, it can achieve comparable and even superior performance against existing centralized GC and federated graph
learning (FGL) methods.

FGL
Global
model
GC

FGC

…

1

Server

Clients

Abstract

Condensed
graph
(a) Centralized GC

Condensed
graph
Cross-client
edges

(b) Federated GL and GC

Figure 1: The comparison between (a) centralized graph
condensation (GC), (b) federated graph learning (FGL) and
federated graph condensation (FGC).

et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2023; Liu, Bo, and
Shi 2024), as shown in Figure 1(a), which reduces largescale graphs into small ones but keeps the utility of original
graphs, facilitating the storage of graph data and computations of downstream tasks. As a typical technique of GC,
gradient matching (Jin et al. 2022b,a) forces the gradients of
GNN models trained on the original graph and condensed
graph to be the same, maintaining a comparable model performance, but largely reducing the graph size.
Despite significant progress in GC, existing works all hold
a basic assumption that the graph data is centrally stored. In
reality, the whole graph is divided into multiple subgraphs
held by different parties, as in healthcare systems, a hospital only possesses a subset of patients (nodes), their information (attributes), and interactions (links). Due to privacy concerns, data holders are unwilling to share their
data and many strict regulations such as GDPR (Voigt and
Von dem Bussche 2017) also forbid collecting data arbitrarily, which makes centralized GC unfeasible. Federated graph
learning (FGL) (Yao et al. 2023; Wan et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2021) has emerged in recent years to endow collaboratively training a global model without exposing local data,
as is shown in Figure 1(b). Typically, they are dedicated
to training a global model by exchanging encrypted information for recovering missing structures (e.g., cross-client
edges and neighbors). However, they still suffer from bur-

Introduction

Graph data, such as social networks and transportation networks, is ubiquitous in the real world. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been prevalent for modeling these
graphs and achieved remarkable success in recent years
(Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Kipf and Welling
2017; Velickovic et al. 2018). However, GNNs have struggled with real-world large-scale graphs due to memory
and computational overheads, which are further exacerbated
when the models need to be trained multiple times, e.g.,
neural architecture search (NAS) (Zhang et al. 2022) and
continual learning (Li and Hoiem 2016). A natural solution
from the data-centric view is graph condensation (GC) (Jin
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12990

