The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LiD-FL: Towards List-Decodable Federated Learning
Hong Liu1 , Liren Shan2 , Han Bao1 , Ronghui You3 * , Yuhao Yi1,4 * , Jiancheng Lv1
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
2
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
3
School of Statistics and Data Science, Nankai University
4
Institute of Clinical Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University
hong liu@stu.scu.edu.cn, lirenshan@ttic.edu, baohan1@stu.scu.edu.cn, yourh@nankai.edu.cn, yuhaoyi@scu.edu.cn,
lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn
Abstract

or lead it to collapse (Blanchard et al. 2017; Shejwalkar
and Houmansadr 2021; Baruch, Baruch, and Goldberg 2019;
Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2020; Fang et al. 2020).
To address Byzantine attacks, a number of Byzantinerobust FL algorithms have been proposed. These algorithms
usually leverage robust aggregation rules to filter out abnormal clients or control the influence of Byzantine clients to
acceptable level (Blanchard et al. 2017; Pillutla, Kakade,
and Harchaoui 2022a; Karimireddy, He, and Jaggi 2021;
El Mhamdi, Guerraoui, and Rouault 2018; Allouah et al.
2023; Yi et al. 2024; Luan et al. 2024). The proposed
Byzantine-robust FL algorithms are investigated from various perspectives, advancing both theoretical foundations
and practical frontiers of this theme. It has been shown
that previous solutions which use robust aggregators to train
a global model have a breaking point of 1/2 (Gupta and
Vaidya 2020; Yin et al. 2018; Allouah et al. 2023; Farhadkhani et al. 2022; Allouah et al. 2024b). When the honest
clients are less than one half, the robust aggregation rules
lose efficacy.
However, the assumption of an honest majority does not
necessarily hold under Sybil attacks, in which the attacker
creates massive pseudonymous identities. Therefore it is important to consider adversarial scenarios where over half of
the clients are malicious. Prior work considering more than
half malicious clients includes the FLTrust algorithm (Cao
et al. 2021) and the RDGD algorithm (Zhao and Wan 2024),
which resort to a small verified dataset on the server to push
the breaking point over 1/2. However, such assumption is
unavailable for privacy sensitive federated learning scenarios. Additionally, the performance of the global model significantly relies on the availability of an adequately representative validation set on the server, which can be challenging to gather.
In this paper, we propose a list-decodable federated
learning framework, LiD-FL. Conventional robust federated learning algorithms often rely on resilient aggregation
rules to defend the learning process and optimize a single
global model iteratively. Unlike previous Byzantine-robust
FL schemes, LiD-FL preserves a list of global models and
optimizes them concurrently. In each global round, LiDFL randomly samples a global model from the list, which
promises a constant probability of obtaining the valid model
in the list. Further, the server attains a model update from the

Federated learning is often used in environments with many
unverified participants. Therefore, federated learning under
adversarial attacks receives significant attention. This paper
proposes an algorithmic framework for list-decodable federated learning, where a central server maintains a list of models, with at least one guaranteed to perform well. The framework has no strict restriction on the fraction of honest clients,
extending the applicability of Byzantine federated learning to
the scenario with more than half adversaries. Assuming the
variance of gradient noise in stochastic gradient descent is
bounded, we prove a convergence theorem of our method for
strongly convex and smooth losses. Experimental results, including image classification tasks with both convex and nonconvex losses, demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can
withstand the malicious majority under various attacks.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has gained popularity in distributed
learning due to its nature of keeping the data decentralized
and private (Kairouz et al. 2021). With significant scalability, FL is applied to a number of large-scale distributed systems, such as finance and healthcare software (Yang et al.
2019; Nguyen et al. 2023). In a typical federated learning
setting, multiple devices (called clients) collaboratively train
a global model, each of which preserves a chunk of the training data. FL employs a central server (also called parameter server), which holds no data, to optimize the global
model iteratively by aggregating local model updates from
clients (McMahan et al. 2017; Bonawitz et al. 2019).
Although the federated learning paradigm improves privacy and the overall training efficiency, its training procedure is prone to malicious attacks (Karimireddy, He, and
Jaggi 2022; Farhadkhani et al. 2024). Byzantine clients
refers to arbitrarily behaving faulty clients except for changing the identities and behaviors of other clients. A variety of
instantiations of the Byzantine attack model are designed,
with the goal of preventing the model from converging or
creating a backdoor to the system (Bagdasaryan et al. 2020;
Shejwalkar et al. 2022). Previous study has shown that welldesigned Byzantine attacks could degrade the global model
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18825

