The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking U-Net: Task-Adaptive Mixture of Skip Connections for Enhanced
Medical Image Segmentation
Zichen Luo, Xinshan Zhu * , Lan Zhang, Biao Sun *
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
luozichen 01@tju.edu.cn, xszhu@tju.edu.cn, zl2022@tju.edu.cn, sunbiao@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

C-Transformer

U-Net is a widely used model for medical image segmentation, renowned for its strong feature extraction capabilities
and U-shaped design, which incorporates skip connections to
preserve critical information. However, its decoders exhibit
information-specific preferences for the supplementary content provided by skip connections, instead of adhering to a
strict one-to-one correspondence, which limits its flexibility
across diverse tasks. To address this limitation, we propose
the Task-Adaptive Mixture of Skip Connections (TA-MoSC)
module, inspired by the Mixture of Experts (MoE) framework. TA-MoSC innovatively reinterprets skip connections
as a task allocation problem, employing a routing mechanism
to adaptively select expert combinations at different decoding
stages. By introducing MoE, our approach enhances the sparsity of the model, and lightweight convolutional experts are
shared across all skip connection stages, with a Balanced Expert Utilization (BEU) strategy ensuring that all experts are
effectively trained, maintaining training balance and preserving computational efficiency. Our approach introduces minimal additional parameters to the original U-Net but significantly enhances its performance and stability. Experiments on
GlaS, MoNuSeg, Synapse, and ISIC16 datasets demonstrate
state-of-the-art accuracy and better generalization across diverse tasks. Moreover, while this work focuses on medical
image segmentation, the proposed method can be seamlessly
extended to other segmentation tasks, offering a flexible and
efficient solution for diverse applications.

S-Transformer
CNN
ResPath
(a) Origin

(b) Dense

(c) Residual

(d) Space-wise

(e) Channel-wise

(f) CNN

(g) Sparse MoE

Figure 1: Different types of skip connections and the sparse
skip connection we proposed.

widely adopted architectures due to its robust feature extraction capabilities and U-shaped structure. More and more
variants(Peng, Sonka, and Chen 2023; Yu et al. 2023; Zhu
et al. 2024) were developed. The skip connections in UNet help recover spatial information lost during pooling operations. However, they fail to address the semantic gap
between encoder and decoder, which becomes more pronounced with diverse datasets (Wang et al. 2022b). Different
medical imaging tasks often require varying levels of semantic feature focus, which the simple skip connection mechanism in the original U-Net may fail to address adequately,
leading to performance limitations. As a result, the direct
transfer of features between the encoder and decoder without considering these differences can exacerbate the semantic gap, ultimately limiting the model’s performance. Recent
advancements in medical image segmentation have sought
to overcome these limitations by refining the skip connection
strategy to better align the semantic information between
the encoder and decoder stages. For instance, UNet++(Zhou
et al. 2018) employs nested and dense skip pathways to mitigate the semantic gap, but this comes at the cost of increased architectural complexity. Other approaches incorporate attention mechanisms(Oktay et al. 2018) or replace
convolutional operations with transformers (Vaswani 2017;
Chen et al. 2021; Zhang, Liu, and Hu 2021; Zheng et al.

Code — https://github.com/AshleyLuo001/UTANet

Introduction
Medical image segmentation is essential for analyzing and
interpreting medical data, aiding healthcare professionals in
diagnosing diseases, formulating treatment strategies, and
tracking disease progression. Over the years, numerous segmentation models have been developed, such as convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are tailored for volumetric tasks, and Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) address specific challenges
through multi-scale and skip connections. With U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) being one of the most
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5874

