The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Compress to One Point: Neural Collapse for
Pre-Trained Model-Based Class-Incremental Learning
Kun Wei, Zhe Xu, Cheng Deng*
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
{weikunsk, zhexu.xd, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

New
Classes

Abstract
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) requires an artificial intelligence system to learn different tasks without class overlaps
continually. To achieve CIL, some methods introduce the PreTrained Model (PTM) and leverage the generalized feature
representation of PTM to learn downstream incremental tasks
continually. However, the generalized feature representations
of PTM are not adaptive and discriminative for these various
incremental classes, which may be out of distribution for the
pre-trained dataset. In addition, since the incremental classes
cannot be learned at once, the class relationship cannot be
constructed optimally, leading to undiscriminating feature representation for understream tasks. Thus, we propose a novel
Pre-Trained Model-based Class-Incremental Learning (PTMCIL) method to explore the potential of PTM and obtain optimal class relationships. Inspired by Neural Collapse theory, we
introduce the frozen Equiangular Tight Frame classifier to construct optimal classifier structure for all seen classes, guiding
the feature representation adaptation for downstream continual tasks. Specifically, Task-Related Adaptation is proposed to
modulate the generalized feature representation to bridge the
gap between the pre-trained dataset and various downstream
datasets. Then, the Feature Compression Module is introduced
to compress various features to the specific classifier weights,
constructing the feature transfer pattern and satisfying the
characteristic of Neural Collapse. Optimal Structural Alignment is designed to supervise the feature compression process,
assisting in achieving optimal class relationships across different tasks. Sufficient experiments on seven datasets prove the
effectiveness of our method.

Base Step

Step 1
（a）Prior methods

Base Step

New
Classes

Step 1

（b）Our method

Figure 1: A sketch comparison between prior methods and
our method. Since the classes of different steps cannot be
learned simultaneously and the objective function may be unsuitable, the classifier structure is not optimal for all seen
classes. Our method assigns the optimal classifier structure before the model optimization and freezes the classifier
weight, guiding the feature representation adaptation.

Introduction
The complex streaming data (Guo et al. 2024)(Tao et al.
2021) in real-world situations requires artificial intelligence
systems (Tao et al. 2022) to update themselves to continually
adapt to novel tasks (Chen et al. 2021)(Dong et al. 2022)(Wei
et al. 2022). Since the change of model parameters in the
adaptation process, feature representation shifts will appear
in the different incremental tasks and lead to the performance
drop for previous tasks. In the incremental steps, the feature
representation of the same data changes seriously, which
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21465

is denoted as Catastrophic Forgetting (Robins 1995)(McCloskey and Cohen 1989) and limits artificial intelligence
systems applied to real-world situations. Thus, Incremental
Learning (Dong et al. 2024)(Kirkpatrick et al. 2017)(Wei
et al. 2020) is a learning pattern to continually learn novel
tasks without retraining previous tasks, improving model efficiency and performance. Benefitting from the generalization
ability of Pre-Trained Models (PTM) trained on large-scale
datasets, class-incremental learning methods can leverage
the generalized feature representation to adapt to incremental
tasks (Chen et al. 2022)(Wei et al. 2024)(Wang et al. 2022a),
avoiding feature shifts and obtaining impressive performance
compared with traditional class-incremental methods (Wei
et al. 2021b)(Yan, Xie, and He 2021).
However, the generalized feature representation of PTM
is indiscriminative for these continual downstream tasks,
limiting incremental performance. Many PTM-CIL methods (Wang et al. 2022c)(Wang et al. 2022b) adapt the generalized feature representation to streaming out-of-distribution

