The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contextual Structure Knowledge Transfer for Graph Neural Networks
Zhiyuan Yu1 , Wenzhong Li1 * , Zhangyue Yin2 , Xiaobin Hong1 , Shijian Xiao1 , Sanglu Lu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{zhiyuan yu, xiaobinhong, xiaoshijian}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {yinzy21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {lwz, sanglu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph transfer learning endeavors to develop a Graph Neural Network (GNN) model in a fully-labeled source domain,
with the intention of deploying it on a target domain that
has limited labeled data for inference. We reveal that prevalent graph transfer learning methods are susceptible to the
homophily shift problem. This issue arises from the divergence in homophily structures between the source and target
graphs, leading to a notable deterioration in the performance
of GNN models. In this paper, we introduce a novel Contextual Structural Graph Neural Network (CS-GNN) method,
leveraging a tailored attention mechanism to apprehend a variety of local structural cues, facilitating structural knowledge
transfer across domains. It features an ego-network module
to distill local structural diversity and a moment-based approach to gauge structural patterns without needing groundtruth labels. CS-GNN crafts a feature smoothness matrix
from node attributes, guiding a customized attention mechanism for feature aggregation. A group-wise fairness loss is
employed to balance learning across various structural patterns, enhancing the model’s ability to transfer knowledge
across domains. Comprehensive experiments conducted on
six benchmark datasets substantiate the superiority of CSGNN over the state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating significant improvements in accuracy and robustness against homophily shifts.

Figure 1: Performance of graph transfer learning methods
with varying homophily discrepency on the Citation (left)
and Social (right) dataset, where different levels of homophily discrepency were generated by adding 0, 5%, 10%,
15%, 20% of heterophilous edges on the source graph accordingly.

Domains

Citation
A&D

Social
B1&B2

WebKB
C&T

U&B

Airport
U&E

B&E

Homo Diff

0.2814

0.0533

0.1957

0.3076

0.1994

0.2833

Table 1: The homophily discrepancy of different real-world
datasets.

be leveraged to predict the functionalities of proteins in a
new target network. While standard transfer learning for
image or text data often focuses on minimizing distribution discrepancies across domains, graph-structured datasets
present a more complex challenge due to the additional distribution shift over their intricate structures.
Recent researches have sought to enhance the applicability of GNNs in transfer learning. For example, DANE
(Zhang et al. 2019b) applies adversarial training of domain classifiers based on the last-layer node representations.
UDAGCN (Wu et al. 2020) further imposes inter-graph attention mechanisms on top of adversarial training. EGI (Zhu
et al. 2021) adopts Ego-Graph Information Maximization
tactics to align structural information and node embeddings.
GRADE (Wu, He, and Ainsworth 2023) proposes optimizing Graph Subtree Discrepancy inspired by the WeisfeilerLehman Subtree Kernel. However, these works either neglect the unique characteristics of graph-structured datasets
or focus solely on the topological discrepancies. Recent approaches like SpecReg (You et al. 2023) and StruRW (Liu

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Keriven and Peyré 2019; Wu et al. 2021; Hong et al.
2021a) have become prominent in the field of graph machine learning due to their ability to transform unstructured
data into low-dimensional representations by capturing both
node features and topological dependencies. However, many
GNN methods struggle with sparse label scenarios, limiting their effectiveness in real-world datasets where obtaining labels is challenging or impractical. To address this,
graph transfer learning has emerged as a promising solution, which involves transferring knowledge from a relevant
source graph to a target graph (Tan et al. 2018; Zhuang et al.
2019). For example, in protein-protein interaction networks,
abundant functional information from a source network can
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22263

