The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Nuance Matters: Probing Epistemic Consistency in Causal Reasoning
Shaobo Cui1 , Junyou Li2 , Luca Mouchel1 , Yiyang Feng1 , Boi Faltings1
1

EPFL, Switzerland
University of Waterloo, Canada
shaobo.cui@epfl.ch, j2626li@uwaterloo.ca, luca.mouchel@epfl.ch, yiyang.feng@epfl.ch, boi.faltings@epfl.ch
2

Abstract
Previous research on causal reasoning often overlooks the
subtleties crucial to understanding causal reasoning. To address this gap, our study introduces the concept of causal
epistemic consistency, which focuses on the self-consistency
of Large Language Models (LLMs) in differentiating intermediates with nuanced differences in causal reasoning. We
propose a suite of novel metrics – intensity ranking concordance, cross-group position agreement, and intra-group clustering – to evaluate LLMs on this front. Through extensive
empirical studies on 21 high-profile LLMs, including GPT4, Claude3, and LLaMA3-70B, we have favoring evidence
that current models struggle to maintain epistemic consistency in identifying the polarity and intensity of intermediates in causal reasoning. Additionally, we explore the potential of using internal token probabilities as an auxiliary tool
to maintain causal epistemic consistency. In summary, our
study bridges a critical gap in AI research by investigating
the self-consistency over fine-grained intermediates involved
in causal reasoning.

Intermediates

Widening income disparity
within and between nations.

For a cause-effect pair, LLMs are required to write fine-grained
intermediates, including:

Supporters :
Defeaters

:

For these intermediates, can LLMs maintain self-consistency
in discerning:
1

Intensity

2

Polarity

3

Clustering

Figure 1: Overview of the evaluation framework for causal
epistemic consistency. The first step involves instructing
LLMs to generate fine-grained intermediates that influence
a given causal relationship differently. The second step requires LLMs to rank their own generations based on their
causal nuance. Finally, the proposed metrics are used to assess the self-consistency between ranking and generation,
i.e., the LLMs’ causal epistemic consistency.

Code — https://github.com/cui-shaobo/causal-consistency
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.00103

1

Effect

Cause
Increasingly close global
economic integration.

Introduction

of LLMs’ perception of the intermediates. We posit that if
LLMs can correctly differentiate their generated intermediates based on varying polarities and intensities, these intermediates are self-consistent and thus, more reliable for making predictions and decisions. Drawing from this insight,
our study proposes the concept of “causal epistemic consistency”:

Previous studies in causal reasoning have primarily focused
on discovering or determining the existence of a causal relationship between two variables (Roemmele, Bejan, and Gordon 2011; Cui et al. 2024b). However, these causal relationships are not always absolute. They can be heavily influenced by additional intermediate factors, which may vary in
both polarity and intensity (Fitzgerald and Howcroft 1998;
Bauman et al. 2002). The polarity of these intermediates indicates whether they support or defeat (oppose) the original causal relationship, while their intensity determines the
strength of this supporting or defeating influence.
Forming fine-grained differentiation is essential for precise causal modeling (Iwasaki and Simon 1994); however,
it is insufficient for LLMs to merely generate these intermediates. It is as equally important to ensure that these intermediates are reliable and credible (Shi et al. 2023). One
method to verify this is through assessing the consistency

Definition 1 (Causal epistemic consistency) Causal epistemic consistency refers to an LLM’s ability to maintain selfconsistency in differentiating its generated intermediates in
three aspects: (i) discerning intensity: accurately assessing
the intensity nuance in their causal impact. (ii) differentiating polarity: effectively distinguishing between supporting
and defeating intermediates, and (iii) forming cohesive clusters: creating well-separated clusters of intermediates based
on their polarity and intensity.
To quantify LLMs’ ability to maintain causal epistemic
consistency in the aforementioned aspects, we introduce
a suite of novel metrics. These metrics include (i) Inten-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
23715

