The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Global Attribute-Association Pattern Aggregation for Graph Fraud Detection
Mingjiang Duan1,2 , Da He1,4 , Tongya Zheng3,1 ,
Lingxiang Jia1,4 , Mingli Song1,4 , Xinyu Wang1,2 , Zunlei Feng1,4 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
Bangsheng Technology Co,Ltd.
3
Big Graph Center, Hangzhou City University
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{duanmj, zunleifeng}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Fraud is increasingly prevalent, and its patterns are frequently
changing, posing challenges for fraud detection methods
such as random forests and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
which rely on bin-based and mixture features separately.
The former may lose crucial graph-associated features, while
the latter face incorrect feature fusion. To overcome these
limitations, we propose an approach based on attributeassociation pattern that leverages the distinct attribute and
association patterns differentiating fraudulent from benign
behaviors, to enhance fraud detection capabilities. Attribute
features are adaptively split into separate bins to eliminate incorrect attribute fusion and combine association patterns through graph neighbor message passing, thereby deriving attribute-association pattern features. Using the learned
attribute-association patterns, the fraud patterns between a
single pattern and the patterns across the entire graph are
globally aggregated. Extensive experiments comparing our
approach with 24 methods on 7 datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves SOTA performance.

Age

Age

60

6

Age

2

33

(a) Attribute：Income Age
( c)

8

10

[0,0,1]

[1,0,0]

[1,0,1]

Low Mid High Youth Mid Old (b)

low-income kid

high-income elder

(d)

70 60
50 43
Mid Mid

High

Old

70 60

Figure 1: Attribute-pattern (top) and association-pattern
(down). (a) Adding normal attribute features leads to
erroneous feature values. (b) In contrast, utilizing the
attribute-pattern (single attribute features are represented in
a fragment-wise vector) preserves the correct meaning. For
two easily misled groups (“low-income kids” and “wealthy
elders”), (c) feature aggregation using normal attribute features results in inaccuracies ( “middle-income middle-aged
people”). Conversely, (d) when employing attribute-pattern
aggregation, accurate association patterns emerge (indicating that fraudsters tend to target “high-income elders”).

Code — https://github.com/AtwoodDuan/GAAP

Introduction
The widespread adoption of the Internet and electronic payments has led to a rise in fraudulent activities, resulting in
significant economic losses for society and businesses. In
fraud detection, data are often represented as graphs, with
nodes containing complex features such as age, gender, and
transaction history. The relationships among these attributes
are intricate and dynamic, which presents numerous challenges. Evolving patterns of fraudulent behavior make it difficult for traditional detection methods to address these dynamic scenarios effectively.
Extensive research has been conducted to address these
challenges in various domains such as social networks (Li
et al. 2023), mobile payments (Zheng et al. 2023), insurance
fraud (Zhang et al. 2024b), and e-commerce (Wang et al.
2023). Fraud detection methods can be broadly classified
into two categories: traditional machine learning approaches
and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).

Traditional machine learning methods, such as Random
Forest (Breiman 2001), effectively capture attribute feature
patterns and identify feature intervals. Despite their effectiveness, they overlook the associations between nodes in
graph-structured data, leading to suboptimal performance.
In contrast, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Defferrard,
Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al. 2018)
aggregate information from neighboring nodes to capture associative patterns within graph structures. However, when
processing attribute features, GNNs often conflate similar
and distinct types of attributes.
For example, averaging two ages (e.g. 60: older and 6:
child) leads to erroneous feature values (e.g. 33: middleaged). Furthermore, merging disparate attributes, such as
age and income, can result in nonsensical outcomes. This
mixing complicates the model’s ability to identify attribute

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11616

