The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoPEFT: Fast Adaptation Framework for Multi-Agent Collaborative Perception
with Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
Quanmin Wei1, 2 , Penglin Dai1, 2 * , Wei Li1, 2 , Bingyi Liu3 , Xiao Wu1, 2
1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University
Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education
3
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
wqm@my.swjtu.edu.cn, penglindai@swjtu.edu.cn, liwei@swjtu.edu.cn, byliu@whut.edu.cn, wuxiaohk@gmail.com
2

Abstract

&ROODERUDWLYH
3HUFHSWLRQ0RGHO
6SHFLILF.QRZOHGJH
(QYLURQPHQWDO.QRZOHGJH
$GDSWDWLRQ

'HSOR\PHQW 'DWD

0DFUROHYHO
$GDSWDWLRQ
0LFUROHYHO
$GDSWDWLRQ

$YH 
LPSURYHPHQW

*HQHUDO
.QRZOHGJH

,QFRQVLVWHQF\

7UDLQLQJ'DWD

&ROODERUDWLYH
3HUFHSWLRQ0RGHO

a
SDUDPHWHUV

7UDLQLQJ

Multi-agent collaborative perception is expected to significantly improve perception performance by overcoming the
limitations of single-agent perception through exchanging
complementary information. However, training a robust collaborative perception model requires collecting sufficient
training data that covers all possible collaboration scenarios, which is impractical due to intolerable deployment costs.
Hence, the trained model is not robust against new traffic scenarios with inconsistent data distribution and fundamentally restricts its real-world applicability. Further, existing methods, such as domain adaptation, have mitigated
this issue by exposing the deployment data during the training stage but incur a high training cost, which is infeasible for resource-constrained agents. In this paper, we propose a Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning-based lightweight
framework, CoPEFT, for fast adapting a trained collaborative perception model to new deployment environments
under low-cost conditions. CoPEFT develops a Collaboration Adapter and Agent Prompt to perform macro-level and
micro-level adaptations separately. Specifically, the Collaboration Adapter utilizes the inherent knowledge from training data and limited deployment data to adapt the feature
map to new data distribution. The Agent Prompt further enhances the Collaboration Adapter by inserting fine-grained
contextual information about the environment. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our CoPEFT surpasses existing
methods with less than 1% trainable parameters, proving the
effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed method.

Figure 1: Illustration of CoPEFT. We mitigate the impact of
inconsistent data distribution on collaborative perception by
dynamically combining general knowledge derived from the
training data with specific and environmental knowledge obtained from the deployment data. Here, general knowledge
encompasses the general patterns of collaborative perception, specific knowledge represents the disparities between
the new deployment and the training data, and environmental knowledge refers to fine-grained contextual information.
Consequently, CoPEFT can fast adapt a well-trained model
to various deployment environments at a low cost.

robot automation (Li et al. 2022), and UAV collaborative
rescue (Hu et al. 2023). The field of collaborative perception
is experiencing rapid growth, driven by the availability of
high-quality datasets (Xu et al. 2021b, 2022; Yu et al. 2022),
the evolution of powerful fusion methods (Chen et al. 2019;
Xu et al. 2021b), and the development of robust collaborative systems (Wei et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024a).
Most existing collaborative perceptions (Xu et al. 2021b;
Hu et al. 2024) rely on the assumption that the training and
deployment data follow the same distribution, but ensuring
this assumption is inherently challenging. In real-world deployment, the distribution inconsistency between the training and deployment data is a common occurrence (Yuan,
Xie, and Li 2023), such as unseen road topology during
training or different sensing patterns due to updated sensors,
which often result in performance degradation of the trained
collaborative perception model. The ineffective utilization
of popular adaptation methods from other fields, such as
transfer learning (Zhu et al. 2023), to address this dilemma
is compounded by the collaborative nature and sparsity of

Code — https://github.com/fengxueguiren/CoPEFT

Introduction
Collaborative perception allows agents to share complementary information through communication, thereby enhancing
a more comprehensive perception (Han et al. 2023). This
fundamentally becomes a new paradigm to overcome the
long-standing limitations of single-agent perception, such as
difficulties in distant and occluded perception (Ren, Chen,
and Zhang 2022). Recent studies have highlighted the potential of collaborative perception in various realistic applications, including autonomous driving (Wang et al. 2020),
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23351

