The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Logic Specifications for Policy Guidance in POMDPs: an Inductive
Logic Programming Approach
Daniele Meli, Alberto Castellini, Alessandro Farinelli
University of Verona

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Meli, Castellini, and Farinelli (2024).

Abstract
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
are a powerful framework for planning under uncertainty.
They allow to model state uncertainty as a belief probability distribution. Approximate solvers based on Monte
Carlo sampling show great success to relax the computational demand and perform online planning. However, scaling to complex realistic domains with many actions and
long planning horizons is still a major challenge, and a key
point to achieve good performance is guiding the actionselection process with domain-dependent policy heuristics
which are tailored for the specific application domain. We
propose to learn high-quality heuristics from POMDP traces
of executions generated by any solver. We convert the beliefaction pairs to a logical semantics, and exploit data- and
time-efficient Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) to generate interpretable belief-based policy specifications, which
are then used as online heuristics. We evaluate thoroughly
our methodology on two notoriously challenging POMDP
problems, involving large action spaces and long planning horizons, namely, rocksample and pocman. Considering different state-of-the-art online POMDP solvers, including POMCP, DESPOT and AdaOPS, we show that learned
heuristics expressed in Answer Set Programming (ASP)
yield performance superior to neural networks and similar
to optimal handcrafted task-specific heuristics within lower
computational time. Moreover, they well generalize to more
challenging scenarios not experienced in the training phase
(e.g., increasing rocks and grid size in rocksample, incrementing the size of the map and the aggressivity of ghosts in
pocman).

References
Meli, D.; Castellini, A.; and Farinelli, A. 2024. Learning
logic specifications for policy guidance in pomdps: an inductive logic programming approach. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 79: 725–776.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28743

