The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Imagine: Image-Guided 3D Part Assembly with Structure Knowledge Graph
Weihao Wang, Yu Lan, Mingyu You* , Bin He
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Frontiers Science Center for Intelligent Autonomous Systems,
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Autonomous Systems
myyou@tongji.edu.cn
Knowledge Update

Abstract
3D part assembly is a promising task in 3D computer vision
and robotics, focusing on assembling 3D parts together by predicting their 6-DoF poses. Like most 3D shape understanding
tasks, existing methods primarily address this task by memorizing the poses of parts during the training process, leading
to inaccuracies in complex assemblies and poor generalization to novel categories. In order to essentially improve the
performance, structure knowledge of the target assembly is
indispensable before assembling, which abstracts the potential
part composition and their structural relationships. An image
of the target assembly can serve as a common source for constructing this structure knowledge. Nevertheless, the image
is far from enough, as its knowledge can be incomplete and
ambiguous due to part occlusion and varying views. To tackle
these issues, we propose Imagine, a novel Image-guided 3D
part assembly framework with structure knowledge graph. As
a novel assembly prior, the structure knowledge graph originates from the image and is refined as understanding the
3D parts. It encodes robust part-aware structural and semantic information of the assembly, guides the 3D parts from
a coarse super-structure to a fine assembly, and co-evolves
progressively throughout the assembly process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our
framework, along with strong generalization to novel images
and categories.

Prior
Extractor
Coarse
Relation
Modeling

Image

3D parts

Fine
Relation
Modeling

Part Assembly

Figure 1: Pipeline of our framework. We derive the structure
knowledge graph from the image, which is further refined in
a knowledge-assembly co-evolution paradigm.
different structural priors from those they have learned. Even
for experienced humans, determining the accurate assembly
structure based solely on the geometries of parts without
external guidance is challenging.
To address this dilemma, structural knowledge is indispensable. In this work, we refer to structural knowledge as a
type of assembly prior that abstracts the potential part composition and approximate structure of the target assembly. This
knowledge aids in determining the accurate structure of the
assembly from all seemingly possible solutions. More importantly, it provides strong generalizable guidance for constructing unfamiliar structures of unseen categories, rather than
blindly copying from memorized experiences. This knowledge can be obtained from various sources. An image of the
target assembly serves as a common source which can be
conveniently found in manuals or on selling websites.
Despite its convenience, the knowledge derived from an
image can be insufficient for achieving accurate and generalizable assembly. First, such 2D structure information can
be incomplete due to part occlusion. For example, consider
the leg that is completely occluded by the seat in Figure 1.
Additionally, parts that are partially occluded and only halfvisible in the image can cause confusion among geometrically similar parts. Second, this information lacks robustness
because it depends on the view of image. When the view
changes, the image can exhibit quite different structure information (e.g., comparing a front view with a back view),
leading to confusion and inefficiencies during part assembly.

Introduction
Most 3D objects in our lives are composed of more finegrained parts. Understanding the delicate relationships of
parts is critical for several 3D shape understanding tasks,
e.g., assembling a set of 3D parts together by predicting their
6-DoF poses, known as 3D part assembly. Recently, several
studies have attempted to address this task by memorizing the
poses of parts using elaborate geometric modeling techniques,
including graph neural networks (Zhan et al. 2020), attention
mechanisms (Zhang et al. 2022; Du et al. 2024), and even the
prevalent diffusion model (Cheng et al. 2023). Nevertheless,
such rigid memorization exhibits poor accuracy in assembly
with dense parts and complex structures, which typically
have a large solution space. Moreover, these designs struggle
to generalize to assemblies of unseen categories, due to the
* Mingyu You is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7889

