The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MLC-NC: Long-Tailed Multi-Label Image Classification Through the Lens of
Neural Collapse
Zijian Tao1,2 , Shao-Yuan Li1,2,3 * , Wenhai Wan4 , Jinpeng Zheng1,2 , Jia-Yao Chen1,2 , Yuchen Li5 ,
Sheng-Jun Huang1,2 , Songcan Chen1,2
2

1
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
College of Computer and Software, Hohai University
(a)

Abstract

(b)

Long-tailed (LT) data distribution is common in multilabel image classification (MLC) and can significantly impact the performance of classification models. One reason
is the challenge of learning unbiased instance representations (i.e. features) for imbalanced datasets. Additionally,
the co-occurrence of head/tail classes within the same instance, along with complex label dependencies, introduces
further challenges. In this work, we delve into this problem through the lens of neural collapse (NC). NC refers to
a phenomenon where the last-layer features and classifier
of a deep neural network model exhibit a simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF) structure during its terminal training phase. This structure creates an optimal linearly separable state. However, this phenomenon typically occurs in balanced datasets but rarely applies to the typical imbalanced
problem. To induce NC properties under Long-tailed multilabel classification (LT-MLC) conditions, we propose an approach named MLC-NC, which aims to learn high-quality
data representations and improve the model’s generalization
ability. Specifically, MLC-NC accounts for the fact that different labels correspond to different feature parts located in
images. MLC-NC extracts class-wise features from each instance through a cross-attention mechanism. To guide the features toward the ETF structure, we introduce visual-semantic
feature alignment with a fixed ETF structured label embedding, which helps to learn evenly distributed class centers.
To reduce within-class feature variation, we introduce collapse calibration within a lower-dimensional feature space.
To mitigate classification bias, we concatenate features and
feed them into a binarized fixed ETF classifier. As an orthogonal approach to existing methods, MLC-NC can be seamlessly integrated into various frameworks. Extensive experiments on widely-used benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Number of instance

800

700

(c)

600
500
400

300
200

100
cow
sheep
aeroplane
train
bird
horse
boat
bus
motorbike
cat
bicycle
dog
tvmonitor
sofa
pottedplant
bottle
diningtable

car

chair
person

Class index of VOC-LT dataset

Figure 1: An illustrative example and the challenges of the
LT-MLC problem on the VOC-LT dataset(Wu et al. 2020).
field has seen a surge in research on developing advanced algorithms such as probabilistic graphical models(Chen et al.
2019), new deep model architectures(Vaswani 2017), and
novel loss functions(Ridnik et al. 2021; Kobayashi 2023).
Despite these advancements, the success of these methods is
often constrained by the prevailing yet unrealistic assumption: all categories appear with comparable numbers of instances. This textbook scenario glosses over the intricate
long-tailed data distribution challenge inherent to practical
multi-label classification scenarios(Reed 2001; Zhang et al.
2023).
Figure 1 plots an illustrative example and the challenges
of the LT-MLC problem on the VOC-LT dataset(Wu et al.
2020). It is characterized by: 1) Long-Tailed Class Distribution of Categories: From the class aspect, we can
see a significant disparity in the prevalence of categories,
with head classes (e.g., ’person’, ’chair’, ’car’) enjoying
abundant instances, in the meanwhile a large number of
tail classes (e.g., ’aeroplane’, ’sheep’, ’cow’) are underrepresented with rare instances. It’s widely acknowledged
in the literature that training on such datasets can lead the
model to be biased towards overfitting the head classes and
underfitting the tail classes, significantly undermining the
model’s generalization ability(He and Ma 2013; Veit et al.

Introduction
Multi-label image classification involves identifying and
predicting a comprehensive set of labels that correspond to
the various objects, attributes, or actions present within an
image(Zhang and Zhou 2013; Everingham et al. 2015). This
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20850

