The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Discrete Curvature Graph Information Bottleneck
Xingcheng Fu1, 2 * , Jian Wang1, 2 , Yisen Gao3 , Qingyun Sun4 * , Haonan Yuan4 ,
Jianxin Li4 , Xianxian Li1, 2
2

1
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{fuxc, lixx}@gxnu.edu.cn, wj668811@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, {yisengao, sunqy, yuanhn, lijx}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph neural networks(GNNs) have been demonstrated to
depend on whether the node effective information is sufficiently passing. Discrete curvature (Ricci curvature) is used
to study graph connectivity and information propagation efficiency with a geometric perspective, and has been raised in
recent years to explore the efficient message-passing structure of GNNs. However, most empirical studies are based
on directly observed graph structures or heuristic topological assumptions and lack in-depth exploration of underlying optimal information transport structures for downstream
tasks. We suggest that graph curvature optimization is more
in-depth and essential than directly rewiring or learning for
graph structure with richer message-passing characterization and better information transport interpretability. From
both graph geometry and information theory perspectives,
we propose the novel Discrete Curvature Graph Information
Bottleneck (CurvGIB) framework to optimize the information transport structure and learn better node representations
simultaneously. CurvGIB advances the Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB) principle for Ricci curvature optimization to learn the optimal information transport pattern for specific downstream tasks. The learned Ricci curvature is used
to refine the optimal transport structure of the graph, and the
node representation is fully and efficiently learned. Moreover,
to reduce the computational complexity of Ricci curvature,
we combine Ricci flow and VIB to deduce a curvature optimization approximation to form a tractable IB objective function. Extensive experiments on various datasets demonstrate
the superior effectiveness and interpretability of CurvGIB.

1

Figure 1: Ricci flow, Ollivier-Ricci curvature and different
curvature-relevant topologies.

and importance for improving their overall performance and
adaptability.
In practice, the properties of graphs are often determined by critical structures relevant to downstream tasks,
rather than the entire graph structure (Sun et al. 2021).
In response to this observation, two main research directions have emerged. Some of the existing work focuses
on the exploration and mining of critical subgraph structures (Yu et al. 2020) relevant to tasks by leveraging some
information-theoretic techniques, such as maximum mutual information (Wu et al. 2020) and information bottleneck (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000). On the other hand,
other works focus on the messaging perspective, and these
works are devoted to addressing messaging issues such as
excessive smoothing and excessive compression, which can
seriously impair GNNs’ performance. Recently, the definition of graph curvature has provided a new perspective and
insight for understanding and alleviating technical bottlenecks in the message-passing mechanism (Topping et al.
2021; Nguyen et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2024). However, the
first existing works only focuses on finding task-relevant information and lacks a deep understanding of the message-

Introduction

Through the unique mechanism of message passing, graph
neural networks (GNNs) are capable of effectively capturing
complex relationships and structural information between
nodes. Extensive empirical studies have proved that whether
the node information can be sufficient and effectively propagated is crucial, and the efficiency of message passing directly impacts the learning capability of GNNs. For different downstream tasks and applications, studying the optimal
message passing structure in GNNs is of crucial necessity
* Co-corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16666

