The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Intrinsic Alignments within Text Corpus
Zi Liang1,2 , Pinghui Wang2 * , Ruofei Zhang3 , Haibo Hu1* ,
Shuo Zhang2 , Qingqing Ye1 , Nuo Xu2 , Yaxin Xiao1 , Chen Zhang4 , Lizhen Cui5
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Apple
4
Zhejiang Createlink Technology
5
Shandong University
zi1415926.liang@connect.polyu.hk, phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, rfzhang@gmail.com, haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk
zs412082986@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, qqing.ye@polyu.edu.hk, nxu@sei.xjtu.edu.cn
20034165r@connect.polyu.hk, zhangchen@chuanglintech.com, clz@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

ter bot Tay (Wolf, Miller, and Grodzinsky 2017), Blenderbot 3.0, and ChatGPT have been reported to produce offensive and racist responses after their release (Zhu, Wang, and
Liu 2024). In the context of task-oriented dialogues (TOD),
some research also focuses on the politeness transfer (Silva,
Semedo, and Magalhães 2022) within real-world corpora.

Recent years have witnessed rapid advancements in the safety
alignments of large language models (LLMs). Methods such
as supervised instruction fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement
learning with human feedback (RLHF) have thus emerged as
vital components in constructing LLMs. While these methods achieve robust and fine-grained alignment to human values, their practical application is still hindered by high annotation costs and incomplete human alignments. Besides, the
intrinsic human values within training corpora have not been
fully exploited. To address these issues, we propose ISAAC
(Intrinsically Supervised Alignments by Assessing Corpus),
a primary and coarse-grained safety alignment strategy for
LLMs. ISAAC only relies on a prior assumption about the
text corpus, and does not require preferences in RLHF or
human responses selection in SFT. Specifically, it assumes
a long-tail distribution of text corpus and employs a specialized sampling strategy to automatically sample high-quality
responses. Theoretically, we prove that this strategy can improve the safety of LLMs under our assumptions. Empirically, our evaluations on mainstream LLMs show that ISAAC
achieves a safety score comparable to current SFT solutions. Moreover, we conduct experiments on ISAAC for some
RLHF-based LLMs, where we find that ISAAC can even improve the safety of these models under specific safety domains. These findings demonstrate that ISAAC can provide
preliminary alignment to LLMs, thereby reducing the construction costs of existing human-feedback-based methods.

1

Existing research in this field, such as supervised training
and reinforcement learning (RL), detoxifies dialogue models
by the feedback of human annotators. For supervised training, researchers either train safety classifiers based on annotated safety corpora (Sun et al. 2021; Dinan et al. 2019;
Roller et al. 2020; Baheti et al. 2021; van Aken et al. 2018)
to filter unsafe dialogues, or they annotate training samples
with human-crafted responses (Ung, Xu, and Boureau 2022;
Bianchi et al. 2024; Zhong et al. 2024). Based on the detoxified dataset, they then fine-tune models (Bianchi et al. 2024)
via SFT. Similarly, reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang, Wu, and et al. 2022; Bai et al.
2022a), involves collecting a dataset of LLM-interactive dialogues, rating each response in the dialogues, and training
a reward model to guide LLMs training with RL algorithms
(e.g. PPO (Schulman et al. 2017)) or directly training the
LLMs (e.g. DPO (Rafailov et al. 2023)).
Though effective, these methods encounter two challenges. First, they heavily rely on human annotations for
alignment. Second, these methods are often vulnerable to
specific topics if the human-collected subset does not represent the entire distribution of the training corpus. Consequently, maintainers of LLMs need to recollect new subsets
for emerging safety topics or scenarios due to the adversarial evolution phenomenon (Shachaf and Hara 2010; Dinan
et al. 2019) in interactions. These challenges highlight the
need for a more flexible and evolvable alignment strategy.

Introduction

Large language model (LLM) enhanced dialogue systems,
such as ChatGPT, have garnered significant attention thanks
to their wide range of real-world applications (Anil et al.
2024; Achiam et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023) in chitchat, information-seeking, and task-oriented business. However, they still face the problem of unsafe response generation (Anwar et al. 2024), which involves generating offensive, politically sensitive, unprofessional, or biased sentences, particularly under adversarial prompts from illintentioned users. For instance, chatbots like XiaoIce, Twit-

To address the above issues, we explore whether there are
potential features (induced bias) in text corpus that naturally
represent human values. In other words, we aim to align
LLMs with human values inherent in the text corpus itself,
rather than injecting human values through additional annotations. This task is challenging, as it requires discriminating the safety of a training sample without label information.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27455

