The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pilot: Building the Federated Multimodal Instruction Tuning Framework
Baochen Xiong1,2,3 , Xiaoshan Yang1,2,3 , Yaguang Song2 , Yaowei Wang2,4 , Changsheng Xu1,2,3*
1

MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
xiongbaochen2022@ia.ac.cn, {xiaoshan.yang, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {songyg01, wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we explore a novel federated multimodal instruction tuning task(FedMIT), which is significant for collaboratively fine-tuning MLLMs on different types of multimodal instruction data on distributed devices. To solve the
new task, we propose a federated multimodal instruction tuning framework(Pilot). Our framework integrates two stages of
“adapter on adapter” into the connector of the vision encoder
and the LLM. In stage 1, we extract task-specific features and
client-specific features from visual information. In stage 2,
we build the cross-task Mixture-of-Adapters(CT-MoA) module to perform cross-task interaction. Each client can not only
capture personalized information of local data and learn taskrelated multimodal information, but also learn general knowledge from other tasks. In addition, we introduce an adaptive parameter aggregation strategy for text training parameters, which optimizes parameter aggregation by calculating
weights based on the euclidean distance between parameters,
so that parameter aggregation can benefit from positive effects to the greatest extent while effectively reducing negative effects. Our framework can collaboratively exploit distributed data from different local clients to learn cross-task
knowledge without being affected by the task heterogeneity
during instruction tuning. The effectiveness of our method is
verified in two different cross-task scenarios.

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of the FedIT task with the FedMIT
task. (b) Compare the relative scores of traditional FedIT
methods on the two tasks.
Current instruction tuning methods are usually implemented by centralized learning paradigm, where one central party collects a substantial amount of data to train the
model, which may lead to privacy security issues. Federated
Learning (FL) is currently the primary framework for distributed training of models while maintaining data security
and privacy. McMahan et al. (2017) proposed the first federated learning algorithm, FedAvg, which aggregates model
gradients from local clients to a central server without data
sharing. Afterwards, FL is also successfully used for instruction tuning of pre-trained models (Zhang et al. 2024b; Ye
et al. 2024), called Federated Instruction Tuning (FedIT).
These frameworks can effectively leverage locally private
instruction-following data.
Although existing FedIT approaches have made important progress, they only consider the case where different
clients perform different instruction-based natural language
processing(NLP) tasks, and there is little exploration in the
multimodal field. The integration of vision and language
plays a crucial role in machine perception and understanding
of the world. Language is the basis of cognitive processing,

Introduction
The emergence of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) (Li et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024; Driess et al. 2023;
Dai, Li et al. 2023) has significantly advanced the field of
artificial intelligence. MLLMs have shown excellent ability
in processing and integrating various modalities information (especially text and image), and has achieved remarkable performance in tasks such as text generation, machine
translation and question answering. Enhancing the zero-shot
generalization ability of MLLMs on novel multimodal tasks
is a key goal driving its development. Multimodal instruction tuning has been shown to be highly effective in improving the zero-shot generalization ability of models to unseen
multimodal problems (Xu et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2023; Sun
et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024a; Xiao et al. 2024b).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21716

