The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reconsidering Feature Structure Information and Latent Space Alignment in
Partial Multi-label Feature Selection
Hanlin Pan1,2 , Kunpeng Liu3 , Wanfu Gao1,2 *
1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97201 USA
panhl23@mails.jlu.edu.cn, kunpeng@pdx.edu, gaowf@jlu.edu.cn
Candidate labels
• house
• tree
• street lamp
• people
• mountain
• bike
• flower

Abstract
The purpose of partial multi-label feature selection is to select the most representative feature subset, where the data
comes from partial multi-label datasets that have label ambiguity issues. For label disambiguation, previous methods
mainly focus on utilizing the information inside the labels
and the relationship between the labels and features. However, the information existing in the feature space is rarely
considered, especially in partial multi-label scenarios where
the noises is considered to be concentrated in the label space
while the feature information is correct. This paper proposes
a method based on latent space alignment, which uses the information mined in feature space to disambiguate in latent
space through the structural consistency between labels and
features. In addition, previous methods overestimate the consistency of features and labels in the latent space after convergence. We comprehensively consider the similarity of latent space projections to feature space and label space, and
propose new feature selection term. This method also significantly improves the positive label identification ability of the
selected features. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed method.

Figure 1: An example of partial multi-label learning. The
image is partially labeled by noisy annotators. Among the
candidate labels, house, street lamp, people and bike are
ground-truth labels while tree, mountain and flower are
noisy labels.
Rn×d which represents n samples with d-dimensional feature space and Y ∈ Rn×l ∈ {0, 1}n×l be the label space
with l labels. In the label matrix, Yik = 1 means the k-th
label is one of the candidate labels of Xi .
The core of addressing the problem of PML is how to deal
with ambiguation in label set, which essentially involves
identifying the ground-truth label of an instance from its
candidate label sets. A common idea is to exploit existing information to disambiguate noises in labels. Several methods
utilize relationships between labels (Xie and Huang 2018,
2021), while others focus on analyzing the relationships between labels and features (Zhang and Fang 2020; Xu, Liu,
and Geng 2020; Yu et al. 2018). Additionally, some methods
combine these two ideas (Xie and Huang 2020; Sun et al.
2021; Li, Lyu, and Feng 2021).
However, existing research predominantly leverages the
information contained within the labels or the relationship
between labels and features. While features also contain
valuable information that can be exploited. In partial label
learning scenarios, the information within features is considered to be relatively accurate in contrast to the potentially
erroneous label information. By using the accurate information within the features, the ground-truth label of a sample
can be identified from its candidate set. Moreover, the structural consistency between labels and features has not been
thoroughly considered, i.e., similar features correspond to
similar labels. By integrating these two characters, we can

Introduction
Partial Multi-Label Learning (PML) (Xie and Huang 2018;
Yu et al. 2018) is a emerging framework within the realm of
weakly supervised learning. In this paradigm, each instance
is linked to a set of potential candidate labels, in which only
part of these labels represent the true label. The characteristic of not requiring the label set to be completely correct
makes this type of method more aligned with real-world scenarios and more robust in the face of noises in the dataset. It
also diverges from traditional supervised learning methodologies, which precisely annotating label on each sample,
thereby incurring substantial labeling cost. These two natures of PML renders it a viable solution for a multitude
of practical applications, such as image recognition (Pham
et al. 2022; Zeng et al. 2013), web mining (Chen et al. 2021),
and ecoinformatics (Yilmaz et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2018).
Formally speaking, let D = {(xi , yi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} be the
partial multi-label training set. X = {xi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} ∈
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19786

