The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Correcting Robot Manipulation via Gaussian-Splatted Foresight
Shaohui Pan1,2 , Yong Xu1,3,4 , Ruotao Xu2,5 * , Zihan Zhou6 , Si Wu1,2 , Zhuliang Yu2,7,8
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China
2
Institute for Super Robotics (Huangpu), Guangzhou, 510000, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Big Data Intelligent Analysis, Guangzhou, 510000, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory of Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518120, China
5
Key Laboratory of Large-Model Embodied-Intelligent Humanoid Robot, 510000, China
6
School of College of Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510640, China
7
Shien-Ming Wu School of Intelligent Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China
8
School of Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China
csshpan@mail.scut.edu.cn, {yxu, cswusi, zlyu}@scut.edu.cn, rtxu@superobots.com, zhouzihan@scau.edu.cn
Abstract
Language-conditioned robotic manipulation in unstructured
environments presents significant challenges for intelligent
robotic systems. However, due to partial observation or imprecise action prediction, failure may be unavoidable for
learned policies. Moreover, operational failures can lead to
the robotic arm entering an untrained state, potentially causing destructive results. Consequently, the ability to detect
and self-correct failures is crucial for the development of
practical robotic systems. To address this challenge, we propose a foresight-driven failure detection and self-correction
module for robot manipulation. By leveraging 3D Gaussian
Splatting, we represent the current scene with multiple Gaussians. Subsequently, we train a prediction network to forecast
the Gaussian representation of future scenes conditioned on
planned actions. Failure is detected when the predicted future significantly deviates from the real observation after action execution. In such cases, the end-effector rolls back to
the previous action to avoid an untrained state. Integrating
this approach with the PerAct framework, we develop a selfcorrecting robot manipulation policy. Evaluations on ten RLBench tasks with 166 variations demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method, which outperforms stateof-the-art methods by 12.0% success rate on average.

w/o Self-correction

w/ Self-correction

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed self-correcting policy.

was successful. Moreover, since existing policies are typically learned from successful expert trajectories, they may
fall into an untrained state after failures, potentially leading
to further undesirable outcomes. Therefore, it is crucial to
develop robust methods for failure detection and recovery.
Addressing the challenge of execution-level failure detection and self-correction, in this paper, we present a foresightdriven self-correction scheme for robot manipulation. The
proposed method is predicated on a concise definition of
failure: a discrepancy between the robot’s actions and expected outcomes. Specifically, in the context of vision-based
manipulation, we define failure as an inconsistency between
the post-execution observation and the predicted visual outcome. To represent and predict future observations, we adopt
the Gaussian Splatting model as a representation and develop a prediction network that outputs the transformation
of the Gaussian distribution conditioned on a given action to
predict the Gaussian model of the future scene. The reasons
for using the Gaussian Splatting model are threefold: firstly,
compared to 2D representations, the 3D Gaussian model includes three-dimensional geometric information, which can
better simulate actions in 3D space for prediction. Secondly,
compared to implicit representations, such as NeRF, the
Gaussian Splatting method uses an explicit representation,

Introduction
The development of autonomous agents for languageconditioned manipulation tasks (Shridhar, Manuelli, and
Fox 2022; Lu et al. 2025) has been a long-standing objective in the field of intelligent robotics. These tasks are
becoming increasingly challenging, with growing expectations for robots to perform long-horizon tasks in dynamic
and unstructured environments. Due to potential occlusions,
environmental disturbances, and control inaccuracies, failures are inevitable. Exacerbating this issue is the fact that, in
many cases, while the failed action itself may not be destructive, it can lead to catastrophic results if the robot continues to operate under the assumption that the previous action
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26642

