The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Designing Ambiguity Sets for Distributionally Robust Optimization Using
Structural Causal Optimal Transport
Ahmad-Reza Ehyaei 1 , Golnoosh Farnadi 2 Samira Samadi 1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
2
Mila - Québec AI Institute, Université de Montréal
Montréal, Canada
ahmadreza.ehyaei@uni-tuebingen.de, farnadig@mila.quebec, ssamadi@tuebingen.mpg.de
Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization tackles out-of-sample issues like overfitting and distribution shifts by adopting an
adversarial approach over a range of possible data distributions, known as the ambiguity set. To balance conservatism
and accuracy, these sets must include realistic probability distributions by leveraging information from the nominal distribution. Assuming that nominal distributions arise from a
structural causal model with a directed acyclic graph G and
structural equations, previous methods such as adapted and
G-causal optimal transport have only utilized causal graph information in designing ambiguity sets. In this work, we propose incorporating structural equations, which include causal
graph information, to enhance ambiguity sets, resulting in
more realistic distributions. We introduce structural causal
optimal transport and its associated ambiguity set, demonstrating their advantages and connections to previous methods. A key benefit of our approach is a relaxed version, where
a regularization term replaces the complex causal constraints,
enabling an efficient algorithm via difference-of-convex programming to solve structural causal optimal transport. We
also show that when structural information is absent and must
be estimated, our approach remains effective and provides finite sample guarantees. Lastly, we address the radius of ambiguity sets, illustrating how our method overcomes the curse
of dimensionality in optimal transport problems, achieving
faster shrinkage with dimension-free order.

Introduction
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) is a data-driven
framework designed to address out-of-sample challenges,
such as distribution overfitting and distributional shifts, by
minimizing potential discrepancies between in-sample expected loss and out-of-sample expected loss. DRO achieves
this by defining a distributional ambiguity set (DAS) that
encompasses a range of possible data distributions around
the estimated true probability, ensuring that the DAS contains the unknown true underlying distribution with certainty
or at least with high confidence. To guarantee the model’s
performance over out-of-sample distributions, DRO employs an adversarial approach that minimizes the worst-case
loss to identify the optimal model (Blanchet et al. 2024).
Ambiguity sets are typically categorized into two groups:
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: The underlying distribution P∗ originates from a
causal structure. The dark blue region represents B(P, δ) the
ambiguity set for the classical OT. The light blue region corresponds to B A (P, δ) the DAS for adapted optimal transport.
The light yellow region denotes B G (P, δ) the DAS for Gcausal OT, and the dark yellow region represents B F (P, δ)
the DAS for our structural causal OT with diameter δ.

discrepancy-based and moment-based. Discrepancy-based
sets include distributions close to a nominal distribution according to a discrepancy measure, while moment-based sets
include distributions whose moments satisfy certain properties (Rahimian and Mehrotra 2022). Among discrepancybased sets, the Wasserstein distance is often preferred, as
it quantifies the discrepancy by the minimal transportation cost, ensuring computational tractability through strong
dual formulations and convergence guarantees. Additionally, Wasserstein ambiguity sets are robust against outliers
and can handle both continuous and discrete distributions,
unlike the KL divergence ball, which is limited to discrete
distributions (Guo, Hong, and Yang 2017).
In designing the DAS two points need to be considered (Rahimian and Mehrotra 2022):
P1. What distributional information should the DAS include?
P2. How large should the radius of the DAS?
To understand the significance of P1, consider the corresponding DAS of classical Wasserstein DRO. It includes
all probability distributions within a specified Wasserstein
16462

