The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reasoning About Actual Causes in Nondeterministic Domains
Shakil M. Khan1 , Yves Lespérance2 , Maryam Rostamigiv1
1

University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
2
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
shakil.khan@uregina.ca, lesperan@eecs.yorku.ca, maryam.rostamigiv@uregina.ca

Abstract

In response to these criticisms, in recent years researchers
have become increasingly interested in studying causation within more expressive action-theoretic frameworks,
in particular in that of the situation calculus (Batusov and
Soutchanski 2017, 2018; Khan and Soutchanski 2020).
Among other things, this allows one to formalize causation
from the perspective of individual agents by defining a notion of epistemic causation (Khan and Lespérance 2021) and
by supporting causal reasoning about conative effects, which
in turn has proven useful for explaining agent behaviour using causal analysis (Khan and Rostamigiv 2023) and has the
potential for defining important concepts such as responsibility and blame (Yazdanpanah et al. 2023).
While there has been a lot of work on actual causation,
the vast majority of the work in this area has focused on
deterministic domains. However, a distinguishing feature of
the real world is that change is often unpredictable. Very
few studies address causation in nondeterministic systems,
and those that do, are formalized in SEM-based causal models that are known to have limited expressiveness and suffer
from a variety of problems. For instance, recently Beckers
(2024) presented an extension of causal models to deal with
nondeterminism. However, despite improving on expressivity of causal models, it is not clear how one can formalize various aspects of action-theoretic/dynamic frameworks
there, e.g. non-persistent change supported by fluents, possible dependency between events, temporal order of event
occurrence, etc.
To deal with this, building on previous work on actual
causation in the situation calculus (Batusov and Soutchanski
2018; Khan and Lespérance 2021), more recently (Rostamigiv et al. 2024) formalized actual causes in more expressive nondeterministic action-theoretic domains. They used
the nondeterministic situation calculus (De Giacomo and
Lespérance 2021) as their base framework. They introduced
notions of “Certainly Causes” and “Possibly Causes” that
enable the representation of actual cause when the agent
does not control her actions’ outcomes and does not know
the choices that are made by the environment. However, this
early work formalizes reasoning about causes in these domains by considering all possible evolutions of the scenario,
which makes reasoning computationally intractable.1 In this

Reasoning about the causes behind observations is crucial to
the formalization of rationality. While extensive research has
been conducted on root cause analysis, most studies have predominantly focused on deterministic settings. In this paper,
we investigate causation in more realistic nondeterministic
domains, where the agent does not have any control on and
may not know the choices that are made by the environment.
We build on recent preliminary work on actual causation in
the nondeterministic situation calculus to formalize more sophisticated forms of reasoning about actual causes in such
domains. We investigate the notions of “Certainly Causes”
and “Possibly Causes” that enable the representation of actual cause for agent actions in these domains. We then show
how regression in the situation calculus can be extended to
reason about such notions of actual causes.

Introduction
The term causation refers to a collection of closely-related
important philosophical problems dealing with causes and
their effects that has been studied since the time of Aristotle. Determining the “actual” causes of an observed effect, which are events chosen from a recorded history of
actions that occurred prior to the observation of the effect
(also known as the scenario) is one such problem (called
“efficient” cause in Aristotelian lingo) that has been extensively researched. Motivated by David Hume’s philosophical work and Herbert Simon’s early contributions, Pearl
(Pearl 1998, 2000), and later Halpern (Halpern 2000, 2015,
2016), Halpern and Pearl (Halpern and Pearl 2005), and others (Eiter and Lukasiewicz 2002; Hopkins 2005; Hopkins
and Pearl 2007) developed computational formalizations of
this problem within Structural Equations Models (SEM).
While their inspirational work significantly advanced this
field, their approach based on SEM has been nevertheless
criticized for its limited expressiveness (Hopkins 2005; Hopkins and Pearl 2007; Glymour et al. 2010), and others have
expanded SEM with additional features (Leitner-Fischer and
Leue 2013) or proposed alternate formalizations of actual
cause, e.g. (Bochman 2018; Beckers and Vennekens 2018;
de Lima and Lorini 2024).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

15024

They reason about “Certainly Causes” by considering all the

