The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constraint-aware Pareto Optimization for Tree-Structured Networks:
Addressing Decarbonization Targets with Hydropower Expansion
Marc Grimson1 , Zhongdi Qu1 , Yue Mao1 , Aaron M Ferber1 , Felipe Siqueira Pacheco2 , Sebastian
Heilpern3 , Héctor Angarita4 , Alexander Flecker2 , Carla P Gomes1
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University
3
Department of Public and Ecosystem Health, Cornell University
4
Natural Capital Project, Stanford University
mg2425@cornell.edu, zq84@cornell.edu, ym277@cornell.edu, amf272@cornell.edu, fsp9@cornell.edu,
s.heilpern@cornell.edu, haac@stanford.edu, asf3@cornell.edu, gomes@cs.cornell.edu
2

Abstract

considering multiple competing objectives. Such decisionmaking problems translate to Multi-Objective Combinatorial Optimization Problems (MOCOP), and have received growing attention in recent years from both computer science and applied scientific communities (Ehrgott
and Gandibleux 2000; Ehrgott, Gandibleux, and Przybylski
2016; Wiecek et al. 2008).
Our work herein is motivated by the problem of hydropower expansion, a key source of renewable energy
prominently featured in global efforts to decarbonize energy
systems and curb climate change. Nevertheless, damming
rivers to generate hydropower can also lead to adverse environmental and socioeconomic impacts, from trapping sediment and changing river hydrology to fragmenting rivers, altering biodiversity, and displacing populations. Hydropower
is slated to rapidly expand in biodiverse river systems with
large untapped potential, many of which are located in the
Global South. These systems include the Magdalena River
basin in Colombia, which is a globally important biodiversity hotspot and Colombia’s economic powerhouse. Of the
more than 3,700 dams >1MW proposed globally, 143 are
located in the Magdalena River basin.
To date, strategic basin planning for hydropower often
considers the full possible range of energy buildout for a region. In reality, all proposed hydropower dams are unlikely
to be built; instead, most countries have estimated a range of
future hydropower buildouts needed to meet different decarbonization targets. Rather than considering the full range of
energy buildout scenarios when evaluating multi-objective
trade-offs, including objective bounds can more realistically
identify potential portfolios that pave a path towards decarbonization while also minimizing the adverse socioeconomic and environmental impacts of hydropower expansion.
In this work, in collaboration with domain scientists
across a number of disciplines in ecology, energy, and policy
to tackle this interdisciplinary challenge, we address the constrained hydropower dam portfolio selection problem, which
consists of selecting a subset of proposed dam sites, considering multiple competing objectives, where several objectives have upper and lower bound constraints. We aim to
identify the Pareto frontier of feasible solutions, where no
solution can be improved in one objective without compro-

Addressing global sustainability challenges as outlined by
the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) often requires navigating many potentially conflicting societal objectives simultaneously. For instance, increasing hydropower production enhances renewable energy supply but may adversely impact people and nature. Understanding these trade-offs is crucial, and the Pareto frontier
- the set of solutions that cannot be improved with respect
to one objective without negatively affecting another - is a
valuable framework. Strategic hydropower planning concerns
finding energy portfolios that achieve decarbonization targets, while balancing energy production with socioeconomic
and environmental impacts. Previous work has considered exact and approximate algorithms for Pareto optimization for
tree-structured networks, such as rivers, for hydropower planning. However, such approaches do not account for bounding
constraints, such as realistic energy production targets, critical in real-world applications. Herein, we propose a novel
approach for constraint-aware Pareto optimization for treestructured networks, incorporating objective bounds to ensure more realistic and robust solution outcomes. We apply
our constraint-aware Pareto approach to the strategic planning of hydropower expansion, considering energy bounds to
adhere to the UN’s net zero by 2050 decarbonization targets,
in the Magdalena River basin, home to more than 80% of
Colombia’s population. Our analysis demonstrates how lower
and upper bounds can significantly modify the unconstrained
Pareto frontier, revealing that feasible Pareto solutions can
be dominated by infeasible solutions, and thus may be ignored by constraint-agnostic solvers. Our results highlight
the importance of considering real-world constraints in multiobjective problems such as optimizing hydropower expansion
to meet both energy and sustainability goals.

Introduction
Computational Sustainability harnesses Artificial Intelligence (AI) to balance environmental, economic, and societal
needs for a sustainable future, as captured by the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Gomes
et al. 2019; United Nations 2015). Real-world decisionmaking is needed to achieve such goals, which often requires
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28015

