The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MDFG: Multi-Dimensional Fine-Grained Modeling for Fatigue Detection
Mei Wang 1,2 * , Xiaojie Zhu4 * , Ruimin Hu 1,2,3† , Dongliang Zhu 1,2 , Liang Liao 5 , Mang Ye 1,2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,Wuhan University
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Whuhan, China
4
Cyberspace Security Laboratory, School of Network and Information Security, Xidian University, Xi’an,China
5
The School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{dr.mei.wang, hrm, zhudongliang, yemang}@whu.edu.cn,zhuxiaojie@stu.xidian.edu.cn,liang.liao@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

academia, and researchers have developed various fatigue
detection methods, including those based on physiological
signals (Zhao et al. 2024; Gong et al. 2024), psychological measurements (Wiehler et al. 2022), behavioral patterns
(Dai, Li, and Zhang 2023; Sukumar et al. 2024), and facial
features (Ghoddoosian, Galib, and Athitsos 2019; Liao et al.
2024). It has become a new research hotspot.
Fatigue does not develop steadily. Transitional states of
fatigue often occur when individuals are disturbed by the environment (Yin et al. 2016), i.e., fatigue includes many intermediate states with short-term variations between alert and
fatigue, exhibiting varying fatigue levels. Capturing these
states is crucial for accurate assessment and management
of fatigue. However, fatigue labels typically rely on selfassessment questionnaires (e.g., KSS and SSS (Perkins et al.
2022)), reflecting overall fatigue over several minutes to
hours, known as Coarse-Grained Label (CGL), which fail
to capture short-term fatigue changes within seconds or milliseconds. Thus, a fine-grained labeling system is urgently
needed for more accurate and reliable fatigue detection.
For Fine-Grained Label (FGL) in fatigue detection, cFNSCL (Wang et al. 2024a) introduces a method that automatically generates FGL from CGL by self-supervised contrastive learning. However, cFNSCL only categorizes shortterm clips as alert or fatigued and fails to capture intermediate states. FatigueView (Yang et al. 2022) proposes a hierarchical fine-grained annotation method, FatigueTree, which
refines labels from coarse to fine (elements, sets, and events)
by considering the “eyes,” “head,” “mouth,” and their 14
combinations. Take the element “eye” as an example; its set
contains various types like eye squinting, closure, blinking,
etc., with events categorized into distinct levels: alert, signs,
sleepy, and sleep. Similarly, Liu et al. (2021) manually relabeled single-minute videos. However, these methods primarily rely on manual, it challenging to assess short-term
fatigue variations effectively. Nonetheless, these studies underscore the complexity and diversity of fatigue types and
levels. Fig.1(a) and Fig.1(b) demonstrate the errors from neglecting these aspects, while Fig.1(c) shows the impact on
performance in reRLDD and reDROZY. In conclusion, effectively measuring intermediate states requires more than
just a temporal dimension; it must account for the intricate
distribution of fatigue types and levels. Therefore, we propose a Multi-Dimensional Fine-Grained Label (MDFGL),

Fatigue is a critical factor contributing to accidents in industries such as safety monitoring and engineering construction. Fatigue exhibits dynamic complexity and non-stationary
characteristics, so there are many intermediate states of shortterm variation between alert and fatigue. Capturing and learning the signs of these intermediate states is essential for accurate fatigue assessment. However, current fatigue detection methods primarily rely on coarse-grained labels, typically spanning minutes to hours, and commonly treat alert
and fatigue as two distinctly separate distributions, overlooking the expression of intermediate states and oversimplifying
the rich distribution information of fatigue types and levels,
thereby limiting detection effectiveness. To address these, this
paper explores a refined representation of fatigue in terms of
three dimensions: time, type, and level, and proposes a MultiDimensional Fine-Grained Modeling for Fatigue Detection
(MDFG). This introduces the SmallLoss to extract trustworthy samples, utilizes clustering to identify diverse subtypes
under alert and fatigued states, and establishes base class sets
in each state. Subsequently, a complete base class set containing intermediate state bases is constructed using the base
class synthesis method, which achieves the expression of intermediate fatigue states from absence to presence. Finally,
fatigue levels are quantified based on the matching between
samples and the complete base class set. Moreover, to cope
with the complex variability of fatigue states, MDFG employs
meta-learning for training. MDFG achieves an Average accuracy improvement of 10.0% and 12.1% on two real datasets
compared to methods that do not consider fine-grained information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the MDFG
exhibits superior robustness and stability among current fatigue detection methods.

Introduction
Fatigue significantly reduces cognitive task performance,
particularly in high-risk fields such as aviation, automotive, and construction machinery operations, which has become a critical factor in causing safety accidents (Tu et al.
2022; Li et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2020; Dai, Li, and Zhang
2023). Fatigue detection has received a lot of attention in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12730

