The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EGSRAL: An Enhanced 3D Gaussian Splatting Based Renderer with Automated
Labeling for Large-Scale Driving Scene
Yixiong Huo* , Guangfeng Jiang* , Hongyang Wei, Ji Liu† , Song Zhang, Han Liu, Xingliang Huang,
Mingjie Lu, Jinzhang Peng, Dong Li, Lu Tian, Emad Barsoum
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Beijing, China
{yixiong.huo, guangfeng.jiang, ji.liu, mingjiel, jinz.peng, d.li, lu.tian, emad.barsoum}@amd.com

Abstract

images present challenges for their application in complex
autonomous driving scenes.
To address these challenges, Drive-3DAu (Tong et al.
2023) introduces a 3D data augmentation approach using
NeRF, designed to augment driving scenes in the 3D space.
DGNR (Li et al. 2023) presents a novel framework that
learns a density space from scenes to guide the construction
of a point-based renderer. Meanwhile, READ (Li, Li, and
Zhu 2023) offers a large-scale driving simulation environment for generating realistic data for advanced driver assistance systems. 3D GS-based methods (Zhou et al. 2024; Yan
et al. 2024) have been employed to synthesize driving scenes
due to their superior generation capabilities. While these
methods generate realistic images suitable for autonomous
driving, they cannot simultaneously synthesize novel views
and provide corresponding 2D/3D annotation boxes, which
are crucial for supervised model training. Consequently, enhancing novel view synthesis for large-scale scenes and
achieving automatic annotations for new views remain
key challenges in autonomous driving.
To overcome these challenges, we introduce a novel
framework called EGSRAL based on an enhanced 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D GS) technique. This framework improves
the quality of novel view synthesis while simultaneously
generating corresponding annotations. Specifically, we propose a deformation enhancement module to refine the Gaussian deformation field enhancing the modeling of both dynamic objects and static backgrounds. Additionally, we introduce an opacity enhancement module that leverages a
neural network, replacing the original learnable parameter,
to significantly boost the modeling capacity of complex driving scenes. Furthermore, to address the issue of unrealistic
viewpoints in rendering large-scale complex scenes, where
occluded distant Gaussians should not be included, we also
propose a grouping strategy for vanilla 3D GS.
In short, our contributions are as follows: (1) We propose
an enhanced 3D GS-based renderer called EGSRAL, which
can synthesize novel view images with corresponding annotations based on existing dataset annotations. EGSRAL introduces a deformation enhancement module and an opacity
enhancement module, both of which enhance the modeling
capability of 3D GS for complex scenes. (2) Additionally,
to address the issue of unreasonable perspectives in rendering large-scale, complex scenes, we introduce a grouping

3D Gaussian Splatting (3D GS) has gained popularity due to
its faster rendering speed and high-quality novel view synthesis. Some researchers have explored using 3D GS for reconstructing driving scenes. However, these methods often
rely on various data types, such as depth maps, 3D boxes,
and trajectories of moving objects. Additionally, the lack of
annotations for synthesized images limits their direct application in downstream tasks. To address these issues, we propose
EGSRAL, a 3D GS-based method that relies solely on training images without extra annotations. EGSRAL enhances 3D
GS’s capability to model both dynamic objects and static
backgrounds and introduces a novel adaptor for auto labeling, generating corresponding annotations based on existing
annotations. We also propose a grouping strategy for vanilla
3D GS to address perspective issues in rendering large-scale,
complex scenes. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets without any extra annotation. For
example, the PSNR metric reaches 29.04 on the nuScenes
dataset. Moreover, our automated labeling can significantly
improve the performance of 2D/3D detection tasks.

1

Introduction

Synthesizing novel photorealistic views represents a complex and crucial challenge within the fields of computer
vision and graphics. With the rapid development of neural radiance fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al. 2021), freeview synthesis has gradually transferred to the domain
of large-scale view synthesis, particularly in synthesizing
streetscapes critical for autonomous driving (Chen 2019).
However, Simulating outdoor environments is challenging due to the complexity of geographical locations, diverse surroundings, and varying road conditions. Image-toimage translation methods (Wang et al. 2018; Isola et al.
2017) have been proposed to synthesize semantically labeled streetscapes by learning the mapping between source
and target images. While these methods generate visually
impressive street views, they often exhibit noticeable artifacts and inconsistent textures in local details. Additionally, the relatively uniform viewpoints of the synthesized
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3860

