The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Predictive Modeling of Homeless Service Assignment:
A Representation Learning Approach
Khandker Sadia Rahman, Charalampos Chelmis
Department of Computer Science, University at Albany, SUNY
Albany, New York, USA
{srahman2, cchelmis}@albany.edu

Abstract

2022; Rahman, Zois, and Chelmis 2023; Pokharel, Das,
and Fowler 2024). Specifically, (Pokharel, Das, and Fowler
2024) investigate simple models (e.g., Decision Trees with
Short Explainable Rules) to recommend the exact service
individuals can benefit from, while (Rahman and Chelmis
2022; Rahman, Zois, and Chelmis 2023) explicitly model
the trajectories of individuals within the homeless system.
The main limitation of these methods lies in their inability to capture the informative relationships between different feature values (i.e., within–feature interactions) and the
complex between–feature interactions.
Administrative data collected by the homeless service
providers comprises of (i) service assignments and duration
of stay, (ii) housing outcome after service assignments, (iii)
demographics (e.g., race, gender, ethnicity), educational history, disabling condition, and (iv) time–variant information (e.g., monthly income, health). Most of these features
are categorical, and existing methods use one–hot encoding to handle them, mainly for simplicity. Unfortunately,
such treatment misses the rich relationships within the features, while exponentially increasing the dimensionality of
the data with growing number of categories (Rodrı́guez et al.
2018). Instead, we propose a predictive model that learns latent representations for features and services, which are then
utilized to capture feature interactions and relationships between individuals. We show that the learned representations
significantly improve the accuracy of homeless service assignment compared to the state–of–the–art.
This brings us to the core contribution of our work. Similar to (Rahman and Chelmis 2022; Rahman, Zois, and
Chelmis 2023) we study the interactions between services
found in individuals’ history. However, those studies oversimplify the task of predicting the likelihood of reaching
the next service based solely on transitional probabilities
between past services, while we assert that many other interactions exist that provide valuable context which can in
turn enhance predictive performance. Specifically, subsequent services are often assigned to individuals to serve a
particular purpose at a specific time. Understanding such
functional and temporal relationship between services can
provide insights into why a particular service is assigned at a
specific time. Our work extends beyond previous studies by
incorporating temporal and functional interaction between
services. Furthermore, our model explores the relationships

In recent years, there has been growing interest in leveraging machine learning for homeless service assignment. However, the categorical nature of administrative data recorded
for homeless individuals hinders the development of accurate machine learning methods for this task. This work asserts
that deriving latent representations of such features, while at
the same time leveraging underlying relationships between
instances is crucial in algorithmically enhancing the existing assignment decision–making process. Our proposed approach learns temporal and functional relationships between
services from historical data, as well as unobserved but relevant relationships between individuals to generate features
that significantly improve the prediction of the next service
assignment compared to the state–of–the–art.

Code — https://github.com/IDIASLab/REPLETE
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07747

1

Introduction

Machine learning has gained significant attention for its ability to solve complex real–world problems across various
domains including criminal justice, e–commerce, healthcare, banking, finance, and social service (Sarker 2021). At
the same time, a constant rise in the rate of homelessness
has been observed (Dej, Gaetz, and Schwan 2020). In the
United States alone, homelessness has risen 12.5% between
2022 and 2023, with a particularly sharp increase of 29.5%
in chronic patterns of homelessness (Henry et al. 2023).
Chronic pattern of homelessness occurs when individuals
experience repeated homelessness over an extended period
(e.g., at least two years), or endure continuous homelessness
for at least 12 months (Fleury et al. 2021).
To date, various machine learning approaches have been
proposed for predicting whether individuals will reenter
the homeless system (Gao, Das, and Fowler 2017; Hong
et al. 2018; Kube, Das, and Fowler 2019) as well as assessing the risk of chronic homelessness of individuals (VanBerlo et al. 2021; Messier, John, and Malik 2021). However,
only limited work has addressed the more challenging problem of homeless service assignment (Rahman and Chelmis
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28312

