The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DECIDER: Difference-aware Contrastive Diffusion Model with Adversarial
Perturbations for Image Change Captioning
Guojin Zhong1 * , Jinhong Hu1, 2 * , Jiajun Chen3 , Jin Yuan1† , Wenbo Pan4†
1

2

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
GuangDong Engineering Technology Research Center of Intelligent Service of Urban and Rural Planning and Construction
3
School of Robotics, Hunan University
4
CRRC Zhuzhou Institute
gjzhong@hnu.edu.cn, jinhonghu@hnu.edu.cn, chenjiajun@hnu.edu.cn, yuanjin@hnu.edu.cn, panwb@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Irrelevant
Information
Inconsistency

“the large block
changed to metal.”

Uni-Image
Encoder

Img2

Image change captioning (ICC) poses great challenges stemming from describing subtle differences between two similar images in natural language, significantly increasing the
complexity of feature extraction and cross-modal learning
compared to the image captioning task. Existing ICC methods often suffer from two key challenges: 1) Massive irrelevant information of uni-image features leads to suboptimal visual difference representations; 2) Imprecise intermodality correspondence degrades the quality of generated
captions. This paper proposes a Difference-aware Contrastive
Diffusion Model with Adversarial Perturbations (DECIDER)
for ICC due to the excellent performance of diffusion models in image/text generation. Technically, difference-aware
cross-modal learning is developed to suppress irrelevant information and learn compact yet robust visual difference representations. This is achieved by optimizing a novel objective mathematically derived from the information bottleneck
principle that excels in filtering redundant features and highlighting differences. Furthermore, we propose to dynamically
generate “hard” positive and negative samples via adversarial perturbations, which are involved in contrastive diffusion training with a tighter variational bound. This design
encourages our DECIDER to excavate and construct complex correspondences between visual differences and captions, thereby improving generalization performance. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate that DECIDER
significantly exceeds state-of-the-art performance.

Caption
Image-pair
Encoder

Uni-Image
Encoder

Img1

Abstract

(a) Irrelevant information in visual difference representation
Image Pair

Generated Caption
Generated: “the people
walking have moved positions.”
Ground Truth: “the car is
missing.”

Failed to locate
changing
object

Generated: “the tiny blue
object changed to gray.”
Ground Truth: “the tiny blue
cube became yellow.”

Failed to
describe
fine-grained
attribute

(b) Incorrect inter-modality correspondence

Figure 1: Examples to show two ICC challenges: one is the
presence of irrelevant information in visual difference representations, and the other is the failure of correspondence in
matching generated captions with input images.

Code — https://github.com/zgj77/DECIDER

natural language, raising significant technical challenges.
Even large vision-language models like Qwen-VL (Bai et al.
2023) and LLaVA (Liu et al. 2024), which excel in various
multi-modal tasks, struggle with ICC task attributed to their
limited ability to accurately model visual differences. Since
ICC has high practical values in real-world applications like
reporting industrial anomalies, detecting and describing lesions, it is crucial to develop an effective model for ICC.
Most existing ICC methods employ the encoder-decoder
framework to uniformly model the complex cross-modal
correlations between visual differences and linguistic representations. The visual encoder specifically aims to capture the subtle differences between two images (Park, Darrell, and Rohrbach 2019), while the linguistic decoder produces descriptions accordingly (Kim et al. 2021). With the
advent of transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017), recent studies

Introduction
The natural modality gap between vision and text poses
great challenges for machines to understand visual information by using textual descriptions and promotes the birth
of Image Captioning (IC) (Vinyals et al. 2015), which aims
at generating accurate linguistic captions for an image. Beyond IC, Image Change Captioning (ICC) (Jhamtani and
Berg-Kirkpatrick 2018) involves an in-depth comparison of
two similar images and describes their tiny differences in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10662

