The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relational Neurosymbolic Markov Models
Lennert De Smet* 1 , Gabriele Venturato* 1 , Luc De Raedt†1,2 , Giuseppe Marra†1
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
Örebro University, Sweden
firstname.lastname@kuleuven.be
2

Abstract

the representational learning prowess of neural networks.
This integration can improve interpretability (Ciatto et al.
2024) and provably satisfy logical constraints. For example, to guarantee the safety of an autonomous agent (Yang
et al. 2023), to constrain autoregressive language generation (Zhang et al. 2023) or to impose physical modelling
into temporal forecasting (Reichstein et al. 2019).
Such a combination already exists in many different
flavours, using either fuzzy logic (Badreddine et al. 2022)
or probabilistic logic (Manhaeve et al. 2021; Yang, Ishay,
and Lee 2020; Huang et al. 2021; De Smet et al. 2023), and
either propositional or relational logic (Marra et al. 2024).
The probabilistic case is of special interest, as probabilistic
NeSy systems provide a sound semantics to handle uncertainty, as well as to tackle generative tasks. The relational
case is also of special interest as relational logic is a popular and very expressive representation for representing states
in, for instance, databases and planning (Russell and Norvig
2020). Moreover, relational representations facilitate strong
generalisation behaviour (Hummel and Holyoak 2003). Unfortunately, existing probabilistic or relational NeSy models can not exploit the sequential decomposition inherent to
temporal reasoning tasks, thereby limiting their applicability
in complex sequential problems. Therefore, there are still no
inference algorithms for such NeSy models that are tailored
to scale in sequential settings.
In order to overcome these limitations, we identify four
desiderata that a model and its inference algorithm should
satisfy. (D.I) It must be able to model and exploit relational logical constraints on states and transition functions.
It should use relational states as in planning, and ideally it
can cope with both continuous and discrete aspects of reality. (D.II) It has to exploit sequential dependencies without
restricting the modelling power, allowing it to scale further
than existing NeSy systems. (D.III) It must be properly neurosymbolic, that is, it must support transition functions that
are logical, neural or purely probabilistic in nature, or any
combination thereof. Moreover, it must be end-to-end differentiable to allow for the optimisation of any neural components of the model. (D.IV) It can tackle both discriminative
and generative tasks in a probabilistic fashion.
Both existing probabilistic techniques and neurosymbolic AI are insufficient. On the neurosymbolic side, scalability (D.II) remains the biggest problem, and genera-

Sequential problems are ubiquitous in AI, such as in reinforcement learning or natural language processing. State-ofthe-art deep sequential models, like transformers, excel in
these settings but fail to guarantee the satisfaction of constraints necessary for trustworthy deployment. In contrast,
neurosymbolic AI (NeSy) provides a sound formalism to enforce constraints in deep probabilistic models but scales exponentially on sequential problems. To overcome these limitations, we introduce relational neurosymbolic Markov models (NeSy-MMs), a new class of end-to-end differentiable sequential models that integrate and provably satisfy relational
logical constraints. We propose a strategy for inference and
learning that scales on sequential settings, and that combines
approximate Bayesian inference, automated reasoning, and
gradient estimation. Our experiments show that NeSy-MMs
can solve problems beyond the current state-of-the-art in neurosymbolic AI and still provide strong guarantees with respect to desired properties. Moreover, we show that our models are more interpretable and that constraints can be adapted
at test time to out-of-distribution scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/ML-KULeuven/nesy-mm
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13023

1

Introduction

Markov models are the theoretical foundation for many successful applications of artificial intelligence, such as speech
recognition (Juang and Rabiner 1991), meteorological predictions (Khiatani and Ghose 2017), games (Schrittwieser
et al. 2020), music generation (Austin et al. 2021), sports analytics (Van Roy et al. 2023) and many more (Mor, Garhwal,
and Kumar 2020). They are so popular mainly because they
naturally factorise a sequential problem into step-wise probability distributions. Such a decomposition leads to better
predictions in terms of bias and variance compared to models that do not incorporate the sequential nature of the problem (Bishop 2006).
Neurosymbolic AI (NeSy) has also enjoyed a tremendous
increase in attention. Its general goal is to combine the generalisation potential of symbolic, i.e. logical, reasoning with
* Equal first authorship
†

Equal last authorship
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16181

