The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can Large Language Models Derive High-Level Cognition from Low-Level and
Fragmented Foundational Information?
Yang Liu1 , Xiaoping Wang1 * , Kai Lu2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
2
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
liuyang0542@hnu.edu.cn, xpwang@hnu.edu.cn, kailu@nudt.edu.cn

Our Work

Abstract
As one of the key technologies leading to Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI), Large Language Models (LLMs) have
achieved remarkable accomplishments. Exploring the capabilities of LLMs is crucial for scientific research, and many
studies propose new challenges from various aspects to explore the boundaries of capabilities in LLMs. This paper attempts to push the challenges of information understanding,
synthesizing and reasoning to the extreme, in order to explore the boundaries of more advanced dimensional cognitive capabilities in LLMs. It is defined as the task of HighLevel Cognition (HLC), which involves obtaining high-level
conclusions from low-level and fragmented foundational information. To evaluate HLC, we construct a dataset based
on soccer matches. Experiments and analysis on this dataset
show that current state-of-the-art LLMs lack the ability to effectively solve the task of HLC, because their performance is
equivalent to random-level. However, by fine-tuning Llama38B-Instruct, there are improvements of 14.4%, 48.1%, and
19.4% over random-level in three types of evaluation tasks.
This indicates that LLMs have great potential to solve the
task of HLC.

Low-level and Fragmented
Foundational Information

Previous Work
Cultural

Physical
Concepts

High-level
Conclusions

Push to the
Extreme

LLMs

Capabilities of Cognition
User Intent

Crosslingual

Understanding

Synthesizing

Figurative
Humor
Language

Data and Long-form
Text
Content
......

Analogical Multi-hop

Reasoning
Abstract

Temporal

Figure 1: An illustration of our work compared to the previous work. To explore the HLC in LLMs, an attempt that
pushing the challenges of information understanding, synthesizing and reasoning to the extreme in this paper.

Model & Dataset Details — https://github.com/nlpmy/hlc

1

High-Level Cognition

Introduction

soning (Gendron et al. 2023; Stechly, Marquez, and Kambhampati 2023). They guide researchers to consider how to
improve LLMs, thereby achieving more human-like cognitive intelligence. Nevertheless, the boundaries of more advanced dimensional cognitive capabilities in LLMs remain
unresolved, because the standards and methods for measuring in complex cognitive tasks are still not clear enough. To
address this, the challenges of information understanding,
synthesizing, and reasoning are pushed to the extreme in this
paper. It is the task of High-Level Cognition (HLC).
HLC is obtaining high-level conclusions from low-level
and fragmented foundational information. In a soccer match,
the low-level foundational information includes players’
performance and ball events, and the high-level conclusions
refer to the tactical characteristics of teams, which cannot be
directly extracted from foundational information. To achieve
this, the relationship between all low-level foundational information (e.g., passing, shooting) is pushed to the boundaries of understanding. Then an implicit global structure is

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant progress in a wide range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, including intelligent dialogue (Yi et al.
2024; Joko et al. 2024), commonsense reasoning (Krause
and Stolzenburg 2024; Zhao, Lee, and Hsu 2024), text comprehension (Chen and Leitch 2024; Säuberli and Clematide
2024), and code generation (Wang and Chen 2023; Jiang
et al. 2024b). These demonstrate their strong capabilities
in handling complex language tasks. However, the capabilities and potential of LLMs remain an open field. Exploring the boundaries of capabilities in LLMs is crucial for advancing their intelligence. There are many new challenges
about the capabilities of LLMs are proposed, which involve
understanding (Zhu et al. 2024; Hessel et al. 2022), synthesizing (Hu et al. 2024; Salvador et al. 2024), and rea* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24677

