The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OAMaskFlow: Occlusion-Aware Motion Mask for Scene Flow
Xiongfeng Peng, Zhihua Liu, Weiming Li, Yamin Mao, Qiang Wang
Samsung R&D Institute China-Beijing, China
{xf.peng, zhihua.liu, weiming.li, yamin18.mao, qiang.w}@samsung.com

Abstract
The scene flow estimation methods make significant progress
by estimating pixel-wise 3D motion on implicitly learning a motion embedding using an end-to-end differentiable
optimization framework. However, the motion embedding
learned implicitly is insufficient for grouping pixels into rigid
object in challenging regions, such as occlusion and inconsistent multi-view geometric properties. To address this issue, we propose a novel method for estimating scene flow
called OAMaskFlow, which has three novelties. Firstly, we
propose the concept of occlusion-aware motion (OAM) mask
and generate the ground truth annotation through the photometric and geometry consistency. Secondly, we propose to
supervise the motion embedding with the OAM mask to
learn informative and reliable motion representation of the
scene. Finally, a 3D motion propagation module is proposed
to propagate high-quality 3D motion from reliable pixels to
the challenging occluded regions. Experiments show that our
proposed OAMaskFlow has reduced the EPE3D metric by
21.0% on the FlyingThings3D dataset and decreased SF-all
metric by 24.3% on the KITTI scene flow benchmark than
the baseline method RAFT-3D. Furthermore, we apply our
proposed OAM mask in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) to improve a state-of-the-art method DROIDSLAM. In comparison, the ATE metric has decreased by
65.7% and 58.3% on the TartanAir monocular and stereo
datasets respectively.

Figure 1: Visual comparison of our OAMaskFlow with
RAFT-3D (Teed and Deng 2021b). (a) and (b) are input RGB
image pair. We convert the motion embedding of RAFT3D to mask and show it in (c). Our predicted OAM mask
is shown in (d). Our OAM mask distinguishes between occluded pixels (black), static pixels (dark red), and dynamic
objects (all other pixels). In contrast, the black pixels in
the RAFT-3D method may be caused by either occlusion or
large variance of motion embeddings, such as the black part
in the middle of (c). (e) and (f) show the 2D end-point error
(EPE2D ).(Best viewed in color.)
networks, and then infers the 3D motions by differentiating through Gauss-Newton updates. RigidMask (Yang and
Ramanan 2021) predicts the optical flow and segmentation
masks of the background and multiple rigidly moving objects, and then parameterize them by their 3D rigid transformations to update 3D scene flow. One limitation of these
approaches is that the network requires additional training
of an instance segmentation branch for scene flow estimation. Another limitation is that each sub-task is independent,
making it difficult to utilize the complementary properties
between the sub-tasks in a unified network for overall optimization.
Recently, RAFT-3D (Teed and Deng 2021b) method proposes to learn dense rigid-motion embeddings and iteratively updates the dense SE3 motion field in an end-toend differentiable architecture. Based on RAFT-3D, MFUSE (Mehl et al. 2023) proposes to estimate the scene
flow with multiple frame fusion of forward and backward
flow. EMR-MSF (Jiang and Okutomi 2023) proposes a selfsupervised monocular scene flow estimation by exploiting
ego-motion rigidity and an ego-motion aggregation module.
However, these methods implicitly learn motion embedding
to softly group a pixel with its neighborhood. The learned
motion embedding is not supervised which easily breaks the

Introduction
Scene flow task involves estimating both 3D structure and
3D motion of a complex and dynamic scene between a pair
of video frames. This task has attracted increasing attention
in recent years due to its importance in various applications
such as robotics, augmented reality and autonomous driving.
Some previous scene flow methods (Behl et al. 2017; Ma
et al. 2019; Yang and Ramanan 2021) assume that the scene
can be well approximated as a collection of rigidly moving
objects, such that the scene flow can be approximated by estimating the rigid motions of individual components. These
methods construct a modular network to estimate scene flow
based on multiple sub-tasks. For example, DRISF (Ma et al.
2019) jointly trains optical flow and instance segmentation
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6497

