The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TIME-FS: Joint Learning of Tensorial Incomplete Multi-View Unsupervised
Feature Selection and Missing-View Imputation
Yanyong Huang1 , Minghui Lu1 * , Wei Huang2 , Xiuwen Yi3 , Tianrui Li4
1

Joint Laboratory of Data Science and Business Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
2
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
3
JD Intelligent Cities Research and JD Intelligent Cities Business Unit
4
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University
huangyy@swufe.edu.cn, lu.m.h@foxmail.com, huangweifujian@126.com, xiuwenyi@foxmail.com, trli@swjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Multi-view unsupervised feature selection (MUFS) has received considerable attention in recent years. Existing MUFS
methods for processing unlabeled incomplete multi-view
data, where some samples are missing in certain views, first
impute the missing values and then perform feature selection
on the completed dataset. However, treating imputation and
feature selection as two separate processes overlooks their potential interactions. The graph-guided local structure gleaned
from feature selection can aid in imputation, which in turn
can enhance the feature selection performance. Additionally,
most similarity graph-based MUFS methods suffer from high
computational costs. To address these problems, we propose
a novel MUFS method, termed Tensorial Incomplete Multiview unsupErvised Feature Selection (TIME-FS). TIME-FS
unifies missing value recovery, discriminative feature selection, and low-dimensional representation learning within a
joint framework through matrix decomposition. Then, TIMEFS conducts CP decomposition on tensor data formed by the
low-dimensional representations of different views to learn a
consistent anchor graph across views and a view-preference
weight matrix, both of which simultaneously guide missing
view imputation and feature selection. Furthermore, an efficient algorithm with low time complexity and rapid convergence is proposed to solve TIME-FS. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of TIMEFS over state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: The framework of the proposed TIME-FS.

Existing MUFS methods are commonly classified into
two categories. The first category involves concatenating
multiple views into a single view and subsequently applying
single-view feature selection methods. Typical methods in
this category include JELSR (Hou et al. 2014), DUFS (Lim
and Kim 2021) and HSL (Mi et al. 2024). In contrast to the
first category, which combines multi-view data in a sequential manner, the second category directly conducts feature
selection on multi-view data by leveraging potential correlations between views, exemplified by methods such as
TLR-MUFS (Yuan et al. 2022), SDFS (Zhou et al. 2023),
and JMVFG (Fang et al. 2024). TLR-MUFS employs tensor low-rank regularization on similarity graphs to capture
cross-view consistency during the feature selection process.
JMVFG integrates multi-view graph learning and multiview feature selection into a unified framework.
Although previous methods have demonstrated promising feature selection performance, they are predicated on the
assumption that each sample appears in all views. This assumption does not always hold in real-world scenarios. For
example, in e-commerce recommendation systems, many
users only have purchase behavior features, with profile information often missing due to privacy concerns (Elkahky,

Introduction
Multi-view data are common in real-world applications,
where the same sample is described using heterogeneous
features from different perspectives (Sun 2013; Zhao et al.
2017). Multi-view data are typically high-dimensional and
unlabeled, which is attributable to the diverse sources of features and the labor-intensive process of labeling (Xie, Tao,
and Wei 2016; Tang et al. 2022a). As an important unsupervised learning method, multi-view unsupervised feature
selection (MUFS) aims to select informative features from
unlabeled multi-view data, thereby achieving dimensionality reduction and enhancing the performance of downstream
tasks (Li et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17503

