The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AGLLDiff: Guiding Diffusion Models Towards Unsupervised Training-free
Real-world Low-light Image Enhancement
Yunlong Lin1,2 * , Tian Ye3* , Sixiang Chen3* , Zhenqi Fu4 , Yingying Wang1,2 , Wenhao Chai5 ,
Zhaohu Xing3 , Wenxue Li3 , Lei Zhu3,6 , and Xinghao Ding1,2†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics,Xiamen University, China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
4
Tsinghua University, China
5
University of Washington, USA
6
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
dxh@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

more high-fidelity and realistic details, thereby fostering a
surge of interest in adapting diffusion models to LIE (Yin
et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023).
Recent diffusion-based LIE methods can be roughly classified into two categories (He et al. 2024): 1) The common approaches (Yin et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2023) are dedicated to accurately modeling degradation process via supervised learning, which show proficiency in synthetic degradation scenes but lack robustness to handle challenging unseen
degradations. This inadaptability primarily stems from the
inconsistency between the synthetic degradation of training
data and the actual degradation in the real world. Enriching the synthetic data for model training would improve the
models’ generalizability, but it is obviously impractical to
simulate every possible degradation in the real world. 2) The
second ones (Fei et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2024) strive to exploit the diffusion priors in the pre-trained diffusion models,
which are effective in adapting to multiple degradations. Yet,
despite their versatility, these methods are inevitably constrained in terms of generalizability, as they require prior
knowledge of the specific degradation process in advance.
In practice, degradations in the wild often include a mixture
of multiple types, posing a challenge to accurately model
them. In summary, two primary challenges are commonly
encountered in real-world LIE: i) the collection of distorted/clean image pairs is often impractical and sometimes even
unavailable, and ii) accurately modeling complex degradations presents a non-trivial problem.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we introduce
a novel training-free and unsupervised framework, named
AGLLDiff, for real-world low-light enhancement. In contrast to prior works that predefine the degradation process,
our approach models the desired attributes and incorporates this guidance within the diffusion generative process.
Concrectly, we leverage a well-performing diffusion model
(DM) (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021), which generates images
through a stochastic iterative sampling process, and the attributes act as classifiers to constrain the generative process
to a reliable high-quality (HQ) solution space. As shown

Existing low-light image enhancement (LIE) methods have
achieved noteworthy success in solving synthetic distortions,
yet they often fall short in practical applications. The limitations arise from two inherent challenges in real-world LIE:
1) the collection of distorted/clean image pairs is often impractical and sometimes even unavailable, and 2) accurately
modeling complex degradations presents a non-trivial problem. To overcome them, we propose the Attribute Guidance
Diffusion framework (AGLLDiff), a training-free method for
effective real-world LIE. Instead of specifically defining the
degradation process, AGLLDiff shifts the paradigm and models the desired attributes, such as image exposure, structure
and color of normal-light images. These attributes are readily available and impose no assumptions about the degradation process, which guides the diffusion sampling process to
a reliable high-quality solution space. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach outperforms the current leading unsupervised LIE methods across benchmarks in terms
of distortion-based and perceptual-based metrics, and it performs well even in sophisticated wild degradation.

Introduction
Real-world low-light image enhancement (LIE) aims to
ameliorate the quality and brightness of an image suffering from unknown degradation, such as low contrast, multiple artifacts, poor visibility, sensor noise, etc. Great improvement in enhancement quality has been witnessed over
the past few years with the exploitation of generative priors (Fei et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2021). For instance, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Jiang et al. 2021;
Wang and Zhao 2024a) that are trained on extensive datasets
of clean images and learn rich knowledge of real-world
scenes have succeeded in LIE through GAN inversion. Compared to GANs, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Guo et al. 2024) yield
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5307

