The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Vision for Reinventing Credible Elections with Artificial Intelligence
Biplav Srivastava
AI Institute, University of South Carolina
1112 Greene St, Columbia, SC 29208 USA
biplav.s@sc.edu

Abstract

the need for accurate information for voters, candidates and
other stakeholders could never have been greater. However,
around the world, stakeholders are struggling to find accurate information, which is now especially acute in the age of
generative Artificial Intelligence (AI). They include, as examples, (a) Voters wanting to know about - voting logistics,
candidate information, and issues (b) Candidate wanting to
know about - what voters care about, how can the candidate
best position themselves to a group of voters. (c) Election
Commissions wanting to know about: what machines to buy,
how to recruit and train poll workers. These queries should
only be seen as illustrative of the stakeholders and information gaps that they face today.
In the United States, not only is it hard to find the right
information but also the election infrastructure supporting
the democratic process is under increasing threat from challenges like security attacks and information disorders, a term
which covers misinformation, disinformation and malinformation (Norris 2017; Carroll et al. 2023; Rossetti and Zaman 2023; Shu et al. 2020; Kandel 2020). In terms of concrete metrics, researchers have tried to estimate the effort
needed to vote (interpreted as barrier to participate) in different states in the United States using COVI, a cost of voting
index (Schraufnagel, Pomante II, and Li 2020; COVI June
2022). Based on this index, Oregon ranks as the top state,
where it is the easiest to vote in while New Hampshire ranks
the last (50th). Within this spectrum, the region of the Southern US is generally considered as one of the hardest with
South Carolina (SC) and Mississippi (MS), the two states
where we have worked (Muppasani et al. 2023; Lakkaraju
et al. 2024; Narayanan et al. 2021), ranked 43rd and 49th
costliest states for citizens to vote in, respectively.

In this blue sky paper, we seek to stimulate the research community to pursue important new as well as existing (unsolved)
AI problems in the context of a challenging, often ignored,
socio-sensitive application domain. We outline the key challenges in conducting elections credibly in leading democracies around the world today and identify our vision of a path
forward with an overarching goal to increase voter participation with a two-pronged approach of AI-lead technological
innovations and interdisciplinary community building. On the
technology front, we envisage the need to transform Collation and Distribution of election information, and promote its
Comprehensibility for users understanding and trust (CDC).
On the community front, we need to invigorate the multidisciplinary community consisting of, but not limited to, researchers in AI, security, journalism, political science, sociology, and business, to PROMote AI’s Safe usage for Elections
(PROMISE) with best-practices. This work is informed by
our interdisciplinary research as well as experience in conducting three workshops at leading AI conferences and the
AI Magazine special issue on AI and Elections.

Introduction
The success of any democracy depends on the ability of participants to vote in regular elections and the ability of the
government to implement the subsequent orderly transfer of
power. Although there are other stakeholders in a democracy beyond voters, including candidates contesting in elections and election commissions conducting them, traditionally, the act of voting has been conceptualized as the preeminent indicator of political participation (Norris 2017; Verba
and Nie 1972; PewResearchCenter 2018) and commonly
measured by voter participation rates. A vibrant democracy
relies on engaged voters making informed decisions about
their representatives and keeping them accountable based
on reliable information and secure election infrastructure.
Democracy at a practical level means empowering the voter
with a right to choose and providing all relevant and reliable
information including knowing about candidates, campaign
finance, voting procedure, processing of votes, and declaration of results.
With 2024 being the year of elections as almost half the
world’s population is experiencing elections (Ewe 2023),

State of Global Decision Support for 2024 Elections
OpenAI declared that ChatGPT will defer election questions to human-curated Frequently Asked Questions
(FAQs), even though it has one of the best performance
in question-answer (QA) settings.
Within this wider societal context, Artificial Intelligence
(AI) as the data-driven technologies that researchers have
been working for over five decades to provide information
may have been considered the right tool to rise to occasion

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28616

