The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Computational Foreseeability
Sarit Kraus1 , Kayla Boggess2 , Robert Kim3 , Bryan H. Choi3 , Lu Feng2
1
Bar-Ilan University
University of Virginia
3
Ohio State University
sarit@cs.biu.ac.il, {kjb5we, lu.feng}@virginia.edu, {kim.9566, choi.1399}@osu.edu
2

Abstract

works such as (Floridi and Cowls 2022) propose principles such as beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, and explicability to guide system decision making. Yet,
the generation of these expectations and principles is often
contested, incoherent, situationally dependent, inconsequential, and difficult to implement in real-world systems (Munn
2023; Huang et al. 2022). Thus, current work has left a gap
between expectations and practical application in computational methods.
Although autonomous systems struggle to define acceptable decisions in critical situations, the legal system has
well-established systems to ascertain reasonable decisionmaking for human actors. Foreseeability is a central concept
in tort law that serves the essential purpose of limiting liability to a reasonable scope in negligence liability (human
actors) (Zipursky 2009) and products liability (product manufacturers) (Owen 2010). Generally, a person (or entity) cannot be found negligent unless they either actually foresaw, or
a reasonable person similarly situated would have foreseen,
the risk of harm. Essentially, if an autonomous system is not
liable for its actions, it is deemed to have made a legally
acceptable choice. Thus, foreseeability can guide the decision making and evaluation of autonomous system actions
in critical situations.
Currently, manufacturers use data-driven bounds defined
by observed variables to assess system foreseeability for autonomous systems. These bounds establish safe behavior:
if the system operates within them, events are considered
foreseeable (Intelligent Transportation Systems Committee
2022). Yet, this approach faces several issues: it is rigid,
ignores uncertainty, depends on simulation data, and disregards subjective factors like human behavior. Thus, the
method does not effectively evaluate acceptable behaviors
in real-world scenarios, as the foreseeability envelope is far
narrower than the universe of computationally observable or
predictable events.
One dominant way courts assess reasonable foreseeability
is by using the “Hand formula” or “BPL” formula: Burden
< Probability × Loss (Posner 1972; Keating 2015; Selbst
2020). This formula considers three factors that are the probability of harm, the severity of potential harm, and the burden of precautions to prevent harm. These values are generated by a hypothetical reasonable entity in the same situation as the actor in question. If the burden of precautions

This paper addresses the challenges of computational accountability in autonomous systems, particularly in Autonomous Vehicles (AVs), where safety and efficiency often
conflict. We begin by examining current approaches such as
cost minimization, reward maximization, human-centered approaches, and ethical frameworks, noting their limitations addressing these challenges. Foreseeability is a central concept
in tort law that limits the accountability and legal liability of
an actor to a reasonable scope. Yet, current data-driven methods to determine foreseeability are rigid, ignore uncertainty,
and depend on simulation data. In this work, we advocate for
a new computational approach to establish foreseeability of
autonomous systems based on the legal “BPL” formula. We
provide open research challenges, using fully autonomous
vehicles as a motivating example, and call for researchers
to help autonomous systems make accountable decisions in
safety-critical scenarios.

1

Introduction

Imagine an autonomous vehicle (AV) detecting a pedestrian
walking in the same direction along the sidewalk with its advanced pedestrian movement prediction capabilities (Huang
et al. 2022). Now, the AV must decide whether to proceed
slowly behind the pedestrian, frequently stopping if it thinks
the pedestrian might step into the street, or pass the pedestrian quickly to minimize delays and enhance their safety,
risking a collision if the pedestrian suddenly enters the road.
What should the AV do in this critical scenario?
Many autonomous systems determine actions by minimizing cost or maximizing reward (Silver et al. 2021; Wirth
et al. 2017). Yet, cost minimization may not always choose
an acceptable decision because of the possibility of inaction (the AV incurs no cost by remaining stationary) and
the subjective nature of cost in critical situations (safety versus efficiency) if the reward system is poorly designed or
not well understood which is often true in complex critical
situations. Several projects, such as the Moral Machine Experiment (Awad et al. 2018) and The Molly Problem (Gal
et al. 2020), use real human input to measure expectations
for accountable decisions in critical situations. Furthermore,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28586

