The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S KIP P OOL: Improved Sparse Hierarchical Graph Pooling with
Differentiable Exploration
Sarith Imaduwage
Independent Researcher
imaduwagesarith932@gmail.com

Abstract

formation may be lost while capturing low-resolution representations of the graph, thus effective graph pooling must
preserve crucial graph-level information while leveraging
the benefits of local pooling. Hierarchical Graph Pooling
does exactly this by extracting hierarchical structures such
as clusters in input nodes’ feature space. Hierarchical graph
pooling can be categorized into two categories: Dense methods that try to overcome the inherent flat nature of GNNs
through the aggregation of nodes such that hierarchical clusters are formed & Sparse methods only select those deemed
as necessary to represent hierarchical clusters present. For
example,D IFF P OOL (Ying et al. 2018), a dense method calculates a soft assignment matrix for all the nodes over a predetermined number of clusters.
According to the SRC framework (Grattarola et al. 2022)
pooling operators are a combination of 3 functions: Select,
Reduce, and Connect. Select specifies the scheme that selects a subset of nodes, Reduce specifies the transformation of selected nodes to form output nodes, and Connect
specifies relations among output nodes. The Select function
of sparse methods assigns an importance score si to each
node i, then selects a subset based on the rank determined
by scores. We define a standard setup where the scores are
a function of node attributes xi that is si = f (xi ), Select
nodes with Top-K scores, and Reduce selected node i′ as
g(si′ )xi′ where g is an arbitrary function. We abuse the
notation si also for g(si ), meaning si := g(si ). We define methods that adhere to this setup as Standard-SparsePooling (SSP). T OP KP OOL (Gao and Ji 2019; Cangea et al.
2018) & SAGP OOL (Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019) belong to
SSP. T OP KP OOL calculate scores as f (xi ) = p⊤ xi and
SAGP OOL calculate as f (xi ) = p⊤ GNN(xi ) where p is
a trainable vector and GNN is any GNN.
Sparse methods like ASAPP OOL (Ranjan, Sanyal, and
Talukdar 2020), KMIS (Bacciu, Conte, and Landolfi 2023)
& E DGE P OOL (Diehl 2019) add complexities to this standard setup, so a thorough analysis of SSP is needed. The
key is to understand the role of scores in Selection and Reduction. The existing perspective is to treat scores as gating
values: si ≃ 1 on nodes to be selected, si ≃ 0 on the ones to
be discarded. Thus the ideal choice of g is the Sigmoid function. But empirically si can differ from the desired values
(i.e. 0 & 1) and still perform well or even outperform (see
Appendix A.1). Such misalignment between the empirical

Hierarchical pooling in conjunction with Graph Neural Networks (GNN) improves performance in graph classification
tasks. Hierarchical pooling has to produce Multi-resolution
representations while preserving graph-level information.
One such hierarchical pooling is Standard-Sparse-Pooling
(SSP). SSP assigns an importance score to each node, selects
the Top-K nodes, and scales their attributes by their scores to
produce the output. We reveal SSPs’ tendency to pool Over
Representative Regions (ORR) on the graph’s signal space
leaving some regions unpooled thus proving that SSP is incapable of preserving graph-level information robustly. We
propose to overcome this by an improved differentiable exploration over the graph’s signal space dubbed as skipping
hence the name S KIP P OOL. We tested S KIP P OOL & its variant S KIP P OOL -F ULL each against matching pooling methods. Proposed methods achieve new state-of-the-art performance on the majority of benchmark datasets. Moreover, we
show that they are more robust at capturing the graph signal
space consequently preserving more graph-level information
than their counterparts. Proposed methods require a reasonably few parameters and their execution time can be kept low
with parallelization.

Code — https://github.com/SarithRavI/SkipPool

1

Introduction

Multi-resolution representation captures the input across
various resolutions or scales to achieve maximal invariance
at a local level through local pooling (Bronstein, Bruna,
and Cohen 2021). Various works have investigated how local pooling on graphs can improve Graph Neural Network
(GNN) architectures which are the go-to solution for graphstructured data. Additionally, local pooling with GNNs allows the accumulation of information from the furthest in
the graph and computational efficacy due to the smaller
pooled graph. GNNs are shown to be effective across node
classification (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) & link
prediction (Schütt et al. 2017) and in graph-level classification (Xu et al. 2019) & regression (Gilmer et al. 2017; Duvenaud et al. 2015) tasks where the preservation of graphlevel information is important. In graph-level tasks some inCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17546

