The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SCOPE: Sign Language Contextual Processing with Embedding from LLMs
Yuqi Liu* , Wenqian Zhang* , Sihan Ren, Chengyu Huang, Jingyi Yu, Lan Xu†
ShanghaiTech University
{liuyq2, zhangwq2022, rensh2022, huangchy, yujingyi, xulan1}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

visual signals into intermediate gloss sequences (Stokoe Jr
2005), while SLT translates visual signals or glosses into
natural language. Yet, we notice that most existing methods, both SLR and SLT, focus on translating one sentence at a time, largely ignoring the contextual information of dialogue scenes. Indeed, it’s mainly due to the severe lack of sign language datasets for dialogue scenes with
sufficient contextual information. For example, the widely
adopted PHOENIX2014 (Koller, Forster, and Ney 2015)
and PHOENIX2014T datasets (Camgoz et al. 2018) focus
on weather forecasts. The How2Sign dataset (Duarte et al.
2021) addresses everyday scenarios but only contains isolated sign language sentences. The CSL-Daily dataset (Zhou
et al. 2021a) contains daily sentences but they lack preceding or following context and are essentially still independent statements. On the other hand, in the field of Natural
Language Processing, recent advances (Ouyang et al. 2022;
Touvron et al. 2023; qwe 2024) with large language models
(LLMs) have demonstrated that contextual information can
significantly improve semantic understanding and linguistic abilities. Some recent methods (Gong et al. 2024; Wong,
Camgöz, and Bowden 2024) utilize LLMs for sign language
understanding. Yet, they still focus on per-sentence translation and fall short of analyzing the contextual information
for dialogue scenarios. In a nutshell, both the dataset and
methodology for contextual vision-based sign language processing remain far-reaching.
To this end, we introduce SCOPE, a contextual sign language recognition and translation approach tailored for the
dialogue scenes, as shown in Fig. 1 for overview. Specifically, we first contribute a context-based dataset of Chinese
sign language dialogues. Our dataset covers a wide range of
both daily and professional conversations like shopping and
medical treatment. It includes 59,231 dialogue sequences
totaling 72.4 hours. For each sequence, we provide video
footage, gloss annotations, and dialogue texts, all by professional Deaf individuals from diverse backgrounds.
Secondly, we provide a strong baseline for vision-based
contextual sign language processing, which organically utilizes recent LLMs to extract the contextual information from
our unique dataset. For the SLR task, we extract sign motion features from the video footage and then introduce a
novel embedding alignment module to align them to the context embeddings from a frozen LLM. Then, we feed these

Sign languages, used by around 70 million Deaf individuals
globally, are visual languages that convey visual and contextual information. Current methods in vision-based sign language recognition (SLR) and translation (SLT) struggle with
dialogue scenes due to limited dataset diversity and the neglect of contextually relevant information. To address these
challenges, we introduce SCOPE (Sign language COntextual
Processing with Embedding from LLMs), a novel contextaware vision-based SLR and SLT framework. For SLR, we
utilize dialogue contexts through a multi-modal encoder to
enhance gloss-level recognition. For subsequent SLT, we further fine-tune a Large Language Model (LLM) by incorporating prior conversational context. We also contribute a new
sign language dataset that contains 72 hours of Chinese sign
language videos in contextual dialogues across various scenarios. Experimental results demonstrate that our SCOPE
framework achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets, including Phoenix-2014T, CSL-Daily, and our
SCOPE dataset. Moreover, surveys conducted with participants from the Deaf community further validate the robustness and effectiveness of our approach in real-world applications.

Code and Supplementary Materials —
https://github.com/Godheritage/SCOPE

Introduction
Sign language is the vital visual language used by the Deaf
and hard of hearing. Hence, vision-based sign language understanding provides a communication bridge between the
Deaf and hearing communities. Such a bridge should accurately and conveniently convey complex contextual information during communication between us humans, especially
for dialogue scenarios.
Currently, the two main tasks in vision-based sign
language processing include Sign Language Recognition
(SLR) (Jiao et al. 2023; Wei and Chen 2023; Zheng et al.
2023) and Sign Language Translation (SLT) (Zhao et al.
2024; Chen et al. 2022b; Yin et al. 2023). SLR converts
* The authors contributed equally
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5739

