The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLM4RSR: Large Language Models as Data Correctors for
Robust Sequential Recommendation
Yatong Sun1,2 , Xiaochun Yang1 * , Zhu Sun3 * , Yan Wang2 , Bin Wang1,4,5 * , Xinghua Qu6
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
4
National Frontiers Science Center for Industrial Intelligence and Systems Optimization, China
5
Key Laboratory of Data Analytics and Optimization for Smart Industry (Northeastern University), Ministry of Education,
China
6
Bytedance(Seed), Singapore
yatong@stumail.neu.edu.cn, yangxc@mail.neu.edu.cn, zhu sun@sutd.edu.sg, yan.wang@mq.edu.au,
binwang@mail.neu.edu.cn, quxinghua17@gmail.com

Sequential Recommenders (SRs) are trained to predict the
next item as the target given its preceding items as the input,
assuming every input-target pair is matched and is reliable for
training. However, users can be induced by external distractions to click on items inconsistent with their true preferences,
resulting in unreliable training instances with mismatched
input-target pairs. To resist unreliable data, researchers attempt to develop Robust SRs (RSRs). However, our data analysis unveils that existing RSRs are data-driven. That is, for
most instances formed by infrequently co-occurred items, existing RSRs are uncertain about their reliability. To fill this
gap, we propose a generic framework – LLM4RSR (Large
Language Models for Robust Sequential Recommendation)
to semantically complement data-driven RSRs by correcting
uncertain instances into reliable ones based on LLMs’ semantic comprehension of items beyond co-occurrence. In this
way, RSRs can be re-trained with the corrected data for better accuracy. This is a selective knowledge distillation procedure, where the LLM acts as a teacher guiding student RSRs
via uncertain instances. To align LLMs with the data correction task and mitigate inherent hallucinations, we equip the
LLM with profile, plan, and memory modules, which are automatically optimized via textual gradient descent, eliminating the need for human effort and expertise. Experiments on
four real-world datasets spanning eight backbones verify the
generality, effectiveness, and efficiency of LLM4RSR.

0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

BERD+
FMLP-Rec
STEAM
BirDRec

0

0
<30 <60 <90 <120 <150 <180
Max Co-occurrence Frequency per Instance

Figure 1: Bars show the ratio of instances with different max
co-occurrence frequencies on ML-1M dataset. Lines show
the relation between instances’ co-occurrence frequency and
RSRs’ confidence in identifying instances’ being reliable.
References of the RSRs can be found in experiments.

As such, a training instance for SRs typically consists of an
input item sequence and its next item as the target. However,
distractions in daily life (e.g. friends’ recommendations) can
lead users to interact with items that are inconsistent with
their true preferences (Sun et al. 2021). This results in unreliable training instances with either completely or partially
mismatched input-target pairs (Sun et al. 2023a), which depends on whether the item caused by distractions acts as an
unreliable target or an unreliable input, respectively.
Such an issue has prompted researchers to develop robust SRs (RSRs) that can resist unreliable instances (Lin
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024a). However, existing RSRs
face a core limitation as shown in Fig. 1, that is, as datadriven methods, they tend to confidently classify instances
involving frequently co-occurred items as reliable while being uncertain about the reliability of most instances formed
by infrequently co-occurred items. That is, it is challenging for existing RSRs to differentiate whether the infrequent
co-occurrence of two items is due to external influences
(e.g. two irrelevant items on sale simultaneously), or data
sparsity (e.g. two relevant but unpopular items seldom cooccur). Note that the co-occurrence frequency of an item pair
(vi , vj ) is the number of training instances that contain vi as

Code — https://github.com/AlchemistYT/LLM4RSR.

1

0.6

Confidence

Ratio of Instances

Abstract

Introduction

Sequential Recommenders (SRs) (Wang et al. 2019a; Fang
et al. 2020) have recently gained significant attention due to
the dynamic and evolving nature of user preferences in realworld scenarios. SRs are trained to predict the next item a
user will interact with based on her preceding interactions.
* denotes the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12604

