The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoCoCo: Improving Text-Guided Video Inpainting for Better Consistency,
Controllability and Compatibility
Bojia Zi1 , Shihao Zhao2 , Xianbiao Qi* 3 , Jianan Wang3 , Yukai Shi3 , Qianyu Chen1 , Bin Liang1 ,
Rong Xiao4 , Kam-Fai Wong1 , Lei Zhang3
1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
2 The University of Hong Kong,
3 International Digital Economy Academy,
4 IntelliFusion Inc.
{bjzi, qychen, kfwong}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, bin.liang@cuhk.edu.hk, shzhao@cs.hku.hk,
{qixianbiao, rongxiao, wendyjnwang}@gmail.com, {shiyukai, zhanglei}@idea.edu.cn

Abstract

Wang, and Chen 2021; Li et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023)
has also experienced a surge in development recently. As a
pivotal subtask within video generation, video inpainting involves restoring or replacing missing or corrupted regions
within a video clip, given specified masks. This technology boasts a diverse array of applications, encompassing
video completion, video recovery, and video dewatermarking (Zhou et al. 2023).
Video inpainting methods can be summarised as two
types: unconditional and conditional. The unconditional approach primarily aims to restore corrupted visual content
within a video based solely on its background or surrounding information (Kim et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019; Li et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2023). Conversely, conditional video inpainting relies on additional information, such as semantic details (Zhang et al. 2023b), and sketches (Wang et al.
2023c), to generate visual content within specified masked
regions across frames. Notably, text prompts emerge as a
pivotal condition, since they are more intuitive and easily
obtainable. Furthermore, the recent advancements in textguided image inpainting (Ju et al. 2024) and text-to-video
generation (Wang et al. 2023a; Guo et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2024) have significantly motivated our exploration into textguided video inpainting.
Regarding the field of text-guided video inpainting, prior
research has made initial explorations. VideoComposer
(Wang et al. 2023c), for example, has focused on creating a unified video generation model that can simultaneously receive various conditions to control video generation.
Among these conditions lies the utilization of mask conditions in conjunction with text conditions to achieve textguided video inpainting. AVID (Zhang et al. 2023b) is another well-established method for text-guided video inpainting, which introduces a motion module with temporal capability into the image inpainting model, and leverages the
image inpainting model’s ability to control text to achieve
text-guided video inpainting.
Now, we rethink the task of text-guided video inpainting.
Compared to the well-studied text-to-video generation task,
text-guided video inpainting faces much more challenges.
Unlike text-to-video generation, video inpainting not only
requires consistency across frames, but also consistency be-

Video inpainting is a crucial task with diverse applications,
including fine-grained video editing, video recovery, and
video dewatermarking. However, most existing video inpainting methods primarily focus on visual content completion
while neglecting text information. There are only a limited
number of text-guided video inpainting techniques, and these
techniques struggle with maintaining visual quality and exhibit poor semantic representation capabilities. In this paper, we introduce CoCoCo a text-guided video inpainting
diffusion framework. To address the aforementioned challenges, we enhance both the training data and model structure. Specifically, we devise an instance-aware region selection strategy for masked area sampling and develop a
novel motion block that incorporates efficient 3D full attention and textual cross attention. Additionally, our CoCoCo framework can be seamlessly integrated with various
personalized text-to-image diffusion models through a delicate training-free transfer mechanism. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that CoCoCo can create high-quality visual content with enhanced temporal consistency, improved
text controllability, and better compatibility with personalized
image models.

Code — https://github.com/zibojia/COCOCO
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12035

Introduction
With the advancements in diffusion models, the realm of
video generation has witnessed remarkable progress (Ho
et al. 2022b; Singer et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023a;
Pika Labs 2023; Brooks et al. 2024). Techniques such as
VideoCrafter(Chen et al. 2024) and AnimateDiff(Guo et al.
2023) have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in generating videos. Recent groundbreaking works like Sora(Brooks
et al. 2024) and Gen-3(Gen-3 2024) have elevated the field
to new heights. Beyond these video generation models,
video inpainting (Kim et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2019; Zeng, Fu, and Chao 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Ouyang,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11067

