The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Citations and Trust in LLM Generated Responses
Yifan Ding1 , Matthew Facciani1 , Ellen Joyce1 , Amrit Poudel1 , Sanmitra Bhattacharya2 , Balaji
Veeramani2 , Sal Aguinaga2 , Tim Weninger1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
2
AI Center for Excellence, Deloitte & Touche LLP, New York City, NY, 10112
{yding4, mfaccian, apoudel, ejoyce3, tweninge}@nd.edu, {saguinaga, bveeramani, sanmbhattachary}@deloitte.com

Abstract
Please enter your question:

Question answering systems are rapidly advancing, but their
opaque nature may impact user trust. We explored trust
through an anti-monitoring framework, where trust is predicted to be correlated with presence of citations and inversely related to checking citations. We tested this hypothesis with a live question-answering experiment that presented
text responses generated using a commercial Chatbot along
with varying citations (zero, one, or five), both relevant and
random, and recorded if participants checked the citations and
their self-reported trust in the generated responses. We found
a significant increase in trust when citations were present, a
result that held true even when the citations were random; we
also found a significant decrease in trust when participants
checked the citations. These results highlight the importance
of citations in enhancing trust in AI-generated content.

How far is it from the
Earth to the Moon?
The average distance from Earth to the
Moon is about 384,400 kilometers
(238,900 miles) [1,2,3,4,5]
How much do you trust this answer?
7

1

10

Figure 1: AI Chatbot system answering a user’s question
with five hyperlink citations. The presence of citations significantly increases the user’s trust of the response.

Code — https://github.com/yifding/TrustCitationLLM
Datasets — https://https://osf.io/yqm8z/

touch is absent because AI systems lack anthropomorphic
traits and social nuances (Miller 2019). In other words, AI
systems, which are largely devoid of social motives, may increase trust among users who seek impartial and objective
information (Sambrook 2012; Rosen 1999).
Human trust in AI is a complicated subject that depends
on several factors, with accuracy being the most important
contributor (Lucassen and Schraagen 2011) and explainability (Rawal et al. 2021) following not far behind. Accuracy refers to the AI’s ability to provide correct information consistently. Explainability entails the articulation
of the model’s decision-making pathways, rendering them
transparent and comprehensible to users. Explainability is
crucial for building a trust-based relationship between humans and AI (Stephanidis et al. 2019), significantly influencing users’ willingness to engage with AI systems (Hoff
and Bashir 2015).
Existing research on explainability primarily focuses
on enabling AI engineers to understand model behavior. However, empirical investigations of explainability’s
role in user trust are limited, and the evidence is
mixed regarding whether explainability indeed increases
user trust (Scharowski et al. 2023; Nothdurft, Heinroth, and Minker 2013). Some studies report positive effects (Ehsan et al. 2019), while others find no significant
impact (Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. 2021; Zhang, Liao, and
Bellamy 2020; Cheng et al. 2019). These mixed results

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023) stand at the forefront of contemporary
artificial intelligence (AI), wielding immense potential to
reshape the way humans interact with technology and information. However, a critical question persists: Are these
LLMs and their by-products trusted by users? The answer
holds profound implications for the future of AI in society.
Trust (Baier 1986), a cornerstone of human relationships and
societal functioning, plays an indispensable role in the sharing and acceptance of information.
Human trust dynamics are complex, often deeply rooted
in social norms and interpersonal relationships. Humans
navigate complex social structures by building trust through
shared experiences, reputations, and accountability mechanisms (Muir 1987). Leading social theories, like the Principle of Social Proof, suggest that social conventions might
predispose individuals to favor human sources over algorithmic sources (Cialdini 2009). This predicts that responses
from an AI system might be more trusted when a human source corroborates its response. Conversely, responses
from an AI system might be more trusted when the human
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23787

