The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dust-Mamba: An Efficient Dust Storm Detection Network with Multiple Data
Sources
Cong Bai1 , Zhonghao Lin1 , Jinglin Zhang2 * , Shengyong Chen3
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shangdong University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology
congbai@zjut.edu.cn,201906120421@zjut.edu.cn,jinglin.Zhang@sdu.edu.cn,sy@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Accurate detection of dust storms is challenging due to complex meteorological interactions. With the development of
deep learning, deep neural networks have been increasingly
applied to dust storm detection, offering better learning and
generalization capabilities compared to traditional physical
modeling. However, existing methods face some limitations,
leading to performance bottlenecks in dust storm detection.
From the task perspective, existing research focuses on occurrence detection while neglecting intensity detection. From the
data perspective, existing research fails to explore the utilization of multi-source data. From the model perspective, most
models are built on convolutional neural networks, which
have an inherent limitation in capturing long-range dependencies. To address the challenges mentioned, this study proposes Dust-Mamba. To the best of our knowledge, this study
is the first attempt to accomplish both the occurrence and intensity detection of dust storms with advanced deep learning
technology. In Dust-Mamba, multi-source data is introduced
to provide a comprehensive perspective, Mamba and attention
are applied to boost feature selection while maintaining longrange modeling capability. Additionally, this study proposes
Structure Sharing Transfer Learning Strategies for intensity
detection, which further enhances the performance of DustMamba with minimal time cost. As shown by experiments,
Dust-Mamba achieves Dice scores of 0.963 for occurrence
detection and 0.560 for intensity detection, surpassing several baseline models. In conclusion, this study offers valuable
baselines for dust storm detection, with significant reference
value and promising application potential.

Figure 1: (a) Existing research predominantly utilizes satellite data to detect the occurrence of dust storms. (b) Our research aims to utilize multi-source data as input to detect
both the occurrence and intensity of dust storms.

the occurrence and intensity of dust storms, where occurrence detection identifies the presence and intensity detection evaluates intensity levels. Traditional methods employ physical models to detect dust storms, and satellite remote sensing data has been widely utilized (Li et al. 2021).
A typical method is to select specific satellite bands and
model them for detection. The Infrared Difference Dust Index (IDDI) (Legrand, Plana-Fattori, and N’doumé 2001)
is an early practice for dust remote sensing in the Sahel
and Sahara regions. The Normalized Difference Dust Index
(NDDI) (Qu et al. 2006) utilizes the 0.469 and 2.13 µm
bands of Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS) to detect dust storms, such as in northern China
and southern Mongolia. The Brightness Temperature Adjusted Dust Index (BADI) (Yue et al. 2017) uses the brightness temperatures of three thermal infrared MODIS bands
(band20 , band31 , band32 ) to provide high accuracy detection of dust storms. However, due to the complexity of
weather systems, physical models struggle to comprehensively consider all influencing factors, limiting their detection and generalization capabilities (Rivas-Perea, Rosiles,
and Chacon 2010; Li et al. 2021).
With the development of deep learning, deep neural networks have become powerful tools to analyze complex
data (Ma, Pan, and Bai 2024; Zhao et al. 2023). Some
studies have explored the application of convolutional neu-

Introduction
Dust storms are a disastrous weather phenomenon that frequently occur in northern and northwestern China (Zhou
and Zhang 2003; Wang et al. 2004), West Asia (Hamidi,
Kavianpour, and Shao 2013; Khaniabadi et al. 2017) and
North Africa (El-ossta, Qahwaji, and Ipson 2013). Severe
dust storms have a serious impact on human health and the
environment (Goudie 2009; Middleton and Kang 2017), emphasizing the urgent need to improve the precision of dust
storm detection.
As shown in Figure 1, compared to existing research,
our work aims to use multi-source data to detect both
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27813

