The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

R2 -Art: Category-Level Articulation Pose Estimation from Single RGB Image via
Cascade Render Strategy
Li Zhang1, 2, 3 , Haonan Jiang4 , Yukang Huo5 , Yan Zhong6 , Jianan Wang3 , Xue Wang1 ,
Rujing Wang1 † , Liu Liu7 † *
1

Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3
Astribot, Shenzhen, China
4
Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang, China
5
China Agricultural University. Beijing, China
6
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University. Beijing, China
7
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
zanly20mail.ustc.edu.cn, 211122030127@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract

objects is crucial in many downstream multimedia and machine vision tasks, such as embodied AI (Yu et al. 2023;
Karrer et al. 2011), robot manipulation (Xiong et al. 2023),
human-object interactions (Liu et al. 2021), and augmented
reality (Amin and Govilkar 2015).
Generally, compared to instance-level 6D pose estimation, depth-based category-level 6D pose estimation requires
machines to understand the 3D rotation and 3D translation
of unseen objects, with the given partial observations. However, these solutions face the following challenges:
(i) Inaccurate and expensive depth information. Depth
sensors are prone to introduce noise and inaccuracies, particularly with distant or low-reflectivity surfaces.
(ii) Self-occlusion. Mutual and self-occlusion can cause
indistinguishable object views, leading to ambiguous refinement targets. This issue is especially common in articulated
objects with multiple movable parts.
(iii) Implicit learning manner. Previous works often
use implicit object representation methods, such as normalization (Wang et al. 2019) or key-point modeling (Xue
et al. 2021), which involve time-consuming post-processing.
These approaches overlook explicit pose representation
within object categories, limiting performance in 6D pose
estimation.
To deal with the first challenge, we cast the category-level
object pose estimation task as a pose regression task from
a single RGB image. Concretely, we use a color-sensitive
backbone (DINO V2) to extract the pose features and then
use a size-sensitive backbone (HRNet) to regress the depth
in parallel. Considering the correlation between object pose
and mask, we propose a cascade render strategy for further
pose refinement.
To address the second challenge, the basic mechanism behind our method is to employ a joint-centric pose modeling
mechanism. This approach estimates part poses by predicting per-joint states, such as revolute joint angles and translational joint distances. This is because joint states can still be
perceived in occlusion scenarios, whereas part-centric meth-

Human life is filled with articulated objects. Previous works
for estimating the pose of category-level articulated objects
rely on costly 3D point clouds or RGB-D images. In this paper, our goal is to estimate category-level articulation poses
from a single RGB image, where we propose R2 -Art, a novel
category-level Articulation pose estimation framework from
a single RGB image and a cascade Render strategy. Given
an RGB image as input, R2 -Art estimates per-part 6D pose
for the articulation. Specifically, we design parallel regression
branches tailored to generate camera-to-root translation and
rotation. Using the predicted joint states, we perform PC prior
transformation and deformation with a joint-centric modeling approach. For further refinement, a cascade render strategy is proposed for projecting the 3D deformed prior onto the
2D mask. Extensive experiments are provided to validate our
R2 -Art on various datasets ranging from synthetic datasets to
real-world scenarios, demonstrating the superior performance
and robustness of the R2 -Art. We believe that this work has
the potential to be applied in many fields including robotics,
embodied intelligence, and augmented reality.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects are ubiquitous in our daily lives, spanning from small table-scale objects (e.g., eyeglasses) to
large-size objects (e.g., dishwashers). Unlike rigid objects
characterized by fixed and unchanging shapes, articulated
objects consist of a limited number of interconnected rigid
components (linked by various joints), which can easily conduct relative motion between the rigid parts. Kinematic constraints also make articulated object pose estimation more
challenging. Accurate estimation of 6D pose for articulated
* Li Zhang and Haonan Jiang contributed equally.
This work was done when Li Zhang was an intern at Astribot.
Corresponding authors† : Rujing Wang and Liu Liu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9985

