The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ALRMR-GEC: Adjusting Learning Rate Based on Memory Rate to Optimize the
Edit Scorer for Grammatical Error Correction
Zhixiao Wu, Yao Lu* , Jie Wen* , Guangming Lu
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
wzxnh24428@gmail.com, luyao2021@hit.edu.cn, jiewen pr@126.com, luguangm@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

binations and spelling. However, common gradients-based
methods (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011; Tieleman 2012;
Kingma and Ba 2014) fail to guide models to enhance generalization ability considering gradients alone do not guarantee the models to enhance generalization ability since
the gradients only provide the information about how to
minimize the training loss. For example, the training period
using Adamw optimizer with 1e-5 as the learning rate gets
worse performance on the test dataset (Figure 1b) although
it minimizes the training loss faster than the period using
1e-6 (Figure 1a). Therefore, researchers have to adjust the
learning rate artificially to ensure satisfactory generalization
performance, which is costly and labor-intensive.
Finding a solution to separate generalized knowledge and
specific knowledge learning is an urgent issue. In our analysis, generalized knowledge and specific knowledge represent the commonality and individuality of a model when
learning from different data. For specific data, generalized
knowledge can be acquired from other data while specific
knowledge cannot. Therefore, we introduce the accuracy of
the model on a specific subset not involved in later training (memorability) to indicate whether the current learning
rate favors the generalized knowledge accumulation. Exploratory experiments are conducted in Figure 2 and the
analysis can be seen as the following.
Firstly, we explore the influence of learning rates on
memorability in Figure 2a and observe that memorability is
notably diminished when the learning rate is far away from
the favorable learning rate. The above observation implies
that memorability is a trade-off of two competing processes,
designated as A and B. When the learning rate is excessively
low (high), A (B) dominates and leads to low memorability.
Secondly, we explore the characteristics of the above processes in Figure 2b. Applied by small learning rates including 1e-7, process A dominates and the memorability tends to
increase during the later training period. Correspondingly,
applied by large learning rates including 5e-8, process B
dominates and the memorability tends to decrease.
Finally, the correlation between generalization ability
and learning rates can be seen in Figure 2c. Models trained
with learning rates that keep memorability at a high level attain favorable performance on the test dataset. Specifically,
1.5e-6 is the favorable learning rate with nearly 84.8% accuracy on the test set and keeps memorability at a higher level

Edit-based approaches for Grammatical Error Correction
(GEC) have attracted volume attention due to their outstanding explanations of the correction process and rapid inference. Through exploring the characteristics of the generalized and specific knowledge learning for GEC, we discover
that efficiently training GEC systems with satisfactory generalization capacity prefers more generalized knowledge rather
than specific knowledge. Current gradient-based methods for
training GEC systems, however, usually prioritize minimizing training loss over generalization loss. This paper proposes
the strategy of Adjusting Learning Rate Based on Mermory
Rate to optimize the edit-based GEC scorer (ALRMRGEC). Specifically, we introduce the memory rate, a novel
metric, to provide an explicit indicator for the model’s state
of learning generalized and specific knowledge, which can
effectively guide the GEC system to adjust the learning rate
timely. Extensive experiments, conducted by optimizing the
published edit scorer on the BEA2019 dataset, have shown
our ALRMR-GEC significantly enhances the model generalization ability with stable and satisfactory performance nearly
irrespective of the initial learning rate selection. Also, our
method can accelerate the training over tenfold faster in certain cases. Finally, the experiments indicate the memory rate
introduced in our ALRMR-GEC guides the GEC editscorer
to learn more generalized knowledge.

Introduction
Grammatical Error Correction (GEC) involves automatically identifying the errors and converting the source text to
its clean version. Edit-based approaches have attracted volume attention due to their outstanding explanations of the
correction process and rapid inference (Omelianchuk et al.
2020; Tarnavskyi, Chernodub, and Omelianchuk 2022). The
editscorers (Sorokin 2022) use pre-trained Transformerbased models as encoders to identify the correctness of generated edits by GECToR (Omelianchuk et al. 2020) and
achieve state-of-the-art quality. However, how to further unleash the potential of GEC models to get satisfactory performance remains an important issue.
GEC models aim to learn generalized knowledge like
grammar rather than specific knowledge like word com* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21608

