The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MindTuner:
Cross-Subject Visual Decoding with Visual Fingerprint and Semantic Correction
Zixuan Gong1 , Qi Zhang1 , Guangyin Bao1 ,
Lei Zhu1 , Rongtao Xu2 , Ke Liu3 , Liang Hu1 , Duoqian Miao1, *
1

Tongji University
Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Anding Hospital
{gongzx,zhangqi cs,baogy,dqmiao}@tongji.edu.cn
2

Abstract

in the cerebral cortex (Linden 2021). Consequently, fMRI
has garnered considerable attention in image retrieval and
reconstruction tasks.
Open-source large-scale fMRI datasets, such as the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD) (Allen et al. 2022), advance
deep learning models to shine in fMRI decoding. Pre-trained
cross-modality models like CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) offer effective representation space and models for high-quality visual reconstruction. A large body of literature demonstrates the feasibility of training single-subject decoding models to reconstruct high-fidelity images (Lin, Sprague, and Singh 2022;
Scotti et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Takagi and Nishimoto
2023; Lu et al. 2023). However, single-subject decoding has
drawbacks, including the need to train a unique model for
each subject, making it challenging to generalize to new subjects and requiring a substantial amount of fMRI data for
training. As is widely recognized, acquiring a large amount
of fMRI data for each subject is time-consuming, laborintensive, and impractical in practical scenarios. Unfortunately, most current research focuses on single-subject visual decoding rather than exploring the challenging commonalities of the human brain. Consequently, there is an
urgent need for cross-subject decoding models that can be
effectively transferred to new subjects and perform well in
the few-shot setting, as depicted in Figure 1.
The key to cross-subject few-shot decoding lies in effectively utilizing extensive prior knowledge from other subjects or additional modalities. On the one hand, one successful strategy for leveraging knowledge from other subjects involves aligning them to a shared space. Ridge regression is
commonly employed for this purpose, aligning voxel inputs
from different subjects (Scotti et al. 2024; Ferrante, Boccato, and Toschi 2023). This approach is preferred due to the
low signal-to-noise ratio in fMRI data, where complex nonlinear models tend to overfit noise. Nonetheless, the process
of visual information perception and generating brain activity in each individual incorporates unique components, referred to as the visual fingerprint (Wang, Murai, and Whitney 2020) (refer to Preliminary for more detailed analysis).
Current linear alignment methods only enable new subjects
to conform to the shared components across subjects, neglecting the perception difference derived from their distinctive visual fingerprint and resulting in limited performance.

Decoding natural visual scenes from brain activity has flourished, with extensive research in single-subject tasks and,
however, less in cross-subject tasks. Reconstructing highquality images in cross-subject tasks is a challenging problem due to profound individual differences between subjects
and the scarcity of data annotation. In this work, we proposed MindTuner for cross-subject visual decoding, which
achieves high-quality and rich semantic reconstructions using only 1 hour of fMRI training data benefiting from the phenomena of visual fingerprint in the human visual system and a
novel fMRI-to-text alignment paradigm. Firstly, we pre-train
a multi-subject model among 7 subjects and fine-tune it with
scarce data on new subjects, where LoRAs with Skip-LoRAs
are utilized to learn the visual fingerprint. Then, we take the
image modality as the intermediate pivot modality to achieve
fMRI-to-text alignment, which achieves impressive fMRI-totext retrieval performance and corrects fMRI-to-image reconstruction with fine-tuned semantics. The results of both qualitative and quantitative analyses demonstrate that MindTuner
surpasses state-of-the-art cross-subject visual decoding models on the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD), whether using training data of 1 hour or 40 hours.

Introduction
Do our brains form unified perceptions when we observe
similar objects? Do our unique understandings influence
these perceptions differently? The human brain exhibits substantial anatomical similarities in terms of functional organization, including shared attributes like memory, functional
connectivity, and visual cortex functions (Chen et al. 2017;
Fingelkurts, Fingelkurts, and Kähkönen 2005; Stringer et al.
2019). However, individual neural biases always exist due to
inherent differences (Wang, Murai, and Whitney 2020). Understanding both the similarities and gaps in perception has
profound implications for the fields of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) (Nie et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2014) and Brain-Computer
Interface (BCI) research (Wang et al. 2009). Visual decoding is a straightforward way to understand the brain, where
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a widely
embraced non-invasive tool used to decode natural visual
stimuli, revealing intricate perceptual and semantic details
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14247

