The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Understanding EFX Allocations: Counting and Variants
Tzeh Yuan Neoh1,2 , Nicholas Teh3
1

Institute of High-Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
University of Oxford, UK
neohty@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, nicholas.teh@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

is considerably stronger compared to EF1. However, while
EF1 allocations always exists and can be found in polynomial time (even when agents have arbitrary monotone valuations over the goods) (Budish 2011; Lipton et al. 2004), the
existence of EFX remains one of the biggest open problems
in the field of fair division (Caragiannis et al. 2019; Moulin
2019; Procaccia 2020).
Despite substantial efforts, the existence of EFX allocations have only been proven for several restricted instances.
These include, but are not limited to (1) when n = 2 (Plaut
and Roughgarden 2020), (2) when n = 3 with at least one
additive agent (Akrami et al. 2023), (3) when m = n + 3
(Mahara 2023), and (4) under identical valuations (Plaut
and Roughgarden 2020). Moreover, many previous algorithms have been shown to not extend to more general cases
(Chaudhury et al. 2021b; Mahara 2023).
In this work, we ask a more general question: How many
EFX allocations are there? If there is an instance where EFX
fail to exist, the answer is clearly 0. However, for instances
where EFX allocation(s) always exists, the answer to this
question is substantially unclear. This question was first explored in Suksompong (2020) where they show that while
there is always an exponential (with respect to the number of
goods) number of EF1 allocations, there could be far fewer
EFX allocations. In particular, when there are two agents,
there can be as few as two EFX allocations, no matter the
number of goods. In this paper, we study the problem of
counting the minimum number of EFX allocations for several restricted instances, and for two variants of EFX in more
general instances.
We posit that pursuing this line of inquiry may uncover
valuable insights regarding (the existence/computation of)
EFX allocations, and make some progress towards resolving
“fair division’s most enigmatic question” (Procaccia 2020):

Envy-freeness up to any good (EFX) is a popular and important fairness property in the fair allocation of indivisible goods, of which its existence in general is still an open
question. In this work, we investigate the problem of determining the minimum number of EFX allocations for a given
instance, arguing that this approach may yield valuable insights into the existence and computation of EFX allocations.
We focus on restricted instances where the number of goods
slightly exceeds the number of agents, and extend our analysis to weighted EFX (WEFX) and a novel variant of EFX
for general monotone valuations, termed EFX+. In doing so,
we identify the transition threshold for the existence of allocations satisfying these fairness notions. Notably, we resolve
open problems regarding WEFX by proving polynomial-time
computability under binary additive valuations and establishing the first constant-factor approximation for two agents.

1

Introduction

The field of fair division models many real-world problems
such as course allocation (Budish and Cantillon 2012), inheritance division (Pratt and Zeckhauser 1990), and divorce
settlements (Brams and Taylor 1996) (also refer to survey
by Amanatidis et al. (2023)). Among the numerous fairness properties that have been proposed, envy-freeness (EF)
(and its approximations or variants) remains one of the most
widely studied in the field. Intuitively, an allocation is said
to be envy-free if every agent values his bundle of goods at
least as much as he values any other agent’s bundle of goods.
However, in the setting with indivisible goods, a complete
envy-free allocation may fail to exist. Hence, many works
consider relaxations of envy-freeness.
Perhaps the most prominent of these relaxations are envyfreeness up to any good (EFX) (Caragiannis et al. 2019) and
envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) (Lipton et al. 2004). An
allocation satisfies EFX if any envy that an agent has towards
another agent can be eliminated by removing any good in the
latter agent’s bundle, and it satisfies EF1 if any envy that an
agent has toward another agent can be eliminated by removing some good in the latter agent’s bundle (refer to Section
2 for the formal definitions). The argument in favor of EFX
as the preferred notion of fairness lies in the fact that EFX

• Establishing tighter upper bounds on the minimum number of EFX allocations allows us to identify ‘hard’ instances for EFX. These ‘hard’ instances can be used either as a first step to find an instance where an EFX allocation fails to exist, or to design algorithms tackling these
‘hard’ instances.
• Establishing tighter lower bounds on special cases allows
us to better understand the kind of EFX allocations that
exist in those special cases.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14036

