The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Residual Diffusion Deblurring Model for Single Image Defocus Deblurring
Haoxuan Feng1 , Haohui Zhou1 , Tian Ye1 , Sixiang Chen1 , Lei Zhu1,2 *
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hfeng108, hzhou142, tye610, schen691}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
leizhu@ust.hk

Abstract
Defocus deblurring is a challenging task due to the spatially
varying nature of defocus blur with multiple plausible solutions of a single given image. However, most existing methods falter when faced with extensive and variable defocus
blur, either ignoring it or relying on additional loss functions to enhance perceptual quality. This often results in unrealistic reconstructions and compromised generalizability. In
this paper, we propose a novel Residual Diffusion Deblurring
Model framework for single image defocus deblurring. Our
approach integrates a pre-trained defocus map estimator and
a lightweight pre-deblur module with a learnable receptive
field, providing crucial posterior information to effectively
address large-scale and varying shaped defocus blur. In addition, a carefully-design denoising network enables the generation of diverse reconstructions from a single input. This
approach not only significantly improves the perceptual quality of defocus deblurring outputs through multi-step residual
learning, but also offers a more efficient inference strategy.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
competitive performance on real-world defocus deblurring
image datasets across both perceptual and distortion evaluation metrics.

Figure 1: Perceptual evaluation metrics (LPIPS and FID192 )
comparison on DPDD dataset (Abuolaim and Brown 2020)
demonstrates that our RDDM achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on single image defocus deblurring task.
image visual quality by obfuscating crucial details and information. This degradation can adversely impact downstream
computer vision tasks, including object detection (He et al.
2024a) and semantic segmentation (Xie et al. 2021), making
the defocus deblurring an important challenge.
Traditional approaches (Zhuo and Sim 2011; Karaali and
Jung 2018; Levin et al. 2007; D’Andres et al. 2016; Lee et al.
2019) to defocus blur mitigation typically employ a twostep procedure: first estimating the per-pixel blur kernel, followed by applying non-blind deconvolution to obtain an allin-focus image. Although these methods are simple and effective for addressing uniform blur, they often struggle with
the inherent non-linearity and varying shapes of real-world
defocus blur, which defy confinement to predefined shapes
such as disc or simple Gaussian kernels. Furthermore, even
with an accurately estimated kernel, the Gibbs phenomenon
(Yuan et al. 2007) introduces ringing artefacts that present
additional challenges.
In recent years, deep learning strategies have attempted to
directly restore sharp images from blurred inputs by leveraging the modeling capabilities of neural networks to adapt
to various blur distributions (Lee et al. 2021; Cun and Pun
2020; Abuolaim and Brown 2020; Ruan et al. 2022; He
et al. 2024b; Ye et al. 2022). These methods typically optimize pixel-level losses (e.g., L1, L2) to improve metrics
such as PSNR. However, two significant shortcomings re-

Introduction
Defocus deblurring is an important task in image processing and computer vision that aims to restore a all-in-focus
image from a defocused image (Abuolaim and Brown 2020;
Ruan et al. 2022; Cun and Pun 2020). Defocus blur is always
caused by using a large aperture to increase the luminous
flux and thus shorten the exposure time to capture an image.
This creates a shallow depth of field (DoF), causing points
far from the focal plane to be projected onto the camera sensor as out-of-focus circles of confusion (COC) that exceed
the permitted diameter (Potmesil and Chakravarty 1981).
Using a smaller aperture will provide a deeper depth of field
but reducing the vision quality and increasing the exposure
time will make it easier to produce motion blur on moving
objects. The complexity of defocus blurring stems from its
spatial variability and the fact that each pixel point produces
a different COC diameter, which significantly undermines
* Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2960

