The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M2 N: A Progressive Macro-to-Micro 3D Modeling Scheme for
Unveiling Drug-Target Affinity
Tianxu Lv1 , Jie Zhu1 , Jinyi Liu1 , Shiyun Nie1 , Hongnian Tian1 , Yang Xiao2 ,
Yuan Liu1 * , Lihua Li3 * , Xiang Pan1,4 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518071, China
3
Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Instrumentation, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
4
The PRC Ministry of Education Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Healthcare, Wuxi, Jiangsu
214122, China
lyuan1800@jiangnan.edu.cn, lilh@hdu.edu.cn, xiangpan@jiangnan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

structure-based methods (Nguyen et al. 2021; Jiang et al.
2020; Ma et al. 2023; Bi et al. 2023), and hybrid methods (Yuan, Chen, and Chen 2022). Sequence-based methods focus on the sequential nature of protein amino acid
sequences and drug SMILES strings, leveraging techniques
from natural language processing (NLP) for DTA prediction. In comparison, 2D structure-based methods extend the
analysis to the topological and geometrical aspects of drug
molecules and proteins. Drug molecular graphs are typically
constructed from SMILES strings with atoms as nodes and
bonds as edges, while protein graphs are built based on contact maps. Thus, graph neural networks (GNNs) are often
employed to learn structural information from these graph
representations. Hybrid methods aim to integrate both sequence and structure features, combining the strengths of the
two approaches to enhance DTA prediction performance.
However, the aforementioned methods are primarily engaged in single-scale modeling of proteins and molecules.
For proteins, they often operate at the macro (residue) scale,
which cannot provide high-resolution information at the micro (atom) scale. Recent studies have demonstrated the potential of multi-scale protein modeling (Zheng et al. 2024),
which offers a comprehensive understanding of protein
structures and functions. For drug molecules, current models
typically focus on micro (atom) scale modeling, neglecting
the importance of macro (functinal groups, FGs) scale. FGs
are specific groups of atoms within a molecule that determine the characteristic chemical reactions of the molecule
(Liang, Neumann, and Ritter 2013). The presence and arrangement of FGs in a drug can influence its interactions
with targets, affecting the drug’s efficacy and pharmacokinetics (Lipinski 2004). Several works have shown the effectiveness of FGs in molecule design (Wu et al. 2024a). Thus,
a core question for DTA prediction is how to optimally exploit macro-to-micro scale representations of targets-drugs.
Based on the above considerations, we propose a novel
progressive Macro-to-Micro 3D modeling Network (M2 N),
designed to refine the representations of protein/drug from
residue/FG-scale to atom-scale for accurate DTA prediction.
First, M2 N constructs a 3D drug FG-based graph and utilizes a DFG-GTformer to assimilate structural information

Accurate drug-target affinity (DTA) prediction holds significant potential in the field of artificial intelligence (AI)-based
drug discovery. However, existing methods primarily operate
at a single scale, specifically at the macro (residue) scale for
target proteins and the micro (atom) scale for drugs, which
limits their ability to provide information at micro (atom)
scale for targets and macro (functional group, FG) scale for
drugs. This limitation hinders a comprehensive understanding of the binding patterns and properties of drug-target pairs.
In this paper, we propose a progressive Macro-to-Micro 3D
Modeling Network (M²N) that enables macro (residue/FG)
to micro (atom) scale unified modeling, termed cross-scale,
to predict DTA. Specifically, M²N operates drugs by learning
their chemical properties and structural characteristics from
a 3D FG graph to a 3D atom graph. Correspondingly, M²N
encodes proteins from a 3D residue graph to a 3D atom graph
to exploit their sequence, evolutionary, and geometric representations. Such cross-scale 3D modeling scheme allows for
coarse-to-fine embedding optimization, followed by an adaptive fusion module to dynamically integrate the refined features by end-to-end learning. Extensive experiments on two
datasets indicate that M²N not only outperforms state-of-theart methods under various conditions, but also provides a new
paradigm for target and drug unified modeling.

Introduction
Predicting drug-target affinity (DTA) is vital in drug discovery, as it is essential to identify potential drug candidates and
understand their interactions with target proteins (Li et al.
2022). Traditional biochemical assays are effective but timeconsuming and costly. Docking software offers a computational alternative but requires pockets and structures (Pinzi
and Rastelli 2019). Thus, it is necessary to develop novel in
silico methods for efficient drug lead screening.
Recently, various deep learning-based approaches have
been proposed for DTA prediction (Zhang et al. 2023), including 1D sequence-based methods (Öztürk, Özgür, and
Ozkirimli 2018; Öztürk, Ozkirimli, and Özgür 2019), 2D
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

586

