The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

What Do Machine Learning Researchers Mean by “Reproducible”?
Edward Raff1,2 , Michel Benaroch3 , Sagar Samtani4 , Andrew L. Farris1
2

1
Booz Allen Hamilton
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
3
Syracuse University
4
Indiana University

Abstract

fined in Table 1. We propose these aspects based on our review of 101 papers published since 2017 and reflect the focus of the community at large. Table 1 also shows for each
aspect the proportion of papers focused primarily on that aspect (though many papers touch on multiple aspects).
The rest of this article is organized as follows. We will
summarize the eight main topic areas of scientific rigor in
Section 2, with sub-areas included based on our literature
review. Based on this survey of the literature, we propose relationships for how these rigors interact in Section 3, which
we find informative as a macro-level picture of the scope of
scientific rigor. Finally, we conclude in Section 4.

The concern that Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML) are entering a “reproducibility crisis” has
spurred significant research in the past few years. Yet with
each paper, it is often unclear what someone means by “reproducibility”. Our work attempts to clarify the scope of “reproducibility” as displayed by the community at large. In doing
so, we propose to refine the research to eight general topic
areas. In this light, we see that each of these areas contains
many works that do not advertise themselves as being about
“reproducibility”, in part because they go back decades before the matter came to broader attention.

1

2

Introduction

The Current Scope of Work

Our literature survey identifies at least eight primary aspects
of scientific rigor studied in the AI/ML literature. Each major sub-section will repeat one of the eight rigors defined
in Table 1, and include further delineation for nuanced subcategories that are present or noteworthy in the literature. A
key criterion for being included in Table 1 is that the paper must self-identify itself as being about “repeatability, reproducibility, or replicability” since those are the three preexisting terminologies used (interchangeably) in the prior
literature. These delimitations reflect the current scope of
what researchers actively consider “reproducibility” consider worthy of study and effort. As our bibliography will
show though, many more papers exist in these topical areas
that were published before 2017, and thus before the AI/ML
communities started to put renewed effort into the issue of
scientific rigor. We include such articles in the discussion of
each section to establish the full scope of available work and
to connect the current reproducibility-themed motivation to
its historical precedents, as the historical literature is often
unknown to existing researchers on this topic.
Before we detail these aspects, it is worth noting that
many existing articles are best summarized as opinion pieces
with varying degrees of formalization of their arguments.
Most of these articles propose strategies or arguments on
how to obtain “reproducibility”, without evidence of effect
(Gundersen and Kjensmo 2018; Matsui and Goya 2022;
Publio, Esteves, and Zafar 2018; Tatman, Vanderplas, and
Dane 2018; Sculley et al. 2018; Vollmer et al. 2020; Drummond 2009, 2018; Raff and Farris 2022; Lin 2022). The contents of our article are focused on works that study issues,

The Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML)
communities are increasingly concerned with the “reproducibility” of their fields. This has come on the heels of a
reproducibility crisis noted in many others. We will refer to
this overarching concern, that the science of research is being done with some error rate, as a generic scientific rigor
concern. This concern is justified, and it is increasingly challenging to evaluate the state of research around scientific
rigor due to confused and incompatible usage of the same
few terms like “reproducibility” (Plesser 2018).
Due to confusing and often inconsistently used terminology in the literature, it is challenging to understand precisely
what issues of scientific rigor the community is tackling. In
light of these issues, we propose a new formulation of current scientific rigor research by surveying the current articles by the topics they cover. In doing so, we observe that
many historical works tackled these very issues – with different motivations and no particular thematic name like “reproducibility” as it was not an urgent concern at the time.
In this article, we will expand the ACM’s proposed terminology of Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Replicability
which we find useful, although still insufficient to capture
the breadth of work done to date. Our contribution classified current AI / ML research in scientific rigor into eight
aspects we label as repeatability, reproducibility, replicability, adaptability, model selection, label/data quality, meta &
incentive, and maintainability. These eight aspects are deCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28671

