The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangled Table-Graph Representation for Interpretable
Transmission Line Fault Location
Na Yu1,2 * , Yutong Deng1,2 * , Shunyu Liu3 , Kaixuan Chen1,2† , Tongya Zheng4,1 , Mingli Song1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Nanyang Technological Univerisity
4
Big Graph Center, Hangzhou City University
{na yu, dengyt, chenkx, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, shunyu.liu@ntu.edu.sg, doujiang zheng@163.com
2

Abstract

on mathematical physical models and those based on statistical analysis of measurement data. The methods based
on mathematical physical models mainly use methods based
on traveling waves (Li et al. 2020; Jafarian and SanayePasand 2010; Ngwenyama, Le Roux, and Ngoma 2021)
and impedance (Rafinia and Moshtagh 2014; Esmaeilian,
Popovic, and Kezunovic 2015; Bı́scaro et al. 2015; Liu et al.
2011; Orozco-Henao et al. 2019; Majidi and Etezadi-Amoli
2018), requiring the establishment of mathematical models
based on prior knowledge, with poor generality and complex
calculations; the statistical analysis methods based on measurement data mainly use traditional machine learning methods (Okumus and Nuroglu 2021; Thukaram, Khincha, and
Vijaynarasimha 2005; Majidi, Arabali, and Etezadi-Amoli
2014), deep learning (Tong et al. 2021; Shi and Xu 2021),
and reinforcement learning methods (Li et al. 2022), requiring sufficient historical data to train and adjust the computational models, thus demanding high quality of the dataset.
However, with the continuous application of emerging
complex architectures such as microgrids, new generation
loads, and equipment in the existing power system network, traditional protection schemes are no longer sufficient
to meet new challenges. In addition, with the increasing
amount of available measurement data, traditional fault location methods mainly face two problems (Liao et al. 2021):
firstly, these methods cannot flexibly merge measurement
data from different buses but instead specify fault lines and
process fault data; secondly, traditional machine learning
methods struggle to model the topology of power system,
let alone the possibility of topology changes. These limitations result in insufficient accuracy and precision in predicting results when dealing with complex power grid systems.
Therefore, the introduction of graph neural networks is crucial. They can effectively handle graph data, model nodes
and lines of the power grid, and utilize the topological relationships between nodes for information transmission and
learning, thus better reflecting the actual operational status
of the power grid (Liu et al. 2024a,b).
This study aims to utilize the feature disentangled graph
convolutional network to address the issue of fault location
in power grids. By leveraging both data features and spatial
features of buses, the goal is to enhance the accuracy of predicting power grid fault locations. The proposed method in-

The fault location task in power grids is crucial for maintaining social order and ensuring public safety. However, existing methods that rely on tabular state records often neglect
the intrinsic topological influences of transmission lines, resulting in a segmented approach to fault location that consists
of multiple stages. In this paper, we propose an Disentangled
Table-Graph representation framework, termed DTG, which
integrates fault location tasks at coarse-grained line levels
and fine-grained point levels within an end-to-end learning paradigm. Our innovative disentanglement strategy produces interpretable attribution coefficients that connect tabular records and transmission line topology, thereby facilitating fault location at both line- and point-levels. The joint
prediction tasks designed around our disentangled tabular
graph representation promote mutual information exchange
between features and topology of transmission lines in an
interpretable manner. Experimental results on the 7-bus system, 36-bus system and a realistic 325-bus system in China
demonstrate that the proposed method adapt to different topological structures and handle different types of faults. Compared to traditional methods, DTG4Power achieves high accuracy in both fault lines and fault points.

Introduction
The power transmission system often faces problems such
as power outages and equipment damage due to line faults,
which not only affect the reliability and stability of the
power grid system but also pose a threat to social order and
public safety. Therefore, it is necessary to detect, classify,
and locate faults in the power grid as early as possible to
avoid long-term power interruptions and cascading failures.
This not only ensures the operational quality of the power
grid system but also reduces revenue losses caused by power
failures and saves labor costs when manually locating faults.
The fault diagnosis of power grid is divided into three
steps: fault detection, fault classification, and fault location(FL) (Fahim et al. 2021). The current methods for fault
location in power grid can be categorized into those based
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

977

