The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C2F-TP: A Coarse-to-Fine Denoising Framework for Uncertainty-Aware
Trajectory Prediction
Zichen Wang1 , Hao Miao2 , Senzhang Wang1 * , Renzhi Wang1 , Jianxin Wang1 , Jian Zhang1
1

Central South University
2
Aalborg University
zcwang0422@csu.edu.cn, haom@cs.aau.dk, szwang@csu.edu.cn,
rzwang516@gmail.com, jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn, jianzhang@csu.edu.cn
Abstract

𝑩𝒕−𝟏

Accurately predicting the trajectory of vehicles is critically
important for ensuring safety and reliability in autonomous
driving. Although considerable research efforts have been
made recently, the inherent trajectory uncertainty caused by
various factors including the dynamic driving intends and
the diverse driving scenarios still poses significant challenges
to accurate trajectory prediction. To address this issue, we
propose C2F-TP, a coarse-to-fine denoising framework for
uncertainty-aware vehicle trajectory prediction. C2F-TP features an innovative two-stage coarse-to-fine prediction process. Specifically, in the spatial-temporal interaction stage,
we propose a spatial-temporal interaction module to capture
the inter-vehicle interactions and learn a multimodal trajectory distribution, from which a certain number of noisy trajectories are sampled. Next, in the trajectory refinement stage,
we design a conditional denoising model to reduce the uncertainty of the sampled trajectories through a step-wise denoising operation. Extensive experiments are conducted on two
real datasets NGSIM and highD that are widely adopted in
trajectory prediction. The result demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposal.

𝑨𝒕−𝟏
𝑪𝒕−𝟏

𝑩𝒕
brake

𝑨𝒕

𝑪𝒕

𝑨𝒕+𝟏

𝑩𝒕+𝟏
𝑪𝒕+𝟏

Figure 1: Illustration of the dynamics and temporal correlation of inter-vehicle interactions.

and Trivedi 2018; Salzmann et al. 2020; Song et al. 2020;
Zhao et al. 2021) are proposed to model the spatial interactions among vehicles. However, existing deep learning based
approaches fall short in modeling the uncertainty of the trajectories (Chen et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023), which is common in real-world driving scenarios (Liao et al. 2024). Generally, uncertainty in autonomous driving can be broadly categorized into uncertainty in driving behavior and in driving
scenarios (Suk et al. 2024). How to design an uncertaintyaware trajectory prediction model is still not fully explored
and remains as an open research problem.
However, achieving the uncertainty-aware trajectory prediction is non-trivial due to the following challenges. First,
the inherent uncertainty in trajectories caused by various uncertainty factors in dynamic driving scenarios, make the accurate future trajectory prediction difficult (Li et al. 2023).
Existing approaches mostly directly predict the coordinate
points of future trajectories (Alahi et al. 2016; Xie et al.
2021) without considering such uncertainty factors. Although some recent methods are proposed for multimodal
trajectory prediction (Deo and Trivedi 2018; Chen et al.
2022), they still cannot effectively model the complex uncertainty. Second, it is challenging to simultaneously model
the dynamics and temporal correlations of vehicle interactions. Existing approaches either only learn a fixed interaction weight between two vehicles (Alahi et al. 2016; Deo
and Trivedi 2018) or simply consider the dynamics of interactions by modeling them at each timestamp (Wang et al.
2023). For example, as shown in Figure 1, at time t, vehicle
A is driving at a constant speed, and vehicles B and C intend to accelerate to merge into the middle lane. To avoid a
collision, vehicle A may slow down to keep a safe distance
from vehicles B and C, and vehicle C may delay the lanechanging considering vehicle B’s lane-changing behavior at

Code — https://github.com/wangzc0422/C2F-TP

Introduction
Vehicle trajectory prediction aims to predict the future trajectory of the target agent based on the historical trajectories of itself and its surrounding neighbours. Accurately predicting the future trajectory of vehicles is crucial for many
autonomous driving applications, including optimal driving path planning, making accurate driving decisions in dynamic environments, and enhancing driving safety (Liu et al.
2021; Lun et al. 2024).
Traditionally, statistical models are employed to predict
future trajectories based on the historical trajectories of individual agents (Hearst et al. 1998; Williams and Rasmussen
2006). Nonetheless, they do not consider the interactions between the target agent and the surrounding agents, which deteriorates the prediction performance. To address this issue,
various deep learning based models (Alahi et al. 2016; Deo
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12810

