The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cost-Aware Near-Optimal Policy Learning
Joy He-Yueya∗ , Jonathan Lee∗ , Matthew Jörke, Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
heyueya@cs.stanford.edu, jnl@stanford.edu, joerke@stanford.edu, ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
It is often of interest to learn a context-sensitive decision
policy, such as in contextual multi-armed bandit processes. To
quantify the efficiency of a machine learning algorithm for
such settings, probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds,
which bound the number of samples required, or cumulative
regret guarantees, are typically used. However, real-world settings often have limited resources for experimentation, and
decisions/interventions may differ in the amount of resources
required (e.g., money or time). Therefore, it is of interest to
consider how to design an experiment strategy that reduces the
experimental budget needed to learn a near-optimal contextual
policy. Unlike reinforcement learning or bandit approaches that
embed costs into the reward function, we focus on reducing
resource use in learning a near-optimal policy without resource
constraints. We introduce two resource-aware algorithms for
the contextual bandit setting and prove their soundness. Simulations based on real-world datasets demonstrate that our
algorithms significantly reduce the resources needed to learn a
near-optimal decision policy compared to previous resourceunaware methods.

Code and datasets — https://github.com/joyheyueya/costaware-policy-learning

Introduction
Consider designing a program to support people to attend their
court date (Fishbane, Ouss, and Shah 2020; Chohlas-Wood
et al. 2021). Missing a required court appearance, even for a
minor offense, can sometimes lead to warrants and jail time—
consequences many defendants may be unaware of. Missed
appointments also waste time and money in the judicial
system. Historically, if one wanted to test out interventions
that were specific to each individual, one would have had to
rely on mailing different interventions to different individuals.
This process requires significant manual human effort and
provides limited time specificity. In contrast, as the majority
of people now carry a cell phone, one can now automatically
send targeted intervention support (such as text messages,
transit coupons, or ride-sharing fares) to specific individuals
at specific times. The costs involved may vary substantially by
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
28088

individual and action—while a text message is very low cost,
providing transportation for an individual living far from the
court house is expensive.
Prior work (Chohlas-Wood et al. 2021) has modeled this as
a contextual multi-armed bandit (CMAB) problem and aimed
to learn high-performing policies within a short experimental
period. However, such work neglects the potentially vast
differences in costs incurred by different actions during the
experimental period.
Indeed, considering the cost incurred to learn highperformance decision policies is relevant in many social
impact settings. As a second example, we consider interventions to support voter turnout (Gerber, Green, and Larimer
2008) and learning a contextual bandit policy that could
customize interventions per potential voter. There are many
potential interventions that might be used to increase voter
turnout, including phone calls, letters, or in person visits,
which have substantially different costs. In addition, in such
settings it would be of particular interest to design a data
gathering experimental policy in advance to allocate samples
such that after a single election a good decision policy could
be learned. In line with prior work (Zanette et al. 2021), we
call this static exploration, since it cannot use the observed
outcomes from one context-decision to adapt and change
the action taken for the next context (which would require
waiting for one election for each decision). Reducing the cost
of learning a near-optimal contextual policy would be highly
valuable for campaigns and advocacy groups.
Motivated by such examples, we introduce a new setting
of cost-aware near-optimal policy learning for contextual
multi-armed bandits (CMABs). Historically, the majority
of research on multi-armed bandits (MABs) and CMABs
has focused on cumulative regret minimization (Lattimore
and Szepesvári 2020). Cumulative regret measures policy
suboptimality at each round of interaction during exploration,
whereas our pure exploration setting aims to minimize policy
suboptimality only at the end of exploration. There is substantial research on best arm identification in non-contextual
MABs (Audibert, Bubeck, and Munos 2010; Jamieson and
Nowak 2014; Kaufmann, Cappé, and Garivier 2016). Most of
this work focuses on sample efficiency and does not consider
cost. Another line of work considers knapsack bandits where
there is a fixed budget and tries to maximize the reward
obtained given that cumulative budget (Slivkins 2019). The

