The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Lip Reading:
Adapting to Your Unique Lip Movements with Vision and Language
Jeong Hun Yeo1 , Chae Won Kim1 , Hyunjun Kim1 ,
Hyeongseop Rha1 , Seunghee Han1 , Wen-Huang Cheng2 , Yong Man Ro 1 *
1

Integrated Vision and Language Lab, KAIST, South Korea
2
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
sedne246@kaist.ac.kr, chaewonkim@kaist.ac.kr, kimhj709@kaist.ac.kr,
ryool 1832@kaist.ac.kr, gkstmdgml211@kaist.ac.kr, wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw, ymro@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract

loud factories where audio signals are compromised. Furthermore, it can support individuals with hearing impairments, enabling them to comprehend speech through visual
means. With these practical benefits and the development of
deep learning, we can accurately infer what a speaker says
without a speaker’s voice by utilizing recent lip reading systems (Shi et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Yeo et al. 2024b).
Despite significant advancements in lip reading technologies, their performance often declines when applied to unseen speakers not included in training data (Assael et al.
2016; Kim, Kim, and Ro 2022). This limitation arises because lip reading models are inherently sensitive to variations in lip appearances, movements, and speaking speeds
among different individuals. To address this issue, recent
studies (Kim, Kim, and Ro 2023; He et al. 2024; Luo et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2024) have incorporated speaker adaptation
techniques into lip reading. These techniques aim to adapt
pre-trained lip reading models to unseen speakers by utilizing minimal additional training parameters. Specifically,
these works have applied prompt tuning (Brown et al. 2020;
Zhou et al. 2022) and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu
et al. 2021) strategies to improve the adaptability and performance of lip reading models on target speakers.
Although recent studies have advanced our understanding of speaker adaptation in lip reading, existing approaches
suffer from several limitations. Firstly, previous works have
focused solely on visual cues for speaker adaptation, overlooking the role of individual linguistic patterns. While
language-level adaptation for target speakers has demonstrated effectiveness in the NLP domain (Kolár, yang, and
Shriberg 2007), these effects remain unexplored in speakeradaptive lip reading. Secondly, previous studies such as
(Kim, Kim, and Ro 2022) and (He et al. 2024) primarily
utilize the GRID and LRW-ID datasets, which do not adequately capture the complexity of real-world scenarios. As
shown in Table 1, these datasets especially lack pose diversity and have a limited vocabulary size.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel method
to adapt the model to unseen target speakers in vision and
language levels. This methodology comprises two primary
components: 1) For vision level adaptation, the proposed
method adjusts the pre-trained lip reading model to adapt
to the lip appearance, movements, and speaking speed of the

Lip reading aims to predict spoken language by analyzing lip
movements. Despite advancements in lip reading technologies, performance degrades when models are applied to unseen speakers due to their sensitivity to variations in visual information such as lip appearances. To address this challenge,
speaker adaptive lip reading technologies have advanced by
focusing on effectively adapting a lip reading model to target speakers in the visual modality. However, the effectiveness of adapting language information, such as vocabulary
choice, of the target speaker has not been explored in previous works. Additionally, existing datasets for speaker adaptation have limited vocabulary sizes and pose variations, which
restrict the validation of previous speaker-adaptive methods
in real-world scenarios. To address these issues, we propose
a novel speaker-adaptive lip reading method that adapts a
pre-trained model to target speakers at both vision and language levels. Specifically, we integrate prompt tuning and the
LoRA approach, applying them to a pre-trained lip reading
model to effectively adapt the model to target speakers. Furthermore, to validate its effectiveness in real-world scenarios,
we introduce a new dataset, VoxLRS-SA, derived from VoxCeleb2 and LRS3. It contains a vocabulary of approximately
100K words, offers diverse pose variations, and enables the
validation of adaptation methods in the wild, sentence-level
lip reading for the first time in English. Through various experiments, we demonstrate that the existing speaker-adaptive
method also improves performance in the wild at the sentence
level. Moreover, we show that the proposed method achieves
larger improvements compared to the previous works.

Code — https://bit.ly/Personalized-Lip-Reading
Datasets — https://bit.ly/VoxLRS-SA-Dataset
Extended version — https://bit.ly/2409-00986

Introduction
Lip reading, also known as Visual Speech Recognition
(VSR), aims to predict spoken language by analyzing visual
cues from lip movements. It plays a crucial role in enhancing
human communication in bustling cafes, crowded streets, or
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9472

