The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedSum: Data-Efficient Federated Learning Under Data Scarcity Scenario For
Text Summarization
Zhiyong Ma1 * , Zhengping Li1 * , Yuanjie Shi2 , Jian Chen1†
1

South China University of Technology
2
Washington State University
seallen97@mail.scut.edu.cn, lievan20022@gmail.com, yuanjie.shi@wsu.edu, ellachen@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

To construct a summarizer, most existing literature focused
on the centralized manner with ample data. However, the
data from individuals or institutions are generally private
and sensitive, prohibiting access from the public. This makes
the collection of text data in a central location infeasible. Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) provides a paradigm to utilize information and construct a
shared model securely. Nevertheless, when the FL system is
plagued by data scarcity (e.g., under edge computing or cold
starting settings, where each FL client trains a common and
basic summarization model with over 10M parameters with
less than 500 samples), it is intractable for the summarizer to
get adequate knowledge (Lin et al. 2022) and vulnerable to
data bias, such as Leading Bias (Zhong et al. 2019; Ko et al.
2021), resulting in performance degradation. Then a natural question is: How to derive a well-behaved summarizer in
data scarcity FL?
Generally, data scarcity leads to the knowledge shortage
of the summarizer, which is the main reason for degeneration (Cai et al. 2023b). To tackle this challenge, complementing samples (Zhang et al. 2018; Cubuk et al. 2019) or
improving the efficiency of data (Zhuang et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021) are two common-used strategies. The former creates
samples by applying various transformations to the original
data (Yoon et al. 2021; Zhou and Konukoglu 2023), which
generally is computation-costed and heavily relies on the hyperparameters setting (Xu, Lin, and Wang 2023; Duan et al.
2023). The latter focuses on exploiting limited resources
(Collins et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2023), such as utilizing the
distance between measured prototypes and exploring parameters. Although these methods further explore the limited
data, the improvement is not remarkable in the practice, due
to the neglect of data bias.
To find an effective solution for the degeneration, we propose to maximize the data efficiency in model training. We
study the strategy of sample weighting, and mining hidden knowledge from different aspects. We propose FedSum
which extends the standard FL framework from depth and
breadth to further extract prime and diversified knowledge
for constructing the summarizer, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
For depth extension, inspired by hard sample mining and
bias elimination (Chen et al. 2023a), we introduce the Data
Partition method to recognize the prime samples, and adjust
the weight of data by the proposed Data skip mechanism,

Text summarization task extracts salient information from a
large amount of text for productivity enhancement. However,
most existing methods heavily rely on training models from
ample and centrally stored data which is infeasible to collect in practice, due to privacy concerns and data scarcity
nature under several settings (e.g., edge computing or cold
starting). The main challenge lies in constructing the privacypreserving and well-behaved summarization model under the
data scarcity scenario, where the data scarcity nature will
lead to the knowledge shortage of the model while magnifying the impact of data bias, causing performance degeneration. To tackle this challenge, previous studies attempt to
complement samples or improve the efficiency of data. The
former is usually associated with high computing costs or
has a large dependence on empirical settings, while the latter might not effective due to the lack of consideration of data
bias. In this work, we propose FedSum which extends the
standard FL framework from depth and breadth to further extract prime and diversified knowledge from limited resources
for text summarization. For depth extension, we introduce a
Data Partition method to cooperatively recognize the prime
samples that are more significant and unbiased, and the Data
skip mechanism is introduced to help the model further focus
on those prime samples during the local training process. For
breadth extension, FedSum extends the source of knowledge
and develops the summarization model by extracting knowledge from the data samples, hidden spaces, and globally received parameters. Extensive experiments on four benchmark
datasets verify the promising improvement of FedSum compared to baselines, and show its generalizability, scalability,
and robustness .

Code — https://github.com/Li-Evan/FedSum

Introduction
The amount of text data has grown explosively in various
domains, such as journalism, medicine, and entertainment.
For productivity enhancement, the summarization model,
namely summarizer, compresses textual content into shorter
versions while retaining key concepts from input content.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19340

