The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RRT-MVS: Recurrent Regularization Transformer for Multi-View Stereo
Jianfei Jiang, Liyong Wang, Haochen Yu, Tianyu Hu, Jiansheng Chen, Huimin Ma *

Abstract

Advanced F-score (%)

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
{jiangjf, d202410454, haochen.yu}@xs.ustb.edu.cn, {tianyu, jschen, mhmpub}@ustb.edu.cn

GeoMVSNet
WT-MVSNet
ET-MVSNet
MVSFormer
DMVSNet
GoMVS
RRT-MVS

Overall Error (mm)

0.305
0.300

Learning-based multi-view stereo methods aim to predict
depth maps for reconstructing dense point clouds. These
methods rely on regularization to reduce redundancy in the
cost volume. However, existing methods have limitations:
CNN-based regularization is restricted to local receptive
fields, while Transformer-based regularization struggles with
handling depth discontinuities. These limitations often result in inaccurate depth maps with significant noise, particularly noticeable in the boundary and background regions.
In this paper, we propose a Recurrent Regularization Transformer for Multi-View Stereo (RRT-MVS), which addresses
these limitations by regularizing the cost volume separately
for depth and spatial dimensions. Specifically, we introduce
Recurrent Self-Attention (R-SA) to aggregate global matching costs within and across the cost maps and filter out noisy
feature correlations. Additionally, we present Depth Residual
Attention (DRA) to aggregate depth correlations within the
cost volume and a Positional Adapter (PA) to enhance 3D positional awareness in each 2D cost map, further augmenting
the effectiveness of R-SA. Experimental results demonstrate
that RRT-MVS achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
DTU and Tanks-and-Temples datasets. Notably, RRT-MVS
ranks first on both the Tanks-and-Temples intermediate and
advanced benchmarks among all published methods.

0.295
0.290
0.285
4

6
8
10 12
GPU Memory (GB)
(a)

43
42
41
40
64

65
66
67
68
Intermediate F-score (%)
(b)

Figure 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods in terms
of (a) overall error and GPU memory consumption on the
DTU test set (lower is better), and (b) generalization ability
on the Tanks-and-Temples benchmark (higher is better).

Learning-based MVS methods primarily focus on calculating pair-wise feature correlations between reference image and each source image by differentiable wrapping (Yao
et al. 2018), and aggregate them into a cost volume. Although current MVS methods have attempted to improve the
accuracy of cost volume by enhancing feature extraction capabilities (Cao, Ren, and Fu 2022; Liu et al. 2023) or cost
volume construction methods (Wei et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022c), constructing the cost volume inevitably introduces
redundant background information and incorrect matching
costs. Consequently, effectively tackling cost volume regularization is crucial for MVS tasks.
Recently proposed state-of-the-art MVS methods often
use a cascade structure to predict depth maps in a coarse-tofine manner. As a crucial step in cascade-based MVS methods, cost volume regularization is typically achieved using
either CNNs or Transformers. CNN-based methods are constrained by their receptive fields, lacking the ability to capture the global context of the cost volume, and thus can
only perform local cost volume regularization. Transformerbased methods require converting the format of 3D cost
volume to be processed by Transformers. Specifically, WTMVSNet (Liao et al. 2022) and CostFormer (Chen et al.
2023) partition the depth and spatial dimensions into smaller
3D windows and then apply window-based attention (Liu
et al. 2021). MVSFormer++ (Cao, Ren, and Fu 2024) combines the depth and spatial dimensions into 1D sequences
and uses vanilla attention (Dao 2023) for cost volume reg-

Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) is a challenging task in computer
vision, aims to recover dense 3D point clouds of scenes or
objects from a series of calibrated images. Although traditional MVS methods (Galliani, Lasinger, and Schindler
2015; Xu and Tao 2020b; Xu et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2023;
Yuan et al. 2024) have shown advancements in recent years,
they are hindered by manually crafted feature representations, and still struggle with issues such as reflective surfaces, occlusions, and areas with low texture. To address
these challenges, researchers have harnessed the powerful
capabilities of deep neural networks to develop learningbased MVS methods. These methods typically involve four
key steps: feature extraction, cost volume construction, cost
volume regularization, and depth prediction.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3994

