The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GeoAggregator: An Efficient Transformer Model for Geo-Spatial Tabular Data
Rui Deng1 , Ziqi Li2 , Mingshu Wang1 *
1

School of Geographical and Earth Science, University of Glasgow
2
Department of Geography, Florida State University
{rui.deng, mingshu.wang}@glasgow.ac.uk, ziqi.li@fsu.edu

Abstract

and geo-statistical models. Although these models explicitly account for spatial effects, such as spatial autocorrelation (SA) and spatial heterogeneity (SH), they often depend
on strong data and model assumptions. Besides, their effectiveness diminishes when handling large volumes of data or
modeling complex non-linearity due to their high computational complexity and linear nature (Li 2022).
In addition to classic methods, efforts have been broadened to cover a wide range of deep learning paradigms
(Jiang 2019). By explicitly defining a graph to represent the
data points and the underlying spatial structure, the problems
can be approximated to node-level learning tasks. Graphbased networks can be trained for node regression and classification (Zhu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022).
Alternatively, with a spatial proxy grid proposed by (Dai
et al. 2022), convolutional networks can work on irregular grids and effectively model SH in spatial regression. On
top of these approaches, ensemble learning methods have
also been applied to further improve predictive performance
(Cheng et al. 2024). However, the above models are typically associated with large input sizes and a considerable
number of parameters, which makes them scale poorly on
large datasets.
Lately, transformer models have demonstrated their effectiveness in handling irregular grids (Lee and Oh 2024),
point clouds (Zhao et al. 2021) as well as geospatial datasets
(Li et al. 2023; He et al. 2023; Jia et al. 2024; Unlu 2024).
The attention mechanism selectively focuses on elements
in a sequence and aggregates the information according to
relation-based attention scores. This approach brings new
horizons for geospatial data modeling in that it accounts for
contextual information based on proximity, and is sensitive
to positional information (Vaswani 2017; Su et al. 2024; Vivanco Cepeda, Nayak, and Shah 2024). That is, it allows
information aggregation from neighboring points to learn
SA patterns while remaining aware of SH patterns across
the global space. Besides, transformers represent a group
of modern architectures that can serve as a general-purpose
feature extractor for multiple tasks and multi-modal fusion
(Jaegle et al. 2021; Xu, Zhu, and Clifton 2023).
However, the well-known problem of computational and
time complexity increasing quadratically with input sequence length limits the application of transformers, especially in geospatial contexts, where the size of real-world

Modeling geospatial tabular data with deep learning has become a promising alternative to traditional statistical and
machine learning approaches. However, existing deep learning models often face challenges related to scalability and
flexibility as datasets grow. To this end, this paper introduces GeoAggregator, an efficient and lightweight algorithm
based on transformer architecture designed specifically for
geospatial tabular data modeling. GeoAggregators explicitly
account for spatial autocorrelation and spatial heterogeneity through Gaussian-biased local attention and global positional awareness. Additionally, we introduce a new attention mechanism that uses the Cartesian product to manage
the size of the model while maintaining strong expressive
power. We benchmark GeoAggregator against spatial statistical models, XGBoost, and several state-of-the-art geospatial deep learning methods using both synthetic and empirical
geospatial datasets. The results demonstrate that GeoAggregators achieve the best or second-best performance compared
to their competitors on nearly all datasets. GeoAggregator’s
efficiency is underscored by its reduced model size, making
it both scalable and lightweight. Moreover, ablation experiments offer insights into the effectiveness of the Gaussian
bias and Cartesian attention mechanism, providing recommendations for further optimizing the GeoAggregator’s performance.

Code and Data —
https://github.com/ruid7181/GeoAggregator

1

Introduction

Geospatial data are increasingly available with the
widespread deployment of GPS-enabled sensors and the
growing demand for location-based services (Luo, Liu, and
Liu 2021; Stewart et al. 2022). Geospatial data modeling is
crucial in natural and social sciences to understand intricate
spatial relationships, predict future spatial scenarios, and inform decision-making. Its applications span various fields,
including public health, environmental science, urban and
regional planning, among others (Karimi and Karimi 2017).
To date, geospatial studies have primarily relied on spatial
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11572

