The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asynchronous Distributed Gaussian Process Regression
Zewen Yang* , Xiaobing Dai* , Sandra Hirche
Technical University of Munich
zewen.yang@tum.de, xiaobing.dai@tum.de, hirche@tum.de

Abstract

D1 (t01 ) fˆ1 (x(t01 )) process D1 (t11 ) compute fˆ1 (x(t11 )) fˆ1 (x(t))
only prior available
= fˆ1 (x(t0 ))
fˆ1 (x(t0 )) available

In this paper, we address a practical distributed Bayesian
learning problem with asynchronous measurements and predictions due to diverse computational conditions. To this end,
asynchronous distributed Gaussian process (AsyncDGP) regression is proposed, which is the first effective online distributed Gaussian processes (GPs) approach to improve the
prediction accuracy in real-time learning tasks. By leveraging the devised evaluation criterion and established prediction
error bounds, AsyncDGP enables the distinction of contributions of each model for prediction ensembling using aggregation strategy. Furthermore, we extend its utility to dynamic
systems by introducing a learning-based control law, ensuring guaranteed control performance in safety-critical applications. Additionally, a networked online learning simulation platform for distributed GPs, namely online GP gym
(GPgym), is introduced for testing the performance of learning and control of dynamical systems. Numerical simulations
within GPgym across regression tasks with real-world data
sets and dynamical control scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness and applicability of AsyncDGP.

1

1

t11

t01

fˆ2 (x(t))
= fˆ2 (x(t2 ))

t

2

t02

t32

t22

t12

fˆ3 (x(t))
= fˆ3 (x(t1 ))

t

3

t03

t13

t23

t

Figure 1: Asynchronous distributed predictions. The temporal sequence of the learning process of each computational
node i is characterized by discrete phases: a green block representing the time frame for receiving and allocating data set
Di at its own time tki with k ∈ N, and a blue block denoting
the computational duration of the prediction fˆi of the true
function f . During the intervening gray block, only previous predictions are available.
homogeneous, non-simultaneous measurement and data reception exhibit asynchrony. Addressing this issue becomes
imperative for ensuring the seamless usage of distributed
learning algorithms in real-world applications, especially in
contexts where timely and accurate predictions are essential
for the safe real-time operations of dynamical systems1 .

Introduction
Distributed learning, employing parallelized training and cooperative learning within distributed systems, holds promise
for enhancing the efficiency of machine learning in the training and prediction process. The application of distributed
learning extends across diverse domains, including but not
limited to multi-agent systems (Yan et al. 2020), edge computing (Chen and Ran 2019), and networked Internet of
Things devices (Park and Saad 2019), etc. Specifically, for
the safe operation of systems in complex and dynamic environments, real-time predictions and prompt model updates
must be employed. However, the implementation of online learning within a distributed framework is confronted
with challenges of the inherent heterogeneity in computational nodes, leading to asynchronous predictions (see Figure 1). In other words, variations in computation speeds
among nodes result in distinct computational times, while
discrepancies in data volume contribute to different processing times. Even in scenarios where computational nodes are

Related Work
To achieve online learning in distributed systems, we consider Gaussian process (GP) regression, a non-parametric
supervised learning technique, increasingly utilized in
safety-critical applications for its high expressive capabilities and probabilistic guaranteed bounded prediction errors (Hashimoto et al. 2022). As the computational complexity associated with updates and predictions in GP regression escalates with the expanding number of training points, an effective way to mitigate the issue is distributed computing inducing distributed Gaussian processes
(DGPs) (Deisenroth and Ng 2015), where a center node
aggregates the predictions from the distributed nodes (experts) with the divided sub-dataset. One such approach is

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Extended related work, proofs, and results are available in the
complementary document at arXiv (Yang, Dai, and Hirche 2024).

22065

