The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Reinforcement Learning Through Adaptively Pretrained Visual Encoder
Yuhan Zhang12 * Guoqing Ma13 * , Guangfu Hao12 , Liangxuan Guo13 , Yang Chen14 , Shan Yu134†
1

Laboratory of Brain Atlas and Brain-inspired Intelligence, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhangyuhan2022, maguoqing2022, haoguangfu2021, guoliangxuan2021, yang.chen, shan.yu}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

While Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents can successfully
learn to handle complex tasks, effectively generalizing acquired skills to unfamiliar settings remains a challenge. One
of the reasons behind this is the visual encoders used are taskdependent, preventing effective feature extraction in different settings. To address this issue, recent studies have tried
to pretrain encoders with diverse visual inputs in order to
improve their performance. However, they rely on existing
pretrained encoders without further exploring the impact of
pretraining period. In this work, we propose APE: efficient
reinforcement learning through Adaptively Pretrained visual
Encoder—a framework that utilizes adaptive augmentation
strategy during the pretraining phase and extracts generalizable features with only a few interactions within the task environments in the policy learning period. Experiments are conducted across various domains, including DeepMind Control
Suite, Atari Games and Memory Maze benchmarks, to verify the effectiveness of our method. Results show that mainstream RL methods, such as DreamerV3 and DrQ-v2, achieve
state-of-the-art performance when equipped with APE. In addition, APE significantly improves the sampling efficiency
using only visual inputs during learning, approaching the efficiency of state-based method in several control tasks. These
findings demonstrate the potential of adaptive pretraining of
encoder in enhancing the generalization ability and efficiency
of visual RL algorithms.

Random
Initialization

Supervised
Pretraining

Unsupervised
Pretraining

APE(Ours)

Figure 1: Visualization of ResNet-18 model with different
pretraining strategy using LayerCAM (Jiang et al. 2021),
which indicates that APE is able to extract more precise outline of the Walker than other initialization settings. The first
row displays the pure feature maps, which are also presented
together with the image in the second row.
ciency and often overfitting to specific environments (Song
et al. 2019; Srinivas, Laskin, and Abbeel 2020). Since the
performance of these agents depends heavily on the quality of extracted features, the critical role of enhancing visual encoders has been highlighted in both model-free and
model-based algorithms (Yarats et al. 2019; Hafner et al.
2019; Poudel et al. 2023).
In visual RL, various approaches have been explored to
improve representation learning, among which data augmentations are often used to increase data diversity (Wang
et al. 2020; Raileanu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022, 2023).
The challenge lies in extracting generalizable features rather
than focusing on task-specific details, leading to difficulties
in transferring learned skills to unseen scenarios (Lee et al.
2019; Laskin et al. 2020).
One promising direction is to exploit cross-domain
knowledge learned by pretrained models (Shah and Kumar
2021; Yuan et al. 2022), which has shown great success in
improving data efficiency and generalization ability in recent deep learning (Devlin et al. 2019; Baevski et al. 2020).
In computer vision, since these models have typically been
trained on extensive sets of natural images, their features
inherently possess general knowledge about the world (Hu
et al. 2023). This approach has the potential to enable RL
agents to extract useful features more effectively, enhancing
their ability to learn and generalize across different domains.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (Deep RL) has made great
advances in recent years. Notable algorithms such as
MuZero (Schrittwieser et al. 2019), Player of Games
(Schmid et al. 2021) and ReBeL (Brown et al. 2020) have
been proposed to solve many challenging decision making
problems. While these advances have primarily focused on
state-based inputs, significant progress has also been made
in visual RL, i.e., leveraging image inputs for policy learning (Srinivas, Laskin, and Abbeel 2020; Hafner et al. 2019,
2020, 2023; Kostrikov, Yarats, and Fergus 2020).
However, visual RL agents learning from these highdemensional observations suffer from problems of low effi* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22668

