The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Embodied AI for Smart Robotic Cells in Manufacturing Applications
Satyandra K. Gupta
Smith International Professor, Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California
Co-Founder and Chief Scientist, GrayMatter Robotics

Abstract

successfully used in mass-production applications. However, high-mix applications have posed significant challenges for robotic automation.
In mass production applications humans program the
robots. Robots simply executed pre-programmed motions.
Human programming effort is amortized over a large number of parts and therefore it can be economically justified.
Moreover, by carefully controlling the variation in the upstream processes, the need for online process monitoring and
adaptation can either be eliminated or minimized. High-mix
manufacturing applications require the part changeover to
be accomplished within a few minutes, therefore, we cannot rely on humans to program robots when a new part arrives. Unfortunately, at present, the use of robots in high-mix
manufacturing applications is limited, requiring humans to
perform ergonomically challenging and physically demanding tasks. Using robots in these applications requires robots
to autonomously execute tasks on high-level task descriptions and deliver human competitive performance. This is a
challenging problem and addressing it requires leveraging
the latest advances in AI. The last decade has seen significant advances in AI such as reinforcement learning, deep
learning, large language models, and generative AI that are
endowing robots with new capabilities (Kusiak 2020; Bhatt
et al. 2021; Zonta et al. 2022; Florence et al. 2022; Stocking,
Gopnik, and Tomlin 2022; Huang et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2023; Singh et al. 2023; Malhan and Gupta 2023; Chi et al.
2024; Mishra and Chen 2024; Gregory and Gupta 2024; AlHussaini et al. 2024).
For the last thirty years, I have been working in area of
developing robotics technologies for manufacturing applications. We have leveraged recent advances in AI to create smart robotic cells for manufacturing applications (Manyar et al. 2022, 2023b,a; Kang et al. 2024b,a; Patel et al.
2024; Shukla et al. 2024; Manyar et al. 2024; Nemlekar
et al. 2024). I also have considerable prior experience in
transitioning technologies developed in my lab to the industry. I am co-founder and Chief Scientist at GrayMatter
Robotics, a company focused on robotic automation solutions for high-mix manufacturing applications. GrayMatter
Robotics’ smart robotics cells are installed in many factories
in the US serving aerospace & defense, specialty vehicles,
marine & boats, metal fabrication, sports equipment, and
furniture & sanitary ware sectors. These cells are helping

Many manufacturing companies are facing an acute shortage
of qualified workers. Deploying robotic cells is a potential solution to address this challenge. Historically robots have been
deployed only in mass production applications in manufacturing. A large fraction of manufacturing is classified as highmix manufacturing where a large variety of products are produced. Manually programming robots is not a viable solution
in high-mix manufacturing applications. Robotic cells need
to be powered by embodied AI to make them useful in highmix manufacturing applications. This paper aims to build a
bridge between smart manufacturing and AI communities to
enable AI researchers to develop methods and tool that can be
successfully deployed to realize smart robotic cells for highmix manufacturing applications. This paper highlights key requirements for developing embodied AI for powering robotic
cells for high-mix manufacturing applications. It also makes
the case for approaches that combine model-based and datadriven methods to meet the needs of embodied AI in manufacturing applications and describes the role of generative
AI approaches in smart manufacturing applications. Finally,
it describes how AI can be used to enhance digital twins and
augment human-machine interfaces in manufacturing applications.

Introduction
A large number of manufacturing companies are facing an
acute shortage of qualified workers. Many manufacturing
tasks such as sanding, grinding, coating, blasting, and spraying involve holding a tool in hand and moving it over a
surface to make value-added changes to the surface. Most
such operations can be ergonomically challenging and have
a very high labor churn. This is creating a major problem
for manufacturing companies in terms of maintaining capacity and completing production on time. Robotic automation
technologies are needed to speed up production and achieve
consistent quality.
Manufacturing applications can be broadly classified into
two categories: (1) mass production, (2) high-mix. In mass
production applications, the identical part are produced repeatedly. High-mix applications have the following characteristics: (1) quick part changes in production, and (2) variability in part dimensions and geometry. Robots have been
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28630

