The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

下降趋势 and Grounded Artificial Social Intelligence
VEGAS: Towards Visually Explainable
更大字体

Hao Li1 , Hao Fei2 , Zechao Hu1 , Zhengwei Yang1 , Zheng Wang1 *
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{sc.lihao, hzc aim, yzw aim, wangzwhu}@whu.edu.cn, haofei37@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Social Intelligence Queries (Social-IQ) serve as the primary
multimodal benchmark for evaluating a model’s social intelligence level. While impressive multiple-choice question
(MCQ) accuracy is achieved by current solutions, increasing
evidence shows that they are largely, and in some cases entirely, dependent on language modality, overlooking visual
context. Additionally, the closed-set nature further prevents
the exploration of whether and to what extent the reasoning path behind selection is correct. To address these limitations, we propose the Visually Explainable and Grounded
Artificial Social Intelligence (VEGAS) model. As a generative multimodal model, VEGAS leverages open-ended answering to provide explainable responses, which enhances
the clarity and evaluation of reasoning paths. To enable visually grounded answering, we propose a novel sampling strategy to provide the model with more relevant visual frames.
We then enhance the model’s interpretation of these frames
through Generalist Instruction Fine-Tuning (GIFT), which
aims to: i) learn multimodal-language transformations for
fundamental emotional social traits, and ii) establish multimodal joint reasoning capabilities. Extensive experiments,
comprising modality ablation, open-ended assessments, and
supervised MCQ evaluations, consistently show that VEGAS
effectively utilizes visual information in reasoning to produce
correct and also credible answers. We expect this work to offer a new perspective on Social-IQ and advance the development of human-like social AI.

Question: How does the older woman feel when the woman in white throwing out her food?
A:She feels upset because she thinks the woman in white is being ridiculous.
B:She feels happy ...
C:…is being rude. D:… is being wasteful.

(a)

(b)

ABCD

A: She feels upset…

Multichoice

+Q

A: She feels upset…

+V

A: She feels upset…

Openended

Q+V

The older woman seems
to be upset…She is seen Openended
crying and looking sad.

(c)

A
63 65 62 65

28

QA

74 74 76

QAV
70

+Q

random

+V

A: She feels upset…

Q+V

The older woman appears
to be upset …. She looks
at the woman in white
with a frown on her face.

Max
78 77 79

69

76

74

57

32 32

Social-IQ*

random

ABCD

Multichoice

57

81

66

28
DeSIQ*

MMTC-ESC Video-LLaVA

DeSIQ

Ours

Social-IQ*
MMTC-ESC Video-LLaVA
Figure
1: (a) DeSIQ*
An existing
approach selects DeSIQ
the correctOurs
option
without knowing the question or even the video context, revealing incorrect rationale in the open-ended answers. (b)
Our study begins with a correct reasoning path grounded
in the video, ensuring reliable selection. (c) Our model enhances visual engagement, reduces the language shortcut,
and achieves comparable but more reliable MCQ accuracy.
* denotes the baseline of the corresponding method.

Code — https://github.com/lihao921/VEGAS
integration of video, audio, and subtitles to test models’ reasoning ability regarding social dynamics. This benchmark is
a valuable resource of ASI, as it mirrors the complexity of
real-world social scenarios.
Social-IQ posed significant challenges for advanced
VideoQA methods when it was first introduced (Zadeh et al.
2017; Lei et al. 2018; Liang et al. 2018): relying solely on
the question and answer (BlindQA) resulted in near-random
accuracy. With the ongoing advancements of Large Language Models (LLMs), recent multimodal approaches incorporating them have more than doubled this accuracy. However, as illustrated in Figure 1 (c), these improvements are
largely due to the LLMs’ shortcut effect, i.e., exploiting
inherent spurious correlations between questions and options, while visual context is almost entirely disregarded in

Introduction
Human-level AI necessitates not only formidable reasoning
abilities at the individual level, but also must exhibit social
intelligence akin to that of humans in social contexts. This
motivates the study of the topic of Artificial Social Intelligence (ASI) (Bainbridge et al. 1994; Dautenhahn 2007),
which aims to advance machine comprehension and interaction within complex social contexts. The Social-IQ benchmark (Zadeh et al. 2019) exemplifies this challenge through
a multiple-choice question (MCQ) task, which allows the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4707

