The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Dual-domain Learning for Underwater Image Enhancement
Lintao Peng, Liheng Bian*
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing & Zhuhai, China
{penglintao, bian}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, learning-based Underwater Image Enhancement
(UIE) methods have demonstrated promising performance.
However, existing learning-based methods still face two challenges. 1) They rarely consider the inconsistent degradation
levels in different spatial regions and spectral bands simultaneously. 2) They treat all regions equally, ignoring that the regions with high-frequency details are more difficult to reconstruct. To address these challenges, we propose a novel UIE
method based on spatial-spectral dual-domain adaptive learning, termed SS-UIE. Specifically, we first introduce a spatialwise Multi-scale Cycle Selective Scan (MCSS) module and a
Spectral-Wise Self-Attention (SWSA) module, both with linear complexity, and combine them in parallel to form a basic
Spatial-Spectral block (SS-block). Benefiting from the global
receptive field of MCSS and SWSA, SS-block can effectively model the degradation levels of different spatial regions
and spectral bands, thereby enabling degradation level-based
dual-domain adaptive UIE. By stacking multiple SS-blocks,
we build our SS-UIE network. Additionally, a FrequencyWise Loss (FWL) is introduced to narrow the frequency-wise
discrepancy and reinforce the model’s attention on the regions
with high-frequency details. Extensive experiments validate
that the SS-UIE technique outperforms state-of-the-art UIE
methods while requiring cheaper computational and memory
costs.

Figure 1: PSNR-Parameters-FLOPs comparisons with existing UIE methods. The vert axis is PSNR (dB), the horizontal
axis is FLOPs (computational cost), and the circle radius is
the parameter number (memory cost) of each UIE model.
Our SS-UIE outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
while requiring fewer FLOPs and Params.
The purpose of UIE is to enhance image quality by removing scattering and correcting color distortions in degraded images. To achieve this goal, traditional physical
model-based methods (Ancuti et al. 2012; Drews Jr et al.
2013; Li et al. 2016b) first investigate the physical mechanisms of underwater image degradation and then reverse
the degradation process using various hand-crafted physical priors. However, these methods rely on manually tuned
physical parameters and cannot account for all the complex
physical and optical factors in underwater scenes, leading to
poor generalizability. In contrast, learning-based UIE methods eliminate the need for manual parameter tuning. Researchers initially applied CNNs (Zeiler and Fergus 2014)
to learning-based UIE methods to improve generalization
capability. However, CNN-based methods (Li et al. 2017,
2020, 2021; Islam, Xia, and Sattar 2020) show limitations
in capturing non-local self-similarity and long-range dependencies in images, resulting in suboptimal UIE performance.
Recently, Transformer-based UIE methods (Peng, Zhu,
and Bian 2023; Tang, Kawasaki, and Iwaguchi 2023; Zhao
et al. 2024) have demonstrated promising performance. The
self-attention mechanism in Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017) can model long-range dependencies and non-local

Code — https://github.com/LintaoPeng/SS-UIE

Introduction
Underwater imaging technology (Sahu, Gupta, and Sharma
2014; Yang et al. 2019) is essential for obtaining underwater
images and investigating the underwater environment. However, due to the strong absorption and scattering effects on
light caused by dissolved impurities and suspended matter
in the medium (water), underwater images often suffer from
inconsistent levels of degradation in different spatial regions
and spectral bands, which ultimately leads to problematic issues, such as color casts, artifacts and blurred details (Schettini and Corchs 2010). Therefore, Underwater Image Enhancement (UIE) related innovations are of great significance for improving the visual quality and merit of images
in accurately understanding the underwater world.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6461

