The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Friends-MMC: A Dataset for Multi-modal Multi-party Conversation
Understanding
Yueqian Wang1 , Xiaojun Meng2 , Yuxuan Wang3 , Jianxin Liang1 , Qun Liu2 , Dongyan Zhao1,4 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
{wangyueqian,liangjx,zhaodongyan}@pku.edu.cn, {xiaojun.meng, qun.liu}@huawei.com, wangyuxuan1@bigai.ai
Abstract

from social media, these dialogues are mostly presented in
question-answer format (AlAmri et al. 2019) between a human and a system, instead of among several human interlocutors; (2) the speakers are bystanders (Das et al. 2016)
and discuss the given visual content such as an image or a
video, instead of really being situated in the context.
In contrast, in real-world face-to-face conversations, the
interlocutors are situated in the visual & audio context 1 ,
which means that the conversation and the visual context
influence each other rather than interlocutors discussing
about a given fixed visual context. Also, there can be more
than 2 interlocutors involved, which means that modelling
speaker information is crucial for comprehending the conversation. Understanding face-to-face conversations is an
important foundation for achieving embodied artificial intelligence (Zhou et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023).
Therefore, we emphasize that multi-modal multi-party conversation is a very important field for real industrial applications yet a less studied topic.
To overcome the shortcomings of existing work on multimodal conversation, in this paper we extend its scopes and
propose a new field of research: multi-modal multi-party
conversation (MMC). Compared with traditional multimodal conversations, MMC differs in the following aspects:
(1) The conversation is not only between a user and an
assistant, but among an arbitrary number of interlocutors,
therefore the information of the speaker should be explicitly modeled; (2) Instead of chatting on images / videos as
bystanders, the interlocutors are situated within the visual
context, or in other words, the visual context provides rich
information about the interlocutors, such as their identities,
expressions and actions.
To foster the study of MMC, we build Friends-MMC, a
multi-modal multi-party conversation dataset collected from
the famous TV series Friends. 2 An overview of Friends-

Multi-modal multi-party conversation (MMC) is a less studied yet important topic of research due to that it well fits
real-world scenarios and thus potentially has more widelyused applications. Compared with the traditional multi-modal
conversations, MMC requires stronger character-centered understanding abilities as there are many interlocutors appearing in both the visual and textual context. To facilitate the
study of this problem, we present Friends-MMC in this paper, an MMC dataset that contains 24,000+ unique utterances
paired with video context. To explore the character-centered
understanding of the dialogue, we also annotate the speaker
of each utterance, the names and bounding bboxes of faces
that appear in the video. Based on this Friends-MMC dataset,
we further study two fundamental MMC tasks: conversation
speaker identification and conversation response prediction,
both of which have the multi-party nature with the video or
image as visual context. For conversation speaker identification, we demonstrate the inefficiencies of existing methods
such as pre-trained models, and propose a simple yet effective baseline method that leverages an optimization solver to
utilize the context of two modalities to achieve better performance. For conversation response prediction, we fine-tune
generative dialogue models on Friend-MMC, and analyze the
benefits of speaker information. The code and dataset will
be publicly available, and thus we call for more attention on
modelling speaker information when understanding conversations.

Datasets —
https://github.com/yellow-binary-tree/Friends-MMC

Introduction
Multi-modal dialogue systems have attracted extensive attention in recent studies (Zang et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2022;
Feng et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Li et al.
2023a; Maaz et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b), especially with
the rapid development of multi-modal large language models. However, there are two main deficiencies of existing
works: (1) As most multi-modal datasets are collected from
human annotations, LLM generated contents or chat history

1

In this work, either images or videos can be used as the visual
context. When videos are used, the audios are also included. To
avoid cluttering, we keep using “visual context” to refer to videos
and omit “& audio” in the rest of this paper.
2
We have investigated the copyright issue of releasing our
dataset, it can be released and used for non-commercial purposes.
In fact, previous work (Poria et al. 2018) also created a dataset
collected from TV Series Friends, and the authors have already re-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25425

