The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

InpDiffusion: Image Inpainting Localization via Conditional Diffusion Models
Kai Wang, Shaozhang Niu* , Qixian Hao, Jiwei Zhang
Beijing Key Lab of Intelligent Telecommunication Software and Multimedia, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
{kaiwang, szniu, qixianhao123, jwzhang666}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
As artificial intelligence advances rapidly, particularly with
the advent of GANs and diffusion models, the accuracy of
Image Inpainting Localization (IIL) has become increasingly
challenging. Current IIL methods face two main challenges: a
tendency towards overconfidence, leading to incorrect predictions; and difficulty in detecting subtle tampering boundaries
in inpainted images. In response, we propose a new paradigm
that treats IIL as a conditional mask generation task utilizing diffusion models. Our method, InpDiffusion, utilizes the
denoising process enhanced by the integration of image semantic conditions to progressively refine predictions. During
denoising, we employ edge conditions and introduce a novel
edge supervision strategy to enhance the model’s perception
of edge details in inpainted objects. Balancing the diffusion
model’s stochastic sampling with edge supervision of tampered image regions mitigates the risk of incorrect predictions
from overconfidence and prevents the loss of subtle boundaries that can result from overly stochastic processes. Furthermore, we propose an innovative Dual-stream Multi-scale
Feature Extractor (DMFE) for extracting multi-scale features,
enhancing feature representation by considering both semantic and edge conditions of the inpainted images. Extensive
experiments across challenging datasets demonstrate that the
InpDiffusion significantly outperforms existing state-of-theart methods in IIL tasks, while also showcasing excellent generalization capabilities and robustness.

Figure 1: Visualization results of tampered edges and region
predictions captured by InpDiffusion at different sampling
stages. x̂0 and ê represent the predicted inpainted objects
and their edges at different sampling stages, respectively.
w/oES
x̂0
are the predictions without edge supervision strategy .

learn comprehensive representations; 2) Multi-stage (Liu
et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2023) feature fusion frameworks
that integrate features extracted at different levels of the
backbone network; 3) Branch frameworks (Xu, Shen, and
Lyu 2023; Shi et al. 2023) that implement a single-input,
multiple-output architecture, including tasks like word segmentation and auxiliary branches. These techniques are
built upon a semantic segmentation foundation, employing
learning-based backbones for feature extraction and decoder
heads to generate segmentation masks. However, without a
sophisticated design, this approach is prone to overconfidence in predictions, leading to incorrect assessments, especially when dealing with increasingly sophisticated inpainting images (Barglazan, Brad, and Constantinescu 2024).
The high invisibility of inpainting edges further complicates
the task, as it blurs the distinction between the inpainted areas and the original image background, increasing the risk
of misidentification.
To address the unique challenges of IIL, we develop a new
framework called InpDiffusion. This framework leverages
the diffusion model paradigm, known for its strong generative capabilities and sensitivity to conditions. Unlike traditional IIL models, InpDiffusion’s iterative noise reduction
mechanism simplifies the refinement process. Moreover, the
diffusion model’s stochastic sampling process introduces

Introduction
Image inpainting, essential for digital restoration and other
applications, has reached unprecedented realism through advancements in deep learning techniques (Rombach et al.
2022; Zeng et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2023; Park et al. 2024).
This sophistication has outpaced traditional tampering detection methods, which depend on visible signs. The field
of image forensics now faces the new challenge of detecting
subtle, concealed manipulations through the emerging task
of Image Inpainting Localization (IIL).
Researchers have responded to this challenge by proposing various strategies, focusing primarily on three design
paradigms: 1) Multi-stream frameworks (Dong et al. 2022;
Niloy et al. 2023) that leverage multiple input streams to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7771

