The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Online Nonsubmodular Optimization with
Delayed Feedback in the Bandit Setting
Sifan Yang1,2 , Yuanyu Wan3,1, * , Lijun Zhang1,3, *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{yangsf,zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wanyy@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

to the classical online convex optimization (OCO) (Zinkevich 2003), it is typically formulated as a game between
an online player and an adversary. In each round t ∈ [T ],
the player begins by selecting a subset decision St ⊆ [n].
When the player submits its decision St , the adversary
chooses a nonsubmodular loss function ft (·) : 2[n] 7→ R
and then the player suffers a loss ft (St ), where ft (·) =
f¯t (·)−f t (·), f¯t (·) is α-weakly diminishing return submodular (DR-submodular), f t (·) is β-weakly diminishing return
supermodular (DR-supermodular) and 2[n] represents all the
subset of [n].1
The player aims to minimize the cumulative loss over T
rounds, equivalently minimizing the regret:

We investigate the online nonsubmodular optimization with
delayed feedback in the bandit setting, where the loss
function is α-weakly DR-submodular and β-weakly DRsupermodular. Previous work has established an (α, β)-regret
bound of O(nd1/3 T 2/3 ), where n is the dimensionality and
d is the maximum delay. However, its regret bound relies
on the maximum delay and is thus sensitive to irregular delays. Additionally, it couples the effects of delays and bandit feedback as its bound is the product of the delay term
and the O(nT 2/3 ) regret bound in the bandit setting without delayed feedback. In this paper, we develop two algorithms to address these limitations, respectively. Firstly, we
propose a novel method, namely DBGD-NF, which employs
the one-point gradient estimator and utilizes all the available
estimated gradients in each round to update the decision. It
achieves a better O(nd¯1/3 T 2/3 ) regret bound, which is relP
evant to the average delay d¯ = T1 Tt=1 dt ≤ d. Secondly,
we extend DBGD-NF by employing a blocking update mechanism to decouple the joint effect of the delays
√ and bandit feedback, which enjoys an O(n(T 2/3 + dT )) regret
bound. When d = O(T 1/3 ), our regret bound matches the
O(nT 2/3 ) bound in the bandit setting without delayed feedback. Compared to our first O(nd¯1/3 T 2/3 ) bound, it is more
advantageous when the maximum delay d = o(d¯2/3 T 1/3 ).
Finally, we conduct experiments on structured sparse learning to demonstrate the superiority of our methods.

Reg(T ) ≜

T
X
t=1

ft (St ) − min

S⊆[n]

T
X

ft (S),

(1)

t=1

which compares the excess loss suffered by the player with
that of the best decision chosen in hindsight. As pointed out
by El Halabi and Jegelka (2020), the optimization problem
PT
minS⊆[n] t=1 ft (S) is NP-hard, thus it is impossible to
find the optimal decision in polynomial time. For this reason, we follow the previous work (Lin et al. 2022) and apply
the (α, β)-regret to measure the performance of the online
player, which is defined as


T
X
1 ¯ ⋆
Regα,β (T ) ≜
ft (St ) −
ft (S ) − βf t (S ⋆ ) , (2)
α
t=1
PT
where S ∗ = arg minS⊆[n] t=1 ft (S) and (α, β) are the
approximation factors achieved by a certain offline algorithm. Lin et al. (2022) are the first to investigate the online nonsubmodular optimization and √
develop a method that
achieves an (α, β)-regret bound of O( nT ), building on the
Lovász extension (Lovász 1983) and the convex relaxation
model (El Halabi and Jegelka 2020), where n is the dimensionality.
In lots of real-world scenarios, there may be a potential
delay between the query of the player and the corresponding response (Quanrud and Khashabi 2015; Wan et al. 2022,
2023). To address the delayed scenario, Lin et al. (2022) also

Introduction
Online learning is a powerful framework that has been used
to model various sequential prediction problems (ShalevShwartz 2012). It can address scenarios in which decisions
are made from a small set (Hazan and Kale 2012), a continuous space (Hazan et al. 2016), or a combinatorial feasible domain (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2012). In this paper, we study the online nonsubmodular optimization (Lin
et al. 2022), an emerging branch of the online learning,
which appears in many machine learning tasks like structured sparse learning (El Halabi and Cevher 2015), Bayesian
optimization (González et al. 2016), and column subset selection (Sviridenko, Vondrák, and Ward 2017), etc. Similar
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The definition of the α-weakly DR-submodular and β-weakly
DR-supermodular can be found in Definition 2.

21992

