The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GIST: Gear Type Identification by Spatiotemporal
Trajectory Transformation for Monitoring Fisheries
Amir Yaghoubi Shahir1 , Tilemachos Charalampous1 , Mahsa Keramati1 ,
Fatemeh Movafagh1 , Uwe Glässer1 , Hans Wehn2
1

School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada
2
MDA Space Ltd., Richmond, BC, Canada
{sayaghou, tcharala, mkeramat, fma44, glaesser}@sfu.ca, hans.wehn@mda.space
Abstract

devastating consequences of overfishing and promote sustainable fishing practices (Phelps Bondaroff, Reitano, and
van der Werf 2015). With the enormous commercial fishing
vessel fleet operating across vast coastal waters and open
oceans that cover over 70% of our planet’s surface, maritime regulatory authorities face extreme challenges in their
efforts to enforce compliance of fisheries with fishing laws
and regulations (United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development 2018; Global Fishing Watch 2017). In addition, although the most prevalent fishing vessel types play
a central role in commercial fisheries, they are frequently
involved in IUU fishing. Combating IUU fishing, therefore,
necessitates automated detection of fishing activities that deviate from the expected operational characteristics of these
vessels. The operational characteristics of fishing vessels are
influenced by various factors, including the type of fishing
gear, vessel capacity, fishing licenses, and seasonal or geographical restrictions. Among these, the type of fishing gear
is the most distinctive, as each gear type targets specific fish
species and leaves unique footprints on marine environments
and socio-economic structures.
Accurate gear type identification is a fundamental step
toward detecting potential IUU fishing, as it can indicate
various illegal practices (Deng et al. 2005; Kiparissis et al.
2011), such as targeting restricted species or using unauthorized gear types (Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
2021). Once the gear type is identified, the amount of fishing
gear of a specific type used on fishing grounds over a given
period can be determined, allowing for the estimation of the
vessel’s fishing effort and the potential overfishing risks associated with it (Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations 2001). Additionally, understanding the type
of gear and the specifics of each fishing method provides insights into the threats they pose to the sustainability of marine ecosystems, including bycatch and seabed disturbance.
Using rich and reliable Vessel Monitoring System (VMS)
data has shown promising results for identifying fishing gear
types (Marzuki et al. 2017). However, the limited accessibility of VMS data hinders the timely and broad application of these methods. Therefore, Automatic Identification
System (AIS) data—transmitted from marine vessels—is
widely used as a compelling alternative for developing gear
type identification methods (Kim and Lee 2020; RodriguezAlbala et al. 2024; Carlos et al. 2021). Although AIS data is

Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) fishing aggravates the global crisis caused by overfishing, threatening the
sustainability of marine ecosystems and fisheries worldwide.
Distinctive operational characteristics of fishing vessels result in unique footprints on marine environments and socioeconomic structures, depending on their fishing method and
gear type such as trawlers with non-selective gear that disrupts the seabed, purse seiners using Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs), and longliners notorious for high bycatch rates.
As these vessels play an essential role in commercial fishing and the industry, effective monitoring, regulation, and
enforcement are critical to mitigate the devastating consequences of overfishing and promote sustainable fishing practices. To this end, this paper introduces a novel multi-stage
method for Gear type Identification by Spatiotemporal trajectory Transformation (GIST). This method proposes a datacentric approach that employs domain knowledge to facilitate
the deployment of an efficient and accurate analysis of operational patterns of fishing vessels derived from Automatic
Identification System (AIS) data. Our method first extracts
fishing patterns from vessel trajectories to refine data integrity
and isolate only the most relevant activities, thereby ensuring
a more accurate result. Next, it encapsulates the distributional
insights of fishing activities into fixed-sized “images” as actionable input for a multi-class CNN-based classifier. Utilizing GIST bypasses complicated linear analyses of time series
data for rendering lengthy trajectories, advancing an efficient
gear type identification with 97% accuracy. To the best of our
knowledge, GIST is the first to use a multi-stage pipelining method to distinguish three principal gear types widely
used globally. Our experiments confirm GIST’s practicability and effectiveness, marking a significant advancement towards stricter enforcement of regulations in the fight against
IUU fishing.

1

Introduction

IUU fishing is a global threat to marine ecosystems and fisheries, and is estimated to account for up to 30% of all fishing worldwide, causing economic damage of approximately
$23 billion (USD) per year (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 2020). Effective monitoring and
enforcement of fishing regulations is crucial to mitigate the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28349

