The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Edge Contrastive Learning: An Augmentation-Free Graph Contrastive Learning
Model
Yujun Li1 , Hongyuan Zhang2,3 , Yuan Yuan1 *
1

School of Artifcial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P.R. China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom, P. R. China
3
The University of Hong Kong
yujunli361@gmail.com, hyzhang98@gmail.com, y.yuan1.ieee@gmail.com
Abstract

2024). Among SSL methods, contrastive learning (CL) has
been shown to achieve comparable performance levels to its
supervised counterparts across a spectrum of tasks, including Computer Vision (CV) (Chen et al. 2020) and Natural
Language Processing (NLP) (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021).
With the development of CL, CL was introduced into the
graph domain, combining GNN and CL to learn embedding,
also dubbed graph contrastive learning (GCL) (Hassani and
Khasahmadi 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2022).
Recent studies on graph contrastive learning focus on a
similar contrastive learning paradigm. Specifically, graph
contrastive learning aims to learn one or more encoders such
that similar instances in the graph agree with each other, and
dissimilar instances disagree with each other. Most existing GCL methods can be divided into two aspects: graph
view generation by applying different transformations and
learning towards minimizing contrastive loss based on mutual information (MI) estimators. For graph view generation,
there are various graph transformation (augmentation) methods, such as node attribute masking (You et al. 2020)), edge
perturbation (Qiu et al. 2020; You et al. 2020), graph diffusion (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020), π-noise augmentation (Li 2022; Zhang et al. 2024), etc. For contrastive
objectives, there are contrastive losses widely used in CL,
such as Donsker-Varadhan estimator (Donsker and Varadhan 1983; Belghazi et al. 2018), noise contrastive estimation
(InfoNCE) (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2010; Oord, Li, and
Vinyals 2018), normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy
(NT-Xent) (Sohn 2016), to estimate and maximize the mutual information in CL computationally. However, there are
some drawbacks of this paradigm.
On the one hand, MAGCL (Gong, Yang, and Shi 2023)
argues augmentations that retain sufficiently complete taskrelevant information cannot generate diverse enough views.
Existing handcrafted graph augmented strategies may destroy the graph structure resulting in failing to maintain
the task-related information intact. At the same time, using
two encoders with the same neural architecture and tied parameters for the augmented graphs may hurt the diversity
of the augmented views. Specifically, removing important
edges can severely damage graph topology that is highly relevant to downstream tasks, resulting in poor graph embedding quality (Zhu et al. 2021). Generating augmentations in
a heuristic (Zhu, Sun, and Koniusz 2021) or adversarial (You

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims to learn representations from unlabeled graph data in a self-supervised manner
and has developed rapidly in recent years. However, edgelevel contrasts are not well explored by most existing GCL
methods. Most studies in GCL only regard edges as auxiliary
information while updating node features. One of the primary
obstacles of edge-based GCL is the heavy computation burden. To tackle this issue, we propose a model that can efficiently learn edge features for GCL, namely AugmentationFree Edge Contrastive Learning (AFECL) to achieve edgeedge contrast. AFECL depends on no augmentation consisting of two parts. Firstly, we design a novel edge feature generation method, where edge features are computed by embedding concatenation of their connected nodes. Secondly, an
edge contrastive learning scheme is developed, where edges
connecting the same nodes are defined as positive pairs, and
other edges are defined as negative pairs. Experimental results show that compared with recent state-of-the-art GCL
methods or even some supervised GNNs, AFECL achieves
SOTA performance on link prediction and semi-supervised
node classification of extremely scarce labels.

Code — https://github.com/YujunLi361/AFECL

1

Introduction

The recent success of graph neural networks has driven research in knowledge graphs (Zhu et al. 2022), recommendation (Cao et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023), e-commerce (Zhang
et al. 2022a), biological systems (Rao et al. 2022), etc. A
common approach to training graph neural networks is to
use the supervised mode. For supervised learning, a sufficient amount of input data and label pairs are given otherwise this leads to overfitting (Feng et al. 2020). However,
the supervised training process requires a large amount of labeled data and is expensive in real applications, since labels
are expensive, or even long-tailed data (Yang et al. 2023).
Unsupervised and self-supervised learning (SSL) trains
neural network models on unlabeled data, reducing dependence on labeled data (Cai, Jiang, and Yuan 2021; Zhang
et al. 2023; Li, Zhao, and Yuan 2023; Zhang, Zhu, and Li
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18575

