The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Assemblies
Daniel Halpern 1 , Ariel D. Procaccia 1 , Ehud Shapiro 2,3 Nimrod Talmon 4
1
Harvard University
Weizmann Institute of Science
3
London School of Economics
4
Ben-Gurion University
dhalpern@g.harvard.edu, arielpro@seas.harvard.edu, ehud.shapiro@weizmann.ac.il, talmonn@bgu.ac.il
2

Abstract

algorithms, which are designed to achieve descriptive representation while optimizing fairness to volunteers, have been
broadly deployed (Procaccia 2022).

A citizens’ assembly is a group of people who are randomly selected to represent a larger population in a deliberation. While
this approach has successfully strengthened democracy, it has
certain limitations that suggest the need for assemblies to
form and associate more organically. In response, we propose
federated assemblies, where assemblies are interconnected,
and each parent assembly is selected from members of its
child assemblies. The main technical challenge is to develop
random selection algorithms that meet new representation constraints inherent in this hierarchical structure. We design and
analyze several algorithms that provide different representation guarantees under various assumptions on the structure of
the underlying graph.

1

Introduction

Citizens’ assemblies are a popular mechanism for democratic
decision making (Stone 2011; Van Reybrouck 2016; Fishkin
2018; Landemore 2020). In the last decade, this paradigm
has vastly grown in recognition and influence. In Europe, for
example, governments have sponsored citizens’ assemblies to
inform national policy on constitutional questions (Ireland),
climate change (France), and even nutrition (Germany). Technology companies like Meta (Clegg 2023) are also piloting
(enormous) citizens’ assemblies as a way of obtaining democratic inputs for AI governance and alignment.
While different assemblies may take somewhat different
approaches, they all share two distinctive features. First, members of a citizen’s assembly are randomly selected among
volunteers. Second, members of the assembly engage in a
long and substantial deliberation before reaching any conclusions.
The former feature is of great technical interest, as it is
challenging to design a good random selection process. The
goal is to achieve descriptive representation, in the sense that
the assembly should reflect the composition of the population
along multiple dimensions like gender, age, ethnicity and
level of education; this is seen as a source of legitimacy for
citizens’ assemblies. However, since the pool of volunteers
is typically skewed due to self-selection bias, uniform random selection will not yield descriptive representation and
more sophisticated algorithmic solutions are required. Such
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13897

Our proposal: Federated assemblies. To our knowledge,
the hundreds of citizens’ assemblies convened around the
world have all been independent of each other: in collaboration with practitioners, different countries, regions and
municipalities have organized their own assemblies from the
ground up.
By contrast, we propose a novel form of citizens’ assemblies: federated assemblies. The most basic building block of
a federated assembly is two assemblies (say, each representing the residents of a city) that decide to federate, forming
a new parent assembly (which represents the residents of
both cities and discusses policy questions of mutual interest);
crucially, the members of the parent assembly are selected
from the child assemblies. More generally, a parent assembly
can have more than two children, a child assembly can have
more than one parent, and the parent assemblies themselves
can federate. Overall, a federated assembly is represented
by a directed acyclic graph, where nodes correspond to assemblies and an edge from x to y means that x federated
with other assemblies to form the parent assembly y. The
lowest level (non-federated) assemblies are leaf assemblies,
which allow people to directly sign up as constituents. Even
leaf assemblies need not represent only geographical entities,
they can also correspond to issues (such as climate change) or
identity groups (such as ethnic groups). Furthermore, people
can sign up for multiple leaf assemblies — any that intersect
their multi-faceted interests.
An important question, of course, is who would establish these assemblies, manage the infrastructure, and provide
funding. One possible solution is to use the conceptual framework of grassroots systems (Shapiro 2023a,b). A federated
assemblies grassroots platform (Shapiro 2024) would operate
in a decentralized manner on individuals’ smartphones without relying on any global resources other than the network
itself. This would allow such systems to develop organically,
without centralized authorities and external dependencies.
In our view, federated assemblies have several advantages
over the current practice of citizens’ assemblies. First, the
process of forming a new assembly does not have to start
from the very beginning, as its members are selected from
child assemblies; therefore, the lengthy and costly process

