The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Holistic Semantic Representation for Navigational Trajectory Generation
Ji Cao1 , Tongya Zheng2,3, * , Qinghong Guo1 , Yu Wang1 , Junshu Dai1 ,
Shunyu Liu4 , Jie Yang1 , Jie Song1 , Mingli Song3,5
1
Zhejiang University
Big Graph Center, Hangzhou City University
3
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
4
Nanyang Technological Univerisity
5
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{caoji2001, q.h guo, yu.wang, djs, yang jie, sjie, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
doujiang zheng@163.com, shunyu.liu@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

solution to these challenges is trajectory generation, which
not only meets privacy requirements but also allows for the
creation of diverse high-fidelity trajectories. These trajectories are capable of producing similar data-analysis results,
supporting broader research and application needs.
In addition to traditional statistical methods (Song et al.
2010; Jiang et al. 2016), deep learning has improved trajectory generation by encoding fine-grained human mobility semantics in high-dimensional representations. A series of trajectory generation methods employ RNNs and CNNs to capture spatio-temporal features in the trajectories, along with
various generative models such as VAEs (Huang et al. 2019;
Lestyán, Ács, and Biczók 2022), GANs (Cao and Li 2021;
Wang et al. 2021), and diffusion models (Zhu et al. 2023b).
In addition, another line of methods incorporates the connectivity of spatio-temporal points by embedding the topological semantics of road networks into trajectory generation (Feng et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2024a; Zhu et al. 2024).
However, since experienced drivers (Yuan et al. 2010) often
identify the fastest spatio-temporal routes to their destinations, previous methods have substantially overlooked the
impact of destination on generated trajectories, resulting in
a deviation from practical realities.
To the best of our knowledge, only TS-TrajGen (Jiang
et al. 2023) incorporates both origin and destination locations in trajectory generation based on the A* algorithm.
However, TS-TrajGen strictly adheres to the principle of the
A* algorithm to separately model the semantics of the trajectory level and the road level in a two-tower paradigm, which
hinders semantic sharing and end-to-end learning in trajectory generation. In general, existing methods lack a comprehensive understanding of the relationships between road
segments, trajectories, and their origins and destinations.
Therefore, we are motivated by the semantic relationships
to develop a HOlistic SEmantic Representation (HOSER)
framework for navigational trajectory generation. Using a
bottom-up approach, we first derive long-range road semantics by partitioning road networks into a hierarchical topology. The trajectory representations are then encoded in a
multi-granularity manner to integrate spatio-temporal dynamics with road-level semantics. Finally, we guide the trajectory generation process by incorporating both the semantic context of partial trajectories and the semantics of the

Trajectory generation has garnered significant attention from
researchers in the field of spatio-temporal analysis, as it can
generate substantial synthesized human mobility trajectories
that enhance user privacy and alleviate data scarcity. However, existing trajectory generation methods often focus on
improving trajectory generation quality from a singular perspective, lacking a comprehensive semantic understanding
across various scales. Consequently, we are inspired to develop a HOlistic SEmantic Representation (HOSER) framework for navigational trajectory generation. Given an originand-destination (OD) pair and the starting time point of a latent trajectory, we first propose a Road Network Encoder to
expand the receptive field of road- and zone-level semantics.
Second, we design a Multi-Granularity Trajectory Encoder
to integrate the spatio-temporal semantics of the generated
trajectory at both the point and trajectory levels. Finally, we
employ a Destination-Oriented Navigator to seamlessly integrate destination-oriented guidance. Extensive experiments
on three real-world datasets demonstrate that HOSER outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by a significant margin.
Moreover, the model’s performance in few-shot learning and
zero-shot learning scenarios further verifies the effectiveness
of our holistic semantic representation.

Code — https://github.com/caoji2001/HOSER
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02737

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of Global Positioning Systems
(GPS) and Geographic Information Systems (GIS), the number of human mobility trajectories has soared, significantly
advancing research in spatio-temporal data mining, such as
urban planning (Bao et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2023, 2024b,c),
business location selection (Li et al. 2016), and travel time
estimation (Reich et al. 2019; Wen et al. 2024). However,
due to obstacles including privacy issues (Cao and Li 2021),
government regulations (Chen et al. 2024a), and data processing costs (Zheng 2015), it is not easy for researchers to
obtain high-quality real-world trajectory data. A promising
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

40

