The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Target Semantics Clustering via Text Representations
for Robust Universal Domain Adaptation
Weinan He1 , Zilei Wang1 * , Yixin Zhang1,2
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
hwn2018@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zlwang, zhyx12}@ustc.edu.cn
Unconstrained Continuous Space

Abstract
Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) focuses on transferring source domain knowledge to the target domain under
both domain shift and unknown category shift. Its main challenge lies in identifying common class samples and aligning
them. Current methods typically obtain target domain semantics centers from an unconstrained continuous image representation space. Due to domain shift and the unknown number of clusters, these centers often result in complex and less
robust alignment algorithm. In this paper, based on visionlanguage models, we search for semantic centers in a semantically meaningful and discrete text representation space.
The constrained space ensures almost no domain bias and
appropriate semantic granularity for these centers, enabling
a simple and robust adaptation algorithm. Specifically, we
propose TArget Semantics Clustering (TASC) via Text Representations, which leverages information maximization as
a unified objective and involves two stages. First, with the
frozen encoders, a greedy search-based framework is used
to search for an optimal set of text embeddings to represent
target semantics. Second, with the search results fixed, encoders are refined based on gradient descent, simultaneously
achieving robust domain alignment and private class clustering. Additionally, we propose Universal Maximum Similarity
(UniMS), a scoring function tailored for detecting open-set
samples in UniDA. Experimentally, we evaluate the universality of UniDA algorithms under four category shift scenarios. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness and robustness of our method, which has
achieved state-of-the-art performance.

Constrained Discrete Space

Randomly initialized semantic centers
Obtained semantic centers
Image embeddings
Matching without being biased
Gradually biasing towards a specific domain

Figure 1: Illustration of our core idea. The left part abstractly
represents the updating process of semantic centers in existing clustering-based UniDA methods. These centers gradually become domain-specific and have uncontrollable semantic granularity, such as separating diamonds into two
categories. In the right part, we constrain the search space of
semantic centers to a semantically meaningful and discrete
space, alleviating the issues of domain bias and inappropriate semantic granularity.

Ganin and Lempitsky; Long et al.; Li et al.; Zhang et al.;
Li et al.; Zhang, Li, and Wang; Gao et al.) has emerged,
aiming to transfer models trained on labeled source domains to unlabeled target domains. Although DA has shown
success, traditional DA methods rely on the closed-set assumption, which assumes that the source and target domains
share the same label set, and this assumption can be easily
violated in real-world scenarios. In light of this, Open-set
DA (ODA) (Saito et al. 2018) and Partial DA (PDA) (Cao
et al. 2018) consider the existence of private classes in the
target and source domains, respectively. However, in ODA
and PDA, prior knowledge about the locations of private
classes is still required. To adapt to more general scenarios,
Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) (You et al. 2019)
has been proposed, aiming to achieve DA without any prior
knowledge of category shifts, i.e., UniDA methods should
be able to handle Closed-set DA (CDA), ODA, PDA, and
Open-Partial DA (OPDA) simultaneously.
Currently, researchers have proposed many solutions,
among which the target domain clustering based approach
has been widely adopted (Saito et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021a;
Chang et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2023). Target domain clustering can effectively mine the intrinsic structure of the tar-

Code — https://github.com/Sapphire-356/TASC

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success
across various computer vision tasks (Carion et al.; Dosovitskiy et al.; He et al.; Deng et al.; He et al.). However, the
high cost of annotated data and the limitation of the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumptions between training and test datasets pose challenges in practical applications. To tackle these issues, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (DA) (Pan and Yang; Ben-David et al.;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17132

