The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HC-LLM: Historical-Constrained Large Language Models for Radiology Report
Generation
Tengfei Liu1 , Jiapu Wang1 , Yongli Hu1 * , Mingjie Li2 , Junfei Yi3 ,
Xiaojun Chang4 , Junbin Gao5 , Baocai Yin1
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Stanford University, Palo Alto CA 94305 USA
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University, Hunan, China
4
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
5
University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia
{tfliu, jpwang}@emails.bjut.edu.cn, {huyongli,ybc}@bjut.edu.cn, lmj695@stanford.edu, yijunfei@hnu.edu.cn,
cxj273@gmail.com, junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Radiology report generation (RRG) models typically focus
on individual exams, often overlooking the integration of
historical visual or textual data, which is crucial for patient
follow-ups. Traditional methods usually struggle with long
sequence dependencies when incorporating historical information, but large language models (LLMs) excel at in-context
learning, making them well-suited for analyzing longitudinal
medical data. In light of this, we propose a novel HistoricalConstrained Large Language Models (HC-LLM) framework
for RRG, empowering LLMs with longitudinal report generation capabilities by constraining the consistency and differences between longitudinal images and their corresponding reports. Specifically, our approach extracts both timeshared and time-specific features from longitudinal chest Xrays and diagnostic reports to capture disease progression.
Then, we ensure consistent representation by applying intramodality similarity constraints and aligning various features
across modalities with multimodal contrastive and structural
constraints. These combined constraints effectively guide the
LLMs in generating diagnostic reports that accurately reflect
the progression of the disease, achieving state-of-the-art results on the Longitudinal-MIMIC dataset. Notably, our approach performs well even without historical data during testing and can be easily adapted to other multimodal large models, enhancing its versatility.

Figure 1: Illustration of the longitudinal report generation
process. Unlike traditional methods that rely solely on the
current chest X-ray, our approach emphasizes the effective
utilization of historical diagnostic information to significantly enhance the accuracy of LLMs in RRG.

et al. 2024a; Shen et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024) rely on a single
image as input, preventing them from accurately generating
descriptions of prior references and thereby impacting their
performance. This limitation is evident as current models
struggle to achieve high scores on natural language generation (NLG) metrics. Therefore, as illustrated in Figure 1, this
paper focuses on a more practical research problem: how to
generate radiology reports from longitudinal data.
Zhu et al. (2023b) have made preliminary attempts in this
direction by utilizing a memory mechanism to incorporate
historical information for enhanced chest X-ray report generation. However, their approach still relies on traditional
cross-attention mechanisms and requires the presence of historical data during testing, limiting its practicality. Recently,
large language models (LLMs) have been successfully applied to traditional radiology report generation tasks (Jin
et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024a,b), and their inherent in-context
learning abilities make them well-suited for analyzing longitudinal medical data. However, despite this potential, directly inputting longitudinal medical data into LLMs often

Introduction
Radiology report generation (RRG) is a crucial research area
in medical AI, with numerous studies focused on reducing
the heavy workload of radiologists. In clinical practice, an
essential function of these reports is to document pathological changes in patients, aiding doctors in recalling and diagnosing disease progression. As a result, ground truth reports often include descriptions of historical information.
However, most existing models (Chen et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2021a; Chen et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023a,c; Tanida et al. 2023;
Liu, Tian, and Song 2023; Huang, Zhang, and Zhang 2023;
Wang et al. 2023b,a; Liu et al. 2024b; Jin et al. 2024; Liu
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5595

