The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Personalized Decision Support Policies
Umang Bhatt1,2 * , Valerie Chen3 * , Katherine M. Collins4 , Parameswaran Kamalaruban2 , Emma
Kallina2,4 , Adrian Weller2,4 , Ameet Talwalkar3
1
New York University
The Alan Turing Institute
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
University of Cambridge
umangbhatt@nyu.edu, valeriechen@cmu.edu
2

Abstract
Individual human decision-makers may benefit from different
forms of support to improve decision outcomes, but when will
each form of support yield better outcomes? In this work, we
posit that personalizing access to decision support tools can be
an effective mechanism for instantiating the appropriate use
of AI assistance. Specifically, we propose the general problem
of learning a decision support policy that, for a given input,
chooses which form of support to provide to decision-makers
for whom we initially have no prior information. We develop
Modiste, an interactive tool to learn personalized decision
support policies. Modiste leverages stochastic contextual
bandit techniques to personalize a decision support policy
for each decision-maker. In our computational experiments,
we characterize the expertise profiles of decision-makers for
whom personalized policies will outperform offline policies,
including population-wide baselines. Our experiments include
realistic forms of support (e.g., expert consensus and predictions from a large language model) on vision and language
tasks. Our human subject experiments add nuance to and bolster our computational experiments, demonstrating the practical utility of personalized policies when real users benefit
from accessing support across tasks.

1

Figure 1: Depending on the input, decision-makers need
different forms of decision support to make correct decisions.
Modiste personalizes access to the right form of support
at the right time for the right decision-maker online. Here,
Alice would not benefit from model access, while Bob would
not benefit from a senior consult.

Introduction

Human decision-makers use various forms of support to inform their opinions before making a final decision (Keen
1980). Decision-makers with differing expertise may benefit from different forms of support on a given input (Yu
et al. 2024). For example, one radiologist may provide a
better diagnosis of a chest X-ray by leveraging model predictions (Kahn Jr 1994) while another may perform better after
viewing suggestions from senior radiologists (Briggs et al.
2008): see Figure 1. In this paper, we study how to improve
decision outcomes by personalizing which form of support
we provide to a decision-maker on a case-by-case basis.
Since artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly used as
a form of decision support (Lai et al. 2023), even moving
towards systems that could act as “thought partners” (Collins
et al. 2024b), responsible machine learning (ML) model
deployment requires clarity on who should have access to

model outputs and when model outputs can be safely exposed to decision-makers (Amodei et al. 2016). Regulation
increasingly calls for the “effective and appropriate use” of
AI (Biden 2023), requiring careful consideration of when
models ought to be accessible to decision-makers. In this
paper, we formalize learning a decision support policy that
dictates for each individual decision-maker when additional
support (e.g., LLM output) should be viewed and used for a
given input.
While prior work has assumed access to offline human decisions under support (Laidlaw and Russell 2021; Charusaie
et al. 2022) or oracle queries of human behavior (De-Arteaga,
Dubrawski, and Chouldechova 2018; Mozannar and Sontag
2020) to learn decision support policies, we argue that this
data is unrealistic to obtain in practice across all available
forms of support for a new decision-maker. Thus, for individuals for whom we have no prior information initially,
we propose learning how to personalize support online. We
develop Modiste,1 an interactive tool that leverages offthe-shelf stochastic contextual bandit algorithms (Li et al.
2010) to learn decision support policies by modeling human
1

While a “modiste” usually refers to someone who tailors clothing and makes dresses/hats, we use the term to capture our tool’s
ability to alter a policy to a decision-maker.

* Both authors contributed equally: order decided by a coin flip.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14203

