The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Adversarially Robust Dataset Distillation by Curvature Regularization
Eric Xue1 , Yijiang Li2 , Haoyang Liu3 , Peiran Wang3 , Yifan Shen4 , Haohan Wang3
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego
3
School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
4
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
e.xue@mail.utoronto.ca, yijiangli@ucsd.edu, whilebug@gmail.com, {hl57, yifan26, haohanw}@illinois.edu,
2

Abstract

expanded rapidly in the direction of improving the test accuracy following the evaluation procedure (Sachdeva and
McAuley 2023). Additionally, many studies focus on improving the efficiency of the distillation process (Sachdeva
and McAuley 2023).

Dataset distillation (DD) allows datasets to be distilled to
fractions of their original size while preserving the rich distributional information so that models trained on the distilled
datasets can achieve a comparable accuracy while saving significant computational loads. Recent research in this area has
been focusing on improving the accuracy of models trained
on distilled datasets. In this paper, we aim to explore a new
perspective of DD. We study how to embed adversarial robustness in distilled datasets, so that models trained on these
datasets maintain the high accuracy and meanwhile acquire
better adversarial robustness. We propose a new method that
achieves this goal by incorporating curvature regularization
into the distillation process with much less computational
overhead than standard adversarial training. Extensive empirical experiments suggest that our method not only outperforms standard adversarial training on both accuracy and robustness with less computation overhead but is also capable
of generating robust distilled datasets that can withstand various adversarial attacks.

Less attention, however, has been given to an equally important aspect of this area of research: the adversarial robustness of models trained on distilled datasets. Adversarial
robustness is a key indicator of a model’s resilience against
malicious inputs, making it a crucial aspect of trustworthy
machine learning. Given the potential of dataset distillation to safeguard the privacy of the original dataset (Geng
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023), exploring its capability to
also enhance model robustness opens a promising avenue
for advancing research in trustworthy machine learning (Liu,
Chaudhary, and Wang 2023). Thus, our work seeks to bridge
this gap and focuses on the following question: How can
we embed adversarial robustness into the dataset distillation process, thereby generating datasets that lead to
more robust models?

Introduction

Motivated by this question, we explore potential methods
to accomplish this goal. As it turns out, it is not as simple as
adding adversarial training to the distillation process. To find
a more consistent method, we study the theoretical connection between adversarial robustness and dataset distillation.
Our theory suggests that we can directly improve the robustness of the distilled dataset by minimizing the curvature of
the loss function with respect to the real data. Based on our
findings, we propose a novel method, GUARD (Geometric
regUlarization for Adversarial Robust Dataset), which incorporates curvature regularization into the distillation process.
We then evaluate GUARD against existing distillation methods on ImageNette, Tiny ImageNet, and ImageNet datasets.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows

In the era of big data, the computational demands for training deep learning models are continuously growing due to
the increasing volume of data. This presents substantial challenges, particularly for entities with limited computational
resources. To mitigate such issues, concepts like dataset distillation (Wang et al. 2018) and dataset condensation (Zhao,
Mopuri, and Bilen 2021; Zhao and Bilen 2021, 2023) have
emerged, offering a means to reduce the size of the data
while maintaining its utility. A successful implementation of
dataset distillation can bring many benefits, such as enabling
more cost-effective research on large datasets and models.
Dataset distillation (DD) refers to the task of synthesizing
a smaller dataset such that models trained on this smaller
set yield high performance when tested against the original,
larger dataset. The dataset distillation algorithm takes a large
dataset as input and generates a compact, synthetic dataset.
The efficacy of the distilled dataset is assessed by evaluating
models trained on it against the original dataset.
Conventionally, distilled datasets are evaluated based on
their standard test accuracy. Therefore, recent research has

• Empirical and theoretical exploration of adversarial robustness in distilled datasets
• A theory-motivated method, GUARD, that offers robust
dataset distillation with minimal computational overhead
• Detailed evaluation of GUARD to demonstrate its effectiveness across multiple aspects

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9041

