The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mixture of Online and Offline Experts for Non-Stationary Time Series
Zhilin Zhao1,2,3 , Longbing Cao2 , Yuanyu Wan4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
zhaozhl7@hotmail.com, longbing.cao@mq.edu.au, wanyy@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

interval is converted to the last offline interval, and a new
online interval begins.
Some existing methods (Shalev-Shwartz 2012; Zhang,
Lu, and Zhou 2018) train an expert on the entire time series
using off-the-shelf online optimization techniques, without
considering the non-stationary nature of the data. However,
the dynamic data with varying distributions can mislead the
expert. Other methods (Yu 1994; Mohri and Rostamizadeh
2008, 2010) train an expert from scratch for each new online interval, which is safer but unreliable due to the scarcity
of labeled samples at the early stage. Thus, it is fundamental yet highly challenging to design a learning method with
tight sample complexity that outputs a hypothesis with desirable generalization. For non-stationary time series, the data
distribution in the current online interval may have appeared
in historical offline intervals. Therefore, a natural solution
is to combine the offline experts from the offline intervals
with the online expert from the current interval to address
the shortcomings of the aforementioned methods.
Inspired by the mixture of experts (Puigcerver et al.
2024), we propose Mixture of Online and Offline Experts
(MOOE) to transfer knowledge from offline intervals to the
online interval, addressing the non-stationarity issue. Following the paradigm of prediction with expert advice (CesaBianchi and Lugosi 2006; van Erven and Koolen 2016),
MOOE employs a meta expert to combine the online and
offline experts by adaptively weighting them according to
their effectiveness. Specifically, the online expert is continuously updated in the current online interval using an existing
online optimization method. Additionally, when an online
interval collects enough samples to become an offline interval, all samples from this interval, along with previously
obtained offline experts, are used to train the offline expert
for this interval.
Theoretically, we prove that the regret of MOOE is determined by the regret of the off-the-shelf online optimization
method used for the online expert. However, this can be improved if the number of maintained experts is within a bound
controlled by the size of intervals and the empirical errors of
the offline experts. By connecting optimization with learning theory (Hazan 2016), we derive the generalization error
bound by jointly exploiting the regret, the properties of the
loss function, the hypothesis class, and the data distribution,
thereby verifying the effectiveness of our approach. Exper-

We consider a general and realistic scenario involving nonstationary time series, consisting of several offline intervals
with different distributions within a fixed offline time horizon, and an online interval that continuously receives new
samples. For non-stationary time series, the data distribution
in the current online interval may have appeared in previous
offline intervals. We theoretically explore the feasibility of
applying knowledge from offline intervals to the current online interval. To this end, we propose the Mixture of Online
and Offline Experts (MOOE). MOOE learns static offline experts from offline intervals and maintains a dynamic online
expert for the current online interval. It then adaptively combines the offline and online experts using a meta expert to
make predictions for the samples received in the online interval. Specifically, we focus on theoretical analysis, deriving
parameter convergence, regret bounds, and generalization error bounds to prove the effectiveness of the algorithm.

Introduction
For a non-stationary time series, the data distribution in the
current time window may have appeared in the past. Therefore, can we apply the knowledge from historical data to the
current time window? In this paper, we theoretically prove
that this is feasible.
A common assumption in statistical learning theories for
time series is that observed samples are i.i.d., or stationary
in stochastic processes (Hamilton 1994). To leverage sample dependence in non-i.i.d. processes, it is often assumed
that observations come from a stationary φ-mixing or βmixing sequence (Mohri and Rostamizadeh 2010). However, these assumptions may not hold as the distribution of
real-life time series usually changes over time, making the
hypothesis class not (agnostically) PAC learnable (Hanneke
2016). Fortunately, distribution changes in real life are often
gradual, and samples in a short interval are nearly identically distributed (Kuznetsov and Mohri 2015). Therefore, we
consider a realistic scenario involving non-stationary time
series with several offline intervals of different distributions
within a fixed offline time horizon and an online interval that
continuously receives new samples. Once the number of received labeled samples reaches a predefined size, the online
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22867

