The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TSDF-Based Efficient Motion-Compensated Temporal Interpolation for 3D
Dynamic Sequences
Soowoong Kim1∗ , Minseong Kwon2∗ , Junho Choi2 , Gun Bang1 , Seungjoon Yang2†
1

Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
2
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
{soowoong.kim, gbang}@etri.re.kr, {minseongkwon, junhochoi, syang}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper introduces a method for efficiently interpolating
3D dynamic sequences using truncated signed distance function (TSDF) volumes. The method calculates bi-directional
motions between TSDF volumes of two frames and refines
them to reconstruct intermediate Unlike point cloud-based
methods, which can suffer from varying and irregular point
densities, the uniform and dense grid structure of TSDF offers a consistent framework for estimating the true motion of
objects within a scene. In our experiments, the TSDF-based
method offers more precise and reliable smooth motion prediction compared to the often error-prone surface depiction
in point clouds. Experimental results demonstrate improved
accuracy and reduced computational complexity, making it
suitable for real-time applications.

: Forward Motion Compensation
: Backward Motion Compensation

Figure 1: Visualization of our TSDF-based temporal interpolation. Intermediate TSDF is generated by a network that
considers bi-directional flow and time.

on high-rate displays. This results in jerky motion of objects
in a scene, which is known as motion judder (Roberts 2002;
Allison et al. 2017). Motion judder is generally considered
undesirable as it disrupts the viewer’s immersion and can
detract from the overall viewing experience. Temporal interpolation is a useful technique that involves adding frames
between existing frames to reduce motion judder and create
smoother motion (Ojo and de Haan 1997; Lee et al. 2002;
Thaipanich, Wu, and Kuo 2009). This is achieved by estimating the motion of objects in a scene and displacing them
in the inserted intermediate frames to create a consistent appearance that matches the eye’s tracking trajectories of objects.
Accurate temporal interpolation for 3D dynamic sequences can be a challenging task. Real-time rendering is
necessary to ensure a high level of immersion and prevent motion sickness. Display devices limit the computational complexity, so the conversion algorithm must be light
enough to be executed at the display device yet still effective enough to provide high-quality conversion. Latency can
negatively impact the user experience. To render a view, the
viewpoint information due to the user’s head or eye movement must be accessible. If the conversion starts after the
viewpoint information becomes available, there can be a significant delay since only the past views can be interpolated.
Therefore, the up-conversion needs to be done ahead with
3D data itself independently from viewpoints, allowing the
views to be rendered as soon as the viewpoint information is
available.

Introduction
3D scanning devices, such as lidars, multi-view camera arrays, structured-light cameras, and time-of-flight (ToF) cameras, have a slower frame rate compared to 2D cameras.
These devices require more computational power and time
to capture color and depth information for each point in a
scene. Additionally, the depth sensors used in 3D scanning
devices often have a slower response time than traditional
2D camera sensors. Synchronizing multiple sensors in 3D
scanning setups can also introduce delays and reduce the
system’s effective frame rate. Typically, these 3D acquisition devices provide 15∼30 frames per second (fps) of data.
High frame rates are extremely important for 3D applications such as virtual reality to deliver a smooth and immersive experience (Hofmeyer et al. 2019). Low frame rates
are known to cause motion sickness. Higher frame rates
help reduce blur and latency, which makes virtual reality
more comfortable and immersive. Achieving and maintaining high frame rates is essential for a truly compelling virtual reality experience. 3D displays offer an immersive user
experience and avoid motion sickness by supporting a high
frame rate of 90 fps.
When the frame rates of 3D data do not match the refresh
rates of display devices, lower-rate data is repeatedly shown
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4311

