The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Plug-and-Play Bregman ADMM Module for
Inferring Event Branches in Temporal Point Processes
Qingmei Wang1 , Yuxin Wu1 , Yujie Long2 , Jing Huang2 ,
Fengyuan Ran2 , Bing Su1 , Hongteng Xu1 *
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University

Abstract

2018), and so on. Typically, for an event sequence generated by a TPP, there exists a branching process capturing the
event-level triggering patterns hidden in the sequence (Dion
and Yanev 1994; Møller and Rasmussen 2006). As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the branching process is often represented as a transition matrix of events, which provides insights into the causal relationships between events and helps
identify the cascades of subsequent events. Therefore, inferring such event branches from observed event sequences is
crucial for us to reveal the underlying mechanism of event
generation and information diffusion, e.g., identifying the
source node in an information diffusion network (Farajtabar
et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018) and controlling the diffusion
of specific information (Farajtabar et al. 2014, 2017a).
Despite its significance, inferring event branches is challenging because they are latent variables unobservable in
practice. For some classic TPPs like Hawkes process (Zhou,
Zha, and Song 2013b), we can learn the TPPs based on
observed event sequences in the expectation-maximization
(EM) framework, in which the event branches are often inferred as the responsibilities of the events (i.e., the posterior probabilities of historical events given the current
ones). For neural TPPs like transformer Hawkes process
(THP) (Zuo et al. 2020) and self-attentive Hawkes process
(SAHP) (Zhang et al. 2020), the attention maps within the
models indicate the impacts of historical events on the current ones, and thus, can be treated as evidence of event
branches. However, both methods often suffer the oversmoothness issue and lead to unstructured event branches.
How to infer interpretable and structured event branches effectively for various TPP models is still an open problem.
In this study, we introduce a novel plug-and-play module based on the Bregman Alternating Direction Method of
Multipliers (Bregman ADMM or BADMM for short) algorithm (Wang and Banerjee 2014), which helps infer event
branches in the maximum likelihood estimation framework
of TPPs. As illustrated in Figure 1(b), given the responsibility matrices of classic TPPs or the attention maps of neural
TPPs, the BADMM module imposes low-rank and sparse
structures on the matrices by solving a subspace clustering
problem (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013) or a sparse group-lasso
problem (Simon et al. 2013). Applying the BADMM module to the EM algorithm of classic TPPs, we can optimize
the responsibility matrices iteratively to guide the learning of

An event sequence generated by a temporal point process is
often associated with a hidden and structured event branching
process that captures the triggering relations between its historical and current events. In this study, we design a new plugand-play module based on the Bregman ADMM (BADMM)
algorithm, which infers event branches associated with event
sequences in the maximum likelihood estimation framework
of temporal point processes (TPPs). Specifically, we formulate the inference of event branches as an optimization problem for the event transition matrix under sparse and low-rank
constraints, which is embedded in existing TPP models or
their learning paradigms. We can implement this optimization
problem based on subspace clustering and sparse group-lasso,
respectively, and solve it using the Bregman ADMM algorithm, whose unrolling leads to the proposed BADMM module. When learning a classic TPP (e.g., Hawkes process) by
the expectation-maximization algorithm, the BADMM module helps derive structured responsibility matrices in the Estep. Similarly, the BADMM module helps derive low-rank
and sparse attention maps for the neural TPPs with selfattention layers. The structured responsibility matrices and
attention maps, which work as learned event transition matrices, indicate event branches, e.g., inferring isolated events
and those key events triggering many subsequent events. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data show that
plugging our BADMM module into existing TPP models and
learning paradigms can improve model performance and provide us with interpretable structured event branches.

Code —
https://github.com/qingmeiwangdaily/BADMM TPP

Introduction
Temporal point processes (TPPs) are powerful tools for
modeling events that occur sequentially in continuous-time
domain (Kingman 1992; Ross et al. 1996). They have been
extensively used to capture the dynamics of the events in
various domains, such as earthquake prediction (Lewis and
Shedler 1979), financial analysis (Bacry, Mastromatteo, and
Muzy 2015), social network modeling (Zhou, Zha, and
Song 2013a), recommendation systems (Xu, Carin, and Zha
* Corresponding author: hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21216

