The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decentralized Convergence to Equilibrium Prices in Trading Networks
Edwin Lock1 , Benjamin Patrick Evans2 , Eleonora Kreacic2 , Sujay Bhatt3 , Alec Koppel3 ,
Sumitra Ganesh3 , Paul W. Goldberg1
1

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Parks Road
Oxford, OX1 3QD, UK
2
JPMorgan AI Research
London, UK
3
JPMorgan AI Research
New York, USA
{edwin.lock, paul.goldberg}@cs.ox.ac.uk
{benjamin.x.evans, eleonora.kreacic, sumitra.ganesh}@jpmorgan.com,
{sujay.bhatt, alec.koppel}@jpmchase.com
Abstract

captures uncoordinated negotiations between neighbors in a
network of market participants. We work in a general model
of trading introduced by Hatfield et al. (2013), in which
a network of heterogeneous agents can engage in bilateral
trades for indivisible goods or services. Agents can act as
buyer, sellers, or as traders involved in some trades as a
buyer and in other trades as a seller. Our model allows for cycles of trades, and for ‘horizontal’ as well as ‘vertical’ (Ostrovsky 2008) network structures. The model also embeds
well-known settings such as labor markets (Kelso and Crawford 1982), and general exchange economies with heterogeneous indivisible goods (Gul and Stacchetti 1999; Yang
2000), capturing a broad range of market configurations.

We propose a decentralized market model in which agents
can negotiate bilateral contracts. This builds on a similar, but
centralized, model of trading networks introduced by Hatfield et al. in 2013. Prior work has established that fullysubstitutable preferences guarantee the existence of competitive equilibria which can be centrally computed. Our motivation comes from the fact that prices in markets such as
over-the-counter markets and used car markets arise from decentralized negotiation among agents, which has left open
an important question as to whether equilibrium prices can
emerge from agent-to-agent bilateral negotiations. We design
a best response dynamic intended to capture such negotiations between market participants. We assume fully substitutable preferences for market participants. In this setting,
we provide proofs of convergence for sparse markets (covering many real world markets of interest), and experimental results for more general cases, demonstrating that prices
indeed reach equilibrium, quickly, via bilateral negotiations.
Our best response dynamic, and its convergence behavior,
forms an important first step in understanding how decentralized markets reach, and retain, equilibrium.

Like Hatfield et al., we focus primarily on agents with fullysubstitutable (FS) preferences. Our central point of departure from Hatfield et al. (2013) is that each agent maintains
an offer for each of their trades, so each trade has a buying
and selling offer. In our market dynamic, agents take turns to
update their offers in a manner that maximizes their utility.
The dynamic ends in equilibrium if there is no agent who
wishes to modify her offers any further (because her current
offers already maximize her utility); at this point the buyer
and seller of each trade agree to execute this trade iff their
two offers coincide.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13972

1

Introduction

Price discovery is a central feature of modern markets. In
many real-world markets, prices arise from a decentralized
process governed by negotiations between market participants. By contrast, market outcomes are classically studied from the perspective of ‘static’ optimality criteria such
as competitive equilibrium or stability, or viewed through
the lens of centralized market procedures (such as auctions
and clearing houses). In particular, this does not address the
question of when, and how, desirable market outcomes can
arise from decentralized market processes.

Trading networks have received increased attention in recent
years (Morstyn, Teytelboym, and McCulloch 2018; Hatfield et al. 2019; Osogami, Wasserkrug, and Shamash 2023).
Prior work has focused on establishing the existence of
competitive equilibrium prices and stable outcomes in markets of increasing generality under the condition that agents
have substitutes preferences (see, e.g., Kelso and Crawford
1982; Gul and Stacchetti 1999; Jagadeesan and Teytelboym
2021; Baldwin et al. 2023b). In the model of Hatfield et al.
(2013), the authors show that competitive equilibra are guaranteed to exist if agents have fully-substitutable preferences.
Moreover, an equilibrium is efficiently computable via an
ascending-price algorithm. This algorithm can be run, e.g.,
by a central exchange to centrally compute prices if it has

This paper introduces a ‘best response’ market dynamic that
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14002

