The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AgentMixer: Multi-Agent Correlated Policy Factorization
Zhiyuan Li1 , Wenshuai Zhao1 , Lijun Wu2 , Joni Pajarinen1
1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhiyuan.li, wenshuai.zhao, joni.pajarinen}@aalto.fi, wljuestc@sina.com

Abstract

(CTDE) (Lowe et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2022) allows agents
to access global information during the training phase while
during evaluation learned decentralized policies have access
only to local information.
To enhance coordination, one line of research is to use
value decomposition (VD). VDN (Sunehag et al. 2017) and
QMIX (Rashid et al. 2020) learn a centralized joint action value function factorized by decentralized agent utility functions. With the structural constraint of IndividualGlobal-Max (IGM) (Son et al. 2019), this approach guarantees action consistency between the centralized and decentralized policies. On the other hand, multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG) methods, such as MADDPG (Lowe
et al. 2017) and MAPPO (Yu et al. 2022), have achieved
high performance. However, even when learning a centralized critic, previous works are still constrained by assuming independence among agents during exploration. Inspired
by the Correlated Equilibrium (CE) (Maschler, Zamir, and
Solan 2013) in game theory, MAVEN (Mahajan et al. 2019)
and SIC (Chen et al. 2022) introduce a hierarchical control
method with an external shared latent variable as additional
information for agent coordination. Assuming a pre-defined
execution order a few recent works further propose autoregressive policies to impose coordination among agents by
allowing agents to observe other agents’ actions, either explicitly (Wang, Ye, and Lu 2023; Li et al. 2024b) or implicitly (Li et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2022). Most existing correlated
policy approaches violate the requirement for decentralized
execution. This paper instead aims to achieve a correlated
equilibrium in a fully decentralized way which is crucial for
real-world applications such as wireless devices (Pajarinen,
Hottinen, and Peltonen 2014), where agents are required to
operate autonomously while collectively maximizing performance.
In order to mitigate the difficulty of learning under partial observability, CTDE exploits true state information, usually via a centralized critic, to train individual policies conditioned on the local observation-action history. While it is
possible to first learn a centralized expert policy and then
train the decentralized agents to follow it, it may result
in suboptimal partially observable policies since the omniscient critic or agent has no knowledge of what the decentralized agents do not know, referred to as the asymmetric
learning failure (Warrington et al. 2021). Consider a sce-

In multi-agent reinforcement learning, centralized training
with decentralized execution (CTDE) methods typically assume that agents make decisions based on their local observations independently, which may not lead to a correlated
joint policy with coordination. Coordination can be explicitly encouraged during training and individual policies can be
trained to imitate the correlated joint policy. However, this
may lead to an asymmetric learning failure due to the observation mismatch between the joint and individual policies. Inspired by the concept of correlated equilibrium, we introduce
a strategy modification called AgentMixer that allows agents
to correlate their policies. AgentMixer combines individual
partially observable policies into a joint fully observable policy non-linearly. To enable decentralized execution, we introduce Individual-Global-Consistency to guarantee mode consistency during joint training of the centralized and decentralized policies and prove that AgentMixer converges to an
ϵ-approximate Correlated Equilibrium. In the Multi-Agent
MuJoCo, SMAC-v2, Matrix Game, and Predator-Prey benchmarks, AgentMixer outperforms or matches state-of-the-art
methods.

Code — https://github.com/LiZhYun/
BackPropagationThroughAgents.git
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08728

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has attracted substantial attention in recent years owing to
its promise in solving many real-world tasks that naturally
comprise multiple decision-makers interacting at the same
time, such as multi-robot control (Gu et al. 2023), traffic
signal control (Ma and Wu 2020), and autonomous driving
(Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016). In contrast
to the single-agent RL settings, learning in multi-agent systems (MAS) poses two primary challenges: 1) coordination,
that is, agents learning to work together in order to achieve
a common goal, and 2) partial observability which limits
each agent to her own local observations and actions. To address these challenges, the commonly used learning framework called Centralized Training Decentralized Execution
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18611

