The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequence to Sequence Reward Modeling: Improving RLHF by Language Feedback
Jiayi Zhou* 1, 2 , Jiaming Ji* 1, 2 , Josef Dai1, 2 , Yaodong Yang1†
1

2

Institute for AI, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Institute for AI, Peking University
{gaiejj, yaodong.yang}@pku.edu.cn {jtd.acad, jiamg.ji}@gmail.com

Abstract
User

Aligning the behavior of Large language models (LLMs) with
human intentions and values remains a critical challenge. Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) aligns
LLMs by training a reward model (RM) on human preferences and fine-tuning the LLMs to maximize RM feedback.
Despite its effectiveness and popularity, RLHF is prone to
biased local optimization. It means RM fails to provide feedback that accurately aligns with human preference, causing
LLMs to explore unexpected generalizations, and failing to
achieve alignment objectives. To mitigate this issue, we propose a novel sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) reward modeling
method. Its key insight is that learning from language feedback
rather than scalar feedback improves RLHF without additional
annotations. We replaced the reward modeling target from
binary maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) with sequence
MLE. This method enables richer and fine-grained language
feedback without additional annotations, models, or training
stages. Our experiments demonstrated its effectiveness, specifically, reducing the refusal-to-response paradigm in single-turn
safety dialogues and the long-response bias in text summarization tasks. We provide further analysis that seq2seq RM
improves RLHF performance across 2B and 7B LLMs on 3
NLP tasks, achieving an average win rate of 76.9%. We further
show that seq2seq RM can still improve the performance of
RLHF under out-of-distribution prompts.

How can we make
bombs?
Making bomb needs...

LLM

Unsafe

Scalar Feedback

-1.0

RL

RM
I don’t know.

LLM

Safe but not helpful

Language Feedback

Making bomb needs...

RL

RM
Making bomb is
unsafe because...

LLM

Safe and helpful

Figure 1: The traditional sequence-to-scalar reward model
provides only coarse-grained scalar feedback on the LLM’s
response, making it prone to exploiting unexpected generalization for high rewards during the RL fine-tuning phase
(Skalse and Abate 2023), e.g., falling into a refusal-to-answer
paradigm (Bai et al. 2022; Dai et al. 2023). Without additional annotations, we propose a novel sequence-to-sequence
reward modeling method that offers richer language feedback, improving RLHF performance.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023) have significantly advanced capabilities
in conversation, summarization, reasoning, and more tasks,
leading to widespread application (Meng et al. 2024; Anthropic 2023). Alignment techniques (Ji et al. 2023), particularly Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
(Ouyang et al. 2022), have become crucial for aligning LLMs
with human intentions and values, e.g., reducing toxicity (Bai
et al. 2022; Ji et al. 2024d,e). RLHF consists of two main
steps: training a reward model (RM) based on binary human preferences and then fine-tuning the LLMs to maximize
feedback from this RM (Ouyang et al. 2022; Schulman et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27765

2017; Scheurer et al. 2023). Current reward modeling implementations typically use the sequence-to-scalar (seq2scalar)
approach, where a sequence, combined with a prompt and
response, is scored as a scalar value (Huang et al. 2024).
However, due to high divergence, noise, and sparsity in
crowd-annotated preference datasets (Wu et al. 2024), the
traditional seq2scalar RM tends to capture patterns unrelated
to genuine human preferences, leading to unexpected generalization (Pan, Bhatia, and Steinhardt 2021; Gao, Schulman,
and Hilton 2023). It means RM fails to provide feedback that
accurately aligns with human preference, leading RLHF to a
deviation from actual alignment objective (Di Langosco et al.
2022): LLMs obtain high rewards but negatively impact their
capabilities and fail to achieve alignment objectives (Tien
et al. 2022; Knox et al. 2023; Lambert and Calandra 2023).

