The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Graph Bandit Learning with Side-Observations and Switching
Constraints
Xueping Gong, Jiheng Zhang
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong S.A.R., China.
xgongah@connect.ust.hk, jiheng@ust.hk

Abstract
This paper presents a novel framework for multi-armed bandit
problems with side-observations and switching constraints,
which arises in a range of real-world applications such as
robotic. To address the challenges of effectively utilizing
graph-structured observations while adhering to graph constraints, we design graph-agnostic and graph-aware algorithms
tailored to this new setting. Specifically, our graph-agnostic algorithm selects nodes with the highest upper confidence bound
without prior knowledge of feedback probabilities, while minimizing switching costs using offline shortest path planning and
the doubling trick. If the graph structure and associated probability matrix are known, our graph-aware algorithm plans
the exploration step using a linear programming approach and
eliminates suboptimal nodes iteratively. We rigorously analyze
the performance of our proposed algorithms, providing nearoptimal minimax and instance-dependent regret upper bounds.
Our analysis shows that our algorithms outperform generic
reinforcement learning methods in terms of both regret and
computational efficiency. Extensive numerical experiments
on various types of graphs, including two real-world datasets,
demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed methods and their
advantages over benchmark methods in graph bandit settings.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a well-known
framework for decision-making under uncertainty (Lattimore
and Szepesvári 2020). In the classical stochastic MAB problem, an agent repeatedly selects from a finite set of actions
to maximize total rewards, balancing exploration and exploitation. This framework has received significant attention
from the online learning community and has been applied to
various fields, including recommendation systems, portfolio
selection, and clinical trials (Li et al. 2010).
Despite its popularity, the classical MAB framework has
limitations in real-world applications that involve side observations and switching constraints. Side observations provide additional information about rewards (e.g., when certain
actions yield similar outcome), such as multiple feedbacks
(Mannor and Shamir 2011) or prior knowledge about the
environment (Lykouris, Sridharan, and Tardos 2018; Seldin
et al. 2014). Switching constraints refer to limitations on
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16871

the ability of the agent to switch freely between different
actions (Coquelin and Munos 2007; Lu et al. 2018; Zhang,
Johansson, and Li 2022), which may have unit switching
costs (Dekel et al. 2014; Arora, Marinov, and Mohri 2019;
Rangi and Franceschetti 2019) or limited switching budgets
(Chen et al. 2020; Simchi-Levi and Xu 2019).
To address these limitations, we propose a new framework, which incorporates both graph feedback and switching
constraints. Specifically, we consider the problem that an
agent traverses an undirected, connected graph Gc = (V, Ec )
that restricts its ability to move between different nodes,
and receives a graph feedback from the whole reward graph
Gr = (V, Er ) upon arrival at a node. We refer to this MAB
problem with graph feedback and graph constraint as the
graph bandit problem.
The proposed framework is a suitable model for many realworld problems, as demonstrated in Appendix. For example,
the graph bandit problem can be applied to optimize the
collection efficiency of cleaning robots (Rayguru et al. 2021)
who can observe the environments in a neighborhood (Gr )
and should follow the route planning (Gc ), to maximize the
use of communication channels of a drone (Qiu et al. 2019)
that can receive signals from geographically close sensors in
a sensor network (Gr ) and should move between different
spots with a map (Gc ), or to provide diverse items to users in
a recommendation system (Li et al. 2010) which may infer
the preferences of users to similar items (Gr ) and follow
certain switching rules (Gc ).
Previously, these real-world problems were often reformulated as non-episodic, un-discounted learning problems
with known deterministic transitions and then solved using
generic reinforcement learning methods. These graph bandit
problems have unique features that generic RL algorithms
may not take into account, leading to high computational
costs, sample complexity, and regrets, especially for largescale problems. This is particularly relevant for robotic learning problems with extended sensors, as described in (Dann
et al. 2020). Therefore, it is worth considering whether any
improvement in computational efficiency and learning performance can be achieved by leveraging the graph bandit
problem structure. Our proposed framework provides a powerful tool for addressing these problems that involve side
observations and switching constraints, by uncovering their
special hidden structure.

