The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Human Input to Enable Robust, Interactive, and Aligned AI Systems
Daniel S. Brown
Kahlert School of Computing, Robotics Center, University of Utah
daniel.s.brown@utah.edu

Robustness to Uncertainty

Abstract

I will next discuss the challenge of how AI systems should
optimize their behavior when they have uncertainty over
their objective function. I will highlight my work which
proposes a novel risk-aware approach to policy optimization from human feedback that explicitly accounts for uncertainty over the human’s true reward function. This work
resulted in the first robust reinforcement learning algorithm
that optimizes an AI system’s behavior over multiple, possibly competing, reward functions inferred from human input
and enables AI systems to effectively deal with ambiguous
human preferences by hedging against uncertainty, rather
than seeking to uniquely identify the human’s reward
function. I will also discuss my labs work on developing the
first Bayesian methods for learning safety constraints from
demonstrations and preferences.

Ensuring that AI systems do what we, as humans, actually
want them to do, is one of the biggest open research challenges in AI alignment and safety. My research seeks to directly address this challenge by enabling AI systems to interact with humans to learn aligned and robust behaviors. The
way robots and other AI systems behave is often the result of
optimizing a reward function. However, manually designing
good reward functions is highly challenging and error prone,
even for domain experts. Although reward functions are often
difficult to manually specify, human feedback in the form of
demonstrations or preferences is often much easier to obtain.
However, human data is often difficult to interpret due to ambiguity and noise. Thus, it is critical that AI systems take into
account epistemic uncertainty over the human’s true intent.
My talk will give an overview of my lab’s progress along the
following fundamental research areas: (1) efficiently maintaining uncertainty over human intent, (2) directly optimizing behavior to be robust to uncertainty over human intent,
and (3) actively querying for additional human input to reduce uncertainty over human intent.

Actively Reducing Uncertainty
The final question I will cover is what an AI system should
do if it has so much uncertainty over the human’s true reward function that it does not know how to behave? I will
discuss active learning methods that generate queries for additional human input in states where the AI system believes
it may have high generalization error. By combining active
risk-aware active learning with my work on high-confidence
performance bounds, we recently showed for the first time
that an AI system can know with high confidence how
many demonstrations it needs to learn a particular task.
I will also discuss how we developed a novel active learning strategy to achieve state-of-the-art interactive imitation
learning while also reducing context switches by a human
supervisor. This research enables a single human supervisor
to simultaneously manage an entire fleet of robots with
minimal cognitive workload and I will discuss how we recently extended this work to enable effective interactive imitaiton learning for complex surgical retraction tasks. Finally,
I will highlight our recent work that allows AI systems to actively query from multiple forms of human feedback based
on models of human rationality and bias and the agent’s own
uncertainty over the human’s reward function.

Maintaining Uncertainty
Maintaining uncertainty is a critical first step towards robust
AI systems. I will start by discussing my work that seeks
to addresses this problem by developing the first scalable
Bayesian reward inference algorithm for visual imitation learning domains. This research combines my work
on learning reward functions from small numbers of ranked,
suboptimal demonstrations with self-supervised deep learning techniques to learn a lower-dimensional latent staterepresentation where Bayesian reward inference becomes
tractable. In comparison to prior Bayesian reward inference
approaches, which would take days to run, my research
enables Bayesian reward inference in only a few minutes
by leveraging a small number of human pairwise preferences over trajectories. This research enables AI systems
the ability to self-assess performance, when learning from
small numbers of human demonstrations and demonstrated
the first practical approach to automatically detect reward
hacking or gaming behaviors, cases where the AI system’s
learned reward function results in misaligned behavior.

References
Brown, D. S. 2020. Safe and efficient inverse reinforcement
learning. PhD Dissertation. UT Austin.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28704

