The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CNC: Cross-modal Normality Constraint for Unsupervised
Multi-class Anomaly Detection
Xiaolei Wang1,2,3 * , Xiaoyang Wang1,2,3 * , Huihui Bai4 , Eng Gee Lim1 , Jimin Xiao1†
1

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Dinnar Automation Technology
4
Beijing Jiaotong University
{Xiaolei.Wang, wangxy}@liverpool.ac.uk, hhbai@bjtu.edu.cn, {enggee.lim, jimin.xiao}@xjtlu.edu.cn
Abstract

Therefore, UniAD (You et al. 2022) proposed a challenging multi-class AD setting, i.e., training one model to detect
anomalies from multiple categories.
Reverse distillation (RD) (Deng and Li 2022) is a highly
effective unsupervised AD (UAD) method. It employs a
learnable decoder (student network) to reconstruct features
from a pre-trained encoder (teacher network) on normal
samples via patch-level cosine distance minimization. Ideally, the learned decoder should only recover the encoded
normal patches, while failing to reconstruct unseen abnormal patterns. Anomaly regions are then detected by comparing features before and after decoding. In multi-class training, a single model is optimized on the normal samples
from multiple classes to achieve unified detection. While
the increasing training diversity can improve model generalization on reconstructing normal patches, it also leads
to undesired generalization to unseen abnormal patch patterns. Consequently, abnormal regions are recovered well
during inference, narrowing the difference between encoded
and decoded features and degrading detection performance
(Fig. 1(B) I.). We term this issue ‘over-generalization’ (OG).
The key question remains: How can we effectively mitigate
‘OG’ while preserving the generalization on normal samples
in the multi-class distillation framework?
To address this challenge, we seek to incorporate an additional constraint in the decoding process. Leveraging insights from vision-language models (VLMs) (Radford et al.
2021), we observe that normal and abnormal regions within
a sample exhibit distinct responses to the same text description, as illustrated in Fig. 1(A). We propose to exploit this
distinction in cross-modal response to differentiate the decoding of normal and abnormal patch features, thereby hindering the recovery of abnormal patterns. Specifically, we
employ class-agnostic learnable prompts to extract the common normality from encoded visual features across different classes. These prompts serve as anchors in the textual
space, aligning the decoded normal features with a universal representation of normality and suppressing the ‘overgeneralization’ of the decoder towards abnormal patterns
(Fig. 1(B) II.). We also design a normality promotion mechanism for feature distillation, introducing cross-modal activation as a control coefficient on visual features to increase
sensitivity to unexpected abnormal patterns. We term the

Existing unsupervised distillation-based methods rely on the
differences between encoded and decoded features to locate abnormal regions in test images. However, the decoder trained only on normal samples still reconstructs abnormal patch features well, degrading performance. This issue is particularly pronounced in unsupervised multi-class
anomaly detection tasks. We attribute this behavior to ‘overgeneralization’ (OG) of decoder: the significantly increasing
diversity of patch patterns in multi-class training enhances
the model generalization on normal patches, but also inadvertently broadens its generalization to abnormal patches. To
mitigate ‘OG’, we propose a novel approach that leverages
class-agnostic learnable prompts to capture common textual
normality across various visual patterns, and then apply them
to guide the decoded features towards a ‘normal’ textual representation, suppressing ‘over-generalization’ of the decoder
on abnormal patterns. To further improve performance, we
also introduce a gated mixture-of-experts module to specialize in handling diverse patch patterns and reduce mutual interference between them in multi-class training. Our method
achieves competitive performance on the MVTec AD and
VisA datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness.

Code — https://github.com/cvddl/CNC

Introduction
Visual anomaly detection (AD) mainly focuses on identifying unexpected patterns (deviating from our familiar normal ones) within samples. Industrial defect detection is one
of the most widely used branches of AD (Bergmann et al.
2019), which requires models to automatically recognize
various defects on the surface of industrial products, such
as scratches, damages, and misplacement. Due to the inability to fully collect and annotate anomalies, unsupervised
methods (Yu et al. 2021; Gudovskiy, Ishizaka, and Kozuka
2022; Liu et al. 2023b) become mainstream solutions for
AD. Previous unsupervised methods mostly train one model
for one class of data, which requires large parameter storage
and long training time as the number of classes increases.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7943

