The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Image Hashing Based on Contrastive Masked
Autoencoder with Weak-Strong Augmentation Alignment
Cundian Yang1 , Guibo Luo1 , Yuesheng Zhu1 * , Jiaqi Li2 , Xiyao Liu2 *
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
yangcundian@stu.pku.edu.cn, {luogb, zhuys}@pku.edu.cn, {jiaqi-li, lxyzoewx}@csu.edu.cn
Abstract

making it unsuitable for distortion-free scenarios, such as
medical images, etc. Consequently, there is a growing interest among researchers in robust image hashing schemes that
leverage either traditional hand-crafted or deep learning feature extraction methods. These schemes extract robustness
features from images and map them to fixed-length hash sequences without altering the image content, thereby attracting an increasing number of researchers.
The robust image hashing algorithm typically comprises
pre-processing, feature extractor, and hash generator, the
most crucial component of which is feature extractor. In traditional robust image hashing methods, researchers use spatial domain-based methods (Shen and Zhao 2020) and transformation domain-based (Liang et al. 2023) methods to design feature extractors to address different types of attacks.
However, feature extractors are often designed for specific
attacks. Consequently, the emergence of new attacks necessitates the development of novel feature extraction methods.
To alleviate this issue, robust image hashing schemes
based on deep learning (Qin et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2023)
have been proposed. These methods resist multiple types of
attacks simultaneously by utilizing data augmentation techniques. However, they require a well-designed loss function to trade off robustness and discrimination, which often makes it difficult to balance the performance of both.
To overcome this challenge, (Fonseca-Bustos, Ramı́rezGutiérrez, and Feregrino-Uribe 2022) introduces contrastive
learning to better balance discrimination and robustness.
They regard an image and the new views formed after the
attack as positive samples and different images as negative
samples. With the contrastive learning loss function, they
minimize the distance between positive samples to ensure
robustness against various types of attacks, and maximize
the distance between negative samples to ensure discrimination, achieving effective content identification performance.
However, existing robust image hashing methods based
on contrastive learning still have following challenges: (1)
They use single attacks and did not consider that more complex attacks such as hybrid attacks may be encountered in
real world. In addition, (Wang and Qi 2022) has shown that
directly incorporating complex attacks during training could
lead to degradation of model performance, as the distortion
induced by complex attacks may severely damage the image structure, resulting in misclassification of the augmented

Recently, numerous robust image hashing schemes have been
developed for content identification. However, many of these
schemes face the challenges of maintaining discrimination
while simultaneously resisting large-scale attacks. In this paper, we propose a robust image hashing scheme based on
Contrastive Masked Autoencoder with weak-strong augmentation Alignment (CMAA). Leveraging contrastive learning,
CMAA is designed to learn features that are robust to largescale and hybrid attacks while maintaining the discrimination
of those features. Specifically, it utilizes distribution divergence to align weak attack augmented features with strong
attack augmented features, namely weak-strong augmentation alignment, to enhance the robustness to strong attacks.
In addition, a masked vision transformer is incorporated to
further enhance content identification performance. CMAA
also includes a parameter-free quantization layer to mitigate
the loss induced by binarization. Experimental results demonstrate that our method exhibits remarkable robustness against
various attacks, including challenging ones such as rotation
and hybrid attacks, and delivers excellent identification performance with a F1 score close to 1.0. Our code and supplementary materials are available on Github.

Github — https://github.com/pikeyang/cmaa

Introduction
With the development of the Internet, users can share their
image creations online, including photographs and artwork,
etc. These contents are the ingenuity of creators, and some of
them even have commercial value. However, it is inevitable
that individuals engage in illegal copying and transmission
of images by tampering or attacks on the images. Therefore,
there is a need for content identification systems that facilitate automatic media identification, which are capable of detecting different digital images and associating the attacked
images with their respective original counterparts.
Currently, prevalent solutions for content identification
include watermarking (Wan et al. 2022) and robust image
hashing (Liang et al. 2023). However, embedded watermarking will compromise the integrity and quality of images,
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9157

