The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Manhattan Self-Attention Diffusion Residual Networks
with Dynamic Bias Rectification for BCI-based Few-Shot Learning
Hao Wang1 , Li Xu1 * , Yuntao Yu2 , Weiyue Ding3 , Yiming Xu4
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China
2
China Electronics Standardization Institute, Beijing, China
3
School of Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
4
College of Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
b223060004@hrbeu.edu.cn, xuli@hrbeu.edu.cn, yuyt@cesi.cn, wyding0501@hotmail.com, kyo@ac.sc.e.titech.ac.jp
Abstract

training samples leads to model overfitting on the support
set data (Wu et al. 2024).
In response to the challenge of distribution biases in
multi-source samples, we drew inspiration from (Liu, Song,
and Qin 2020) to adjust for both inter-class and intra-class
biases, proposing a dynamic bias rectification method. Interclass bias refers to the distance between the mean vectors of
the support and query sets, while intra-class bias refers to the
discrepancy between the actual prototype and the prototype
computed from the support set. By dynamically adjusting
the relationship between each sample and its class prototype,
we rectify the prototypes to enhance the model’s robustness
when handling distributional biases in multi-source samples.
To address the challenge of overfitting caused by the
limited number of samples in the support set, we propose the manhattan self-attention diffusion residual network
(MSADiff-Resnet). This model enhances interactions between labeled and unlabeled samples through a diffusion
mechanism, aggregating similar points. The manhattan selfattention (MSA) mechanism (Fan et al. 2024) controls the
flow of information and optimizes diffusion paths by considering the decaying weights based on manhattan distances
between sample points. This approach effectively transmits
information between similar data points, significantly mitigating the overfitting problem caused by the limited number
of support set samples.
Currently, deep learning models based on electroencephalography (EEG) are designed for specific datasets and
tasks (Liang et al. 2023; Heinrichs, Heim, and Weber 2023;
Wang, Zhang, and Tang 2024), lacking generalizability. To
address this issue, we propose a universal deep learning
framework for processing BCI-based FSL tasks. For multisource EEG data, we first enhance task-related components
using task-related component analysis (TRCA) (Tanaka,
Katura, and Sato 2013). Subsequently, we convert EEG signals with differing statistical characteristics into a uniform
two-dimensional image format using the gramian angular
field (GAF) (Wang and Oates 2015). We divide the multisource dataset into support and query sets, then perform distribution bias rectification. Finally, labels for the query set
are obtained using the proposed MSADiff-Resnet model.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

The distribution biases and scarcity of samples in multisource data present significant challenges for few-shot learning (FSL) tasks based on brain-computer interface (BCI).
Recent efforts have explored the application of diffusion
mechanisms in FSL, typically utilizing labeled data to augment the support set. However, this approach has not effectively utilized unlabeled data nor addressed distribution
biases. Inspired by the latest advancements in FSL, we
propose the manhattan self-attention diffusion residual networks (MSADiff-Resnet) with dynamic bias rectification.
This model explicitly adds the manhattan self-attention diffusion layer to resnet, using attention mechanisms and manhattan distance-based decay function to control local diffusion
intensity, and adjusts the global diffusion strength through
the parameter. This diffusion mechanism bridges labeled and
unlabeled data, addressing the limitations associated with
sample availability. Additionally, we effectively tackle the
distribution biases of multi-source data through inter-class
bias rectification and dynamic intra-class bias rectification.
Moreover, this study presents for the first time a universal
deep learning framework specifically designed for BCI-based
FSL tasks. Extensive experiments on multi-source BCI task
datasets have validated the effectiveness of proposed method.

Introduction
Brain-computer interface (BCI) (Chapin et al. 1999) control the environment by decoding neural activity. Currently,
deep learning is the primary method for handling BCI tasks
(Zhao, Yan, and Lu 2021; Song et al. 2020; Li et al. 2024),
but the difficulty of data collection and labeling in real-world
scenarios limits its generalization capabilities in low-data
situations (Rong et al. 2023). Few-shot learning (FSL) (FeiFei, Fergus, and Perona 2006) addresses the issue of data
scarcity in deep learning by learning transferable knowledge
from data-rich base classes and using a small number of labeled samples to assist in predicting new classes.
However, in FSL, we primarily face two challenges. The
first challenge is that the diversity of sample sources introduces distribution biases, which can impact the model’s generalization capabilities (Li et al. 2020; Yang, Kim, and Yun
2024). The second challenge is that the limited number of
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• A dynamic bias rectification method was proposed to address inter-class and intra-class distribution biases. For
14423

