The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VarDrop: Enhancing Training Efficiency by Reducing Variate Redundancy in
Periodic Time Series Forecasting
Junhyeok Kang1 , Yooju Shin2 , Jae-Gil Lee2 *
1

Number of variates

LG AI Research
2
KAIST
junhyeok.kang@lgresearch.ai, {yooju.shin, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Variate tokenization, which independently embeds each variate as separate tokens, has achieved remarkable improvements
in multivariate time series forecasting. However, employing
self-attention with variate tokens incurs a quadratic computational cost with respect to the number of variates, thus limiting
its training efficiency for large-scale applications. To address
this issue, we propose VarDrop, a simple yet efficient strategy
that reduces the token usage by omitting redundant variate
tokens during training. VarDrop adaptively excludes redundant tokens within a given batch, thereby reducing the number
of tokens used for dot-product attention while preserving essential information. Specifically, we introduce k-dominant
frequency hashing (k-DFH), which utilizes the ranked dominant frequencies in the frequency domain as a hash value
to efficiently group variate tokens exhibiting similar periodic
behaviors. Then, only representative tokens in each group are
sampled through stratified sampling. By performing sparse
attention with these selected tokens, the computational cost of
scaled dot-product attention is significantly alleviated. Experiments conducted on public benchmark datasets demonstrate
that VarDrop outperforms existing efficient baselines.

1

40

150
100

20

50
0
0.7

0.8

0.9

(a) Electricity dataset.

1.0

0
0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

(b) Traffic dataset.

Figure 1: Variate redundancy in public periodic time series
datasets. Most variates are highly correlated with others. For
more detailed analysis, please refer to Appendix A.

Introduction

Transformers have demonstrated impressive performance
in time series forecasting, primarily due to their attention
mechanisms (Trirat et al. 2024; Shin et al. 2024; Nie et al.
2023; Zhang and Yan 2023; Wu et al. 2021; Zhou et al.
2021). Traditionally, most methods have employed temporal
tokenization, treating all variates at a given timestamp as
a single token. However, recent studies reveal that variate
tokenization—where each variate is embedded as a separate token—outperforms temporal tokenization in capturing
inter-variate dependencies thereby increasing forecasting accuracy (Liu et al. 2024b). Due to its broad applicability to
Transformers, variate tokenization has been adopted in recent
advancements in multivariate time series forecasting (Liu
et al. 2024c; Wang et al. 2024; Han et al. 2024).
Despite its advantages, the feasibility of variate tokenization in real-world applications is hindered by the increasing
number of variates (N ). Many public benchmark datasets
* Jae-Gil Lee is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17742

demonstrate the high dimensionality often encountered in
real-world applications. For instance, the Electricity dataset
includes 321 variates, each corresponding to a customer, and
the Traffic dataset comprises 862 variates, each representing
a sensor (Wu et al. 2021). The large N introduces inefficiency, as the computational cost of attention mechanisms
increases quadratically with N . This inefficiency results in a
superfluous carbon footprint during the model training process. In addition, the large N can lead to overfitting and
reduced attention performance by diluting important information (Peysakhovich and Lerer 2023; Liu et al. 2024a). Therefore, reducing N while retaining the essential information is
critical for the success of variate tokenization.
To address this issue, we propose removing variate redundancy in multivariate time series. As different variates
often share the same characteristics such as trends and seasonality at some timestamps, excessive correlations between
them are frequently observed in periodic time series. Figure 1
shows the variate redundancy in the term of maximum Pearson correlation coefficient values (refer to Eq. (4)) between
the variates in two datasets. For the Electricity and Traffic
datasets, 79.4% and 94.7% of all variates exhibit strong correlations with other variates exceeding 0.9, respectively. By
selecting a few informative and distinguishing variates, we
can significantly reduce computational cost while preserving
the original periodic information of the data.
However, efficiently picking out the representative variates
is challenging for two reasons. First, the correlation between
variates fluctuates due to inherent distribution shifts in time
series data. This correlation shift in sliding windows generates a unique set of correlations for each batch as shown in

