The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DOGE: LLMs-Enhanced Hyper-Knowledge Graph Recommender for
Multimodal Recommendation
Fanshen Meng, Zhenhua Meng, Ru Jin, Rongheng Lin* , Budan Wu
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{mengfanshen, zhmeng, rjin, rhlin, wubudan}@bupt.edu.cn

Real World

Vector Space
Text Modality

Abstract
In recent years, there has been a burgeoning interest in multimodal recommender systems within the recommendation
systems domain. These systems aim to understand user preferences by leveraging both user interaction data and multimodal information associated with items. This approach frequently results in superior recommendation accuracy compared to traditional models that rely solely on user-item interactions. Despite the advancements of these methods, there
is a relatively low utilization of image features in propagating item-item characteristics, an overreliance on text feature
similarity, and a frequent neglect of the deep relationships between items, users, and modalities. In response to these challenges, we introduce a novel model termed LLMs-EnhanceD
Hyper-KnOwledge Graph REcommender for Multimodal
Recommendation (DOGE). DOGE utilizes large language
models (LLMs) to understand image information under the
guidance of text information, generating cross-modal features
that effectively enhance the relationship between text and
image modalities. Subsequently, DOGE constructs a HyperKnowledge Graph (HKG) using user-item interaction information and modality features enhanced by large language
models. This graph encompasses a wide range of item-item
and user-user binary relations and hyper-relations, effectively
expanding the feature propagation mechanisms and mitigating the overreliance on text modality. By learning on heterogeneous user-item graphs and homogeneous item-item,
user-user graphs, DOGE enhances potential effective propagation between item features and user features, acquiring
more effective feature representations of users and items.
Comprehensive experimentation across three public realworld datasets illustrates that DOGE attains state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance, exhibiting a 7.2% improvement over
the strongest baseline.

"I need
this. "

……

96.0%
Close
96.7%
95.7%
Description
... …
94.4%
Far
87.9%
90.9%

"I don't
need this."

……

Image Modality

(a) Overreliance on text modality
Vector Space
Similarity
Item
0.3

0.8

0.4 0.7

0.85

0.3

Item modality view

i1

User
i2

Real World

Strong Correlation

Item modality view
i6

i5
i4
i3
User-item interaction

i1

User

i6

i2

i5
i4
i3
User-item interaction

(b) Strong correlation among items

Figure 1: Illustrations of (a) Overreliance on text modality,
and (b) Strong correlation among items.

Early MRSs (Liu, Wu, and Wang 2017; Wei et al. 2021)
fuse multimodal features with item ID embeddings. Some
also apply attention mechanisms to model user preferences
(Chen et al. 2017, 2019; Liu et al. 2019). However, these
methods only capture low-order user-item interactions. The
capabilities of graph neural networks (GNNs) in modeling high-order semantics have propelled graph-based recommendation systems to the forefront of multimodal recommendation research. For instance, MMGCN (Wei et al.
2019) disaggregates multimodal features into multiple spatial views and aggregates information within each space using graph convolutional networks (GCNs) to better model
user preferences. MGCN (Yu et al. 2023) introduces a

Introduction
As multimedia content rapidly expands, recommender systems have become essential for assisting users in discovering personalized products and value chain partners. Leveraging multimodal information, multimodal recommender systems (MRSs) have garnered considerable attention for effectively mitigating the data sparsity issues inherent in realworld datasets.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12399

