The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Perception-Guided Jailbreak Against Text-to-Image Models
Yihao Huang1 , Le Liang2 * , Tianlin Li1 , Xiaojun Jia1,4 * ,
Run Wang3 , Weikai Miao2 , Geguang Pu2,5 , Yang Liu1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
East China Normal University, China
3
Wuhan University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, China
5
Shanghai Trusted Industrial Control Platform Co.,Ltd., China
Abstract
In recent years, Text-to-Image (T2I) models have garnered
significant attention due to their remarkable advancements.
However, security concerns have emerged due to their potential to generate inappropriate or Not-Safe-For-Work (NSFW)
images. In this paper, inspired by the observation that texts
with different semantics can lead to similar human perceptions, we propose an LLM-driven perception-guided jailbreak
method, termed PGJ. It is a black-box jailbreak method that
requires no specific T2I model (model-free) and generates
highly natural attack prompts. Specifically, we propose identifying a safe phrase that is similar in human perception yet
inconsistent in text semantics with the target unsafe word
and using it as a substitution. The experiments conducted on
six open-source models and commercial online services with
thousands of prompts have verified the effectiveness of PGJ.
Warning: This paper contains NSFW and disturbing imagery, including adult, violent, and illegal-related contentious content. We have masked images deemed unsafe.
However, reader discretion is advised.

1

Initial Unsafe Prompt

Attack Prompt

A person is seen injecting
drugs into their arm in a
dark alleyway.

A person is seen drawing
medication into their arm
in a dark alleyway.

Our method

refuse service

Text-to-Image Model
Illegal content
(drug injection)

NSFW

Figure 1: Given an unsafe prompt that is refused by the T2I
model (DALL·E 3), our PGJ method replaces the unsafe
words (injecting drugs) in the prompt with safe phrases. The
attack prompt can successfully bypass the safety checker of
the T2I model and generate an NSFW image.

Introduction

Text-to-Image (T2I) models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022), Midjourney (MidJourney 2022), and
DALL·E (OpenAI 2023a) have gained significant attention
due to their remarkable capabilities and ease of use. These
models request text descriptions (i.e., prompts) from users
and then generate corresponding images. The outstanding
quality of the generated images, which can range from
highly artistic to convincingly realistic, showcases the models’ exceptional generative abilities.
However, the widespread use and advanced capabilities
of these models have led to significant security concerns regarding unsafe image generation. A prominent ethical issue associated with T2I models is their potential to produce sensitive Not-Safe-for-Work (NSFW) images (Qu et al.
2023; Schramowski et al. 2023), including adult content, violence, and politically sensitive material. Therefore, current
T2I models incorporate safety checkers (Midjourney 2023;
Rando et al. 2022) as essential guardrails to prevent the generation of NSFW images.

To evaluate the impact of safety checkers and expose the
vulnerabilities of commercial T2I models, various black-box
attack methods (Yang et al. 2024c; Ba et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2024b; Peng, Ke, and Liu 2024; Ma et al. 2024a) have been
proposed to bypass these mechanisms and compel T2I models to generate NSFW images. However, some approaches
(Yang et al. 2024c,b; Ma et al. 2024a) rely on white-box
adversarial attacks targeting a specific T2I model and subsequently transfer the generated adversarial prompts to attack other T2I models. This often results in the generation
of nonsensical, incomprehensible tokens within the attack
prompts, thereby diminishing their stealthiness. Other methods (Ba et al. 2023; Peng, Ke, and Liu 2024) involve developing complex pipelines that necessitate many queries to the
T2I model, resulting in high time and resource consumption.
To this end, we propose a model-free (i.e., no queries to
the T2I model) black-box jailbreak method that is effective

* Xiaojun Jia and Le Liang are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26238

