The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3DPGS: 3D Probabilistic Graph Search for Archaeological Piece Grouping
Junfeng Cheng, Yingkai Yang, Tania Stathaki
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
London, UK, SW7 2AZ
{junfeng.cheng20, yingkai.yang19, t.stathaki}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new benchmark called ”Archaeological Piece Grouping.” In the field of archaeology, it is common for broken archaeological pieces, such as artifact fragments, to be mixed. Archaeologists often spend significant
time distinguishing these pieces and categorizing them into
different groups. Our benchmark introduces a novel, comprehensive dataset named ArcPie, along with new evaluation
metrics for this task. Additionally, we propose a new framework called ”3D Probabilistic Graph Search” (3DPGS) to address the problem of grouping mixed archaeological pieces.
This framework includes a relation network designed to learn
the relationships among all the input 3D pieces. Utilizing the
relationships learned, our framework generates a probabilistic
matching graph that describes the affinity of any two pieces.
We also introduce a novel search algorithm to identify groups
according to this matrix. Our framework significantly outperforms other baselines.

Figure 1: We propose a new dataset, ArcPie (Archaeological
Piece Dataset), for the newly introduced benchmark of the
Archaeological Piece Grouping task, which aims to group
all the mixed and shuffled pieces. In the figure, the colored
3D meshes represent the fractured pieces, and the white 3D
objects represent their original shapes.

Code — https://github.com/J-F-Cheng/3dpgs-grouping

1

Introduction

In the field of archaeology, an important task is the restoration of cultural relics, such as ancient handicrafts, steles,
sculptures, etc. However, this task is challenging because the
objects are often broken into pieces due to their age, spanning hundreds or thousands of years. The pieces from different objects are usually mixed together, adding significant
complexity to the process of fixing these objects. To successfully restore these objects, archaeologists typically need
a lot of time to compare and separate these mixed pieces.
This procedure is extremely time-consuming, further complicating the restoration process for researchers.
The scenario described above involves a thoughtprovoking problem: given mixed pieces with complex
shapes, how do we separate them into different groups based
on their original affiliations? For convenience, we name this
problem ”Archaeological Piece Grouping.” We use Fig. 2 in
Sec. 3.1 to better illustrate this challenge. This is a complicated task for three main reasons: First, we need to use algorithms to understand the relationships among all the pieces.
Second, it is hard to formulate the output of the algorithms

because the number of potential groups is unknown. In addition to these issues, the lack of appropriate archaeological
data is also a critical problem for researching this topic.
Previous works (Cheng et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2022; Xu, Zheng, and Jin 2024; Narayan, Nagar,
and Raman 2022; Cheng and Stathaki 2024; Du et al. 2024)
have proposed algorithms to process separate furniture parts
or other types of 3D objects. Huang et al. (2020) propose a
novel GNN-based architecture that can automatically assemble parts into a complete shape. Cheng and Stathaki (2024)
use an auto-regressive algorithm to group mixed furniture
parts. Sellán et al. (2022) propose a new dataset for the
assembly task, using simulation methods to break the 3D
meshes to construct the dataset.
Although these works have made some achievements in
3D part assembly/grouping tasks, processing pieces from archaeological objects still has three unaddressed problems.
First, this type of task requires a large broken archaeological
piece dataset for training and testing. However, the current
state-of-the-art broken archaeological piece data established
by Sellán et al. (2022) is small and contains only around 200
shapes. Additionally, their dataset does not contain category

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2447

