The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TimeCHEAT: A Channel Harmony Strategy for Irregularly Sampled Multivariate
Time Series Analysis
Jiexi Liu1,2 , Meng Cao1,2 , Songcan Chen1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{liujiexi, meng.cao, s.chen}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Irregularly sampled multivariate time series (ISMTS) are
prevalent in reality. Due to their non-uniform intervals between successive observations and varying sampling rates
among series, the channel-independent (CI) strategy, which
has been demonstrated more desirable for complete multivariate time series forecasting in recent studies, has failed.
This failure can be further attributed to the sampling sparsity, which provides insufficient information for effective CI
learning, thereby reducing its capacity. When we resort to the
channel-dependent (CD) strategy, even higher capacity cannot mitigate the potential loss of diversity in learning similar
embedding patterns across different channels. We find that
existing work considers CI and CD strategies to be mutually exclusive, primarily because they apply these strategies
to the global channel. However, we hold the view that channel strategies do not necessarily have to be used globally.
Instead, by appropriately applying them locally and globally, we can create an opportunity to take full advantage of
both strategies. This leads us to introduce the Channel Harmony ISMTS Transformer (TimeCHEAT), which utilizes the
CD strategy locally and the CI strategy globally. Specifically, we segment the ISMTS into sub-series level patches.
Locally, the CD strategy aggregates information within each
patch for time embedding learning, maximizing the use of
relevant observations while reducing long-range irrelevant interference. Here, we enhance generality by transforming embedding learning into an edge weight prediction task using
bipartite graphs, eliminating the need for special prior knowledge. Globally, the CI strategy is applied across patches, allowing the Transformer to learn individualized attention patterns for each channel. Experimental results indicate our proposed TimeCHEAT demonstrates competitive state-of-the-art
performance across three mainstream tasks including classification, forecasting and interpolation.

Figure 1: The difference between the 3 kinds of channel
strategies.

ISMTS are characterized by inconsistent intervals between
consecutive data points within a channel, asynchronous sampling across multiple channels and sometimes sampling
sparsity. Such characteristics, arising from irregularities and
multi-channels, pose a significant challenge to classical machine learning methods, which require the data to be defined
in a consistent, fixed-dimensional feature space with constant intervals between successive timestamps.
Recent studies have sought to address this challenge using various approaches. One common method is a two-step
process that treats ISMTS as synchronized, regularly sampled Normal Multivariate Time Series (NMTS) data with
missing values, focusing on imputation strategies (Che et al.
2018; Yoon, Jordon, and Schaar 2018; Camino, Hammerschmidt, and State 2019; Tashiro et al. 2021; Le Morvan
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022; Fan 2022; Du, Côté, and Liu
2023). However, accurate imputation is challenging, therefore separating imputation from downstream tasks may distort the underlying relationships and introduce substantial
noise, leading to suboptimal results (Zhang et al. 2021a; Wu

Introduction
Irregularly sampled multivariate time series (ISMTS) are
ubiquitous in real-world scenarios, such as healthcare (Goldberger et al. 2000; Reyna et al. 2020), meteorology (Schulz
and Stattegger 1997; Cao et al. 2018) and transportation
(Chen et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2020). Due to sensor malfunctions, transmission distortions, cost-reduction strategies, etc,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18861

