The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedVCK: Non-IID Robust and Communication-Efficient Federated Learning via
Valuable Condensed Knowledge for Medical Image Analysis
Guochen Yan1,3,4 , Luyuan Xie2,3,4 , Xinyi Gao5 , Wentao Zhang6 ,
Qingni Shen2,3,4 * , Yuejian Fang2,3,4 , Zhonghai Wu2,3,4†
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
PKU-OCTA Laboratory for Blockchain and Privacy Computing, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
6
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University, Beijing, China
Guochen Yan@outlook.com, 2201110745@stu.pku.edu.cn, xinyi.gao@uq.edu.au, wentao.zhang@pku.edu.cn,
qingnishen@ss.pku.edu.cn, fangyj@ss.pku.edu.cn, wuzh@pku.edu.cn
2

Method
Syn. Data Quality
Knowledge Selection
FedGen
calibrate classifiers
heuristic
distorted sample
repeated
FedMix
FedGAN match single sample
repeated
DFRD
infidelity
heuristic
FedDM only match final feature
repeated
DESA only match final feature
repeated
FedVCK latent dist. constraints model-guided selection

Abstract
Federated learning has become a promising solution for collaboration among medical institutions. However, data owned
by each institution would be highly heterogeneous and the
distribution is always non-independent and identical distribution (non-IID), resulting in client drift and unsatisfactory performance. Despite existing federated learning methods attempting to solve the non-IID problems, they still
show marginal advantages but rely on frequent communication which would incur high costs and privacy concerns. In
this paper, we propose a novel federated learning method:
Federated learning via Valuable Condensed Knowledge
(FedVCK). We enhance the quality of condensed knowledge
and select the most necessary knowledge guided by models,
to tackle the non-IID problem within limited communication
budgets effectively. Specifically, on the client side, we condense the knowledge of each client into a small dataset and
further enhance the condensation procedure with latent distribution constraints, facilitating the effective capture of highquality knowledge. During each round, we specifically target
and condense knowledge that has not been assimilated by the
current model, thereby preventing unnecessary repetition of
homogeneous knowledge and minimizing the frequency of
communications required. On the server side, we propose relational supervised contrastive learning to provide more supervision signals to aid the global model updating. Comprehensive experiments across various medical tasks show that
FedVCK can outperform state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating that it’s non-IID robust and communication-efficient.

Table 1: Representative data-centric methods’ problems of
1) synthesis data quality and 2) knowledge selection in the
synthesis. ‘heuristic’ indicates they adopt heuristic diversity
loss with no relation to the need of models. ‘repeated’ indicates they do nothing and thus select data with repeated
knowledge in synthesis. In contrast, we adopt latent distribution constraints and model-guided selection respectively.

data are highly related to the regional demographic characteristics. The data owned by each client are non-independent
and identical distribution (non-IID), exhibiting significant
data heterogeneity and imbalance. Under this scenario, federated learning methods suffer a global model with unsatisfactory performance due to the model divergence and client
drift phenomenon (Li et al. 2019, 2022a). Meanwhile, frequent communication between heterogeneous and dispersed
institutions would incur high communication costs, delays,
and complex administrative procedures, with increasing privacy and safety risks (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019; Mothukuri
et al. 2021). A non-IID robust and communication-efficient
federated learning method is desired.
Many federated learning methods are proposed to cope
with non-IID problems by modifying local training process (Li et al. 2020; Li, He, and Song 2021; Zhou, Zhang,
and Tsang 2023) or global aggregation process (Chen and
Chao 2020; Lin et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2023). However,
they are mainly model-centric. They focus on mitigating
model parameter-level divergence indirectly under a typical
paradigm of local training and global aggregation, leading
to marginal advantages in performance and communication

Introduction
Federated learning has become increasingly attractive since
it allows collaborative training among sensitive institutions
without direct data sharing. However, in reality, each medical institution would have its specialization, and the private
* Corresponding author: qingnishen@ss.pku.edu.cn
†

Corresponding author: wuzh@pku.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21904

