The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Provably Secure Robust Image Steganography via Cross-Modal Error Correction
Yuang Qi, Kejiang Chen* , Na Zhao, Zijin Yang, Weiming Zhang
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
{qiyuang@mail., chenkj@, znzhaona@mail., bsmhmmlf@mail., zhangwm@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapid development of image generation models has facilitated the widespread dissemination of generated images
on social networks, creating favorable conditions for provably secure image steganography. However, existing methods face issues such as low quality of generated images
and lack of semantic control in the generation process. To
leverage provably secure steganography with more effective
and high-performance image generation models, and to ensure that stego images can accurately extract secret messages
even after being uploaded to social networks and subjected
to lossy processing such as JPEG compression, we propose a
high-quality, provably secure, and robust image steganography method based on state-of-the-art autoregressive (AR) image generation models using Vector-Quantized (VQ) tokenizers. Additionally, we employ a cross-modal error-correction
framework that generates stego text from stego images to aid
in restoring lossy images, ultimately enabling the extraction
of secret messages embedded within the images. Extensive
experiments have demonstrated that the proposed method
provides advantages in stego quality, embedding capacity,
and robustness, while ensuring provable undetectability.

Figure 1: Provably Secure Image Steganography (PSIS)
faces challenges in actual transmission within online social
networks (OSNs).

an explicit distribution of pixels (Van den Oord et al. 2016;
Tulsiani and Gupta 2021), or a sampler corresponding to
the distribution (Song and Ermon 2019; Goodfellow et al.
2020), which meets the requirements of PSS.
Yang et al. (2018) proposed the first provably secure steganography method based on image generative
model, utilizing PixelCNN (Van Den Oord, Kalchbrenner,
and Kavukcuoglu 2016) for message embedding. Ding et
al. (2023) proposed a provably secure steganography contruction based on distribution copies and deployed it on ImageGPT (Chen et al. 2020). These two methods can only
perform steganography at the pixel level, resulting in stego
images with low resolution and poor quality. In the context
where high-resolution image generation models have become increasingly widespread (Zhang et al. 2022; Du et al.
2024), transmitting such low-resolution generated images is
no longer an entirely innocent act; this does not align with
the covert pursuit of steganographic behavior, as depicted in
Figure 1.
Additionally, in practical applications, digital images are
widely disseminated through social networks, and steganographic images are no exception. Therefore, the ability to
withstand lossy processing by social networks is also an important criterion for evaluating image steganography. Unfortunately, for the aforementioned provably secure image
steganography method, lossy processing can cause the receiver to lose synchronization, leading to heavy message
damage. To resist lossy processing, Yang et al. (2023) proposed PARIS, a provably secure robust image steganography

Introduction
Steganography (Cachin et al. 2005) is a science and art of
covert communication that hides secret messages in covers,
which needs to avoid arousing suspicion from steganalysis. In terms of security, steganography is divided into empirically secure steganography (ESS) and provably secure
steganography (PSS). While empirically secure steganography has been developed for many years (Sedighi, Cogranne,
and Fridrich 2015; Wang et al. 2019, 2020), there is relatively little research on PSS. Actually, PSS also has a long
history. Cachin (1998) and Hopper et al. (2002) have proposed the definitions of information-theoretic security and
computational security for steganography, respectively.
For a long time, PSS has been lacking due to the lack of
precise samplers and the inability to obtain a definite cover
distribution. It was not until the emergence of generative artificial intelligence that efficient, efficient PSS became possible (Chen et al. 2018), where generative image steganography was in the vanguard. The image generation model gives
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26354

