The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Understanding Advertisements
Yi Feng1 , Chuanyi Li1 * , and Vincent Ng2
1

2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
Human Language Technology Research Institute, University of Texas at Dallas, USA
fy@nju.edu.cn, lcy@nju.edu.cn, vince@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract

et al. 2019; Blauth, Gstrein, and Zwitter 2022; Millar et al.
2018). Merchants often promote and exaggerate the quality
of their products while selling inferior ones. Unfair business
competitions result in a lose-lose situation for both parties.
Meanwhile, advertising techniques such as user targeting
and ad recommendations continue to evolve, allowing ads
to be precisely targeted at consumers who are more likely to
engage with them (Lin et al. 2024; Rasoolipour and Emamiifar 2020; Feng et al. 2021; Quan et al. 2020; Maio et al.
2021). Furthermore, there are also politicians who use advertising to create political manipulation during campaigns
for election rigging (Horák et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2022b; Vijayaraghavan and Vosoughi 2022). Thus, there is a pressing need to alleviate ad manipulation and unveil the possibly
hidden intentions behind ads.

While AI systems are capable of reading texts and seeing images, they typically perceive surface information explicitly
conveyed with limited abilities to comprehend hidden messages (e.g., a double-edged remark). We propose the novel
task of advertisement understanding: given an advertisement,
which can be a text, an image, or a video, the goal is to identify the persuasion strategies used and determine the (possibly hidden) messages conveyed. Efforts on this task could enhance machine comprehension capabilities, and provide users
with increased situation awareness w.r.t. the advertised message and thus possibly enable mindful decision making. We
believe that this task presents long-term challenges to AI
researchers and that successful understanding of ads could
bring machine understanding one important step closer to human understanding.

1

Several persuasion strategies have been employed in ads
to convey ideas and influence people. Persuasion aims at
convincing the target to internalize the persuasive argument
and adopt the new attitude (Rocklage, Rucker, and Nordgren 2018; Hogan 2010; Cialdini and Cialdini 2007), such
as persuading consumers to buy products or watch the latest movies. There have been numerous persuasion strategies
developed in advertising, from obvious ones to obscure and
insidious ones (Andrews et al. 2013). One typical strategy is
Comparison, where two competing products are compared
to highlight the advantages of one over the other. Consider
Figure 1(b), which is an animated image. The woman in
the image moves from left to right, i.e., from “your phone”
to “iPhone”. During the movement, the woman’s body becomes clearer and clearer. This strategy allows consumers to
know that an iPhone runs smoothly and does not freeze, unlike other manufacturers’ phones. The ultimate goal of this
ad is to persuade consumers to buy iPhones, with the hidden message being iPhones are better than other phones.
Many viewers would have no idea what the ad attempts to
convey if they fail to notice the differences before and after the movement. Therefore, it is necessary to understand
the persuasion strategies in order to fully comprehend the
ad and the underlying hidden message. Note that the (explicitly expressed) surface message in this example is that a
woman moves from left to right, while the (implicit) hidden
message is iPhones are better than other phones. Thus, hidden messages are not the same as those that are explicitly
described in ads. Moreover, hidden messages are different

Introduction

With the advancement of technology, a new wave of digital media has emerged, including social media, short-form
videos, and live streaming. These platforms enable individuals to share knowledge and express their opinions. Similarly, they provide enhanced opportunities for advertisers to
promote their products and services. Different forms of advertisements (ads) have been permeating people’s lives and
bombarding people at all times. When opening an app, an ad
often appears before one can access the main content. When
watching YouTube, a video ad may unexpectedly interrupt
the experience. Repeated exposure to these ads may influence viewers through psychological persuasion strategies,
gradually steering them toward the advertisers’ objectives.
Often, viewers are unknowingly shaped by the underlying
messages and intentions of the advertisers.
In recent years, the issue of manipulation in advertising
has garnered increasing attention. While advertising is generally considered a legitimate commercial tool for promoting products fairly, some unethical advertisers exploit social media platforms such as Twitter and TikTok to deceive
consumers and deliberately tarnish the reputations of competitors (Touahri and Mazroui 2024; Camara et al. 2024;
Aberathne and Walgampaya 2021; Sun et al. 2021; Thejas
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28576

