The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TC-Diffuser: Bi-Condition Multi-Modal Diffusion for Tropical Cyclone
Forecasting
Shiqi Zhang1 , Pan Mu1 , Cheng Huang1 , Jinglin Zhang2 , Cong Bai1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shangdong University
{201906062727, panmu, chenghuang}@zjut.edu.cn, jinglin.zhang@sdu.edu.cn, congbai@zjut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

sure, and wind speed. Trajectory corresponds to the longitude and latitude of the TC center, pressure to the lowest atmospheric pressure (hPa) at the TC center, and wind speed
to the maximum sustained wind speed (m/s) over two minutes near the TC center. These attributes are interdependent
in physics (Callaghan and Smith 1998; Knaff and Zehr 2007;
Yan et al. 2024). However, predicting TC attributes is difficult due to various factors, such as inherent interdependencies among TC attributes and atmospheric modalities. Despite the difficulty, there are still many methods trying to
solve these problems. These methods are categorized into
two main groups: traditional meteorological methods and
deep learning methods.
In traditional meteorological methods, statistical dynamic
forecasting methods employ regression techniques (DeMaria and Kaplan 1999), such as CLIPER (Neumann
and Lawrence 1975). Numerical weather prediction models (NWPs) (Bauer, Thorpe, and Brunet 2015; Coiffier
2011; Kimura 2002), based on physical dynamic equations (Sanders, Pike, and Gaertner 1975; ECMWF 2011),
are extensively used by official meteorological forecasting
agencies, including the China Central Meteorological Observatory (CMO (CMO 2019)). These methods utilize multimodal data but require substantial computational resources,
such as supercomputers, to handle the numerous physical
constraints involved (Chen et al. 2023).
In the field of deep learning, TC forecasting can be
viewed as a spatio-temporal prediction problem; thus, several spatio-temporal prediction models are commonly employed. Notable examples include RNN (Moradi Kordmahalleh, Gorji Sefidmazgi, and Homaifar 2016; Alemany
et al. 2019), LSTM (Gao et al. 2018), ConvLSTM (Kim et al.
2019), BiGRU (Song et al. 2022), and GAN (Rüttgers et al.
2019). Besides, it has been proven that using multi-modal
data (Geng, Liu, and Shi 2023; Wu et al. 2021; Ma, Pan,
and Bai 2024) can effectively introduce atmospheric information to achieve better prediction results and higher interpretability. However, the introduction of multi-modal data
inevitably introduces noise in prediction process. The diffusion model’s unique noise modeling capability can effectively reduce prediction noise.
There are two main challenges in adapting diffusion
model to spatio-temporal prediction based on multi-modal
data. First, how to extract valuable information from multi-

Tropical cyclones (TCs) are complex weather systems with
strong winds and heavy rainfall, causing substantial loss of
life and property. Therefore, accurate TC forecasting is crucial for the effective prevention of disasters caused by TCs.
TC forecasting can be regarded as a spatio-temporal prediction problem. It has been proven that using multi-modal data
can effectively introduce atmospheric information to achieve
better prediction results and higher interpretability. But it
also introduces inevitably introduces noise into the prediction
process. The diffusion model’s unique noise modeling capability can reduce prediction noise when using multi-modal
datasets. However, adapting it to TC forecasting has two
main challenges: how to extract valuable information from
multi-modal data, and how to utilize them to guide the generation process. For the first challenge, while recent methods can predict multiple TC attributes using multi-modal
data, they often overlook the interdependence of multiple attributes and the semantic gap between modalities. Considering the interdependence of attributes, we propose two condition generators that capture the commonalities and characteristics of TC attributes, extracting spatio-temporal and environmental features and incorporating expert knowledge. To
reduce the semantic gap between multi-modal data, we introduce the PGSA-LSTM module to map primary and auxiliary
modalities. For the second challenge, we propose a novel Bicondition diffusion model that sequentially processes conditions from the characteristics to commonalities of attributes,
thereby expanding the guidance information that the diffusion model can accept. Our results surpass state-of-the-art
deep learning models and outperform the numerical weather
prediction model used by the China Central Meteorological
Observatory. TC-Diffuser shows high generalizability across
global ocean areas, strong robustness in handling missing
data, and higher computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Tropical cyclones (TCs) are complex weather systems with
significant impacts on daily life, often bringing strong winds
and heavy rainfall. Therefore, accurate forecasting is crucial
to prevent TC-related disasters. TC forecasting uses historical TC attributes to predict future TC attributes, which typically encompass trajectory (longitude and latitude), pres* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1120

