The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Delay as Payoff in MAB
Ofir Schlisselberg* 1 , Ido Cohen* 1 , Tal Lancewicki1 , Yishay Mansour1,2
1

Tel Aviv University
2
Google Research
{ofirs4, idoc, lancewicki}@mail.tau.ac.il, mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract

namely, the reward and delay are sampled from independent
distributions (more on this in the following sections). Later,
Lancewicki et al. (2021) introduced reward-dependent delay, where the delay and reward are sampled from a joint
distribution. This model is more challenging as it introduces selection bias into the observed payoffs. Tang, Wang,
and Zheng (2024) consider a special case of this they call
strongly-dependent, where for all intents and purposes the
delay is exactly the reward that we are trying to maximize.
We second their motivation to study this case, and additionally generalize this to delay as cost that we are trying to minimize. This motivation is twofold. First, it models well many
real world scenarios. Second, from a performance perspective, it offers a significant gain in the regret. We show that
the delay as payoff scenario is actually “simpler” than the
general payoff-dependent setting by providing a tighter upper bound compared to (Tang, Wang, and Zheng 2024), and
a significantly better bound for the cost setting.
To motivate the cost scenario, consider a communication
network where we route packets from node a to node b, and
would like to do it in the fastest way possible. We can model
this as a stochastic MAB, where every route a → b is an arm
(action) and the time it takes the packet to arrive (formally
known as Round Trip Time (RTT), see Postel (1981)) is our
payoff. For routing we want to minimize the RTT and so
we call the payoff “cost”. To motivate the reward scenario,
consider a web page with some dynamic content. We wish
to capture the viewer’s attention for as long as possible, by
choosing the content wisely. A common metric used in advertising is Average Time on Page (ATP), used, for example,
by Google Analytics. In this case we want to maximize the
ATP and so we call the payoff “reward”. In both scenarios
the payoff (RTT or ATP) is the time elapsed from choosing
an action until its payoff is final, hence it can be modeled as
delay.
As far as performance, an immediate observation is that
while the agent is waiting for an action’s final payoff, it gains
partial knowledge about its payoff as time progresses. More
specifically, if at time t1 an arm is played and by time t2
the payoff has not been revealed, we can learn that the delay
(hence the payoff) is at least t2 − t1 . This is a crucial observation that we use. Taking advantage of this knowledge, we
can improve the regret bounds. Notice that this knowledge is
one-sided in the sense that every time-step that passes pro-

In this paper, we investigate a variant of the classical stochastic Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem, where the payoff received by an agent (either cost or reward) is both delayed,
and directly corresponds to the magnitude of the delay. This
setting models faithfully many real world scenarios such as
the time it takes for a data packet to traverse a network given
a choice of route (where delay serves as the agent’s cost); or
a user’s time spent on a web page given a choice of content
(where delay serves as the agent’s reward). Our main contributions are tight upper and lower bounds for both the cost and
reward settings. For the case that delays serve as costs, which
weP
are the first to consider, we prove optimal regret that scales
T
+ d∗ , where T is the maximal number of
as i:∆i >0 log
∆i
steps, ∆i are the sub-optimality gaps and d∗ is the minimal
expected delay amongst arms. For the case
P that delaysTserves
¯
as rewards, we show optimal regret of i:∆i >0 log
+ d,
∆i
¯
where d is the second maximal expected delay. These improve over the regret inP
the general delay-dependent payoff
T
+ D, where D is the
setting, which scales as i:∆i >0 log
∆i
maximum possible delay. Our regret bounds highlight the difference between the cost and reward scenarios, showing that
the improvement in the cost scenario is more significant than
for the reward. Finally, we accompany our theoretical results
with an empirical evaluation.

1

Introduction

Classical stochastic Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) is a well
studied theoretical framework for sequential decision making, where at every step an agent chooses an action and immediately receives some payoff, be it reward or cost. A natural generalization of this framework considers the situation
where the payoff is only received after a certain delay. This
is known as the stochastic MAB problem with randomized
delays (Joulani, Gyorgy, and Szepesvári 2013), and was extensively researched in previous work under various variants (Vernade, Cappé, and Perchet 2017; Pike-Burke et al.
2018; Zhou, Xu, and Blanchet 2019; Manegueu et al. 2020;
Vernade et al. 2020; Wu and Wager 2022; Howson, PikeBurke, and Filippi 2023; Shi, Wang, and Wu 2023). In all
these works the delay was considered reward-independent,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20310

