The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OmniMark: Efficient and Scalable Latent Diffusion Model Fingerprinting
Jianwei Fei1 , Yunshu Dai2 , Zhihua Xia3 , Fangjun Huang2 , Jiantao Zhou1†
1

State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of
Macau
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University
3
College of Cyberspace Security, Jinan University
{feijianwei, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, daiysh8@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xiazhihua@jnu.edu.cn, huangfj@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

users with white-box model access can easily bypass. Recently, generative watermarking methods have been proposed to produce watermarked outputs by modifying inputs in sophisticated ways, and have achieved good accuracy without model modification. Nevertheless, these methods require preprocessing and can be easily evaded by whitebox users. In contrast, model watermarking methods modify
the model itself, allowing simultaneous image generation
and watermarking without specific preprocessing or postprocessing, thereby offering better flexibility. However, existing watermarking methods require re-training when developers need to distribute multiple model copies with distinct watermarks, significantly increasing the burdens.
In this work, we propose OmniMark, a novel model
fingerprinting method that fine-tunes the LDM to embed
imperceptible fingerprints into every model copy, successfully achieving the goals of conventional fingerprinting system (Kirovski, Malvar, and Yacobi 2002). OmniMark modifies the LDM decoder by introducing multiple OmniMark
layers. The OmniMark layers first expand the original single
convolution kernel into multiple parallel kernels, and then
encode the fingerprint across multiple dimensions, including
kernels, filters, channels, and spatial dimensions of the kernels. A fingerprint decoder is jointly trained to extract, from
images, the fingerprint used to encode OmniMark layers.
The proposed OmniMark does not require input- or outputlevel modifications and supports the creation of model instances with new fingerprints without re-training. Thus, the
proposed OmniMark enables the model developer to deploy
models with unique fingerprints to different users and monitor user accountability, which offers improved efficiency,
security, and scalability. Besides, following common practices (Fei et al. 2022; Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng 2020), we
introduce a noise layer between the LDM decoder and the
fingerprint decoder to apply various image processing augmentations to generated images, improving the robustness
of the fingerprints. We also introduce a sharpness awareness
strategy to enhance robustness against fine-tuning, by optimizing the model using single-step gradient ascent.
We conduct extensive experiments on popular Text-toImage T2I and Image-to-Image (I2I) tasks using the opensource Stable Diffusion (SD). Our evaluations demonstrate
that OmniMark successfully embeds 48-bit fingerprints
without compromising image quality. The fingerprints show

We introduce OmniMark, a novel and efficient fingerprinting
method for Latent Diffusion Models (LDM). OmniMark can
encode user-specific fingerprints across diverse dimensions of
the weights of the LDM, including kernels, filters, channels,
and spatial domains. The LDM is fine-tuned to encode the
invisible fingerprint into generated images, which can be decoded by a decoder. By altering fingerprints and re-encoding
the weights, OmniMark supports efficient and scalable adhoc generation (<100 ms) of numerous models with unique
fingerprints that enable user accountability and model attribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that OmniMark can
be applied to various image generation and editing tasks and
achieve highly accurate fingerprint detection without compromising image quality. Furthermore, OmniMark demonstrates
good robustness against both white-box model attacks and
image attacks, including fine-tuning and JPEG compression.

Code — https://github.com/jumpycat/OmniMark

Introduction
Recent progress in Latent Diffusion Models (LDM) has
enabled high-fidelity image generation and editing. These
models are broadly adopted across many domains like entertainment, design, and film. Big tech companies have developed their models to engage in technological competition.1
The models empower users to boost productivity and create
a range of downstream applications.
However, the progress of such generative artificial intelligence (AI) brings potential security risks. For instance,
LDM can produce increasingly convincing deepfakes which
enables attackers to conduct illegal activities more effectively. Consequently, detecting misconduct in generative
model usage and attributing responsibility are now urgent
problems demanding attention for the sustainable growth of
both research and commercial applications.
To this end, recent solutions propose the use of invisible watermarks to mark the origin of the generated images.
However, they rely on post-processing on images, which
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://openai.com/index/dall-e-3/
https://deepmind.google/technologies/imagen-2/

16550

