The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MIDI-GPT: A Controllable Generative Model for Computer-Assisted Multitrack
Music Composition
Philippe Pasquier1 , Jeff Ens1 , Nathan Fradet1 , Paul Triana1 , Davide Rizzotti1 ,
Jean-Baptiste Rolland2 , Maryam Safi2
1

Metacreation Lab - Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, Canada
2
Steinberg Media Technologies GmbH, Hamburg, Germany
pasquier@sfu.ca

Abstract

Motivated by these considerations, we introduce MIDIGPT, a style-agnostic generative model that builds on an
alternative representation for multi-track musical material
(Ens and Pasquier 2020), resulting in an expressive and
steerable generative system. We outline the ongoing realworld usage of MIDI-GPT and provide quantitative evidence to support our claim that MIDI-GPT rarely duplicates
the training data as the length of the generated material increases; generates musical material that retains the stylistic
characteristics of the training data; and that attribute control
methods are an effective way to steer generation.

We present and release MIDI-GPT, a generative system
based on the Transformer architecture that is designed for
computer-assisted music composition workflows. MIDI-GPT
supports the infilling of musical material at the track and bar
level, and can condition generation on attributes including:
instrument type, musical style, note density, polyphony level,
and note duration. In order to integrate these features, we employ an alternative representation for musical material, creating a time-ordered sequence of musical events for each track
and concatenating several tracks into a single sequence, rather
than using a single time-ordered sequence where the musical
events corresponding to different tracks are interleaved. We
also propose a variation of our representation allowing for
expressiveness. We present experimental results that demonstrate that MIDI-GPT is able to consistently avoid duplicating
the musical material it was trained on, generate music that is
stylistically similar to the training dataset, and that attribute
controls allow enforcing various constraints on the generated
material. We also outline several real-world applications of
MIDI-GPT, including collaborations with industry partners
that explore the integration and evaluation of MIDI-GPT into
commercial products, as well as several artistic works produced using it.

1

2

Background

Considering our interest in developing a system that is well
suited to practical and interactive computer-assisted composition applications, we must identify the factors that enhance
the real-world usability of generative music systems. Our
first design decision is to use the General MIDI format as
input and output given that it is the most supported symbolic
music encoding standard. We consider two main categories:
I/O specifications, which place restrictions on the musical
material that can be processed and generated by the system; and generation methods, favoring using existing musical content as prompt vs. unconditioned generation.

Introduction

Recent research on generative music systems (Huang et al.
2019; Huang and Yang 2020; Briot, Hadjeres, and Pachet
2019; Fradet et al. 2023a,b) has mainly focused on modeling
musical material as an end-goal, rather than on their affordance in practical scenarios (Sturm et al. 2019). Although
these works pave the way for efficient generative methods
for music, their usability in real-world co-creative conditions remains limited. As a result, while we have seen a wide
adoption of generative models for language and vision tasks,
this has not occurred to the same extent for symbolic music
composition. In contrast, artists recently expressed their concerns about the misuse of artificial intelligence in the music
field (Artist Rights Alliance 2024). If we want musicians to
adopt generative systems, we must work on making models
controllable, able to generate content that the user will appropriate as theirs, and integrated into their existing workflows.

2.1

Input/Output Specification

We first define a track (tinst ), which is a distinct set of musical material (i.e. notes) played by an instrument (inst).
In some cases, a track may be distinguished by its musical
purpose (ex. tmelody ) rather than its instrument. For example, MusicVAE (Roberts et al. 2018) aggregates all melodies
into a single track type, rather than distinguishing between
melodies based on their instrumentation (piano, synth, saxp
ophone, etc.). In what follows, tm
inst , tinst and tdrum denote
a monophonic track, a polyphonic track, and a drum track,
respectively. For example, tm
bass denotes a monophonic bass
track.
A generated excerpt can be described by a list of
p
track types (ex. [tm
bass , tpiano ]), and thus, we can define the output specification (O⋆ ) for an arbitrary generative music system as a set of track lists (ex. O⋆ =
p
p
p
{[tm
bass , tpiano ], [tpiano , tsynth ]}) . We consider a system to
have a fixed schema when O⋆ contains a single tracklist. For

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1474

