The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Large Language Model Performance with
Gradient-Based Parameter Selection
Haoling Li1 * , Xin Zhang2† , Xiao Liu2 , Yeyun Gong2 , Yifan Wang1 , Qi Chen2 , Peng Cheng2
1

Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research
li-hl23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xinzhang3@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

process (Huang et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2024; Yu et al.
2023b; Luo et al. 2024b). The existence of the redundancy
of LLM parameter updates can be proven by several
branches of works, like model pruning methods (Ma, Fang,
and Wang 2023), fine-tuning methods dropping the delta
parameters (Yadav et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2023b), and so on,
which shows minimal impact on performance. Furthermore,
inspired by recent works (Liu et al. 2024b; Lv et al. 2024),
we believe that reducing redundancy in parameter updates
has the potential to enhance model performance.
Existing methods for reducing the redundancy of LLM
parameter updates can be broadly classified into two categories based on their implementation. The first involves
sparsifying the network during the training process using
criteria such as randomness (Woo et al. 2024; Hui et al.
2024). However, a significant drawback of these methods
is their failure to leverage information from task-specific
data, may leading to suboptimal optimization objectives
(Chen et al. 2024). The second focuses on eliminating nonessential structural components of the transformer block
(Men et al. 2024; Song et al. 2024) or discarding insignificant parameters (Yadav et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2023b). Yet,
these one-off operations constrain the model’s scalability
across different tasks and impede its ability to adjust or reconfigure its computational complexity, which is crucial for
adapting to varying task demands.
To address the above issues, a method that effectively
identifies and retains the most critical LLM parameters
during training is needed to reduce redundant updates
and enhance overall model performance. In this work, we
introduce the Gradient-Mask Tuning (GMT), a method
that selects the set of parameters to be updated based on
the gradient information associated with task-specific data.
Specifically, after calculating the gradients in the backward
process, we measure the absolute values of gradients and
mask those with small values. There are several reasons for
using gradient magnitude as a criterion. Firstly, gradients
inherently capture task-specific information and can be
utilized without additional computational overhead during
training. Secondly, we assert that the gradient effectively
assesses network parameter significance across different
training datasets, allowing delicate control of the training
process. Thirdly, identifying and removing insignificant
subsets of gradients during the training process, which does

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized numerous fields of research, driving significant advancements in
natural language processing, machine translation, and beyond. Although the extensive number of parameters contributes a lot to the great success, existing studies indicate that
not all model parameters hold equal importance, which further leads to redundancy during the parameter update process.
Recent works for reducing redundant parameter updates for
LLMs either lack task-specific data information, may leading to suboptimal model performance, or discard transformer
components or insignificant parameters, limiting the model’s
scalability across different tasks and potentially compromising the LLM structure. To address these issues and further
enhance the performance of LLMs, we propose GradientMask Tuning (GMT), a method that selectively updates parameters based on gradient information, which is specific to
the target tasks. Specifically, after calculating gradients during back propagation, we measure their absolute values and
mask those with small absolute values. Our empirical results
in various training paradigms like SFT and DPO for various
domains of tasks demonstrate that GMT not only preserves
the original network structure but also enhances the potential
performance of LLMs. Further analysis indicates that GMT
exhibits insensitivity to mask ratio and possesses computational efficiency comparable to vanilla training approach.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have pivoted the centerpiece of various tasks such as textual understanding, natural language planning and instruction following (Achiam
et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024b; Luo et al. 2024a), which can be attributed to
their extensive number of parameters, with performance and
unique abilities significantly enhancing as the number of parameters increases. To optimize the performance of LLMs in
downstream tasks, full-parameter fine-tuning is commonly
employed by researchers and practitioners.
However, a recent trend shows an observable phenomena
that not all parameters of LLMs hold the same importance,
which leads to redundancy during the parameter update
*

Work done during his internship at Microsoft.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

24431

