The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Audio Entailment: Assessing Deductive Reasoning for Audio Understanding
Soham Deshmukh1,2 , Shuo Han1 , Hazim Bukhari1 , Benjamin Elizalde2 ,
Hannes Gamper3 , Rita Singh1 , Bhiksha Raj1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Microsoft
3
Microsoft Research
{sdeshmuk, shuohan, hbukhari}@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract

Gong et al. 2023a; Tang et al. 2024) focus on improving open-ended text generation. The task (Deshmukh et al.
2023) consists of generating free-form text, given an audio and a text input, and has flexibility in the correctness
of the output. For instance, an audio recording labeled as
“dog barking” can be identified by the ALMs as “canine
barking” and still be marked as correct. The open-ended text
generation for ALMs usually takes the form of interactive
question-answering with the user. From a Machine Learning perspective, one can think of a model performing different tasks of Audio Captioning, Audio Question Answering, Audio Dialogues, and Reasoning, to enable interactive
Question-Answering. To generate natural and accurate responses, the ALMs should have learned to think step-bystep, utilize the learned real-world knowledge, and have the
ability to ask follow-up questions for clarifications about
the acoustic content. ALMs are evaluated on such abilities
through Audio Question Answering tasks. Although the performance has been promising, ALMs do not perform well on
interactive Question-Answering. Hence, we introduce a new
direction to evaluate a specific type of reasoning of ALMs
called Logical Reasoning.

Recent literature uses language to build foundation models for audio. These Audio–Language Models (ALMs) are
trained on a vast number of audio–text pairs and show remarkable performance in tasks including Text-to-Audio Retrieval, Captioning, and Question Answering. However, their
ability to engage in more complex open-ended tasks, like Interactive Question-Answering, requires proficiency in logical
reasoning—a skill not yet benchmarked. We introduce the
novel task of Audio Entailment to evaluate an ALM’s deductive reasoning ability. This task assesses whether a text description (hypothesis) of audio content can be deduced from
an audio recording (premise), with potential conclusions being entailment, neutral, or contradiction, depending on the
sufficiency of the evidence. We create two datasets for this
task with audio recordings sourced from two audio captioning datasets—AudioCaps and Clotho—and hypotheses generated using Large Language Models (LLMs). We benchmark
state-of-the-art ALMs and find deficiencies in logical reasoning with both zero-shot and linear probe evaluations. Finally,
we propose “caption-before-reason”, an intermediate step of
captioning that improves the Zero-Shot and linear-probe performance of ALMs by an absolute 6% and 3%, respectively.

Datasets — https://github.com/microsoft/AudioEntailment

1

Logical Reasoning (Copi, Cohen, and McMahon 2016)
can be defined in the context of a premise and a hypothesis.
To perform Logical Reasoning, one needs a comprehension
of premises, the relationships among premises, and then use
rigorous methods to infer conclusions that are implied by the
premises and relations. Deductive reasoning, a form of Logical Reasoning, is useful where the premises are known to be
true, as it allows for drawing specific conclusions from general principles. Deductive reasoning in audio perception involves a “top-down” approach, where one begins with hearing an audio and then determines if a logical conclusion can
be drawn. For instance, an audio contains a dog barking and
children playing. The hypothesis is “children playing in the
park with a dog barking nearby.” Thus, we can conclude the
hypothesis is plausible, as parks can be associated with these
sounds. Evaluating deductive reasoning also helps in identifying audio hallucinations. They may manifest in two ways:
(1) Inferred Cues: The model generates cues not present in
the audio input, such as introducing audio events that were
neither mentioned nor implied. (2) Contextual Events: The
model relies on contextual assumptions rather than audio evidence, for example, interpreting a sound as “dog barking”

Introduction

Recent literature uses language to build foundation models
for audio. These models, referred to as Audio–Language
Models, are trained on millions of audio–text pairs using
either Contrastive Learning (e.g., CLAP (Elizalde et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2023)) or Next-Token Prediction (e.g., Pengi
(Deshmukh et al. 2023), Qwen-Audio (Chu et al. 2023)).
Once trained, ALMs can perform multiple tasks grounded
in audio and user-provided instructions, for example text-toaudio retrieval, captioning, question-answering, and text-toaudio generation. Owing to their performance, support for
various tasks, and inherent ease-of-use, ALMs are being extensively used across various scenarios.
ALMs have achieved state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance
on close-ended tasks like Classification and Retrieval, beating Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) models as well as Supervised models. The latest ALMs efforts (Chu et al. 2023;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23769

