The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedGOG: Federated Graph Out-of-Distribution Generalization with Diffusion
Data Exploration and Latent Embedding Decorrelation
Pengyang Zhou1 , Chaochao Chen1 , Weiming Liu1 , Xinting Liao1 , Wenkai Shen2 , Jiahe Xu1 ,
Zhihui Fu3 , Jun Wang3 , Wu Wen1 , Xiaolin Zheng1 *
1
Zhejiang University
Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
OPPO Research Institute
{zhoupy,zjuccc,21831010,xintingliao}@zju.edu.cn, shenwenkai@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, jiahexu@zju.edu.cn, luca@oppo.com,
junwang.lu@gmail.com, wuwen@intl.zju.edu.cn, xlzheng@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

𝒀𝒀𝟏𝟏 =

Federated graph learning (FGL) has emerged as a promising approach to enable collaborative training of graph models
while preserving data privacy. However, current FGL methods overlook the out-of-distribution (OOD) shifts that occur
in real-world scenarios. The distribution shifts between training and testing datasets in each client impact the FGL performance. To address this issue, we propose federated graph
OOD generalization framework FedGOG, which includes
two modules, i.e., diffusion data exploration (DDE) and latent
embedding decorrelation (LED). In DDE, all clients jointly
train score models to accurately estimate the global graph
data distribution and sufficiently explore sample space using score-based graph diffusion with conditional generation.
In LED, each client models a global invariant GNN and a
personalized spurious GNN. LED aims to decorrelate spuriousness from invariant relationships by minimizing the mutual information between two categories of latent embeddings
from different GNN models. Extensive experiments on six
benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of FedGOG.

1

Training Dataset

Class-invariance

Client A

Spuriousness
𝑺𝑺𝒊𝒊 ∈

Client B

···

𝒀𝒀𝟐𝟐 =

OOD Shifts

···

Structure Shift

···
Client A

Client C

···

Feature Shift

···
Client B

···
Client C

OOD Testing Dataset

Figure 1: An illustration of the out-of-distribution shifts in
the federated graph learning.
spurious correlations between graphs and environments, resulting in unstable predictions and degraded FGL performance. Existing federated learning methods on graph classification mainly focus on handling training graphs with nonindependent and identical distributions (non-IID) through
strategies such as client clustering (Xie et al. 2021) or structural knowledge sharing (Tan et al. 2023). How to tackle the
OOD generalization problem in FGL remains a significant
but unresolved challenge.
Although recent efforts attempt to improve the graph
OOD generalization capability in centralized learning, they
are not directly applicable to the FGL scenarios. Firstly, several methods adopt the graph data augmentation strategies to
enrich the data distribution during training, e.g., applying intervention to diversify the training environments (Wu et al.
2022b; Sui et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2022; Yu, Liang, and He
2023), or using mixup operation for IN-distribution graph
data (Lu et al. 2024; Jia et al. 2024). However, the available graph data in each client is typically limited and biased, making it challenging to effectively explore the OOD
graph sample space and generalize to new and unseen environments. Secondly, a series of studies focus on extracting label-related invariant information from the graph data,
which involves invariant subgraph extraction (Li et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022, 2024a; Gui et al. 2023), structural information bottleneck (Yang et al. 2023) or reweighting strategies (Fan et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024b). Nevertheless, the
heterogeneity of graph data across different clients complicates the extraction of stable and invariant information.
Different from existing work, we highlight two unre-

Introduction

Graph structured data is widely studied in various domains
such as medical diagnosis (Kim et al. 2023), drug discovery (Askr et al. 2023) and social networks (Liu et al. 2024b).
In the real world, graph data is often distributed across multiple sources, making centralized training challenging due to
privacy concerns (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017). Federated graph learning (FGL) (Fu et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024a)
has emerged as a promising approach to enable collaborative
learning without leaking data privacy.
However, current FGL methods overlook the out-ofdistribution (OOD) shifts (Gui et al. 2022) in the practical
deployment. In the literature of graph OOD generalization,
it is typically assumed that a graph includes class-invariant
information that determines the graph property. Meanwhile,
the graph also contains spuriousness influenced by environments, which are causally irrelevant to the class labels. As
shown in Fig. 1, the spuriousness varies between training
and testing datasets in each client, leading to OOD shifts
that occur in both features and structures. These shifts reflect
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22965

