The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Persuasion for Social Good: How to Build and Break AI
Weiyan Shi
Northeastern University
we.shi@northeastern.edu

As AI systems get more involved in people’s daily life, it
becomes critical to study how they will influence people’s
everyday behavior. So I build persuasive AI technologies to
answer related social questions. I will cover three topics toward this research direction in the talk: (1) how to persuade
humans; (2) how to persuade AI for safety; and (3) how to
understand AI’s societal impact.

of 40 persuasion strategies, and use it to paraphrase a plain
harmful query like “how to make a bomb” into a natural persuasive argument in a guided and systematic way.
Compared to traditional attacks, these persuasive prompts
are more human-readable, harder to defend, and improve
the attack success rate from 0% to 92% on GPT-4. We also
explored new defense mechanisms (e.g., summarization)
to mitigate such risks with promising results, and recommended future interdisciplinary directions on AI safety.
This work also received the Best Social Impact Paper
award at ACL 2024.

• To persuade humans. Persuasion is ubiquitous in life
(Izuma 2017), in situations ranging from healthy habit
promotion to emotional support. In the first part, I will
describe how to build the first human-level negotiation AI
system, Cicero, that can play the game of Diplomacy. One
key challenge is that the game is highly strategic, but it is
hard to control what strategies and messages a language
model generates, especially when the context is long. To
control the complex conversation flow, we decoupled the
strategy planning and the dialogue generation functions
into two modules: a reinforcement-learning-based planning engine and a language-model-based dialogue model.
In this way, the planning engine will take symbolic inputs like the game state, and predict the best actions; then
the dialogue model will translate the actions into natural
messages, and also summarize the dialogues to symbolic
states for the planning engine to use later. Finally, our system achieved the 2nd place in an online tournament and
the results were published in Science (FAIR et al. 2022).
Such a negotiation system has big potentials in various domains like political science (Jungherr 2023), international
relations (Varela 2024), law (Nay et al. 2024), and so on.
• To persuade AI for safety. Persuasive AI technologies
can also be misused, but we found a way to use persuasion to study AI safety problems. How to jailbreak an AI
system is the first step towards AI safety. Classic safety
methods still treat AI models as machines, e.g., using gradients to find random strings to attack them (Zou et al.
2023). These approaches rely on security experts with domain knowledge. With AI’s wide usage, I proposed to
study risks that come from everyday users without technology backgrounds, and was the first to marry social science and computer science to persuade AI for jailbreaking. We worked with social scientist to derive a taxonomy

• To understand AI’s societal impact. Through my research in persuasive AI technologies, I realize that it is
not just about the methods, it is also about the impact
they have on people and society. In 2019, California proposed the Autobot Law (Governor 2018), which was the
first to require businesses to disclose chatbot identities. At
that time, little was known about how users would perceive these models with different identities. To answer
this question, we conducted an online factorial experiment
(Shi et al. 2020) with hidden and disclosed chatbot identities on the aforementioned donation persuasion task. We
found that people are more likely to donate money when
they think they are talking to other humans, which proves
the necessity of the Autobot Law across the country. In
cases where humans are aware that they are speaking with
a chatbot, they are more likely to donate if the chatbot
is more competent. This suggests that improving dialogue
quality is crucial for successful persuasion outcomes. This
is one of the first works to caution against the misuse
of chatbot identity and guide persuasive chatbot design,
which could promote the enactment of legislation in related areas.
In sum, my vision is to build persuasive AI technologies
to interact with humans and AI for social good and AI
safety, and to also understand these models’ society impact in a global context. As AI models become more powerful, these persuasion-related research questions will only
become more relevant and important. So in the end, I will
layout future plans on persuasive AI technologies, (1) to develop an interdisciplinary framework for persuasion study;
(2) to understand why persuasion works; and (3) to study
ethics and policies for AI persuasion.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28726

