The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Weighted Poisson-disk Resampling on Large-Scale Point Clouds
Xianhe Jiao1 * , Chenlei Lv2 * , Junli Zhao1† , Ran Yi3 ,
Yu-Hui Wen4 , Zhenkuan Pan1 , Zhongke Wu5 , Yong-Jin Liu6†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Qingdao University;
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University;
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University;
4
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University,
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University;
6
Department of Computer Science and Technology, MOE-Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Tsinghua University
{zjl@qdu.edu.cn, liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn}
2

Abstract
For large-scale point cloud processing, resampling takes the
important role of controlling the point number and density
while keeping the geometric consistency. However, current
methods cannot balance such different requirements. Particularly with large-scale point clouds, classical methods often
struggle with decreased efficiency and accuracy. To address
such issues, we propose a weighted Poisson-disk (WPD) resampling method to improve the usability and efficiency for
the processing. We first design an initial Poisson resampling
with a voxel-based estimation strategy. It is able to estimate
a more accurate radius of the Poisson-disk while maintaining
high efficiency. Then, we design a weighted tangent smoothing step to further optimize the Voronoi diagram for each
point. At the same time, sharp features are detected and kept
in the optimized results with isotropic property. Finally, we
achieve a resampling copy from the original point cloud with
the specified point number, uniform density, and high-quality
geometric consistency. Experiments show that our method
significantly improves the performance of large-scale point
cloud resampling for different applications, and provides a
highly practical solution.

Figure 1: The pipeline of the proposed WPD on UrbanBIS (Yang et al. 2023).
The resampling step aims to control the number of points
while optimizing their distribution. Currently, the mainstream solutions include Poisson-disk resampling (Corsini,
Cignoni, and Scopigno 2012) and variants of the farthest
point sampling (FPS) (Schlömer, Heck, and Deussen 2011;
Lv, Lin, and Zhao 2021). The former has been selected
as a standard function of the well-known software MeshLab (Cignoni et al. 2008). It can effectively improve the distribution of point clouds while reducing the data volume.
The drawback is that the radius estimation of the Poissondisk is not accurate. It cannot precisely control the number
of output points. For the variants of FPS, the advantage lies
in their ability to precisely control the number of points with
simple implementation. Such methods are widely used in
point cloud-based deep learning methods (Qi et al. 2017;
Zhao et al. 2021). However, they have lower efficiency for
large-scale point clouds, and their optimization capability
for local neighborhoods is also limited.
To address the above-mentioned issues, we propose a
weighted Poisson-disk (WPD) resampling method for largescale point cloud processing. It contains two parts: initial

Introduction
With the development of 3D scanning technology, 3D point
clouds are widely collected and gradually become a popular
data representation in 3D vision tasks. Compared to 2D images, 3D point clouds possess comprehensive geometric information, enabling precise spatial data analysis. Although
point clouds possess many outstanding properties, there are
still some limitations that constrain their usage. Specifically,
point clouds scanned from large-scale scenes often entail
substantial data volumes, which reduce computational efficiency in related applications. In addition, the density of
a raw point cloud is typically non-uniform, which significantly impairs the performance of certain downstream applications that are highly sensitive to the quality of point
distribution. Therefore, a resampling step is necessary.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4084

