The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Noise-Injected Spiking Graph Convolution for Energy-Efficient 3D Point Cloud
Denoising
Zikuan Li1 , Qiaoyun Wu3 * , Jialin Zhang2 , Kaijun Zhang2 , Jun Wang1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University
lzkuan@nuaa.edu.cn, wuqiaoyun@ahu.edu.cn, wjun@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract

and Hu 2021). However, these ANN-based methods typically demand numerous multiply-accumulate operations,
leading to high computational costs and energy consumption. This poses significant challenges when deploying such
methods on 3D scanning devices, which have resources and
battery constraints.
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), using spike-driven
communication, have emerged as a prominent solution to
mitigate the exiguity of energy efficiency inherent in contemporary deep learning. In SNNs, all information is encoded within spiking signals rather than floating-point representations, which allows SNNs to adopt spike-based accumulate (AC) operations instead of energy-hungry multiplyaccumulate (MAC) operations, thus leading to extremely
low energy consumption (Kim et al. 2020). The expeditious progression in the domain of neuromorphic engineering has culminated in the advent of sophisticated chips
like Loihi (Davies et al. 2018), which significantly augment
the energy efficiency inherent to SNNs. This advancement
brings us to the future of integrating intelligent neuromorphic processors into the fabric of quotidian existence.
Despite SNNs have been successfully applied in the field
of neuromorphic computing (Cao et al. 2024), the current
body of research on SNNs has been predominantly directed
towards classification endeavors, inadvertently neglecting
the exploration of their regression competencies, notably
within the domain of 3D point cloud denoising. Hence, to
develop a SNN-based regression algorithm supporting effective point cloud denoising whilst maintaining a profile
of low energy expenditure, is imperative. However, two key
concerns deserve much attention in extending SNNs to the
domain: (1) stochastic noise will bring spiking disturbance
to deterministic models, directly undermining their robustness, and (2) semantically similar structures within a point
cloud can facilitate the mutual perception of perturbations,
thereby enhancing the discriminative capacity of the system
to detect and respond to noises in the data.
This paper explores SNNs for energy-efficient 3D point
cloud denoising. For the first concern, we draw inspiration
from the inherent nondeterministic and noisy nature of neural computations, and build noise-injected spiking neurons
to yield flexible and and reliable learning on 3D points.
For the second concern, we borrow concepts from EdgeConv (Wang et al. 2019), especially learning to capture

Spiking neural networks (SNNs), inspired by the spiking
computation paradigm of the biological neural systems, have
exhibited superior energy efficiency in 2D classification tasks
over traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs). However,
the regression potential of SNNs has not been well explored, especially in 3D point cloud processing. In this paper, we propose noise-injected spiking graph convolutional
networks to leverage the full regression potential of SNNs
in 3D point cloud denoising. Specifically, we first emulate
the noise-injected neuronal dynamics to build noise-injected
spiking neurons. On this basis, we design noise-injected spiking graph convolution for promoting disturbance-aware spiking representation learning on 3D points. Starting from the
spiking graph convolution, we build two SNN-based denoising networks. One is a purely spiking graph convolutional
network, which achieves low accuracy loss compared with
some ANN-based alternatives, while resulting in significantly
reduced energy consumption on two benchmark datasets,
PU-Net and PC-Net. The other is a hybrid architecture that
combines ANN-based learning with a high performanceefficiency trade-off in just a few time steps. Our work lights
up SNN’s potential for 3D point cloud denoising, injecting new perspectives of exploring the deployment on neuromorphic chips while paving the way for developing energyefficient 3D data acquisition devices.

Code — https://github.com/Miraclelzk/NI-SGCN

Introduction
Intelligent robotic systems are often equipped with a 3D
data acquisition device, which provides detailed point clouds
for environment perception. However, raw point clouds are
often corrupted by noise, stemming from sensor imperfections, environmental interference, and the probabilistic nature of data capture. Point cloud denoising endeavors to extricate coherent geometrical information from raw scans,
thereby enhancing the precision of the data and fortifying its applicability in advanced perception tasks. With the
continuous advancement of deep learning, learning-based
point cloud denoising methods have achieved remarkable
progress (Rakotosaona et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Luo
* The corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18629

