The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Germane Conflicts: Desirable Properties for Localising Inconsistency
Glauber de Bona1 , Anthony Hunter2
1

Polytechnic School of the University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Luciano Gualberto 158, São Paulo, Brazil
2
Department of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, London, UK
glauberbona@gmail.com, anthony.hunter@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

these minimal conflicts is justified by the fact that removing
a formula from each such subset restores the consistency of
the whole set, and no free formula needs to be withdrawn.
This is at the core of Reiter’s (1987) diagnosis problem and
the AGM belief revision paradigm (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors,
and Makinson 1985), for instance.
For instance, consider the following sentences: “Alice is
a dog”, “Alice is not a dog;” and “It is raining”. The triple
is inconsistent, but it intuitively seems that “It is raining”
has nothing to do with the inconsistency. In fact, the only
minimal conflict is the first pair, and the third sentence is
free. That is, the inconsistency is somehow localised in the
first pair, which would be the only subset germane to the
inconsistency of the knowledgebase.
Despite their ubiquity and usefulness, minimal conflicts
are not suitable for capturing the subsets that are germane
to the inconsistency of the knowledgebase in all contexts
and scenarios. In particular, if the inconsistency can be repaired via weakening formulas, minimal conflicts can fail to
capture problematic formulas, as illustrated in the following
example (De Bona and Hunter 2017):

Inconsistency is a common problem in knowledge, and so
there is a need to analyse it. Inconsistency measures assess
its severity, but there is a more basic question: “where is the
inconsistency?”. Typically, not all subsets of a knowledgebase are causing the inconsistency, and minimal inconsistent
sets have been the standard way to localise the germane ones,
even though there are shortcomings in some scenarios. Recently, ⋆-conflicts were proposed as a more suitable definition
to localise inconsistency when considering a method to repair
it. But in general there is no way to tell what is a sensible definition to capture the germane conflicts. This work provides
a set of desirable properties to assess definitions for germane
conflicts. Also, a new conflict definition, based on substitution, is presented and evaluated via the proposed properties,
and the related computational complexity is analysed.

1

Introduction

Inconsistency is common when formally representing data,
facts about the world, beliefs, etc. Even though paraconsistent logics (Belnap 1977; Priest 2002; Carnielli, Coniglio,
and Marcos 2007) allow for conclusions to be derived from
inconsistent premises, this is typically not the case in classical inference systems, which calls for ways to analyse the
inconsistency. Given a set of inconsistent pieces of information, one might ask where is the inconsistency and how
severe it is. Inconsistency measures have been proposed to
tackle the latter (Knight 2002; Hunter 2002; Hunter and
Konieczny 2005; Doder et al. 2010; Grant and Hunter 2011;
McAreavey, Liu, and Miller 2014; Thimm 2016; Thimm and
Wallner 2016; Grant and Hunter 2017, 2023), but the former
seems underdeveloped, receiving little attention (De Bona
and Hunter 2017; Mu 2024).
In classical logic, typically it is not the case that all inconsistent subsets of a knowledgebase are causing the inconsistency, hence the need to determine the germane ones.
Traditionally, inconsistency has been localised via minimal
inconsistent/unsatisfiable (sub)sets – or minimal conflicts –
, which have been called the purest form of inconsistency
and the causes of it (Hunter and Konieczny 2008, 2010).
Conversely, formulas that do not take part in minimal conflicts are said to be free of contradiction. The central role of

Example 1. The police are investigating a robbery at a
jewellery shop, and the employees give the following testimonies:
• salesperson: “I did not open the safe, and the criminals
carried no guns!”
• security chief: “Only the manager or the salesperson
could have opened the safe, and the criminals carried
guns.”
• manager: “I did not open the safe.”
The set is inconsistent, as the security chief and the salesperson are clearly contradicting each other, forming the only
minimal conflict, while the manager’s testimony is free. Assuming this is the only germane conflict, the police could
focus on the salesperson and the security chief in the search
for the complicit employees, for at least one appears to be lying, ignoring the manager. The investigators could meet the
salesperson and the security chief in order to discuss whether
or not the criminals carried guns. The salesperson could admit the possibility of not having noticed them, updating their
testimony to “I did not open the safe”. But the new set of
testimonies is now a minimal conflict, and maybe both the
salesperson and the security chief have always been telling

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14840

