The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Perturbating, Tuning, and Collaborating: Harnessing Vision Foundation Models for
Single Domain Generalization on Medical Imaging
Chuang Liu1,2 * , Yichao Cao3 * , YingYing Zhang1,2 , Xiu Su4† , Haogang Zhu1,2 †
1

State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, China
2
Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University, China
3
School of Automation, Southeast University, China
4
Big Data Institute, Central South University, China
{cliu_trans, zhangyingying, haogangzhu}@buaa.edu.cn, caoyichao@seu.edu.cn, xiusu@csu.edu.cn
Abstract
Single Domain Generalization (SDG) is critical in medical
imaging applications. Recently, Vision Foundation Models
(VFMs) have spearheaded a trend in AI development due
to their robust generalizability and versatility. This work
aims to fully explore the generalization capabilities of VFMs
alongside the domain-specific expertise of specialized models, thoroughly investigating the boundaries of their respective capabilities, thereby collaboratively addressing SDG challenges within medical imaging. We propose a framework for
Collaborative reasoning between Specialized and Universal
models for Single Domain Generalization (CollaSU-SDG)
in medical imaging. Specifically, we first design a modelaware perturbation injection method from the perspective of
single-source domain data, enabling differentiated and adaptive perturbation injection for two different scales of models.
Then, a domain expansion adapter is designed for the VFM
to adapt to the augmented single-source domain medical data.
Lastly, we introduce an adaptive hierarchical transfer and dynamic dense prompting method that facilitate collaborative
reasoning between the specialized and universal models, eliminating the need for explicit prompts. Through these designs,
CollaSU-SDG fully leverages the strengths of both specialized
and universal models, achieving robust out-of-distribution generalization capabilities on single-source domain data. Experimental results demonstrate that CollaSU-SDG significantly
advances the state-of-the-art performance across a wide range
of medical datasets. All the code will be publicly available.

Figure 1: CollaSU-SDG outperforms state-of-the-art models
on a broad range of datasets. "Pro", "Fun" and "Pol" denote
three medical tasks. Di denotes different domain of datasets.

conditions of limited data availability or stringent privacy
concerns (Price and Cohen 2019). Significant contributions
include Data Augmentation (Su et al. 2022a), Regularization
(Huang et al. 2020a), and Self-supervised Learning (Carlucci
et al. 2019a). However, the SDG problem remains far from
being fully resolved.
Recent advancements in deep learning have been propelled
by foundation models such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021),
LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023), and GPT (Brown et al. 2020),
impacting diverse fields including computer vision (CV) and
natural language processing (NLP). Unlike earlier models,
which were often specialized (S-model), these are termed
Universal Model (U -model, or Foundation Model), emphasizing their robust generalization capabilities across a
broad range of tasks (Zhou et al. 2023). Notably, the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023b) emerges as
the first foundation model tailored for image segmentation,
showcasing remarkable performance across various domains

Introduction
In the field of medical imaging, Domain Adaptation (DA)
(Guan and Liu 2021) and Domain Generalization (DG) (Zhou
et al. 2022) aim to tackle variations in data distributions
that deviate from the traditional assumption of independent
and identically distributed (IID) data (Carlucci et al. 2019b).
Within this context, Single-source Domain Generalization
(SDG) specifically focuses on the realistic challenge of developing methods that can generalize from a single source
to multiple OOD target domains (Xu et al. 2023). This is
particularly relevant in medical imaging, especially under
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5370

