The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HVAdam: A Full-Dimension Adaptive Optimizer
Yiheng Zhang1 * , Shaowu Wu1 * , Yuanzhuo Xu1 , Jiajun Wu2 , Shang Xu3 , Steve Drew2 , Xiaoguang
Niu1 †
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Department of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary
3
Department of Computer Science, University College London
{gjryhxt,wshaow,xyzxyz,xgniu}@whu.edu.cn, {jiajun.wu1, steve.drew}@ucalgary.ca, shang.xu.24@ucl.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Adaptive optimizers such as Adam and RMSProp have
gained attraction in complex neural networks, including
generative adversarial networks (GANs) and Transformers,
thanks to their stable performance and fast convergence compared to non-adaptive optimizers. A frequently overlooked
limitation of adaptive optimizers is that adjusting the learning rate of each dimension individually would ignore the
knowledge of the whole loss landscape, resulting in slow
updates of parameters, invalidating the learning rate adjustment strategy and eventually leading to widespread insufficient convergence of parameters. In this paper, we propose
HVAdam, a novel optimizer that associates all dimensions of
the parameters to find a new parameter update direction, leading to a refined parameter update strategy for an increased
convergence rate. We validated HVAdam in extensive experiments, showing its faster convergence, higher accuracy,
and more stable performance on image classification, image
generation, and natural language processing tasks. Particularly, HVAdam achieves a significant improvement on GANs
compared with other state-of-the-art methods, especially in
Wasserstein-GAN (WGAN) and its improved version with
gradient penalty (WGAN-GP).

(b)

(c)
(a)

Figure 1: A typical example of the valley dilemma. (a)
(c) depict the trajectories of SGD, Adam, AdaBelief and
HVAdam in both 2D and 3D plots. (b) is a close-up of
the red box area in (a), showing the slow convergence and
zigzagging behavior of Adam, AdaBelief, and SGD. However, HVAdam demonstrates rapid convergence along the
hidden vector direction.

In deep learning, model parameters often change significantly during training, and these changes frequently reverse
direction, especially when the model is getting close to its
optimal performance (near the minimum of the loss function). Adam dynamically adjusts the learning rate according
to the magnitude of the gradients, while SGD incorporates
momentum to smooth the gradient and does not directly
modify the learning rate. AdaBelief (Zhuang et al. 2020),
a variant of Adam, adjusts the learning rate based on the
deviation of the gradient from the moving average. However, these approaches may be problematic in complex landscapes, such as valley-like regions that are quite common
within the loss functions of deep learning models (Zhuang
et al. 2020). In such regions, the true direction of optimization often has a small gradient, making it difficult for traditional optimizers to identify and efficiently optimize in these
directions. Traditional optimizers tend to oscillate along valley sides, where gradients are larger, leading to slow and
inefficient convergence. We refer to this phenomenon as
the Valley Dilemma, which occurs when optimization techniques fail to converge effectively due to the challenging
landscape as shown in Figure 1.

Introduction
Optimizers play a crucial role in machine learning, efficiently minimizing loss and achieving generalization. There
are two main types of state-of-the-art optimizers: Nonadaptive optimizers, for instance, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951), use a global learning rate
for all parameters. In contrast, adaptive optimizers, such as
RMSProp (Graves 2013) and Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014),
use the partial derivative of each parameter to adjust their
learning rates separately. When applied correctly, adaptive
optimizers can significantly accelerate the convergence of
parameters, even in cases where partial derivatives are minimal. These adaptive optimizers are crucial for overcoming
saddle points or navigating regions characterized by small
partial derivatives, which can otherwise hinder the convergence process (Xie et al. 2022).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22623

