The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Nash Equilibrium of Markov Potential Games
with a Shared Constraint via Primal-Dual Optimization
Songtao Feng1 , Michael Dorothy2 , Jie Fu1
1

University of Florida, FL, USA
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, MD, USA
sfeng1@ufl.edu, michael.r.dorothy.civ@army.mil, fujie@ufl.edu
2

Abstract

ered individual cost functions for each agent, which depends
on the state and the action associated with that agent (instead of the joint actions). There is limited work on Markov
games with shared constraints (Jordan, Barakat, and He
2024) where cost functions of the constraints depend on the
joint state and joint action space.
In general, finding NE in MARL turns out to be PPADcomplete (Deng et al. 2022; Jin, Muthukumar, and Sidford 2022), and an alternative goal of finding correlated
equilibrium (CE) or coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE)
has been widely adopted (Liu et al. 2021; Mao and Başar
2022; Song, Mei, and Bai 2022; Jin et al. 2022; Mao et al.
2022; Daskalakis, Golowich, and Zhang 2023; Wang et al.
2023). Finding NE for a special class of Markov games,
called Markov potential games (MPGs), has been studied
in Macua, Zazo, and Zazo (2018); Leonardos et al. (2022);
Zhang, Ren, and Li (2022); Ding et al. (2022); Mao et al.
(2022); Zhang et al. (2024); Maheshwari et al. (2023);
Narasimha et al. (2022); Perolat et al. (2017); Guo et al.
(2024); Zhou et al. (2023). In MPGs, it is assumed that there
exists an underlying potential function that can measure the
change of the expected reward of any player caused by deviating from his own policy. If such a potential function is publicly available, then an NE policy can be simply obtained by
finding the global optimum of the potential function. Even if
the potential function is unknown, such structural assumption on the Markov game model can be beneficial in the algorithm design. Moreover, the MPGs cover a wide range of
mixed cooperative and competitive Markov games, including identical interest Markov games and congestion games.
The concept of constrained MPGs has been recently introduced in Alatur et al. (2024), and they proposed a coordinate accent algorithm for finding an NE. Later Jordan,
Barakat, and He (2024) proposed an independent proximalpolicy algorithm to relax the coordination requirement between agents. A more natural duality approach has been
shown to fail when the strong duality does not hold (Alatur
et al. 2024; Jordan, Barakat, and He 2024). In this work, we
consider the problem of finding NE in MPGs with a shared
constraint, and re-investigate the primal-dual approach. Our
contributions are summarized below.
First, we investigate the Lagrangian function in MPGs
with a shared constraint, and introduce the Slater-type condition to establish the strong duality. Moreover, a sample-

The problem of constrained Markov game has recently attracted interests in the study of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL). The existing literature has focused on safe
MARL problems where safety constraints are imposed for
each agent individually. In this work, we consider Markov potential game (MPG) with a shared constraint, where the cost
function with respect to the constraint depends on states and
joint actions of all agents. We adopt a primal-dual framework
to tackle the problem and establish the Slater condition to
ensure the strong duality. Moreover, we propose our primaldual learning algorithm for learning approximate Nash equilibrium in MPG with shared constraint. Thanks to the novel
design of the dual update, we provide asymptotic convergence on the weighted output policy. Specifically, we prove
that both the value function gap and the constraint
√ violation
of the output policy converge at the rate O(ϵ+1/ T ), where
ϵ is the accuracy level of the primal update, and T is the number of iterations. We further show that the weighted output
policy outperforms the existing uniformly chosen policy.

Introduction
The problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
focuses on analyzing the strategic interactions among multiple players in a shared dynamic environment, where reward and state transitions jointly depend on all players’ actions. The goal of MARL is to find Nash equilibrium (NE),
under which no player can benefit from a unilateral deviation. It has broad applications in practical scenarios, including autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and
Shashua 2016), traffic signal control (K.J., A.N, and Bhatnagar 2014), and market pricing (Kononen and Oja 2004).
Although MARL has been extensively studied, its applicability is limited because in many real-life applications, agents are subject to certain constraints, such as antijamming system where jamming signal is subject to average power constraint (Hanawal, Abdel-Rahman, and Krunz
2016). In those applications, agents aim to maximize their
rewards while ensuring their joint policy satisfies the constraints, which motivates the formulation of constrained
Markov games (Altman and Shwartz 2000). In the existing constrained Markov game literature, most works considCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16577

