The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Welfare-Optimal Serial Dictatorships Have Polynomial Query Complexity
Ioannis Caragiannis1 , Kurt Mehlhorn2,3 , Nidhi Rathi2,3
1
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken
3
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
iannis@cs.au.dk, mehlhorn@mpi-inf.mpg.de, nrathi@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2

Abstract

the simplest algorithm with applications in many varied settings such as one-sided matchings (Filos-Ratsikas, Frederiksen, and Zhang 2014), fair division (Svensson 1999),
and assignment problems (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001);
see Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (1998); Caragiannis et al.
(2016); Krysta et al. (2019a); Roth and Sotomayor (1990)
for other examples where serial dictatorship (or a variation)
is useful.
The simplicity of SD mechanism leads to its computational ease as well, and hence, it is easily comprehensible
for the agents. It is favorable for every agent to choose their
favorite available item on their turn (i.e., be greedy) since
SD never considers any feedback from the agents other than
what item they pick at their turn, thereby making SD a truthful mechanism as well.
It is relevant to note that the choice of the action sequence
is crucial since a sub-optimal action sequence may lead to
inefficiencies, i.e., sub-optimal social welfare (Caragiannis
et al. 2016). For example, consider a scenario where two
items a and b are to be assigned to two agents 1 and 2, under
the constraint that each agent is assigned exactly one item.
Agent 1 values item a at 9 and item b at 1, whereas agent 2
values item a at 10 and item b at 8. Let us execute SD with
both sequences of the two agents. When agent 1 is followed
by agent 2, we obtain an optimal social welfare of 17, while
the reverse sequence yields a (sub-optimal) social welfare
of only 11. Therefore, when applying the SD mechanism,
the agent ordering plays a crucial role towards the quality
of the social welfare achieved in assignment problems. Note
that, uniformly choosing over the two action sequences—
which is the main idea of random serial dictatorship—in the above example still leads to inefficiencies (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1998; Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001;
Filos-Ratsikas, Frederiksen, and Zhang 2014; Krysta et al.
2019b).
There are many real-world scenarios where there is some
kind of first-come first-serve policy at work. For example,
consider a shopping mall during a sale or a fresh fish market
in a city, where whoever arrives early gets the better pick of
the day. Another scenario is when a government wishes to allocate homes to its citizens in a newly-built apartment housing. This housing complex may consist of different kinds
of apartments, where some have balconies, some are eastfacing and get good sunlight, or some have better views.

Serial dictatorship is a simple mechanism for coordinating
agents in solving combinatorial optimization problems according to their preferences. The most representative such
problem is one-sided matching, in which a set of n agents
have values for a set of n items, and the objective is to compute a matching of the agents to the items of maximum total value (a.k.a., social welfare). Following the recent framework of Caragiannis and Rathi (2024), we consider a model
in which the agent-item values are not available upfront but
become known by querying agent sequences. In particular,
when the agents are asked to act in a sequence, they respond
by picking their favorite item that has not been picked by
agents who acted before and reveal their value for it. Can
we compute an agent sequence that induces a social welfareoptimal matching?
We answer this question affirmatively and present an algorithm that uses polynomial number (specifically, O(n5 )
queries). This solves the main open problem stated by Caragiannis and Rathi (2024). Our analysis uses a potential function argument that measures progress towards learning the
underlying edge-weight information. Furthermore, the algorithm has a truthful implementation by adapting the paradigm
of VCG payments.

1

Introduction

In this work, we explore the well-studied problem of finding
maximum-weight matchings in complete bipartite graphs1
through the lens of the serial dictatorship (SD) mechanism.
A representative example of the SD mechanism can be seen
when it is considered as a solution to the house allocation problem (e.g., see Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (1998)),
where a set of houses have to be matched to agents who
have strict preferences for them. The algorithm considers the
agents in a fixed order (or sequence) and assigns the mostpreferred available house to each agent considered. The order in which agents come and pick (i.e., act) an item greedily
is called an action sequence. Serial Dictatorship is arguably
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A common way to think of the problem is to consider one side
of the bipartition representing the n agents and the other side representing the n items, where the weight on an agent-item edge indicates the preference of that agent for the item.

13675

