The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Robot Task Allocation Using Global Games with Negative Feedback: The
Colony Maintenance Problem
Logan E. Beaver
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA USA 23529
lbeaver@odu.edu

Abstract

This work falls broadly in the domain of Multi-Robot
Task Allocation (MRTA). MRTA is one of the most challenging open problems in mutli-robot systems research
(Khamis, Hussein, and Elmogy 2015); despite the great
number of MRTA algorithms, critical components, such as
dynamic task allocation and the use of heterogeneous robots,
present a significant open problem in the literature. This
work considers a single task robot + multiple robots per task
(ST-MR) formulation (Chakraa et al. 2023) of MRTA, where
the robots are dynamically allocated to a task that has its own
time-varying dynamics.
In general, MRTA requires solving a combinatorial optimization problem to assign robots to tasks, and this does not
lend itself to the kind of reactive, robust, and resilient formulation required for dynamic allocation. This is apparent in a
recent MRTA survey article (Chakraa et al. 2023), which estimates that at least 75% of the MRTA literature requires either 1) multiple rounds of coordination between robots or 2)
offline computation of a static strategy. This requires either a
centralized authority to solve a complex mixed-integer optimization problem, or it necessitates multiple rounds of communication until all robots reach a consensus on the task assignment. As a consequence, any change in the system (e.g.,
the addition or removal of robots) requires the assignment to
be re-computed.
While there have been advances in robot allocation for
dynamic systems (Notomista et al. 2019), game-theoretic
approaches make up only about 4% of published solutions
(Chakraa et al. 2023). All but one of these approaches use
game theory to generate coalitions (Martin et al. 2023),
which are then assigned to tasks using traditional integer
optimization-based methods. In fact, only (Kanakia, Touri,
and Correll 2016) uses global games for multi-robot task allocation.
In a global game, robots in the system measure a global
signal (or stimulus) corresponding to a task, e.g., the amount
of energy available in a battery array, or the intensity of
a fire in a fire-fighting task (Kanakia, Touri, and Correll
2016). It has been proven that, under reasonable conditions,
a threshold-based strategy exists and is a Bayesian Nash
Equilibrium (Kanakia, Touri, and Correll 2016; Mahdavifar et al. 2018). This implies that robots simply compare
their measurement of the global signal to an internal threshold, and assign themselves to the task when the threshold

In this article we address the multi-robot task allocation problem, where robots must cooperatively assign themselves to
accomplish a set of tasks. We consider the colony maintenance problem as an example, where a team of robots are
tasked with continuously maintaining the energy supply of a
central colony. We model this as a global game, where each
robot measures the energy level of the colony, and the current number of assigned robots, to determine whether or not
to forage for energy sources. The key to our approach is introducing a negative feedback term into the robots’ utility,
which also eliminates the trivial solution where foraging or
not foraging are strictly dominant strategies. We compare our
approach qualitatively to existing an global games approach,
where a positive positive feedback term admits thresholdbased decision making that encourages many robots to forage. We discuss how positive feedback can lead to a cascading failure when robots are removed from the system, and we
demonstrate the resilience of our approach in simulation.

Introduction
As we continue deploying robots in real outdoor environments, there is a growing interest in using robots for remote
sensing (Naderi et al. 2022), environmental data collection
(Dunbabin and Marques 2012), and ecological monitoring
(Notomista, Pacchierotti, and Giordano 2022). These applications require a robust, resilient, and flexible approach to
long-duration autonomy, and the there has been a significant research effort toward ecologically-inspired robotics
(Egerstedt et al. 2018; Beaver and Malikopoulos 2021) to
deal with the messy uncertainties of real-world deployment.
The focus of this work is to explore a global gamesinspired strategy for the colony maintenance problem, where
robots must periodically perform a maintenance tasks, e.g.,
inspection, charging, and energy harvesting, to maintain an
autonomous colony in a remote location. This work also
considers the presence of a human agent, who may recruit
a subset of the colony’s robots as part of an external nonmaintenance task. This requires the system to efficiently allocate robots to tasks in a way that is robust to the removal of
individuals and can quickly adapt to changes in the uncertain
environment.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13597

