The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Are Key-Phrases All that Reviewers Care About?
A Comprehensive Benchmarking of Reviewer Matchmaking Systems
Sourish Dasgupta* , Harsh Sharma* , Devansh Patel* , Prarthee Desai* , Anil K. Roy
Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information & Communication Technology, India
{sourish dasgupta, 202111002, 202001262, 202001257, anil roy}@daiict.ac.in

Abstract
Reviewer Matchmaking (RM) is a pivotal process in academic
publishing that aligns manuscripts with appropriate reviewers
based on their expertise and prior publications. The demand
for an automated RM system has escalated with the significant
surge in submissions over the past decade. State-of-the-art
(SOTA) RM models are document-representation-based (DRRM) and match the manuscript and reviewer’s past publication
using a similarity method defined on a high-dimensional vector
space. However, they are far from accurate despite their largescale usage. In this paper, we establish that conventional RM
evaluation measures are unreliable and instead emphasize that
standard correlation measures are adequate. For the first time,
we compare the performance of six SOTA DR-RM models
with those of fourteen SOTA Key-phrase Extraction-based
RM (KPE-RM) models - an alternate unexplored approach.
We observe that KPE-RM models show comparable results in
many cases, with the new best model being PatternRank-RM a KPE-RM model beating the best DR-RM model SPECTER2RM (Pearson: 0.004+, Spearman: 0.006+, Kendall: 0.043+).
We conclude that KPE-RM models must be contextualized to
the RM task and cannot be used as plug-n-play.

1

Introduction

Academic journals and conferences are crucial platforms for
researchers to share their work and receive expert feedback.
The process of optimally assigning appropriate manuscripts
to reviewers based on the reviewers’ area of interest, expertise, and availability such that every manuscript is assigned the minimum required reviewer and, at the same time,
no reviewer is overburdened by more than the maximum
manuscripts is called Reviewer Allocation (RA) (Stelmakh,
Shah, and Singh 2019; Cousins, Payan, and Zick 2023; Aziz,
Micha, and Shah 2023). A necessary step for RA is Reviewer
Matchmaking (RM), also known as paper-reviewer matching, where a set of ”most suitable” reviewers are matched,
thereby providing a score to every manuscript-reviewer pair.
Need for accurate RM systems. There has been a significant surge in the number of manuscript submissions received
in the past decade, rendering the manually curated, careful
RM process unrealistic. Even with a bidding system, the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23743

sheer volume hinders reviewers from thoroughly evaluating
a long list of manuscripts before deciding on a bid (Zhang
et al. 2023). This has emphasized the need for an automated
RM system. Ideally, this score should correlate with the
reviewers’ confidence scores during reviewing, failing which
the RM model stands unreliable. However, there is much
scope for improvement in RM systems. A study on selected
papers of NeurIPS 2014 shows that there is no correlation
between the quality scores given by the reviewers to accepted
papers and the actual citation-impact of those papers (Cortes
and Lawrence 2021). Besides the inherent subjectivity, such
situations are also due to sub-optimal RM.
Document Representation (DR) based RM. Most venues
use DR-based RM models such as the Toronto Paper Matching System (Charlin and Zemel 2013), ACL Reviewer (ACLorg 2022), and OpenReview (OpenReview-org 2022). These
models are based on document embedding-based matchmaking of manuscripts and the reviewer’s past publications. The
central objective is to represent various arguments (i.e., the
research question and associated claims and justifications)
within a manuscript and map that to related arguments made
in the reviewers’ past publications.
Key Phrase Extraction (KPE) based RM. As an alternative approach to existing DR-based RM models, we investigate for the first time the efficacy of Key-Phrase Extraction
(KPE) models for the RM task. The motivation behind analyzing KPE-based RM was two-fold. First, DR-based models
suffer from representational underfitting because it may include content that is either peripheral or generic to a specific
track. Secondly, KPE models have shown significant success
in downstream NLP tasks such as summarisation (Glazkova
and Morozov 2023) and document clustering (Li and Daoutis
2021). We can design KPE-based RM models using KPE
models to extract the top-k keyphrases from the manuscripts
and the reviewers’ past publications and then apply a suitable
similarity algorithm to the two sets of keyphrases. We study
fourteen SOTA KPE models of architectural designs that are
based on deep neural networks (seven models), graph structures (four models), and statistical approaches (three models).
For the first time, we compare KPE-RM models with six
SOTA DR-based RM models (Table 1; Appendix).
Observations. In this paper, we first show the inadequacy
of existing RM evaluation frameworks and associated measures. More specifically, we argue that the conventional

