The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FaceA-Net: Facial Attribute-Driven ID Preserving Image Generation Network
Jiayu Wang* 1,2 , Yue Yu* 1,2 , Jingjing Chen1,2† , Qi Dai3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{jywang23, yuy24}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chenjingjing, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn,
qid@microsoft.com
Abstract

Recent advances in diffusion-based generative models have
demonstrated superior performance in subject-driven image
generation. Identity (ID) preserving image generation, as a
subtask of subject-driven image generation, aims to generate
customized images for specific human identity and has broad
application potential. However, this task remains challenging
due to the requirement for high ID fidelity and precise detail preservation. Additionally, generating high-quality context presents another challenge, as existing methods struggle
to achieve both high ID fidelity and satisfactory context simultaneously. To address the issues of insufficient ID fidelity,
we introduce a simple yet effective test-time fine-tuning approach. Specifically, we propose an attribute-driven training
method that establishes global-level and local-level tasks to
learn the global face feature and fine-grained attribute features, respectively. Furthermore, we introduce a novel IDcontext decoupling framework that decouples image context
generation from human ID generation, ensuring the quality
of contextual content as well as facilitating the learning of
ID information. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method and showcase
its capabilities across various applications.

Figure 1: Existing methods struggle to achieve both high ID
fidelity and context quality, possibly resulting in poorly rendered contextual content or compromised ID fidelity.

the emergence of notable works like Photo Maker (Li et al.
2023b) and InstantID (Wang et al. 2024a).
Compared to subject-driven image generation, IDpreserving image generation is more challenging. This challenge arises from the complexity and uniqueness of human
facial features, which are essential for recognizing specific
identity yet difficult for models to learn. The human face
contains key ID features such as the details of facial attributes, face proportion, and skin texture. When observing
an image of a person, even subtle differences can distinguish
between different human IDs. Hence, ID-preserving image
generation requires considerably high ID fidelity in generated images. Existing methods for generating customized
images of specific human IDs can be divided into two categories according to the inference approach. The first type
of methods (Ruiz et al. 2023; Gal et al. 2022; Han et al.
2023) requires test-time fine-tuning for a new human ID.
These methods preserve the knowledge of the given ID by
fine-tuning the model’s weights or special tokens associated
with that ID. The second type (Ye et al. 2023; Li, Li, and
Hoi 2024; Li et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2024a) does not need
test-time fine-tuning, enabling zero-shot and instant generation with one or several images of a specific human ID as
input. These methods typically incorporate new modules or
adapters and train these components on large-scale datasets.
Although existing methods enable generating acceptable
images for given human IDs, they primarily have the following limitations: (1) Existing methods still suffer from insufficient ID fidelity. These methods primarily rely on the
target human ID’s global facial features for customized image generation. However, they overlook the fine-grained fea-

Introduction
Subject-driven text-to-image generation aims to generate
images for a given subject conditioned on textual prompts,
which has received widespread attention in recent years.
Methods based on diffusion models, such as Textual Inversion (Gal et al. 2022), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al. 2023), IPAdapter (Ye et al. 2023) and BLIP-Diffusion (Li, Li, and Hoi
2024), demonstrated impressive performance in this task.
These works are capable of producing personalized images
for a specific subject in various poses, styles and scenes. IDpreserving image generation represents a specialized task
within this domain, particularly focusing on generating customized images for human identity (ID). The synthesis of
customized images for human characters has diverse applications, including creating portraits, virtual try-on and animation generation. Therefore, ID-preserving image generation has also attracted considerable interests, leading to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7736

