The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Consistent Query Answering over Existential Rules with Open and Closed
Predicates
Lorenzo Marconi, Riccardo Rosati
DIAG, Sapienza University of Rome
{marconi,rosati}@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

a kind of reasoning. More recently, the distinction between
open and closed predicates has also been considered for
ontology-mediated query answering, both when the intensional knowledge is expressed in some DL (Lutz, Seylan,
and Wolter 2013, 2019; Ahmetaj, Ortiz, and Simkus 2020;
Cauli, Ortiz, and Piterman 2021) or in some class of existential rules (Bienvenu and Bourhis 2019). In (Benedikt
et al. 2016), closed and open predicates take the form of visible and invisible relations, respectively, and the end user
can pose both positive and negative queries over such a data
source. In the subsequent article (Benedikt et al. 2021), the
authors established important complexity results for query
answering in this scenario.
In a framework with open and closed predicates, inconsistencies may arise when a KB consisting of a database coupled with logical rules allows one to infer new knowledge
regarding closed predicates (which, by definition, should not
occur). In the current literature on this topic, however, it remains unclear how to treat such inconsistencies, in particular for the task of query answering. Querying databases and
knowledge bases in an inconsistency-tolerant way is known
as Consistent Query Answering (CQA) (Arenas, Bertossi,
and Chomicki 1999). The central notion in the CQA framework is the one of repair. Given a database D possibly inconsistent with a given set of logical rules Σ, a repair is a
new, consistent database that is “as close as possible” to D
and consistent with Σ. Generally, a database can have multiple repairs. CQA in its original form addresses the following
question: given a query q, what are the answers that hold true
across all repairs of the database?
Various types of repairs and semantics of query answering have been proposed,1 depending on how the above concepts of “closeness” and “consistency” are defined. A notable notion of repair–which is the one we refer to in this
paper–defines it as an inclusion-maximal subset of the original database that conforms to the given rules. CQA for this
kind of repair was deeply investigated in the closed scenario,
see e.g. (Chomicki and Marcinkowski 2005; Afrati and Kolaitis 2009; ten Cate, Fontaine, and Kolaitis 2012). The open
case has also been extensively studied, in particular in the
contexts of DLs, e.g. (Rosati 2011; Bienvenu 2012; Bienvenu, Bourgaux, and Goasdoué 2019), and existential rules,

We study Consistent Query Answering (CQA) over knowledge bases with existential rules. Specifically, we propose
a novel framework for CQA that combines previous approaches, allowing for the simultaneous presence of both
open and closed predicates, i.e. predicates interpreted under
open- and closed-world assumption, respectively. We establish the data complexity of answering unions of conjunctive
queries in such a new framework under the so-called AR semantics and for different classes of existential rules. We also
provide new complexity results for the standard (i.e. noninconsistency tolerant) query answering in the presence of
both open and closed predicates. Our results show that, for
certain classes of rules, the complexity of CQA matches that
of non-inconsistency-tolerant query answering.

1

Introduction

In modern data systems and knowledge bases (KBs), it
is common to encounter situations where the information
to be represented is complete, and others handling incomplete or extensible knowledge. In logical KR frameworks,
this distinction is often modeled by adopting the so-called
closed-world assumption (CWA) or open-world assumption
(OWA), respectively. Under CWA, the absence of a certain
data implies that it is false. Conversely, under OWA one
treats missing information as “unknown”, thus accommodating incomplete knowledge.
Real-life applications, however, often require managing
partially complete knowledge. This may occur both when
some data is actually not available (or must remain undisclosed, as in (Benedikt et al. 2016)) or when, by design
choice, additional knowledge can be inferred from an underlying, complete dataset. This is the scenario that we consider in the current paper, and it is implemented by specifying which predicates used for modeling a given domain of
interest are interpreted in a “closed” (complete) or “open”
(incomplete) way. In the literature on Description Logics
(DLs), a proposal for integrating OWA and CWA was realized by using the so-called DBoxes (Seylan, Franconi,
and de Bruijn 2009; Franconi, Ibáñez-Garcı́a, and Seylan
2011), i.e. sets of assertions involving closed predicates that,
when coupled with a DL TBox, allow one to perform such
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

15083

We refer the reader to (Bertossi 2019) for a recent review.

