The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Functional Connectomes of Neural Networks
Tananun Songdechakraiwut, Yutong Wu
Department of Computer Science, Duke University
t.song@duke.edu, mason.wu@duke.edu

Abstract

networks have predesigned architectures with preconfigured
weights connecting neurons, analogous to how physically
connected brain regions with white matter fibers provide
structural information measured by diffusion MRI. Similarly, functional connections between distant neurons resemble how functional MRI measures functional connectivity between brain regions that may not have direct neuroanatomical connections. These connections in the brain
give rise to coordinated activity patterns crucial for cognitive
processes (Honey et al. 2009). Given that neural networks
are simplified artificial versions of brain functions, it stands
to reason that insights from the functional connectome could
be leveraged to enhance our understanding, interpretability,
and analysis of these networks, potentially leading to the development of more transparent and efficient models.
However, analyzing functional connectomes is inherently
challenging due to the need to extract subtle topological patterns from noisy, complete graphs. Therefore, typical workflows apply a threshold to obtain a sparser graph with a
clearer structure before applying techniques from graph theory (Bullmore and Sporns 2009). Graph theory has played
a crucial role in functional connectome research; however,
prior analyses utilizing graph theory have primarily focused
on pairwise dyadic relationships, often at a fixed spatial
threshold. This approach, centered on dyads, limits the neural structures and functions that graph theory can investigate.
Given that a neural network processes information not only
based on local neurons of a subnetwork but also across the
entire network, from input to output layers, a more comprehensive understanding requires a shift in perspective–
from pairwise interactions to capturing higher-order relations (topology) across the full range of spatial resolutions.
Persistent homology (Edelsbrunner and Harer 2022), an
algebraic topology technique, has emerged as a promising tool for understanding and quantifying the topology of
the human brain (Sizemore et al. 2018; Songdechakraiwut,
Shen, and Chung 2021). Recently, there have been increasing attempts to apply persistent homology to study the interpretability of deep learning. These studies suggest that
persistent homology can extract high-order topological information to interpret neural networks, but challenges remain. In particular, current methods often focus solely on
the network’s structural information, without incorporating
data-driven tasks (Rieck et al. 2019; Watanabe and Yamana

The human brain is a complex system, and understanding
its mechanisms has been a long-standing challenge in neuroscience. The study of the functional connectome, which
maps the functional connections between different brain regions, has provided valuable insights through various advanced analysis techniques developed over the years. Similarly, neural networks, inspired by the brain’s architecture,
have achieved notable success in diverse applications but are
often noted for their lack of interpretability. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach that bridges neural networks
and human brain functions by leveraging brain-inspired techniques. Our approach, grounded in the insights from the functional connectome, offers scalable ways to characterize topology of large neural networks using stable statistical and machine learning techniques. Our empirical analysis demonstrates its capability to enhance the interpretability of neural
networks, providing a deeper understanding of their underlying mechanisms.

Code — https://github.com/masonwu11/topo-fcnn
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15279

1

Introduction

The human brain is an incredibly complex system, and understanding its intricate workings has been a long-standing
challenge in neuroscience. One well-established approach to
gaining deeper insights into the brain’s underlying mechanisms is through the study of the functional connectome,
which maps the functional connections between regions of
brain networks and reflects the brain’s dynamic network of
interactions (Bullmore and Sporns 2009). In recent decades,
successful findings have emerged from this field, thanks to
the development of a wide array of analysis techniques.
Artificial neural networks, inspired by the architecture
and functioning of the human brain, have achieved remarkable success in applications ranging from image recognition
(He et al. 2016) to natural language processing (Vaswani
et al. 2017). However, despite these successes, neural networks are often considered black box models due to their
lack of interpretability and the difficulty in understanding the
underlying mechanisms driving their performance. Neural
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20558

