The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Risk-averse Total-reward MDPs with ERM and EVaR
Xihong Su1 , Marek Petrik1 , Julien Grand-Clément2
1

University of New Hampshire, 33 Academic Way, Durham, NH, 03824 USA
2
HEC Paris, 1 Rue de la Libération, Jouy-en-Josas, 78350 France
xihong.su@unh.edu, mpetrik@cs.unh.edu, grand-clement@hec.fr

Abstract
Optimizing risk-averse objectives in discounted MDPs is challenging because most models do not admit direct dynamic programming equations and require complex history-dependent
policies. In this paper, we show that the risk-averse total reward criterion, under the Entropic Risk Measure (ERM) and
Entropic Value at Risk (EVaR) risk measures, can be optimized by a stationary policy, making it simple to analyze,
interpret, and deploy. We propose exponential value iteration,
policy iteration, and linear programming to compute optimal
policies. Compared with prior work, our results only require
the relatively mild condition of transient MDPs and allow for
both positive and negative rewards. Our results indicate that
the total reward criterion may be preferable to the discounted
criterion in a broad range of risk-averse reinforcement learning
domains.

1

Introduction

Risk-averse Markov decision processes (MDP) (Puterman
2005) that use monetary risk measures as their objective have
been gaining in popularity in recent years (Kastner, Erdogdu,
and Farahmand 2023; Marthe, Garivier, and Vernade 2023;
Lam et al. 2022; Li, Zhong, and Brandeau 2022; Bäuerle and
Glauner 2022; Hau, Petrik, and Ghavamzadeh 2023; Hau
et al. 2023; Su, Petrik, and Grand-Clément 2024a,b). Riskaverse objectives, such as Value at Risk (VaR), Conditional
Value at Risk (CVaR), Entropic Risk Measure (ERM), or
Entropic Value at Risk (EVaR), penalize the variability of
returns (Follmer and Schied 2016). As a result, these risk
measures yield policies with stronger guarantees on the probability of catastrophic losses, which is important in domains
like healthcare or finance.
In this paper, we target the total reward criterion
(TRC) (Kallenberg 2021; Puterman 2005) instead of the
common discounted criterion. TRC also assumes an infinite horizon but does not discount future rewards. To control
for infinite returns, we assume that the MDP is transient,
i.e. that there is a positive probability that the process terminates after a finite number of steps, an assumption commonly
used in the TRC literature (Filar and Vrieze 2012). We consider the TRC with both positive and negative rewards. When
the rewards are non-positive, the TRC is equivalent to the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20646

stochastic shortest path problem, and when they are nonnegative, it is equivalent to the stochastic longest path (Dann,
Wei, and Zimmert 2023).
Two reasons motivate our departure from discounted objectives in risk-averse MDPs. First, considering risk affects
discounted objectives significantly. It is common to use discounted objectives because they admit optimal stationary
policies and value functions that can be computed using
dynamic programs. However, most risk-averse discount objectives, such as VaR, CVaR, or EVaR, require that optimal
policies are history-dependent (Bäuerle and Ott 2011; Hau
et al. 2023; Hau, Petrik, and Ghavamzadeh 2023) and do not
admit standard dynamic programming optimality equations.
Second, TRC captures the concept of stochastic termination, which is common in reinforcement learning (Sutton
and Barto 2018). In risk-neutral objectives, discounting can
serve well to model the probability of termination because
it guarantees the same optimal policies (Puterman 2005; Su
and Petrik 2023). However, as we show in this work, no
such correspondence exists with risk-averse objectives, and
the difference between them may be arbitrarily significant.
Modeling stochastic termination using a discount factor in
risk-averse objectives is inappropriate and leads to dramatically different optimal policies.
As our main contribution, we show that the risk-averse
TRC with ERM and EVaR risk measures admit optimal
stationary policies and optimal value functions in transient
MDPs. We also show that the optimal value function satisfies dynamic programming equations and can be computed
with exponential value iteration, policy iteration, or linear
programming algorithms. These algorithms are simple and
closely resemble the algorithms for solving MDPs.
Our results indicate that EVaR is a particularly interesting
risk measure in reinforcement learning. ERM and the closely
related exponential utility functions have been popular in
sequential decision-making problems because they admit dynamic programming decompositions (Patek and Bertsekas
1999; de Freitas, Freire, and Delgado 2020; Smith and Chapman 2023; Denardo and Rothblum 1979; Hau, Petrik, and
Ghavamzadeh 2023; Hau et al. 2023). Unfortunately, ERM is
difficult to interpret; it is scale-dependent; and it is incomparable with popular risk measures like VaR and CVaR. Because
EVaR reduces to an optimization over ERM, it preserves
most of the computational advantages of ERM, and since

