The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BLADE: Enhancing Black-Box Large Language Models with Small
Domain-Specific Models
Haitao LI1,2 Qingyao AI1,2 * , Jia CHEN3 , Qian DONG1,2 , Zhijing WU4 , Yiqun LIU1,2†
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute for Internet Judiciary, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Xiaohongshu Inc
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
liht22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT and GPT-4
are versatile and capable of addressing open-domain questionanswering(QA) tasks effectively. However, general LLMs,
which are developed on open-domain data, may lack the
domain-specific knowledge essential for tasks in vertical domains, such as legal, medical, etc. To address this issue, previous approaches either conduct continuous pre-training with
domain-specific data or employ retrieval augmentation to support general LLMs in handling QA tasks. Unfortunately, these
strategies are either cost-intensive or unreliable in practical
applications. To this end, we present a novel framework named
BLADE, which enhances Black-box LArge language models
with small Domain-spEcific models. BLADE consists of a
black-box LLM and a small domain-specific LM. The small
LM preserves domain-specific knowledge and offers specialized insights, while the general LLM contributes robust language comprehension and reasoning capabilities. Specifically,
our method involves three steps: 1) pre-training the small LM
with domain-specific data, 2) fine-tuning this model using
knowledge instruction data, and 3) joint Bayesian optimization of the general LLM and the small LM. In our experiments,
we verify the effectiveness of BLADE on diverse LLMs and
datasets across different domains. This shows the potential of
BLADE as an effective and cost-efficient solution in adapting
general LLMs for vertical domains.

Code — https://github.com/CSHaitao/BLADE

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have attracted considerable attention in both academia and industry (OpenAI
2023; Zeng et al. 2022). These models, driven by expansive
neural networks and trained on extensive data sets, exhibit
remarkable ability in comprehending and generating natural language. The wide application of LLMs trained with
open-domain data, denoted in this paper as General LLMs,
has profoundly impacted various aspects of daily life and
professional environments.
* Corresponding authors.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24422

Despite their superior capabilities, large language models often face challenges in addressing QA tasks of vertical domains (e.g., medicine, legal) that require access to a
large amount of domain knowledge (Chalkidis 2023; Cheng,
Huang, and Wei 2023). How to adapt general LLMs for
domain-specific applications has become an important problem for the research community (Arefeen, Debnath, and
Chakradhar 2023).
Existing methods for adapting general LLMs to specific
domains can be broadly divided into two main categories: domain data continuous pre-training and retrieval augmentation.
Continuous pre-training involves infusing domain knowledge
into general LLMs by training them on a domain-specific
corpus (Aharoni and Goldberg 2020; Sachidananda, Kessler,
and Lai 2021). While straightforward, this paradigm requires
direct access to large-scale domain data and LLM parameters,
which are not available in many conditions. Also, even with
access to general LLM parameters and sufficient domainspecific data, directly tuning a general LLM (such as GPT-4)
can be prohibitively expensive and poses a risk of overfitting. Aware of these challenges, researchers propose retrieval
augmentation as a new paradigm, aiming to enhance general
LLMs by leveraging their in-context learning ability (Shi et al.
2023). It involves first using a text retriever to find relevant
content from the domain corpus, which is then incorporated
into the LLM’s input to aid in understanding domain-specific
knowledge. However, there may exist two problems in this
paradigm. For example, retrievers primarily rely on exact
matches or semantic similarity, lacking inferential capabilities. This limitation means they may not always retrieve
documents that fully address specific queries. Additionally,
retrievers can only provide content that is already available
in the corpus and lack the ability to integrate and summarize
different information.
When humans face questions in new domains, besides
taking classes (i.e., continuous pre-training) or conducting
online searches via platforms like Google (i.e., retrieval augmentation), a more direct and practical approach is to seek
advice from experts possessing domain-specific knowledge.
With this idea in mind, we present BLADE, a novel paradigm
where the general LLM is viewed as a black box and the small
domain-specific LM is added as a tuneable module. BLADE
leverages the superior language comprehension and logical

