The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bi-Directional Multi-Scale Graph Dataset Condensation via
Information Bottleneck
Xingcheng Fu1, 2, * † , Yisen Gao3, * , Beining Yang5 , Yuxuan Wu3 , Haodong Qian1, 2 ,
Qingyun Sun4 , Xianxian Li1, 2
2

1
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
5
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
{fuxc, qianhaodong, lixx}@gxnu.edu.cn {yisengao, buaawyx, sunqy}@buaa.edu.cn, B.Yang-32@sms.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Dataset condensation has significantly improved model training efficiency, but its application on devices with different computing power brings new requirements for different
data sizes. Thus, condensing multiple scale graphs simultaneously is the core of achieving efficient training in different on-device scenarios. Existing efficient works for multiscale graph dataset condensation mainly perform efficient
approximate computation in scale order (large-to-small or
small-to-large scales). However, for non-Euclidean structures
of sparse graph data, these two commonly used paradigms
for multi-scale graph dataset condensation have serious scaling down degradation and scaling up collapse problems of
a graph. The main bottleneck of the above paradigms is
whether the effective information of the original graph is fully
preserved when consenting to the primary sub-scale (the first
of multiple scales), which determines the condensation effect
and consistency of all scales. In this paper, we proposed a
novel GNN-centric Bi-directional Multi-Scale Graph Dataset
Condensation (BiMSGC) framework, to explore unifying
paradigms by operating on both large-to-small and small-tolarge for multi-scale graph condensation. Based on the mutual information theory, we estimate an optimal “meso-scale”
to obtain the minimum necessary dense graph preserving the
maximum utility information of the original graph, and then
we achieve stable and consistent “bi-directional” condensation learning by optimizing graph eigenbasis matching with
information bottleneck on other scales. Encouraging empirical results on several datasets demonstrates the significant
superiority of the proposed framework in graph condensation
at different scales.

1

Figure 1: Comparison of existing paradigms

training efficiency by condensing graph datasets into various small yet informative graphs. These condensed graphs
can accommodate the diverse computational needs of lowresource, on-device downstream users.
However, dataset condensation typically requires a computationally intensive learning-based process, and the multisize property exacerbates the challenge in balancing efficiency and effectiveness. Based on the recent studies(He
et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2024), there can be summarized
three intuitive paradigms (illustrated in the Fig.1): (1) Recondensation, which involves selecting an efficient and effective dataset condensation method to redistribute the data
for each scale; (2) Large-to-Small, where the original dataset
is condensed into multiple size/scales in one process by first
creating a relatively large subset and then further condensing
it step by step from large to small; and (3) Small-to-Large,
which starts with the creation of smaller subsets that are
then iteratively expanded to larger scales, preserving essential patterns at each stage. These paradigms offer different
strategies for achieving efficient dataset condensation.

Introduction

With the rapid expansion of applications like social media, e-commerce, and recommendation systems on mobile
and edge devices, the core challenge is efficiently training
on graph data at an increasingly large scale. The multisize dataset condensation approach is designed to enhance
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16674

