The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EvdCLIP: Improving Vision-Language Retrieval with Entity Visual Descriptions
from Large Language Models
GuangHao Meng1,2 , Sunan He6 , Jinpeng Wang1 , Tao Dai4 , Letian Zhang1 , Jieming Zhu5 ,
Qing Li2 , Gang Wang5 , Rui Zhang3 B , Yong Jiang1,2 B *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
School of Computer Science & Tech, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
6
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{menggh22, wjp20, zlt23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, daitao.edu@gmail.com, liq@pcl.ac.cn
jieming.zhu@huawei.com, 3 rayteam@yeah.net, jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
CLIP

Abstract

Pos : A boy in … from a camp of tents.
Neg1 : A woman in a blue … in a village.
Neg2 : A woman in a blue … in a beach.

Vision-language retrieval (VLR) has attracted significant attention in both academia and industry, which involves using
text (or images) as queries to retrieve corresponding images
(or text). However, existing methods often neglect the rich visual semantics knowledge of entities, thus leading to incorrect
retrieval results. To address this problem, we propose the Entity Visual Description enhanced CLIP (EvdCLIP), designed
to leverage the visual knowledge of entities to enrich queries.
Specifically, since humans recognize entities through visual
cues, we employ a large language model (LLM) to generate
Entity Visual Descriptions (EVDs) as alignment cues to complement textual data. These EVDs are then integrated into raw
queries to create visually-rich, EVD-enhanced queries. Furthermore, recognizing that EVD-enhanced queries may introduce noise or low-quality expansions, we develop a novel,
trainable EVD-aware Rewriter (EaRW) for vision-language
retrieval tasks. EaRW utilizes EVD knowledge and the generative capabilities of the language model to effectively rewrite
queries. With our specialized training strategy, EaRW can
generate high-quality and low-noise EVD-enhanced queries.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on imagetext retrieval benchmarks validate the superiority of EvdCLIP
on vision-language retrieval tasks.

WordNetCLIP
Pos
⊙ Neg1 +
Neg2

camp of tents: A form of outdoor
recreation in which people …
village: A community of people…

Pos
Neg1 +
Neg2

Prompt：What are useful features
for distinguishing … in a photo?
camp of tents: a rainfly or tarp…
village: small, clustered house …

Pos : 0.1508
Neg1: 0.1543
Neg2: 0.0964
Pos : 0.1439
Neg1: 0.1470
Neg2: 0.0933

EvdCLIP

Image

Text

Pos : 0.1633
Neg1: 0.1542
Neg2: 0.1014

Score

Figure 1: Illustration of entity visual descriptions (EVD) enhanced framework. The CLIP and WordNetCLIP which introduces the concept of entities struggle to distinguish between “camping of tents” and “village”, leading to incorrect
retrieval results. Our EvdCLIP leverages the EVD generated
by LLMs to improve cross-modal retrieval performance.
visual information in these descriptions and that visual descriptions are crucial to distinguish visually similar entities.
Let’s start by analyzing how humans recognize entities
in an image. Humans are able to easily describe the visual
features of entities using language and leverage these visual
descriptions to enhance perception, even for unfamiliar entities. Our key insights are: (1) Visual descriptions offer textual additional cues that improve image-text alignment. (2)
Descriptions highlight critical details and discriminative information, aiding in entity recognition. (3) They encompass
generic features, boosting the model’s transferability.
However, existing methods struggle to obtain EVD to offer useful cues in multi-modal retrieval. Manually creating
these descriptions is costly and impractical given the vast
number of concepts in our world. Recently, with the advance
in Large Language Models (LLMs), several works utilize the
LLMs to generate training samples or auxiliary information
for specific tasks (Touvron et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2023). The large-scale corpus used to train these LLMs
contains a substantial amount of semantic knowledge, mak-

Introduction
Vision-language retrieval (VLR) has attracted extensive research and industrial interest due to its significant research
and practical value. It usually takes descriptive texts as
queries and retrieves corresponding images, or vice versa.
Existing methods heavily rely on the alignment between
visual and textual representations. As shown in Figure 1,
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) successfully differentiates between “beach” and “camp of tents” but confuses “camp of
tents” with “village”, leading to incorrect retrievals. Even
with descriptions from WordNet (Kilgarriff 2000), it struggles to distinguish these concepts. We argue that the lack of
* B Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6126

