The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLM-RG4: Flexible and Factual Radiology Report Generation Across Diverse
Input Contexts
Zhuhao Wang1 , Yihua Sun1 , Zihan Li1 , Xuan Yang1 , Fang Chen2 , Hongen Liao1,2 *
1

2

School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
School of Biomedical Engineering, and Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
wangzhuh23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liao@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Drafting radiology reports is a complex task requiring flexibility, where radiologists tail content to available information and particular clinical demands. However, most current
radiology report generation (RRG) models are constrained
to a fixed task paradigm, such as predicting the full “finding” section from a single image, inherently involving a mismatch between inputs and outputs. The trained models lack
the flexibility for diverse inputs and could generate harmful, input-agnostic hallucinations. To bridge the gap between
current RRG models and the clinical demands in practice,
we first develop a data generation pipeline to create a new
MIMIC-RG4 dataset, which considers four common radiology report drafting scenarios and has perfectly corresponded
input and output. Secondly, we propose a novel large language model (LLM) based RRG framework, namely LLMRG4, which utilizes LLM’s flexible instruction-following capabilities and extensive general knowledge. We further develop an adaptive token fusion module that offers flexibility
to handle diverse scenarios with different input combinations,
while minimizing the additional computational burden associated with increased input volumes. Besides, we propose a
token-level loss weighting strategy to direct the model’s attention towards positive and uncertain descriptions. Experimental results demonstrate that LLM-RG4 achieves stateof-the-art performance in both clinical efficiency and natural
language generation on the MIMIC-RG4 and MIMIC-CXR
datasets. We quantitatively demonstrate that our model has
minimal input-agnostic hallucinations, whereas current opensource models commonly suffer from this problem.

Figure 1: (a) Mismatch between image and report in typical RRG model. Comparisons, procedures, communication
and views are uninferable. (b) A flexible and factual RRG
paradigm, which emphasizes the flexibility of input and the
alignment between input and output.

Code — https://github.com/zh-Wang-Med/LLM-RG4
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12001

2024). However, certain information in the report is uninferable within a single image, resulting in a mismatch between
the input and the output, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Concretely, Nguyen et al. (2023) classify the information in a
report into several key components: positive mentions, negative mentions, prior comparisons, prior procedures, image
views, doctor communications, and medical recommendations. Notably, elements such as comparisons, procedures,
communication and views are uninferable within a single
image. Current paradigm amplifies model hallucination, reduces model performance, and lowers clinical acceptance.
In response to this phenomenon, several studies have
sought to clean and reconstruct the report content. For instance, Ramesh, Chi, and Rajpurkar (2022) introduced the
GILBERT model, which utilizes token-by-token classifica-

Introduction
The automatic generation of textual descriptions for radiographs has the potential to reduce clinicians’ workload, enhance the efficiency of image interpretation, and support informed treatment decisions. Numerous works have concentrated on generating the comprehensive findings section of
the report from a single radiology image (Li et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2020, 2021; Wang et al. 2022, 2023a; Yan et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8250

