The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IBAS:Imperceptible Backdoor Attacks in Split Learning with Limited Information
Peng Xi, Shaoliang Peng* , Wenjuan Tang
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
xipeng@hnu.edu.cn, wenjuantang@hnu.edu.cn, slpeng@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract

which then completes more complex subsequent computations. Since the server cannot directly access the raw data
and client model (Abuadbba et al. 2020), split learning is
considered a secure and reliable computational method.
However, the server controls the direction of client optimization, and split learning may encounter model security
issues. Backdoor attacks are a typical model security problem. Backdoor attacks cause the model to output a specified
label for data containing a specific identifier, while leaving
normal data unaffected. Typically, backdoor attacks are carried out by poisoning the training data, thereby embedding
a backdoor into the model (Li et al. 2024). However, in split
learning, the server does not have access to the training data.
As a result, the server cannot implement a backdoor attack
by poisoning the training data in split learning. In 2023, Tajalli (Tajalli, Ersoy, and Picek 2023) was the first to propose
the possibility of injecting a backdoor on the server side in
split learning. Although Tajalli proposed two attack framworks to demonstrate split learning is susceptible to backdoor attacks, the experimental results demonstrated that the
impact of backdoor attacks in split learning is significantly
mitigated, indicating a relatively weak effect.
Inspired by the above work, we propose a question: Is
there a type of backdoor attack that can adversely affect the
functionality or performance of a split learning model? To
answer this question, we analyze two major challenges that
backdoor attacks in split learning face. Challenge 1: The simultaneous optimization of both the primary task and the
backdoor task poses a significant challenge for the server
during an attack in split learning scenarios. Challenge 2: The
server needs to comprehend the output characteristics of the
trigger after it passes through the client model to ensure the
alignment between the trigger and the backdoor task.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
novel attack strategy that introduces a backdoor task during model training by modifying intermediate activations.
First, we train a parrot model to learn the client model’s feature space. The poisoned data processed by the parrot model
produces outputs that closely approximate those of the client
model. We then replace the intermediate activations output
by the client with the poisoned intermediate activations generated by the parrot model. Simultaneously, we change the
labels corresponding to these modified intermediate activations to the target labels. During loss calculation, the un-

Split learning, as a distributed learning framework, effectively
addresses the issue of limited computing resources. However,
despite achieving a separation of data and computation, recent studies have pointed out that this framework still faces
two major security challenges: privacy leakage and model security. Most current research focuses on the problem of privacy leakage, emphasizing how to prevent malicious servers
from recovering or inferring the client’s private data. However, the issue of model security in split learning has not
received sufficient attention. This paper reveals the vulnerability of split learning to backdoor attacks. Since split learning cannot access client data directly, it can only guide the
client model to incorporate backdoors through gradients. To
address this issue, we design an attack framework that modifies intermediate activations to influence the gradients. We
designed a parrot model that learns the client’s feature space,
enabling the server to obtain the intermediate activations of
poisoned data. During the forward pass, some of the intermediate activations and labels transmitted from the client to
the server are replaced with poisoned activations and target labels. This replacement method effectively integrates the
backdoor task into the model while partially retaining the
main task. This approach ensures that the main task is preserved while seamlessly embedding the backdoor task. Our
attack framework minimizes reliance on client knowledge
and ensures that the attack process remains undetectable by
the client. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrated
high attack success rates using triggers such as BadNet, SIG,
Blended, and WaNet, while minimizing the impact on the
main task.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence has demonstrated its potential to solve
complex problems in various fields, such as automatic driving (Tan et al. 2024) and pathological diagnosis (Moor et al.
2023). However, these applications typically require vast
amounts of data and computational resources. Split learning has been proposed to address data privacy and resource
constraints (Poirot et al. 2019). In the split learning framework, a neural network is divided into client and server parts.
The client is responsible for performing preliminary computations and sending intermediate activations to the server,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27715

