The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph Contrastive Learning with Joint Spectral Augmentation of Attribute and
Topology
Liang Yang1 , Zhenna Li1 , Jiaming Zhuo1∗ , Jing Liu1 , Ziyi Ma1 ,
Chuan Wang2 , Zhen Wang3 , Xiaochun Cao4
1
Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China,
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing JiaoTong University, Beijing, China,
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China,
4
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
yangliang@vip.qq.com, 202222802031@stu.hebut.edu.cn, jiaming.zhuo@outlook.com, liujing@scse.hebut.edu.cn
zyma@hebut.edu.cn, wangchuan@iie.ac.cn, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

2024a,c), a representative self-supervised learning architecture, has been developed. Vanilla GCLs includes three key
components: graph augmentation that increases the number of training samples, graph encoder that represents these
nodes, and contrastive loss that guides the update direction.
According to how the information is processed, existing
graph augmentation strategies in GCLs are mainly classified
into two categories: random augmentation and prior-based
augmentation. The former performs random perturbations
on both graph topology (e.g., adding and removing edges)
(Zhu et al. 2020; Thakoor et al. 2021) and node attributes
(e.g., masking attributes and adding noise) (Mo et al. 2022;
Zhu et al. 2020). Although simple and somewhat successful, this strategy inevitably incurs the corruption of semantic information, resulting in sub-optimal model performance
(Chang et al. 2021). The latter, hence, focuses on the integrity of the semantic information by incorporating a priori
knowledge to guide the augmentation process (Zhuo et al.
2024b). The representative works include: graph diffusionbased (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020), graph sample-based
(You et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020) and spectrum perturbationbased topology augmentation (Lin, Chen, and Wang 2023).
Unfortunately, most graph augmentations neglect to consider the correlation of the two types of available information in GCLs: node attributes and graph topology. Intuitively, there are correlations between them. The attributes
of a node can determine its connectivity pattern in the graph,
thereby affecting the entire graph topology (Li, Huang, and
Zitnik 2021; Sen et al. 2008). In turn, the topology of the
graph shapes or changes node attributes by impacting information flow and interactions between nodes (Kipf and
Welling 2017). Therefore, it is essential to model such correlations in graph augmentation improve the model performance.
To address the aforementioned issue, this paper seeks to
propose a joint augmentation of node attributes and graph
topology for GCL. The major challenges are, on one hand,
to identify a unified view to align the node attributes and
graph topology, on the other hand, to devise an effective
augmentation strategy based on this view. As a solution to

As an essential technique for Graph Contrastive Learning
(GCL), Graph Augmentation (GA) improves the generalization capability of the GCLs by introducing different forms of
the same graph. To ensure information integrity, existing GA
strategies have been designed to simultaneously process the
two types of information available in graphs: node attributes
and graph topology. Nonetheless, these strategies tend to augment the two types of graph information separately, ignoring
their correlation, resulting in limited representation ability. To
overcome this drawback, this paper proposes a novel GCL
framework with a Joint spectrAl augMentation, named GCLJAM. Motivated the equivalence between the graph learning
objective on an attribute graph and the spectral clustering objective on the attribute-interpolated graph, the node attributes
are first abstracted as another type of node to harmonize the
node attributes and graph topology. The newly constructed
graph is then utilized to perform spectral augmentation to
capture the correlation during augmentation. Theoretically,
the proposed joint spectral augmentation is proved to perturb
more inter-class edges and noise attributes compared to separate augmentation methods. Extensive experiments on homophily and heterophily graphs validate the effectiveness and
universality of GCL-JAM.

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures in the real world and
have a wide range of applications in fields such as social networks (Kipf and Welling 2017) and citation networks (Sen
et al. 2008). To effectively extract useful information in the
graphs, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), including GCN
(Kipf and Welling 2017) and GAT (Veličković et al. 2018),
have been proposed and trained in semi-supervised learning scenarios. The reliance on label information limits the
usability of these models to many tasks where collecting labels is expensive. To solve this drawback, Graph Contrastive
Learning (GCL) (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020; Zhuo et al.
∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21983

