The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Adapter with Semantics Disentangling
for Cross-lingual Cross-modal Retrieval
Rui Cai1,2 , Zhiyu Dong1,2 , Jianfeng Dong1,2 * , Xun Wang1,2
the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future E-Commerce Technology, Hangzhou, China
cairuics@gmail.com, dongzhiyuuu@163.com, {djf, wx}@zjgsu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image

Existing cross-modal retrieval methods typically rely on
large-scale vision-language pair data. This makes it challenging to efficiently develop a cross-modal retrieval model
for under-resourced languages of interest. Therefore, Crosslingual Cross-modal Retrieval (CCR), which aims to align
vision and the low-resource language (the target language)
without using any human-labeled target-language data, has
gained increasing attention. As a general parameter-efficient
way, a common solution is to utilize adapter modules to transfer the vision-language alignment ability of Vision-Language
Pretraining (VLP) models from a source language to a target language. However, these adapters are usually static once
learned, making it difficult to adapt to target-language captions with varied expressions. To alleviate it, we propose
Dynamic Adapter with Semantics Disentangling (DASD),
whose parameters are dynamically generated conditioned on
the characteristics of the input captions. Considering that the
semantics and expression styles of the input caption largely
influence how to encode it, we propose a semantic disentangling module to extract the semantic-related and semanticagnostic features from the input, ensuring that generated
adapters are well-suited to the characteristics of input caption. Extensive experiments on two image-text datasets and
one video-text dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model for cross-lingual cross-modal retrieval, as well as its
good compatibility with various VLP models.

Expressions

Captions
地上坐着一只猫。

Location

一只猫坐在鹅卵石地面上。

Agent

鹅卵石地面上有一只猫。

Location

（On the ground sitting a cat.）
(A cat sitting on the cobblestone ground.)
(On cobblestone ground there is a cat.)

Agent

Action
Action

Object

Object

(a) Captions with the same semantics but different expressions.
Target-Language Caption
一只猫坐在鹅卵石
地面上。

Pretrained
Text Encoder

+

A

(b) A typical adapter for target-language encoding.
Target-Language
Caption
一只猫坐在鹅
卵石地面上。

Semantics
Disentangling

1

Semantic-related Features

Frozen

key actions,
event participants …

Trainable

Semantic-agnostic Features
caption length，
way of expression …
Pretrained
Text Encoder

+

DA

(c) Our proposed DASD framework for CCR.

Figure 1: Illustration of the variety of textual expressions
and the difference between the traditional adapter and our
DASD: (a) Captions of the same image are differently expressed in Chinese-specific ways. (b) Traditional adapters
whose parameters are fixed once learned. (c) Our method extracts semantic-related and semantic-agnostic features from
captions and thereby produces dynamic adapters (DA).

Code — https://github.com/HuiGuanLab/DASD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13510

Introduction
With the rapid emergence of images and videos on the Internet, there is a huge demand from users around the world
for retrieving visual content of interest by natural language
queries (a.k.a. cross-modal retrieval) (Li et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2023; Chang et al. 2023). Recent neural-based crossmodal retrieval models (Bogolin et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2022;
Sun et al. 2023) tend to require a large amount of humanlabeled text-image/video pair data for training which are
available for only a handful of the world’s languages. As a
result, building a cross-modal retrieval system for users with

different language backgrounds is extremely challenging,
especially for low-resource languages (e.g., Czech). With
this regard, cross-lingual cross-modal retrieval (CCR) leverages visual-text pair data in the rich-resource language (the
source language) to construct a retrieval model for a new
language of interest (the target language), avoiding substantial manual annotations costs on the target language.
The perennial problem with building target-language retrieval models lies in the paucity of training data, since existing human-labeled resources for low-resource languages
are rather limited, and it is extremely expensive and timeconsuming to manually annotate images/videos with de-

* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1907

