The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-aspect Self-guided Deep Information Bottleneck for Multi-modal Clustering
Shizhe Hu, Jiahao Fan, Guoliang Zou* , Yangdong Ye *
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
ieshizhehu@gmail.com, iejhfan@gs.zzu.edu.cn, jimmyopop8@gmail.com, ieydye@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract

2024b; Wang et al. 2020). It has been successfully applied in
lots of fields like medical imaging, intelligent transportation
systems, and natural language processing. Recently, deep
learning has gained widespread attention in many communities due to its efficiency in mining key information from
data and its effectiveness in unsupervised learning.
Existing deep MMC methods can be roughly divided into
three categories. (1) Graph Neural Network-Based: Capture inter-modal relationships using graph structures. For
example, an extended contrastive learning approach is developed to handle out-of-sample data in graph MMC (Xia
et al. 2023b). Afterwards, a graph-based structural spectralspatial clustering framework was proposed (Peng et al.
2023), effectively investigating high-order pixel structure relationships and thereby capturing robust spectral-spatial features and the overarching clustering architecture. (2) Matrix
Decomposition-Based: Represent multi-modal data as matrices using techniques like non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). For instance, in the work (Cui et al. 2024),
NMF is used to standardize feature scales across views,
align modalities, and extract discriminative features. Similarly, sparse constraints with NMF are applied to capture
the statistical properties of each modality, thereby enhancing cluster assignments (Li et al. 2024). (3) Joint Representation Learning-Based: Learn a shared latent space for
clustering across modalities. For instance, in the work (Yan
et al. 2023), a shared representation was obtained by fusing
private features of multiple modalities and it was further utilized to guide the model in exploring the relevance of each
modality. In the work (Hu et al. 2023), unique feature information between modals was aligned and combined with
a triple contrastive learning framework to obtain global features so that the downstream tasks can benefit.
However, the above MMC methods still contain two limitations. First, different aspects of self-guidance information
in feature representation and cluster assignment are ignored,
leads to unsatisfactory clustering quality. Second, redundant
information in heterogeneous multi-modal data hinders the
exploration of complementary information between modalities, reducing clustering performance.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel
Multi-aspect Self-guided Deep Information Bottleneck
(MSDIB) method for multi-modal clustering, as shown in
Figure 1. MSDIB integrates information compression and

Deep multi-modal clustering can extract useful information among modals, thus benefiting the final clustering and
many related fields. However, existing multi-modal clustering methods have two major limitations. First, they often ignore different levels of guiding information from both the feature representations and cluster assignments, which thus are
difficult in learning discriminative representations. Second,
most methods fail to effectively eliminate redundant information between multi-modal data, negatively affecting clustering results. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-aspect
self-guided deep information bottleneck (MSDIB) method
for multi-modal clustering, which can effectively employ different aspects of guiding information for learning clusterfriendly information among modals. MSDIB mainly contains
two parts: information compression and information preservation. In information compression, we extract from the private information of each modality to obtain the compact representation and meanwhile conduct mutual compression between them. In information preservation, the aim is to preserve the shared information among modals and the selfsupervised information from the clustering results in each iteration. In the above process, there are mainly three aspects
of self-guiding information, the modality-private information, the modality-shared information and the self-supervised
pseudo label information. By minimizing the mutual information based objective function with a variational optimization method, we can fully extract useful discriminative information while eliminating the irrelevant parts. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art multi-modal clustering methods, showcasing
its superior performance and broad application prospects.

Code — https://github.com/ShizheHu

Introduction
In real-world, objects usually exhibit rich modalities, where
the information is conveyed by diversified media, including images, text descriptions or videos. Multi-modal clustering (MMC) aims to explore the consistency across different modalities or/and the uniqueness of private information
in heterogeneous modalities so as to learn satisfactory clustering result (Xia et al. 2023a; Yang et al. 2022; Hu et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17314

