The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RAP-SR: RestorAtion Prior Enhancement in Diffusion Models
for Realistic Image Super-Resolution
Jiangang Wang1,2 , Qingnan Fan2† , Jinwei Chen2 , Hong Gu2 , Feng Huang3 , Wenqi Ren1†
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
vivo Mobile Communication Co. Ltd
3
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Fuzhou University
wangjg33@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, fqnchina@gmail.com, chenjinwei 1987@126.com,
guhong@vivo.com, huangf@fzu.edu.cn, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

Benefiting from their powerful generative capabilities, pretrained diffusion models have garnered significant attention
for real-world image super-resolution (Real-SR). Existing
diffusion-based SR approaches typically utilize semantic information from degraded images and restoration prompts
to activate prior for producing realistic high-resolution images. However, general-purpose pretrained diffusion models, not designed for restoration tasks, often have suboptimal prior, and manually defined prompts may fail to fully
exploit the generated potential. To address these limitations,
we introduce RAP-SR, a novel restoration prior enhancement approach in pretrained diffusion models for Real-SR.
First, we develop the High-Fidelity Aesthetic Image Dataset
(HFAID), curated through a Quality-Driven Aesthetic Image Selection Pipeline (QDAISP). Our dataset not only surpasses existing ones in fidelity but also excels in aesthetic
quality. Second, we propose the Restoration Priors Enhancement Framework, which includes Restoration Priors Refinement (RPR) and Restoration-Oriented Prompt Optimization
(ROPO) modules. RPR refines the restoration prior using the
HFAID, while ROPO optimizes the unique restoration identifier, improving the quality of the resulting images. RAP-SR
effectively bridges the gap between general-purpose models and the demands of Real-SR by enhancing restoration
prior. Leveraging the plug-and-play nature of RAP-SR, our
approach can be seamlessly integrated into existing diffusionbased SR methods, boosting their performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate its broad applicability and state-ofthe-art results.

SeeSR

SeeSR + RAP-SR

LR

StableSR

StableSR + RAP-SR

Figure 1: Visual Comparison: RAP-SR enhances the
restoration prior of pretrained diffusion models. Our proposed RAP-SR method can be seamlessly integrated into
diffusion-based SR methods, generating more realistic details and textures without the need for fine-tuning the original model.

2021) by employing pixel-level losses such as ℓ1 and MSE,
often resulting in over-smoothed details. Advanced architectures (Liang et al. 2021) have improved performance, but
issues like artifacts and poor visual quality remain when applied to real-world scenarios. To address this, Real-SR methods aim to reproduce realistic details by optimizing both fidelity and perceptual quality, often employing generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). However, GAN-based approaches suffer from problems such as
model collapse and difficult training.
Recently, diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
have gained prominence in image generation, leading to the
development of large-scale pretrained text-to-image (T2I)
diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (SD). For a
wide range of natural images, diffusion prior is more effective than GAN-based prior. Additionally, these models
have shown significant potential in various downstream lowlevel vision tasks, including image editing, image restoration, and image-to-image translation. Methods such as StableSR (Wang et al. 2024), PASD (Yang et al. 2024),
DiffBIR (Lin et al. 2024), SUPIR (Yu et al. 2024), and
SeeSR (Wu et al. 2024) leverage pretrained T2I models to

Code — https://github.com/W-JG/RAP-SR

1

LR

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) inputs, with broad applications in mobile photography, autonomous driving, and
robotics. SR remains a highly ill-posed problem due to the
complexity and variability of degradation models in realworld scenarios. Early SR solutions focus on improving fidelity (Dong et al. 2014; Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016; Zhu et al.
† Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7727

