The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S2 DN: Learning to Denoise Unconvincing Knowledge for Inductive Knowledge
Graph Completion
Tengfei Ma1 , Yujie Chen1 , Liang Wang2,3 , Xuan Lin4 , Bosheng Song1 * , Xiangxiang Zeng1
1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
2
NLPR, MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
College of Computer Science, Xiangtan University, China
{tfma,yjchen}@hnu.edu.cn, liang.wang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, jack lin@xtu.edu.cn, {boshengsong, xzeng}@hnu.edu.cn
Abstract

facts on unseen entities in KGs, has been a hot area of research (Zhang et al. 2023b; Bai et al. 2023) and industry (Du
et al. 2021; Ji et al. 2022).

Inductive Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC) aims to infer
missing facts between newly emerged entities within knowledge graphs (KGs), posing a significant challenge. While recent studies have shown promising results in inferring such
entities through knowledge subgraph reasoning, they suffer
from (i) the semantic inconsistencies of similar relations,
and (ii) noisy interactions inherent in KGs due to the presence of unconvincing knowledge for emerging entities. To
address these challenges, we propose a Semantic Structureaware Denoising Network (S2 DN) for inductive KGC. Our
goal is to learn adaptable general semantics and reliable structures to distill consistent semantic knowledge while preserving reliable interactions within KGs. Specifically, we introduce a semantic smoothing module over the enclosing subgraphs to retain the universal semantic knowledge of relations. We incorporate a structure refining module to filter
out unreliable interactions and offer additional knowledge,
retaining robust structure surrounding target links. Extensive
experiments conducted on three benchmark KGs demonstrate
that S2 DN surpasses the performance of state-of-the-art models. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of S2 DN in
preserving semantic consistency and enhancing the robustness of filtering out unreliable interactions in contaminated
KGs.

To improve the generalization ability of the KGC task
on unknown entities, some researchers propose rule-based
methods (Meilicke et al. 2018; Yang, Yang, and Cohen 2017;
Cheng, Ahmed, and Sun 2023). These methods enable effective reasoning under emerging entities by mining common
reasoning rules, while they are limited by predictive performance (Xu et al. 2022). Recently, there has been a surge in
inductive KGC methods based on Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), inspired by the ability of GNNs to aggregate local
information. For instance, GraIL (Teru, Denis, and Hamilton
2020) models enclose subgraphs of the target link to capture local topological structure, thereby possessing the inductive ability of emerging entities. Motivated by GraIL and
the message passing mechanism of GNN, some works (Mai
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021) have further utilized the enclosing subgraph structure and designed effective propagation strategies to model informative neighbors for inductive
KGC. To explicitly enhance the prediction ability of unseen
entities through semantic knowledge in the KGs, SNRI (Xu
et al. 2022) proposes a relational paths module to improve
the performance of inductive KGC, while RMPI (Geng et al.
2023) designs a novel relational message-passing network
for fully inductive KGC with both unseen entities and relations. Despite the promising results yielded by these models,
they are limited to information redundancy in modeling irrelevant entities and relations. AdaProp (Zhang et al. 2023b)
is developed to learn an adaptive propagation path and filter out irrelevant entities, achieving powerful performance.
However, these models ignore the unconvincing knowledge
(e.g., semantic inconsistencies of similar relations in context
and inherent noise within KGs). For example, the same semantic “the location is” with different relations located in
and lie in may lead to inconsistent knowledge expressions
in the context “(Alibaba, lie in, Hangzhou), and (Hangzhou,
located in, China)”, increasing the complexity of subgraph
reasoning, which deduces the prediction performance on inductive situations. Additionally, logical reasoning may be
misled to conclude a confused fact (Obama, live in, New
York) from the reasoning chain (Obama, work in, The White
House, located in, New York) due to the presence of the

Code — https://github.com/xiaomingaaa/SDN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15822

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent the relations between
real-world entities as facts providing a general way to store
semantic knowledge (Wang et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2023a;
Li et al. 2023b). KGs have been successfully used in various applications, including recommendation systems (Yang
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024a), question answering (Cao et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2023), and drug discovery (Lin et al. 2020;
Ma et al. 2022). However, KGs often suffer from incompleteness (Geng et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a) and newly
emerging entities (Xu et al. 2022). Thus, inductive knowledge graph completion (KGC), proposed to predict missing
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12355

