The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Video Diffusion Models are Strong Video Inpainter
Minhyeok Lee, Suhwan Cho, Chajin Shin, Jungho Lee, Sunghun Yang, Sangyoun Lee
Yonsei University
{hydragon516,chosuhwan,chajin,2015142131,sunghun98,syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

pendent on the accuracy of the completed optical flow, since
pixel information is propagated based on the optical flow
between all adjacent frames. Incorrect predictions can accumulate error noise during the frame propagation process,
reducing the overall quality of the video frames. Secondly,
in the case of object removal, propagation-based models require relatively accurate target object masks. These methods
are highly dependent on the amount of visual cues from the
unmasked areas of the reference frames to fill the masked
regions of the target frame. Therefore, to ensure consistent
performance, the mask size must be minimized, which necessitates precise target object masks. However, this leads
to increased manual frame-by-frame masking costs in realworld applications.
Recently, a few works (Zhang et al. 2024; Zi et al. 2024;
Gu et al. 2023) integrate the powerful generative capabilities of image or video diffusion models into video inpainting tasks. These methods are expected to be more robust to
mask size and generate perceptually improved videos compared to propagation-based methods. However, despite the
advancements in diffusion models, there are two main reasons that make it challenging to apply them to video inpainting. First, diffusion models do not consider the objects behind the moving mask areas. As the mask’s position shifts
over time, the actual pixel information in the previously
masked areas is revealed. If the past frames generated by
the diffusion model differ from the real context, this leads to
videos with awkward consistency over time. This becomes
even more unnatural when new objects hidden behind the
mask appear. Second, when using pre-trained video diffusion models, object hallucination often occurs, where unwanted objects are generated in the mask area. This phenomenon is due to the diffusion model’s powerful video
generation capabilities, and to prevent it, text guidance is
required for the diffusion model.
To address these issues, we propose a new First Frame
Filling Video Diffusion Inpainting model, named FFF-VDI.
We design FFF-VDI, inspired by the capabilities of pretrained image-to-video diffusion models to generate complete videos based on the first frame image. Our model has
the following advantages: First, the proposed model extracts
the latent code of each frame using a VAE encoder to create the masked noise latent code. Next, we use optical flow
to propagate the noise latent codes of future frames to fill

Propagation-based video inpainting using optical flow at the
pixel or feature level has recently garnered significant attention. However, it has limitations such as the inaccuracy of optical flow prediction and the propagation of noise over time.
These issues result in non-uniform noise and time consistency
problems throughout the video, which are particularly pronounced when the removed area is large and involves substantial movement. To address these issues, we propose a
novel First Frame Filling Video Diffusion Inpainting model
(FFF-VDI). We design FFF-VDI inspired by the capabilities of pre-trained image-to-video diffusion models that can
transform the first frame image into a highly natural video.
To apply this to the video inpainting task, we propagate the
noise latent information of future frames to fill the masked
areas of the first frame’s noise latent code. Next, we finetune the pre-trained image-to-video diffusion model to generate the inpainted video. The proposed model addresses the
limitations of existing methods that rely on optical flow quality, producing much more natural and temporally consistent
videos. This proposed approach is the first to effectively integrate image-to-video diffusion models into video inpainting
tasks. Through various comparative experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed model can robustly handle diverse
inpainting types with high quality.

Introduction
Video inpainting (VI) aims to fill in missing regions of a
video with visually consistent content while ensuring both
spatial and temporal consistency. Unlike image inpainting,
video inpainting faces the significant challenge of establishing accurate correspondences with distant frames to obtain
missing pixel information and maintaining time consistency
between video frames to generate natural videos. To address
these issues, recent methods (Gao et al. 2020; Zhang, Fu,
and Liu 2022b,a; Zhou et al. 2023) based on information
propagation through optical flow have gained significant attention. These models use inpainted optical flow information to propagate pixel or feature information to the masked
areas of each frame. While this approach can generate relatively accurate images by propagating actual pixel information to the missing regions, it has several significant drawbacks. Firstly, the quality of the predicted video is highly deCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4526

