The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PixelMan: Consistent Object Editing with Diffusion Models
via Pixel Manipulation and Generation
Liyao Jiang1,2 , Negar Hassanpour2 , Mohammad Salameh2 ,
Mohammadreza Samadi2 , Jiao He3 , Fengyu Sun3 , Di Niu1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta
2
Huawei Technologies Canada
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, China
{liyao1, dniu}@ualberta.ca
{negar.hassanpour2, mohammad.salameh, mohammadreza.samadi1, hejiao4}@huawei.com
sunfengyu@hisilicon.com
Abstract

changing the color, texture, attributes, and style of the image. However, consistent object editing (Kawar et al. 2023;
Cao et al. 2023; Duan et al. 2024) is a distinct type of image
editing that aims to preserve the consistency of objects and
background in the image without changing their texture and
attributes, while modifying only certain non-rigid attributes
of the objects (e.g., changing the position, size, and composition of objects). Typical consistent object editing tasks
include object repositioning (Epstein et al. 2023; Mou et al.
2024b,a; Wang et al. 2024; Winter et al. 2024), object resizing (Epstein et al. 2023; Mou et al. 2024b,a), and object
pasting (Chen et al. 2024; Mou et al. 2024b,a). Consistent
object editing tasks are complex and usually involve multiple sub-tasks such as: (i) generating a faithful reproduction
of the source object at the target location, (ii) maintaining
the background scene details, (iii) harmonizing the edited
object into its surrounding target context, and (iv) inpainting
the original vacated location with a cohesive background.
To solve this problem, training-based methods have been
proposed (Rombach et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2024; Wang
et al. 2024; Winter et al. 2024), which however require
a costly training process and usually also require collecting task-specific datasets. Alternatively, recent training-free
methods (Epstein et al. 2023; Mou et al. 2024b,a) rely on
DDIM inversion (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021) to estimate the
initial noise corresponding to the source image. However,
this process is inefficient as it often requires many (usually
at least 50) inference steps. Reducing the number of steps
to, e.g., 16, significantly compromises editing quality (see
Fig. 2). Moreover, DDIM inversion struggles to produce a
precise and consistent final reconstruction of the source image, often yielding a coarse approximation due to accumulation of errors at each timestep (Duan et al. 2024). As a result, training-free methods that rely on DDIM inversion are
inherently limited in their ability to perform consistent edits.
To facilitate object generation at target location and reproduction of background, DragonDiffusion (Mou et al. 2024b)
and DiffEditor (Mou et al. 2024a) utilize Energy Guidance (EG) to minimize the feature similarity between the
source and target objects (backgrounds). While EG iteratively refines the predicted noise, this process can inadvertently drive the latent representation away from that of the

Recent research explores the potential of Diffusion Models
(DMs) for consistent object editing, which aims to modify object position, size, and composition, etc., while preserving the
consistency of objects and background without changing their
texture and attributes. Current inference-time methods often
rely on DDIM inversion, which inherently compromises efficiency and the achievable consistency of edited images. Recent methods also utilize energy guidance which iteratively
updates the predicted noise and can drive the latents away
from the original image, resulting in distortions. In this paper, we propose PixelMan, an inversion-free and training-free
method for achieving consistent object editing via Pixel Manipulation and generation, where we directly create a duplicate copy of the source object at target location in the pixel
space, and introduce an efficient sampling approach to iteratively harmonize the manipulated object into the target location and inpaint its original location, while ensuring image
consistency by anchoring the edited image to be generated to
the pixel-manipulated image as well as by introducing various
consistency-preserving optimization techniques during inference. Experimental evaluations based on benchmark datasets
as well as extensive visual comparisons show that in as few as
16 inference steps, PixelMan outperforms a range of state-ofthe-art training-based and training-free methods (usually requiring 50 steps) on multiple consistent object editing tasks.

Project — liyaojiang1998.github.io/projects/PixelMan/
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14283

Introduction
Diffusion Models (DMs) excel at generating stunning visuals from text prompts (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al.
2022b; Chang et al. 2023), yet with potentials extending
beyond text-to-image generation. A highly popular application is image editing, as evidenced by widespread tools such
as Google Photos MagicEditor (Google 2023) and AI Editor in Adobe Photoshop (Adobe 2023). Many research efforts (Hertz et al. 2022; Tumanyan et al. 2023; Alaluf et al.
2023; Parmar et al. 2023) achieve promising results on textprompt-guided rigid image editing involving tasks such as
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4012

