The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Thorough Comparison Between Independent Cascade and
Susceptible-Infected-Recovered Models*
Panfeng Liu1 , Guoliang Qiu1 , Biaoshuai Tao2 , Kuan Yang2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
liupf22@sjtu.edu.cn, guoliang.qiu@sjtu.edu.cn
2
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
bstao@sjtu.edu.cn, kuan.yang@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

and Richardson 2001; Brown and Reingen 1987; Richardson and Domingos 2002; Rigobon 2002; Pastor-Satorras and
Vespignani 2001; Lerman and Ghosh 2010). Information
diffusion is typically characterized by cascading—a fundamental social network process in which a number of nodes,
called seeds, initially possess a certain attribute or piece of
information and may spread to their neighbors.
Numerous diffusion models have been developed so far.
Among them, the independent cascade model (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2015) is well-known and extensively
studied. In the independent cascade model (hereinafter denoted by IC), each edge (u, v) is assigned a probability pu,v .
An infected node u attempts to infect its neighbor v only
once, with a success probability of pu,v . The events of successful infections along different edges are independent. In
the IC model, an infected node remains infected throughout
the cascade.
However, in many real-world scenarios, an infected node
may recover. This phenomenon can be observed in various
situations. For example, consider when an individual subscribes to a magazine or signs up for a fitness membership
card under the influence of friends; eventually, this subscription or membership may be terminated. This termination
could result from factors such as the user losing interest
in the service or the subscription/membership expiring. Another example arises when someone introduces a new product to a friend; initially, they may promote it, but eventually,
they tire of advertising it after a few days. Similarly, when
a user shares a post on Twitter, their friends may retweet it
only for a short period before it becomes overshadowed by
other posts. The recovery of nodes may signify the loss of a
certain attribute or the end of spreading this attribute, both
of which undoubtedly impact the cascading process.
The concept of node recovery is effectively captured by
epidemic models. These models divide individuals into distinct states, including susceptible, infected, and recovered.
Various models have been formulated based on feasible state
transitions (Kermack and McKendrick 1927; Allen 1994;
Greenwood and Gordillo 2009). The Susceptible-InfectedRecovered model (Kermack and McKendrick 1927) (hereinafter denoted by SIR) includes the process from susceptible to infected and eventually to recovery and permanent
immunity. In the SIR model, each node u has a recover rate
γu . In each round, an infected node u attempts to infect each

We study cascades in social networks with the independent
cascade (IC) model and the Susceptible-Infected-recovered
(SIR) model. The well-studied IC model fails to capture the
feature of node recovery, and the SIR model is a variant of the
IC model with the node recovery feature. In the SIR model,
by computing the probability that a node successfully infects
another before its recovery and viewing this probability as the
corresponding IC parameter, the SIR model becomes an “outgoing-edge-correlated” version of the IC model: the events of
the infections along different out-going edges of a node become dependent in the SIR model, whereas these events are
independent in the IC model. In this paper, we thoroughly
compare the two models and examine the effect of this extra
dependency in the SIR model. By a carefully designed coupling argument, we show that the seeds in the IC model have
a stronger influence spread than their counterparts in the SIR
model, and sometimes it can be significantly stronger. Specifically, we prove that, given the same network, the same seed
sets, and the parameters of the two models being set based on
the above-mentioned way, the expected number of infected
nodes at the end of the cascade for the IC model is weakly
larger than that for the SIR model, and there are instances
where this dominance is significant.
We also study the influence maximization problem (the optimization problem of selecting a set of nodes as initial seeds
in a social network to maximize their influence) with the SIR
model. We show that the above-mentioned difference in the
two models yields different seed-selection strategies, which
motivates the design of influence maximization algorithms
specifically for the SIR model. We design efficient approximation algorithms with theoretical guarantees by adapting
the reverse-reachable-set-based algorithms, commonly used
for the IC model, to the SIR model.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11470

1

Introduction

The study of information diffusion in social networks, such
as Facebook, Twitter, and WeChat, has garnered significant
attention in the fields of communication media and social
science (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2015; Domingos
* Biaoshuai Tao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

487

