The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Dynamic Music Emotion Recognition
with Dual-Scale Attention-Based Meta-Learning
Dengming Zhang1 , Weitao You2 * , Ziheng Liu2 , Lingyun Sun2 , Pei Chen2
1

2

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{dmz, weitao you, northstar lzh, sunly, chenpei}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic Music Emotion Recognition (DMER) aims to predict the emotion of different moments in music, playing a crucial role in music information retrieval. The existing DMER
methods struggle to capture long-term dependencies when
dealing with sequence data, which limits their performance.
Furthermore, these methods often overlook the influence of
individual differences on emotion perception, even though
everyone has their own personalized emotional perception in
the real world. Motivated by these issues, we explore more
effective sequence processing methods and introduce the Personalized DMER (PDMER) problem, which requires models
to predict emotions that align with personalized perception.
Specifically, we propose a Dual-Scale Attention-Based MetaLearning (DSAML) method. This method fuses features from
a dual-scale feature extractor and captures both short and
long-term dependencies using a dual-scale attention transformer, improving the performance in traditional DMER. To
achieve PDMER, we design a novel task construction strategy
that divides tasks by annotators. Samples in a task are annotated by the same annotator, ensuring consistent perception.
Leveraging this strategy alongside meta-learning, DSAML
can predict personalized perception of emotions with just one
personalized annotation sample. Our objective and subjective experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve
state-of-the-art performance in both traditional DMER and
PDMER.

Figure 1: The differences between traditional DMER and
PDMER. All charts represent the emotion valence/arousal
(V/A) curve of music, where the x-axis represents time and
the y-axis represents V/A values.

SMER inputs music and outputs only one V-A label to describe the emotion, which fails to describe the variations in
emotion within the music. For example, Beethoven’s Symphony No. 5 can’t be described as simply positive and intense, as it also contains moments of sadness and tranquility.
In contrast, DMER predicts the V-A label sequence, using a
sequence label to describe the emotional changes in the music, which can more accurately express the emotions.
Existing DMER work focuses on utilizing sequential information to predict, as the emotion of each moment in music is related to the emotions before and after. Specifically,
long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) attracted the attention of researchers due to its
superiority in sequence data processing. These researchers
use LSTM to extract sequence features and have shown
some effectiveness in DMER (He and Ferguson 2020; Zhang
et al. 2023). However, previous studies (Khandelwal et al.
2018; Li et al. 2019; Grigsby et al. 2021) have found that
LSTM struggles to capture long-term dependencies, which
limits the capture of the global emotion of music, resulting
in poor performance in DMER.
More importantly, existing work often assumes that all

Code & Case — https://littleor.github.io/PDMER

Introduction
Music Emotion Recognition (MER) technology focuses on
identifying emotions conveyed by music, applying to music
therapy (Dingle et al. 2015), music recommendation (Liu
et al. 2023; Tran et al. 2023), and music generation (Huang
and Huang 2020; Ji and Yang 2024). To describe the music emotion, Russell’s two-dimensional valence-arousal (VA) emotional model (Russell 1980) is widely used in MER,
where valence describes the extent to which an emotion
is positive or negative, and arousal refers to its intensity.
Existing MER tasks are generally divided into static MER
(SMER) and dynamic MER (DMER) (Han et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1629

