The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CUGF: A Reliable and Fair Recommendation Framework
Nitin Bisht1 , Xiuwen Gong1* , Guandong Xu2, 1 *
1

University of Technology, Sydney
The Education University of Hong Kong
Nitin.Bisht@student.uts.edu.au, Xiuwen.Gong@uts.edu.au, gdxu@eduhk.hk
2

Abstract

fair job recommendation platform might consistently overlook talented candidates from less renowned universities or
regions, or a streaming service like Spotify where the music
of mainstream artists is perpetually favored, leaving equally
talented groups of indie musicians in the shadows. Such biases can alienate users, skew cultural representation, and ultimately drive people away from the platform. Recently, a
few recommendation models (Zhu et al. 2018; Geyik, Ambler, and Kenthapadi 2019; Islam et al. 2021) try to solve
the fairness problem. However, these models address specific fairness issues in certain fields but lack a generalized
fairness-based recommendation framework that can also ensure model credibility.
Motivated by the above-mentioned problems, we would
like to seek actionable uncertainty quantification for the RS
to provide a reliable and fair recommendation framework.
Specifically, we require a prediction set that reliably covers
the true item with a high probability (e.g., 90%) rather than
an estimate of the most likely outcomes, while guaranteeing
all users’ fairness. The objectives of our framework would
be to 1) construct a prediction set that can cover the true item
with a user-pre-defined probability while 2) guaranteeing the
fairness of users across different groups.
Inspired by conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005), a powerful statistical tool to quantify
uncertainty, we propose a novel framework called Conformalized User Group Fairness (CUGF) to achieve the abovementioned objectives. In general, we apply a conformal prediction framework to produce the prediction set on top of
pre-built recommendation models following the general CP
recipe. However, conformal prediction cannot be directly
applied due to the following challenge: how will conformal prediction conformalize fairness of users in different
groups to generate the prediction set? And it remains a doubt
whether prediction sets still preserve the coverage guarantee.
To solve the above challenges, we create dynamic prediction sets for users in different groups to meet the fairness
constraint. Specifically, we first define the recommendation
problem and formulate it into the standard procedures of
conformal prediction. We then design novel fairness metrics
based on empirical risk corresponding to hit rate or NDCG
to align with the design of the set predictor, which also
makes the proposed framework more flexible by accommodating different types of loss functions. Furthermore, we de-

Recommender systems (RS) play a crucial role in assisting
decision-making but often suffer from either a lack of credibility or unfairness problems. A few recommendation models
have endeavored to address the problem from only one aspect, and approaches to solving both problems remain to be
explored. This paper aims to construct a generalized fairnessbased recommendation framework that can also provide the
credibility of recommendation models. Generally, we propose a reliable and fair recommendation framework called
Conformalized User Group Fairness (CUGF) based on the inspiration of conformal prediction. Specifically, we construct
dynamic prediction sets that are guaranteed to cover the true
item with a user-pre-specified probability to ensure credibility while designing novel fairness metrics based on empirical risks to guarantee the fairness of users across different
groups. Furthermore, we design a novel CUGF Algorithm to
optimize the parameter γ that dominates the prediction sets
and also the fairness. Besides, we conduct extensive experiments by applying CUGF on top of various recommendation
models and representative datasets to validate its effectiveness with respect to recommendation performance (in terms
of average set size) and fairness (in terms of the two defined
fairness metrics), the results of which demonstrate the validity of the proposed framework.

Introduction
Recommendation models (Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2021;
Aggarwal 2016; Jannach et al. 2010) usually recommend
the items with the maximum or the top-k relevance scores
in the models’ output. Although it is important to recommend the most likely items, it is also very important to provide the credibility of recommendation models. Some researchers try to develop methods that provide the model
confidence. However, these methods (Knyazev and Oosterhuis 2023; Cui et al. 2024) are heuristic modeling without
statistical guarantee. Moreover, most existing recommendation models (Han et al. 2021; Kim and Suh 2019; Albora,
Rossi Mori, and Zaccaria 2023) fail to consider the fairness
problem, which is essential in ensuring the long-term success and credibility of digital platforms. For example, an un* Xiuwen Gong and Guandong Xu are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11445

