The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Out-of-Distribution Generalization on Graphs via Progressive Inference
Yiming Xu1,2 , Bin Shi1,2 * , Zhen Peng1,2 , Huixiang Liu1,2 , Bo Dong2,3 , Chen Chen4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Distance Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
{xym0924, liuhxwork}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {shibin, dong.bo}@xjtu.edu.cn, zhenpeng27@outlook.com, zrh6du@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

rely on the assumption that training and testing data are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, this
assumption often becomes untenable in realistic scenarios
due to the uncontrollable underlying data generation mechanism (Bengio et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022b). Several recent
studies have revealed the vulnerability of GNNs in the face
of differently distributed data (Ding et al. 2021; Gui et al.
2022). The lack of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
capabilities hinders the deployment of GNNs in multiple
high-risk scenarios in the open world.
Recently, one of the most promising directions for improving out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is the
method based on causal invariant learning. Specifically,
most existing studies (Sui et al. 2022a; Fan et al. 2022; Wu
et al. 2022) obtain node representations by GNNs and identify causal invariant substructures and features from the input graph in a single-step manner, such as directly applying dot product operations or MLPs. Finally, they introduce
specialized optimization objectives and constraints to minimize the risk of causal invariance across different distributions. However, the attention in existing works has focused
on the design of optimization objectives, but ignored the exploration of model architectures. Unlike grid-like data, the
intricate nature of graphs presents a substantial challenge to
this problem since the topological structure leads to complex
coupling associations between the causal and non-causal
parts. This challenge raises a serious concern: How powerful is this kind of single-step manner in uncovering causal
substructures in the OOD scenarios?
To validate this concern, we conduct an empirical study
to investigate the effectiveness of existing methods in tackling this challenge. Specifically, in an OOD dataset, we visualize the causal features learned by existing methods and
the ground-truth causal features (learned only by feeding
the causal substructures into the GNN model) in the feature space. Unfortunately, our findings reveal a significant
distribution gap between these two sets of features (details
in Figure 4 and Figure 5). In other words, existing methods fail to capture high-quality causal invariant features, adversely affecting the generalization ability of the model. Indeed, when tackling complex problems, humans typically
rely on multi-step inference rather than expecting immediate
accurate results. For example, mathematicians break down
difficult proofs into a series of sub-proofs and iteratively ad-

The development and evaluation of graph neural networks
(GNNs) generally follow the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumption. Yet this assumption is often untenable in practice due to the uncontrollable data generation
mechanism. In particular, when the data distribution shows
a significant shift, most GNNs would fail to produce reliable predictions and may even make decisions randomly. One
of the most promising solutions to improve the model generalization is to pick out causal invariant parts in the input graph. Nonetheless, we observe a significant distribution gap between the causal parts learned by existing methods and the ground-truth, leading to undesirable performance.
In response to the above issues, this paper presents GPro, a
model that learns graph causal invariance with progressive inference. Specifically, the complicated graph causal invariant
learning is decomposed into multiple intermediate inference
steps from easy to hard, and the perception of GPro is continuously strengthened through a progressive inference process to extract causal features that are stable to distribution
shifts. We also enlarge the training distribution by creating
counterfactual samples to enhance the capability of the GPro
in capturing the causal invariant parts. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed GPro outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods by 4.91% on average. For datasets with more
severe distribution shifts, the performance improvement can
be up to 6.86%.

Code — https://github.com/yimingxu24/GPro

Introduction
The powerful graph representation learning abilities of
graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely acknowledged in both academia and industry, and have been proven
to be effective in a variety of applications, such as recommender systems (Niu et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2022; Seo et al.
2022; Yan et al. 2023), finance (Liu et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022; Shi et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2023), life sciences (Hsieh
et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022; Su et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2023)
and autonomous driving (Gao et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2022).
Despite their remarkable success, existing GNNs typically
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12963

