The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prior-guided Hierarchical Harmonization Network for
Efficient Image Dehazing
Xiongfei Su1,2 , Siyuan Li1,2 , Yuning Cui3 , Miao Cao1,2 , Yulun Zhang4 , Zheng Chen4 ,
Zongliang Wu1,2 , Zedong Wang2 , Yuanlong Zhang5 , Xin Yuan2 *
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, e-mail: xsuac@zju.edu.cn
2
Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
3
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
PGH2Net(Ours)

Abstract
42

Image dehazing is a crucial task that involves the enhancement of degraded images to recover their sharpness and textures. While vision Transformers have exhibited impressive
results in diverse dehazing tasks, their quadratic complexity
and lack of dehazing priors pose significant drawbacks for
real-world applications. In this paper, guided by triple priors, Bright Channel Prior (BCP), Dark Channel Prior (DCP),
and Histogram Equalization (HE), we propose a Prior-guided
Hierarchical Harmonization Network (PGH2 Net) for image
dehazing. PGH2 Net is built upon the UNet-like architecture
with an efficient encoder and decoder, consisting of two module types: (1) Prior aggregation module that injects B/DCP
and selects diverse contexts with gating attention. (2) Feature
harmonization modules that subtract low-frequency components from spatial and channel aspects and learn more informative feature distributions to equalize the feature maps.
Inspired by observing the lower sparsity of B/DCP and the
histogram equalization, we harmonize the deep features using a histogram equation-guided module and further leverage
B/DCP to guide spatial attention through a sandwich module
as the bottleneck. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that our model efficiently attains the highest level of performance among existing methods across four different datasets
for image dehazing.

MB-TaylorFormer(ICCV23)

DehazeFormer-L(TIP23)

PSNR (dB)

40 DEA-Net(TIP24)
PMNet(ECCV22)

38

AECR-Net(CVPR21)
36

MAXIM(CVPR22)

DeHamer(CVPR22)

34

FFA-Net(AAAI20)

MSBDN(CVPR20)
PFDN(ECCV20)
50

100

150
FLOPs (G)

200

250

300

Figure 1: Reconstruction quality (PSNR) and computational
complexity (FLOPs) on the SOTS-Indoor (Li et al. 2018)
dataset. The size of the dots indicates the model size.

based approaches (Bai et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2024), including
encoder-decoder structures, dilated convolution, and attention mechanisms, achieving impressive restoration performance. These methods employ deep learning as a black box
for image restoration but rely on 2D images, with computational time increasing rapidly with larger image sizes. Recently, Transformer models have shown significant improvements in image restoration (Chen et al. 2021; Song et al.
2023), but these often increase model complexity, training
costs, and convergence issues due to numerous parameters.
(iii) Hybrid methods (Zheng et al. 2023; Mo 2022) reduce
dependence on training data by combining inherent priors
with the representation ability of deep neural networks. (Cai,
Zuo, and Zhang 2020; Zheng et al. 2023; Dai et al. 2022) use
physics priors in the feature space to enhance interpretability aligned with the hazing process. However, these priors
are limited to shallow layers, which lose rich information in
deep layers. Thus, universal priors and hierarchical mechanisms are necessary to advance hybrid methods.
In this paper, we empirically reveal the guidance mechanism of Bright Channel Prior (BCP) and Dark Channel
Prior (DCP) in the hierarchical feature domain and the distribution matching mechanism of Histogram Equalization
(HE). Specifically, we first analyze the deep feature maps

Introduction
Image dehazing aims to recover clear images from hazy
ones (Zheng et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2025). It is crucial in
fields like surveillance, autonomous driving, and remote
sensing. Estimating clean backgrounds, textures, and colors
from a single hazy image is complex and ill-posed. Solutions
fall into three categories: conventional, deep learning, and
hybrid methods. (i) Conventional methods (Zhang et al.
2017; He, Sun, and Tang 2010) rely on physical model assumptions and manual feature engineering, often failing in
real-world situations due to the problem’s ill-posed nature.
These priors are only effective in specific scenarios, as handcrafted features are too simple for complex phenomena like
haze and have difficulty selecting optimal transforms and
tuning parameters. (ii) Deep learning methods use CNN* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7042

