The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FreeCap: Hybrid Calibration-Free Motion Capture in Open Environments
Aoru Xue1, * , Yiming Ren1, * , Zining Song1 , Mao Ye2 , Xinge Zhu3 , Yuexin Ma1,†
1

ShanghaiTech University
2
Inceptio Technology
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xuear2024, renym2022, mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

accurate depth information. However, the sparsity of longdistance point clouds and the lack of texture information can
lead to inaccuracies in predictions.
To leverage both image texture and LiDAR depth information for more accurate global human motion predictions
in open environments. The previous method(Cong et al.
2023; Fan et al. 2023a) utilizes calibrated multiple cameras
and LiDARs for involving the fusion of raw data, which
can lead to difficulties in unifying data distribution and reduced generalization ability. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 1,
our system consists of the single LiDAR and any number
of moving cameras. The LiDAR captures extensive global
depth information, while the moving cameras provide detailed texture information in local areas. This more flexible
and expandable setup enables accurate multi-person motion
estimation within a unified world coordinate system, making
it suitable for diverse applications.
In this paper, we propose a novel calibration-free multimodel method FreeCap. We can not directly get the crosssensor human matching in large-scale multi-person scenes
without the calibration and the data-driven method can not
intentionally learn the calibration when the camera is moving. To address these challenges, we introduce an efficient
and high-quality local-to-global matching module, Poseaware Cross-sensor Matching. Specifically, we use RTMPose (Jiang et al. 2023) and WHAM (Shin et al. 2024) to
estimate the 2D key points and body pose in image and use
LiveHPS (Ren et al. 2024) to estimate the 3D key points
and body pose in point cloud. The body poses are used for
local matching and the global key points are used for matching refinement. Next, we design a coarse-to-fine sensorexpandable pose optimizer to optimize the coarse align matrix calculated based on the matched 2D key points and 3D
key points, which can unify the calibration-unknown multimodal data and guide the network to further optimize the
3D human key points. Furthermore, considering the narrow
of the camera range, our network can accept expandable
camera data, the more cameras can assist LiDAR to predict
more accurate results. Extensive experiments conducted on
the multi-person large-scale dataset Human-M3(Fan et al.
2023a) and the multi-view sensor dataset FreeMotion(Ren
et al. 2024), demonstrate that our method achieves significant improvements in human pose compared to other singlemodal SOTA methods.

We propose a novel hybrid calibration-free method FreeCap
to accurately capture global multi-person motions in open environments. Our system combines a single LiDAR with expandable moving cameras, allowing for flexible and precise
motion estimation in a unified world coordinate. In particular, We introduce a local-to-global pose-aware cross-sensor
human-matching module that predicts the alignment among
each sensor, even in the absence of calibration. Additionally,
our coarse-to-fine sensor-expandable pose optimizer further
optimizes the 3D human key points and the alignments, it is
also capable of incorporating additional cameras to enhance
accuracy. Extensive experiments on Human-M3 and FreeMotion datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art single-modal methods, offering an
expandable and efficient solution for multi-person motion
capture across various applications.

Introduction
Vision-based human motion capture refers to the process of
accurately predicting and reconstructing human meshes in
open environments by utilizing visual data from LiDAR or
camera. The approach eliminates the need for wearable sensors, enabling the capture of natural and unrestricted human
motion. It is particularly advantageous in scenarios such as
daily activities and sports, where the use of wearable devices
may be impractical or restrictive.
Camera-based methods (Belagiannis and Zisserman
2016; Miezal, Taetz, and Bleser 2017; Rajasegaran et al.
2022; Shin et al. 2024) can effectively capture the accurate human local pose by image texture information but lack
depth information, and depth camera-based methods (Sridhar et al. 2015; Wei, Zhang, and Chai 2012; Yu et al. 2017,
2019; Zheng et al. 2018) suffer from lighting conditions and
the limited sensor range. LiDAR is widely used in robotics
and autonomous driving (Zhu et al. 2021, 2020; Cong et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2023) for perceiving depth
information in large-scale scenes. Previous LiDAR-based
methods (Li et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2023b; Ren et al. 2024)
can estimate the global human pose in large-scale scenes by
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9032

