The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Free-Moving Object Reconstruction and Pose Estimation with Virtual Camera
Haixin Shi1 , Yinlin Hu2 , Daniel Koguciuk2 , Juan-Ting Lin2
Mathieu Salzmann1 , David Ferstl2
2

1
EPFL
Magic Leap

Abstract
We propose an approach for reconstructing free-moving object from a monocular RGB video. Most existing methods
either assume scene prior, hand pose prior, object category
pose prior, or rely on local optimization with multiple sequence segments. We propose a method that allows free interaction with the object in front of a moving camera without relying on any prior, and optimizes the sequence globally
without any segments. We progressively optimize the object
shape and pose simultaneously based on an implicit neural
representation. A key aspect of our method is a virtual camera system that reduces the search space of the optimization
significantly. We evaluate our method on the standard HO3D
dataset and a collection of egocentric RGB sequences captured with a head-mounted device. We demonstrate that our
approach outperforms most methods significantly, and is on
par with recent techniques that assume prior information.

Figure 1: Free-moving object reconstruction and pose estimation from a monocular RGB video. Top: Input sequence.
Middle: Existing methods (Hampali et al. 2023) rely on
segment-wise optimization with multiple easy segments of
the sequence, which tends to be local optimal, as shown in
different trajectory colors. Bottom: Our method optimizes
object shape and pose progressively without any segments,
producing globally consistent shape and pose results.

Project Page — https://haixinshi.github.io/fmov/

1

Introduction

Understanding 3D objects around us is a fundamental
problem in computer vision, and also a critical component in many applications, such as augmented reality (AR) (Billinghurst 2021) and robot manipulation (Thalhammer et al. 2023). This requires an accurate reconstruction and pose estimation of such objects. With a monocular RGB camera, most current work tackle this problem
with major simplifications, either by moving the camera
around a static object (Oechsle, Peng, and Geiger 2021;
Rünz et al. 2020; Yariv et al. 2020; Zou et al. 2024) or by
rotating the object with hands in front of a stationary camera (Rusinkiewicz, Hall-Holt, and Levoy 2002; Tzionas and
Gall 2015; Weise, Leibe, and Van Gool 2008; Weise et al.
2009; Chen et al. 2023).
In this paper, we investigate a more general setting with
the example of an AR device where the object is freemoving in front of a head-mounted camera. We neither assume any object category prior nor any hand prior in this
new setting, which allows the objects to be moved in any
manner, or freely manipulated with any grasping style if
moved by hands.

Without pose initialization, most recent methods (Lin
et al. 2021; Jeong et al. 2021; Rosinol, Leonard, and Carlone 2022; Rozumnyi et al. 2023) optimize the shape representation and poses simultaneously. However, most of them
either rely on geometry clues of the background, which is
inapplicable for free-moving objects, or can only handle a
restricted range of viewpoints. On the other hand, some recent methods (Hampali et al. 2023) use progressive training
to solve this problem and rely on segment-wise optimization
based on multiple overlapping segments of the sequence.
This strategy, however, suffers mainly in two ways. First, the
frame selection of each segment is error-prone, since it typically relies on the changes of mask area of the target between
consecutive frames, which can hardly be generalized to different object shapes. Second, the segment-wise optimization
is inherently local and suboptimal, as shown in Fig. 1.
We propose a method for joint reconstruction and pose
estimation of free-moving objects without any segments,
which can be globally optimized with a single network. Our
observation is that the unknown pose trajectory of the object
can be simplified with a new virtual camera system that al-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6860

