The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-View Collaborative Learning Network for Speech Deepfake Detection
Kuiyuan Zhang1 , Zhongyun Hua1 * , Rushi Lan2 , Yifang Guo3 , Yushu Zhang4 , Guoai Xu1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
School of Computer Science and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, China
3
Alibaba Group, China
4
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, China
zkyhitsz@gmail.com, huazyum@gmail.com, rslan2016@163.com, guoyifang@gmail.com
yushu@nuaa.edu.cn, xga@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Feature Extractor

As deep learning techniques advance rapidly, deepfake
speech synthesized through text-to-speech or voice conversion networks is becoming increasingly realistic, posing significant challenges for detection and raising potential threats
to social security. This growing realism has prompted extensive research in speech deepfake detection. However, current detection methods primarily focus on extracting features from either the raw waveform or the spectrogram, often overlooking the valuable correspondences between these
two modalities that could enhance the detection of previously
unseen types of deepfakes. In this work, we propose a multiview collaborative learning network for speech deepfake detection, which jointly learns robust speech representations
from both raw waveforms and spectrograms. Specifically,
we first design a Dual-Branch Contrastive Learning (DBCL)
framework for learning different view features. DBCL consists of two branches that learn representations from the raw
waveform or the spectrogram and utilizes contrastive learning to enhance inter- and inner-view correlations. Additionally, we introduce a Waveform-Spectrogram Fusion Module
(WSFM) to exchange multi-view information for collaborative learning. In the feature learning process, WSFM converts
features between views and merges them adaptively using
waveform-spectrogram cross-attention. The final detection is
conducted based on the concatenation of the waveform and
spectrogram features. We conduct extensive experiments on
four benchmark deepfake speech detection datasets, and the
experimental results demonstrate that our method can achieve
better detection performance than current state-of-the-art detection methods.

Classifier
(a)
Single-view
Learning

Feature Extractor

Classifier

Feature Extractor

(b)
Multi-view
Classifier Collaborative
Learning

Interaction
Feature Extractor

Figure 1: Illustration of two feature learning frameworks
in speech deepfake detection. Previous single-view learning
methods only learn speech representation from raw waveform or spectrogram, ignoring the correlation between two
views. In contrast, our multi-view collaborative learning
framework can learn speech representation from two views.

develop robust methods for deepfake speech detection.
Recently, researchers have designed many elaborate networks for detecting deepfake speech. These methods have
achieved remarkable performance by modeling speech
forgery cues from either raw waveform or speech spectrogram, using features such as Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC) (Wang et al. 2017), linear frequency cepstral coefficients (LFCC) (Ding et al. 2021), and Fourier bispectrum (AlBadawy, Lyu, and Farid 2019). However, existing detection approaches rely on single-view input for
feature learning, ignoring the potential correlations between
waveform and spectrogram features. This limitation may undermine the overall performance of these detection methods.
The complementary correlation between waveform and
spectrogram features in speech signals can benefit feature
learning for deepfake speech detection. Waveform features
capture the temporal dynamics and amplitude variations inherent in speech, while spectrogram features model timefrequency characteristics in the frequency domain. By integrating information from both views, a more comprehensive understanding of the underlying signal properties can
be achieved, thereby improving the discriminative power
of the detection system. The work (Yang et al. 2024) incorporated multi-view representation using hand-craft spectrogram features and learning-based waveform features for

Introduction
The detection of deepfake speech has attracted increasing
attention recently. With the rapid development of Text-ToSpeech (TTS) and Voice Conversion (VC) techniques, one
can easily use these tools to generate counterfeit speech
that is hard for humans to recognize. This poses significant
threats to multimedia security, as deepfake speech can be
abused for impersonation attacks, reputation damage, online harassment, and other malicious activities (FranceschiBicchierai 2020; Burgess 2020). Therefore, it is urgent to
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1075

