The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Extracting Interpretable Task-Specific Circuits
from Large Language Models for Faster Inference
Jorge Garcı́a-Carrasco, Alejandro Maté, Juan Trujillo
Department of Software and Computing Systems, University of Alicante, Spain
jorge.g@ua.es, {amate,jtrujillo}@dlsi.ua.es

Abstract

the use of LLMs can be a challenge in resource-constrained
environments.
Because of this, the field of model compression has become crucial, specially on LLMs (Zhu et al. 2023). In
short, model compression techniques aim to reduce either
the space required to load a model, the computational cost of
performing the forward pass for inference, or both. Current
model compression techniques can be grouped in four types:
(i) Quantization-based techniques involve reducing the precision of the parameters and/or activations (Liu et al. 2023;
Kim et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2022; Park et al. 2022). (ii) Pruning techniques, first introduced in LeCun, Denker, and Solla
(1989), consist on reducing the size of the model by removing parameters or components of the model. These techniques can be divided into unstructured (Frantar and Alistarh 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2023) and structured
approaches (Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023; Santacroce et al.
2023), where the main difference is that unstructured approaches remove individual parameters, leading to a sparse
model, whereas structured approaches remove connections
or hierarchical structures, therefore preserving the overall
network structure. (iii) Knowledge distillation aims to transfer knowledge from a complex (teacher) model, into a simpler (student) model (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Gu
et al. 2024; Agarwal et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2022; Shridhar, Stolfo, and Sachan 2023). (iv) Low-rank factorization
are techniques that try to approximate a parameter matrix by
a product of two lower-dimensional matrices, hence reducing the number of parameters (Povey et al. 2018; Idelbayev
and Carreira-Perpiñán 2020).
Although these works on model compression have
achieved great results, they generally focus on reducing the
computational size/cost of the model while maintaining the
general performance as much as possible. However, this
leads us to the following question: What if we want to take
advantage of the capabilities that an LLM has on a specific
task? In other words, is it possible to extract the minimal
subset from an LLM that is able to perform a specific task in
a faster, standalone manner?
Recent Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) works have
shown that specific tasks are indeed carried out by a number
of components that can be localized. The field of MI aims to
reverse-engineer neural networks to explain their behaviors
in human-understandable components (Elhage et al. 2021,

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance across a wide range of tasks. However, the size
of LLMs is steadily increasing, hindering their application
on computationally constrained environments. On the other
hand, despite their general capabilities, there are many situations where only one specific task is performed, rendering all
other capabilities unnecessary and wasteful. This leads us to
the following question: Is it possible to extract the minimal
subset from an LLM that is able to perform a specific task in
a faster, standalone manner? Recent works on Mechanistic
Interpretability (MI) have shown that specific tasks are performed by a localized subset of components, or circuit. However, current techniques used to identify the circuit cannot be
used to extract it for its standalone usage. In this work, we
propose a novel approach to automatically extract the subset
of the LLM that properly performs a targeted task requiring
no additional training and a small amount of data samples.
We evaluate our approach on different tasks and show that
the resulting models are (i) considerably smaller, reducing
the number of parameters up to 82.77% and (ii) more interpretable, as they focus on the circuit that is used to carry out
the specific task, and can therefore be understood using MI
techniques.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) based on the Transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) have recently shown impressive performance across a wide range of tasks (Brown
et al. 2020; Achiam et al. 2023). These models are characterized by having a large amount of parameters as well as being
trained on large amounts of broad data in a self-supervised
manner (e.g predicting the next token). In fact, it has been
empirically shown that the performance of LLMs increases
with the number of parameters, as well as training dataset
size and amount of training (Kaplan et al. 2020). Therefore,
we expect the next generation of LLMs to improve their performance even more as they continue growing even larger.
However, the computational cost can become prohibitive
in many situations. As an example, it takes around 130.4GB
of memory just to load the largest Llama2 model (Touvron
et al. 2023a) (70 billion parameters in 16-bit precision), totaling up to two A100 80GB GPUs. This clearly shows that
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16772

