The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Interweaving Memories of a Siamese Large Language Model
Xin Song1 , Zhikai Xue2 , Guoxiu He1 * , Jiawei Liu3 , Wei Lu3
1

School of Economics and Management, East China Normal University
2
Department of Computer Science, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
3
School of Information Management, Wuhan University
xsong2023@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zxue1@wpi.edu, gxhe@fem.ecnu.edu.cn, {laujames2017, weilu}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods optimize
large language models (LLMs) by modifying or introducing a
small number of parameters to enhance alignment with downstream tasks. However, they can result in catastrophic forgetting, where LLMs prioritize new knowledge at the expense
of comprehensive world knowledge. A promising approach
to mitigate this issue is to recall prior memories based on the
original knowledge. To this end, we propose a model-agnostic
PEFT framework, IMSM, which Interweaves Memories of
a Siamese Large Language Model. Specifically, our siamese
LLM is equipped with an existing PEFT method. Given an
incoming query, it generates two distinct memories based on
the pre-trained and fine-tuned parameters. IMSM then incorporates an interweaving mechanism that regulates the contributions of both original and enhanced memories when generating the next token. This framework is theoretically applicable to all open-source LLMs and existing PEFT methods.
We conduct extensive experiments across various benchmark
datasets, evaluating the performance of popular open-source
LLMs using the proposed IMSM, in comparison to both classical and leading PEFT methods. Our findings indicate that
IMSM maintains comparable time and space efficiency to
backbone PEFT methods while significantly improving performance and effectively mitigating catastrophic forgetting.

Figure 1: Comparison between vanilla PEFT (a) and our proposed IMSM (b). Vanilla PEFT methods employ an LLM
only once. The parameter distribution shift will cause the
LLM to forget general knowledge. Instead, IMSM incorporates a siamese LLM, which can be regarded as two LLMs,
sharing identical structure and pre-trained parameters. One
remains frozen while the other is fine-tuned using an existing PEFT method. By flexibly recalling the memory of the
original LLM, IMSM can improve fine-tuning performance
and alleviate catastrophic forgetting.

but does not inherently align LLMs with downstream objectives (Fu et al. 2023; Ding et al. 2023). Continued pretraining or supervised fine-tuning can better align parameters with tasks but is time-consuming and computationally
intensive (VM et al. 2024; Han et al. 2024). To address this
issue, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) (Fu et al. 2023;
Ding et al. 2023), as shown in Figure 1 (a), selectively finetunes a limited subset of parameters or adds new ones, while
keeping the majority fixed.
However, refining the parameters of LLMs using target datasets enhances domain-specific knowledge but introduces biases related to that domain and task (Ren et al.
2024). This process can result in forgetting world knowledge and compromising general abilities, which is known as
catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017). Effective countermeasures typically encompass strategies for replaying pre-training data (Hayes
et al. 2020; Kar et al. 2022) or constraints on updating
parameters (Chen et al. 2020). Nevertheless, obtaining appropriate pre-training data for LLMs presents considerable
challenges. Additionally, the vast range of tasks and the

Code — https://github.com/ECNU-Text-Computing/IMSM

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as a significant breakthrough in natural language processing (NLP)
(Bai et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023; Zeng
et al. 2023). With extensive world knowledge, they have exhibited remarkable zero-shot abilities across various tasks,
such as language understanding (Achiam et al. 2023), logical reasoning (Kojima et al. 2022), etc. Nevertheless, one of
the challenges with LLMs is their susceptibility to generating incorrect or unfaithful outputs, especially in unfamiliar
domains (Sun et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2024). In-context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al. 2020; Huang and He 2024) mitigates
this issue by incorporating typical examples into prompts,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25155

