The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Performance Incentivizing Algorithms for Multi-Armed Bandits with
Strategic Agents
Seyed A. Esmaeili1 , Suho Shin2 , Aleksandrs Slivkins3
1

University of Chicago
University of Maryland
3
Microsoft Research New York City
esmaeili@uchicago.edu, suhoshin@umd.edu, slivkins@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

robust; adaptively learning and adjusting to the agents’ performance in order to generate a non-trivial amount of revenue even when the agents deviate from rational behavior.
We model this problem as a multi-armed bandit (MAB)
problem where the agents (workers) are the arms. As in
the stochastic MAB setting each arm has a reward (performance) distribution associated with it. However, we allow
the agent to modify his rewards after the realization. More
specifically, the agent is able to modify the reward by absorbing (stealing) the reward leading to a low quality output
or he may improve (lift up) the reward to give a better output
to the principal. Since real-life agents are heterogeneous in
their skill level, in our model each agent has a specific mean
for his distribution and can lift up his rewards to a specific
(not necessarily unique) maximum value. To have a more
realistic model of the agents, we assume that there always
exists a subset of honest agents, who either do not modify
their rewards or possibly improve them.
In this paper, we show how to simultaneously achieve
both desiderata of performance incentivization and robustness. Specifically, we show that a class of MAB algorithms which we call sharply-adaptive, monotonic, and fair
(SAMF) are both performance incentivizing and robust. As
the name suggests, SAMF algorithms satisfy a collection of
properties which we show to be both natural and intuitive.
A SAMF algorithm leads to an equilibrium where agents essentially give their top performance leading the principal to
obtain optimal revenue. In fact, under a mild assumption on
the size of market (number of agents) we show that no suboptimal revenue equilibria can exist when using SAMF algorithms. We further consider a setting where the top performance level across the agents is not known either to the principal or the agents. We show that this setting can be handled
by combining second price auction methods with SAMF algorithms, with the final mechanism leading to high revenue
at equilibrium. Importantly, when agents deviate from equilibrium behavior, SAMF algorithms are robust and achieve
revenue at least at the level of the honest agent with the highest reward mean. An advantage of our approach is its modularity. That is, we identify a set of properties that a MAB
algorithm needs to satisfy to be a SAMF algorithm. Interestingly, we show that the standard UCB and ϵ-greedy algorithms are examples of SAMF algorithms. In comparison to
prior work, our setting allows for more complicated scenar-

Motivated by applications such as online labor markets we
consider a variant of the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem where we have a collection of arms representing strategic
agents with different performance characteristics. The platform (principal) chooses an agent in each round to complete
a task. Unlike the standard setting, when an arm is pulled
it can modify its reward by absorbing it or improving it at
the expense of a higher cost. The principle has to solve a
mechanism design problem to incentivize the arms to give
their best performance. However, since even with an effective mechanism agents may still deviate from rational behavior, the principal wants a robust algorithm that also gives a
non-vacuous guarantee on the total accumulated rewards under non-equilibrium behavior. In this paper, we introduce a
class of bandit algorithms that meet the two objectives of performance incentivization and robustness simultaneously. We
do this by identifying a collection of intuitive properties that
a bandit algorithm has to satisfy to achieve these objectives.
Finally, we show that settings where the principal has no information about the arms’ performance characteristics can be
handled by combining ideas from second price auctions with
our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Various settings of the web economy involve a platform
(principal) who selects workers (agents) to complete tasks.
These agents differ in their intrinsic performance abilities
and can in addition exert further effort to improve their performance at the expense of a higher cost. Clearly, if the principal selects the top performing agents that give their best
effort he would obtain higher revenue. To do that the principal has to incentivize higher quality performance through effective mechanism design/performance incentivization. Furthermore, a deeper look would lead to a second important
consideration, namely robustness. While mechanism design
can be effective in settings where the agents are entities like
firms and corporations who exhibit high levels of rationality, when the agents are instead average individuals, deviations from rational behavior are known and observed to
exist. Therefore, a more effective solution should not only
incentivize higher quality contributions, but should also be
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13814

