The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

In-Context Policy Adaptation via Cross-Domain Skill Diffusion
Minjong Yoo, Woo Kyung Kim, Honguk Woo*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
{mjyoo2, kwk2696, hwoo}@skku.edu

Abstract
In this work, we present an in-context policy adaptation (ICPAD) framework designed for long-horizon multi-task environments, exploring diffusion-based skill learning techniques
in cross-domain settings. The framework enables rapid adaptation of skill-based reinforcement learning policies to diverse
target domains, especially under stringent constraints on no
model updates and only limited target domain data. Specifically, the framework employs a cross-domain skill diffusion
scheme, where domain-agnostic prototype skills and a domaingrounded skill adapter are learned jointly and effectively from
an offline dataset through cross-domain consistent diffusion
processes. The prototype skills act as primitives for common
behavior representations of long-horizon policies, serving as
a lingua franca to bridge different domains. Furthermore, to
enhance the in-context adaptation performance, we develop a
dynamic domain prompting scheme that guides the diffusionbased skill adapter toward better alignment with the target
domain. Through experiments with robotic manipulation in
Metaworld and autonomous driving in CARLA, we show that
our ICPAD framework achieves superior policy adaptation
performance under limited target domain data conditions for
various cross-domain configurations including differences in
environment dynamics, agent embodiment, and task horizon.

Conventional policy adaptation

In-context policy adaptation (ICPAD)

Task-wise individual policy adaptation

Domain-wise unified policies adaptation

    …       …  
Policy adaptation
…
…
Task-wise few-shot demo.
    …       …  

    …  

Skill
Prompt
Skill adapter

Skill
Prompt
Skill adapter

Target
domain

Source
domain

Target
domain

Source
domain

    …  

Prototype skills

Figure 1: A middle-tier strategy for cross-domain policy adaptation in ICPAD: as shown on the right, in ICPAD, policies π
learned in the source domain with domain-agnostic prototype
skills (in the middle-tier) are capable of adapting to the target
domain in an in-context unified way by exploiting few-shot
target domain data. Unlike the conventional policy adaptation relying on policy-wise model updates (shown on the left),
ICPAD allows for simultaneous adaptation of multiple policies to the target domain through domain-wise middle-tier
adaptation.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has exhibited remarkable success in addressing sequential decision-making problems.
However, a fundamental challenge emerges in the context of
policy adaptation, the process of applying a policy trained in
a source domain via RL to a different target domain, particularly for complex, long-horizon tasks (Zhu et al. 2023; Zhao,
Queralta, and Westerlund 2020; Hua et al. 2021; He et al.
2024; Hakhamaneshi et al. 2022). This challenge escalates
under practical restrictions that data availability is limited
and direct interaction with the target domain is prohibited.
To address this challenge, we explore skill-based RL approaches (Pertsch, Lee, and Lim 2021; Nam et al. 2022)
in cross-domain environments, with the aim of facilitating
the in-context adaptation of skill-based policies to different
target domains under limited target data. We present an incontext policy adaptation framework, namely ICPAD. As
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22191

illustrated in Figure 1, ICPAD facilitates policy adaptation
to target domains in a unified way, by learning transferable
prototype skills and skill adapters offline, and implementing
a middle-tier adaptation strategy. Unlike conventional policy
adaptation approaches, which typically require task-specific
individual policy transfers, ICPAD offers a notable advantage in cross-domain multi-task environments. Its effectiveness stems from prototype skills that function as the middletier adaptation layer, linking policies and domains. These
skills, which support intermediate representations or functional primitives of policies, facilitate their translation into
domain-specific actions through dedicated skill adapters. In
doing so, we adapt skill-based RL approaches to the context
of cross-domain few-shot policy adaptation. That is, source
domains have abundant data, while target domains are restricted to minimal data.
In the offline learning phase of ICPAD, we first establish
the middle-tier adaptation layer, prototype skills, which encapsulate expert behavior patterns and are transferable across
domains. Specifically, we develop a cross-domain skill diffusion scheme, incorporating the distribution matching-based
cross-domain consistency into the skill diffusion process.

