The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequential Joint Dependency Aware
Human Pose Estimation with State Space Model
Hanxi Yin1 , Shaodi You1 , Jungong Han2 , Zhixiang Chen2 *
1

University of Amsterdam
2
University of Sheffield
{h.yin, s.you}@uva.nl, {jungong.han, zhixiang.chen}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we present a sequential joint dependency
aware model for monocular 2D-to-3D human pose estimation. While existing estimators leverage the (bi)directional
joint dependency with graph convolutions and attention, we
further propose to exploit the sequential dependency between
joints with state space model (SSM) with a pose SSM module. Our sequential dependency takes into consideration the
information of kinematic chain, joint hierarchy and the body
part. We design a sequential dependency aware representation to transform the pose data into sequential data for our
pose SSM module. We tailor the SSM layer in the pose SSM
module for pose estimation by learning joint-dependent parameters and introducing pose aware hidden state initialization. Extensive experiments are conducted on two datasets to
validate the effectiveness of our proposed SSM module, and
the results demonstrate that our pose estimator can deliver
impressive performance.

Figure 1: An illustration of (a) the dependency in graph convolutions, (b) the dependency between any two joints in attention and (c) the sequential dependency in our pose SSM
module.
The latest progress leverages graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) and Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) to capture the relationship between human body joints. As human skeleton can be well
represented by a graph, GCNs are utilized to extract local
features by aggregating neighbor nodes in skeletal structure. While GCNs have been proven effective in dealing
with skeleton graph (Zhao et al. 2019; Ci et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2020; Zou and Tang 2021; Xu and Takano 2021; Zeng
et al. 2021), their performance are limited for only considering first-order neighbors and failing to understand global
information. Stacking multiple GCN layers may increase
model’s receptive fields but will encounter the inherent oversmooth problem (Li, Han, and Wu 2018). On the other hand,
transformer-based methods (Zheng et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022; Zhu et al. 2023) treat human joints as a fully-visible
sequence. The self-attention model is employed to capture
dependencies among all joint nodes by calculating the joints
similarities, and thus obtain global receptive fields. However, this self-attention mechanism lacks some of the inductive biases inherent to GCNs such as structural information
in human joints, which may results in limited capacity to
capture the underlying patterns in skeleton graph and unsatisfied generalization. Some recent works (Zhao, Wang,
and Tian 2022; Zhai et al. 2023; Kang et al. 2023) have applied both GCNs and transformer to extract local and global
features from human joints, achieving promising results.
Generally, GCNs and transformers, with different receptive

Code — https://github.com/yinhanxi/PoseSSM

Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) is a longstanding computer vision problem and has broad application in virtual reality, human tracking (Mehta et al. 2017b), human-robot interaction (Errity 2016), computer animation, and human behavior analysis. Monocular 3D HPE aims to generate 3D human joints locations from a single-frame image. In comparison to multi-frame approach, single-frame approach does
not requires high computational costs and expensive multiview capture system, making it widely used (Zhai et al.
2023). Monocular 3D HPE is an ill-posed problem due to
the depth ambiguity caused by the many-to-one 3D-to-2D
projection. Existing methods can be broadly categorized into
end-to-end learning architectures that infer 3D pose directly
from images and two stage solutions that estimate 2D joint
from images followed by 3D pose estimation from 2D joint
detection. Similar to (Gong et al. 2023; Zhao, Wang, and
Tian 2022; Zhai et al. 2023), in this paper, we study the latter and focus on the lifting from 2D joints to 3D joints as the
first stage can leverage the high performance of existing 2D
keypoint detectors (Dabral et al. 2018; Pham et al. 2020).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9499

