The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pragmatist: Multiview Conditional Diffusion Models for
High-Fidelity 3D Reconstruction from Unposed Sparse Views
Songchun Zhang, Chunhui Zhao*
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology,
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China

Unposed Input
Images

Abstract
Inferring 3D structures from sparse, unposed observations is
challenging due to its unconstrained nature. Recent methods propose to predict implicit representations directly from
unposed inputs in a data-driven manner, achieving promising results. However, these methods do not utilize geometric priors and cannot hallucinate the appearance of unseen
regions, thus making it challenging to reconstruct fine geometric and textural details. To tackle this challenge, our key
idea is to reformulate this ill-posed problem as conditional
novel view synthesis, aiming to generate complete observations from limited input views to facilitate reconstruction.
With complete observations, the poses of the input views
can be easily recovered and further used to optimize the reconstructed object. To this end, we propose a novel pipeline
Pragmatist. First, we generate a complete observation of the
object via a multiview conditional diffusion model. Then,
we use a feed-forward large reconstruction model to obtain
the reconstructed mesh. To further improve the reconstruction quality, we recover the poses of input views by inverting
the obtained 3D representations and further optimize the texture using detailed input views. Unlike previous approaches,
our pipeline improves reconstruction by efficiently leveraging unposed inputs and generative priors, circumventing the
direct resolution of highly ill-posed problems. Extensive experiments show that our approach achieves promising performance in several benchmarks.

SAP3D LEAP

Our 3D Shape and Texture

GT

Figure 1: Our method reconstructs 3D geometry and texture
from sparse unposed images, even across different scenes of
the same object. More results are available in the supplementary material.

the complete 3D structure from only limited partial observations. To overcome these challenges, some methods have
achieved promising results, either by pre-training models
on large-scale datasets to introduce prior knowledge of 3D
scenes (Tang et al. 2024a; Chen et al. 2024a; Yu et al.
2021; Li et al. 2023; Zhang and Zhao 2023), or by optimizing scene by scene through manually designed regularization (Zou et al. 2024; Zhou and Tulsiani 2023; Wang et al.
2023a). However, such methods rely heavily on the known
accurate camera poses of the input image, which is usually
only available in synthetic datasets or through privileged information in additional views. To tackle this challenge, some
methods (Jiang et al. 2024a, 2023; Kani et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2023b) adopt a fully feed-forward pose-free framework by learning geometric priors from large-scale 3D objects through spatial-aware attention. However, these methods have difficulty recovering complex geometries and textures due to volumetric resolution constraints. In addition,
due to the lack of geometric prior, it is challenging for these
methods to converge on datasets containing complex objects. Recent methods (Han et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2023a)
first estimate the sparse camera pose from images using pretrained models, and then reconstruct the 3D model via testtime optimization, which can achieve superior quality compared to the feed-forward methods. However, these methods
do not fully utilize the input view information, and the pose
estimation error may lead to suboptimal 3D reconstruction

Introduction
Dense multi-view 3D reconstruction (Schonberger and
Frahm 2016; Wang et al. 2021; Barnes et al. 2009) has always been one of the core challenges in computer vision
and graphics. Current 3D reconstruction techniques have
achieved impressive results in various applications such as
film production, e-commerce, and virtual and augmented reality. This paper focuses on the specific setting of reconstructing 3D objects from unposed sparse view observations,
which is closer to real-world scenarios with only partial observations (e.g., casual capture and e-commerce scenarios).
This problem is particularly challenging from many perspectives, including lacking the explicit geometric information provided by the camera poses, and the need to infer
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10112

