The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Queryable Prototype Multiple Instance Learning with Vision-Language Models
for Incremental Whole Slide Image Classification
Jiaxiang Gou, Luping Ji* , Pei Liu, Mao Ye
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
goujiaxiang@std.uestc.edu.cn, jiluping@uestc.edu.cn, yuukilp@std.uestc.edu.cn, maoye@uestc.edu.cn

(a)

WSI Data Stream

Abstract
Whole Slide Image (WSI) classification has very significant
applications in clinical pathology, e.g., tumor identification
and cancer diagnosis. Currently, most research attention is focused on Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) using static WSI
datasets. One of the most obvious weaknesses of these methods is that they cannot efficiently preserve and utilize previously learned knowledge. With any new data arriving, classification models are required to be re-trained on both previous and current new data. To overcome this shortcoming and
break through traditional vision modality, this paper proposes
the first Vision-Language-based framework with Queryable
Prototype Multiple Instance Learning (QPMIL-VL) specially
designed for incremental WSI classification. This framework
mainly consists of two information processing branches: one
is for generating bag-level features by prototype-guided aggregation of instance features, while the other is for enhancing class features through a combination of class ensemble, tunable vector and class similarity loss. The experiments
on four public WSI datasets demonstrate that our QPMILVL framework is effective for incremental WSI classification
and often significantly outperforms other compared methods,
achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.

Store

Vision

Buffer
Replay

Image
Encoder

Instance features

Image
Encoder

Query

WSI Data Stream

(b)
Prototype
Pool

Instance features

Aggregator

Classify

Vision

Prompts

Aggregator
Classify

Class
texts

Text
Encoder

Class features

Enhancing

Language

Figure 1: (a) Existing visual modality framework for incremental WSI classification with buffer dependency; (b)
our proposed Vision-Language-based framework with a
queryable prototype pool and class feature enhancement.

Laak, Litjens, and Ciompi 2021; Derakhshani et al. 2022).
As a result, a well-trained WSI classification model that is
suitable for previous data often cannot adapt to new data.
Therefore, it must be re-trained on the entire dataset (including both previous and new data), leading to a significant increase in training costs. This presents the necessities of new
methods well-tailored to dynamic data distributions.
Incremental Learning (IL) (Li and Hoiem 2017), also referred to as continual learning or lifelong learning, is exactly
such approach to filling the aforementioned gap. As a new
learning paradigm, it can encourage models to maintain the
memory stability on old data distributions while adapting to
a new one (Wang et al. 2024), thus mitigating the notorious catastrophic forgetting problem (McCloskey and Cohen
1989). Owing to such practical benefit, this new paradigm
has attracted great attention and has shown strong potential for application in the real-world (Li et al. 2019; Caccia et al. 2021; Wang, Huang, and Hong 2022). Similarly,
in CPATH, IL strategies are also noticed recently and show
promising performance in learning from dynamic WSI data.
Concretely, ConSlide (Huang et al. 2023a) is proposed for
the first time to study incremental WSI classification, as il-

Code — https://github.com/can-can-ya/QPMIL-VL

Introduction
Histopathology Whole Slide Image (WSI) is crucial for
the diagnosis and treatment of tumor diseases (Song et al.
2023). To model gigapixel WSIs (e.g., 90, 000 × 90, 000
pixels) for training clinical-grade models, many methods
based on Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) have been extensively studied in the field of computational pathology
(CPATH) (Campanella et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2021; Lin et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2024c). A shared characteristic of these
methods is that they are specially designed for capturing a
static data distribution (e.g., a given WSI dataset with two
lung cancer subtypes), still following conventional machine
learning paradigm. However, in the real-world, the distribution of WSI data could be dynamic due to the arrival of new
datasets or the discovery of emerging cancer types (Van der
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3158

