The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Invertible Projection and Conditional Alignment for
Multi-Source Blended-Target Domain Adaptation
Yuwu Lu1, 2 , Haoyu Huang1 , Waikeung Wong2 * , Xue Hu1
1

South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
{luyuwu2008, hyhuang99, hx1430940232}@163.com, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA), which utilizes
multiple source domains to align the distribution of a single
target domain, is a popular and challenging setting in domain
adaptation (DA). However, existing MSDA approaches are
difficult to obtain sufficient target domain knowledge, which
serves as the transfer object. Furthermore, the target distributions are confused in the real world, i.e., the model cannot obtain the domain labels of target domains. To tackle these problems, we consider a more realistic DA setting Multi-Source
Blended-Target Domain Adaptation (MBDA) and propose
an Invertible Projection and Conditional Alignment (IPCA)
method. Specifically, to reduce the impact of the distribution discrepancy, we construct an invertible projection for the
source and blended-target domains. Then, we adopt a projection consistency regularization to our model, which makes
the model more robust on the domain-specific parts. In addition, because the labels of the blended-target domain are
unseen, we introduce conditional discrepancy to obtain the
domain-level discriminative information and guide the classifier to serve as the discriminator, which is suitable for MBDA
setting. Extensive experiment results on the ImageCLEF-DA,
Office-Home, and DomainNet datasets validate the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: The comparison of (a) BTDA and (b) MBDA. F
denotes the feature generator, C denotes the classifier, and
DM denotes the discrepancy matching technique. Due to
the lack of source representations in BTDA, the model is
difficult to align distribution.

Code — https://github.com/hyhuang99/IPCA

and a single target domain (test data). Due to insufficient feature information from a single source domain and a single
target domain, the standard UDA methods (Wu et al. 2018;
Ganin et al. 2016) are difficult to learn domain-invariant
representations. Therefore, to obtain more feature information, multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA) attracts
more attention (Peng et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2018). Existing MSDA methods can be roughly divided into two categories. The first category is metric-based methods (Peng
et al. 2019; Zhu, Zhuang, and Wang 2019), which measure
and minimize the distribution discrepancy between multiple
source and target domains. The second category is adversarial learning-based methods (Zhao et al. 2018; Li et al.
2021b), which group multiple source and target domains
into multiple adversarial learning groups and perform the
min-max game between the feature generator and the relevant discriminator to align feature implicitly.
Although existing MSDA methods have made significant progress, they are still facing some challenges. Current
MSDA works are mainly based on the assumption that the

Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have attracted extensive attention due to their promising performance, especially in computer vision tasks (He et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2023; Ni et al. 2023). However, the performance of DNNs is
based on the setting that training data and test data are drawn
from the same distribution. In a real-world environment, the
training data and test data are usually drawn from different
distributions, which may lead to model degradation due to
domain shift (Pan and Yang 2010) between the training and
test data. To address this issue, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Long et al. 2018)
has been proposed.
The standard UDA setting is to learn domain-invariant
representations from a single source domain (training data)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19180

