The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Better Spherical Sliced-Wasserstein Distance Learning with
Data-Adaptive Discriminative Projection Direction
Hongliang Zhang1 , Shuo Chen2 , Lei Luo1 * , Jian Yang1 *
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
{zhang1hongliang, cslluo, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, shuo.chen@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

2020).
The distribution analysis on the hypersphere is often focused on the statistical study of directions, orientations, and
rotations. It is known as circle or sphere statistical analysis
(Jammalamadaka and Sengupta 2001). Recently, there has
been a growing interest in comparing probability measures
on the hypersphere using Optimal Transport (OT) (Cui et al.
2019). This is driven by its appealing statistical, geometrical,
and topological properties (Peyré, Cuturi et al. 2019a).
Two critical challenges in applying OT theory are the
high computational complexity and the curse of dimensionality (Peyré, Cuturi et al. 2019b). These issues have led to
a growing focus on developing faster solving tools (Cuturi 2013) and computationally efficient alternative distance
metrics (Kolouri et al. 2019a). One such metric is the SlicedWasserstein (SW) distance, which has lower computational
complexity and does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality (Nietert et al. 2022). This distance metric inherits
similar topological properties from the Wasserstein distance
(Nadjahi et al. 2020) and is widely used as an alternative
solution for comparing probability measures. The SW distance is defined as the expectation of the one-dimensional
Wasserstein distance between two projected measures over
a uniform distribution on the unit sphere. However, due to
the intractability of this expectation, Monte Carlo estimation is often used to approximate the SW distance. Some
SW variants aim to learn a discriminative or optimal projections distribution from training data, PAC-SW (Ohana et al.
2023) learns a discriminative projection direction distribution from training data based on the PAC-Bayesian theory.
DSW (Nguyen et al. 2021) learns optimal projections distribution from training data by the neural network.
Recently, SW distance has been employed to compare
probability measures on the hypersphere due to its computational efficiency and simplicity of implementation. This has
led to the development of spherical sliced OT approaches
(Bonet et al. 2023; Quellmalz, Beinert, and Steidl 2023;
Tran et al. 2024). The main challenge in developing these
methods is extending the classical Radon transform to its
spherical counterparts. Quellmalz et al. (Quellmalz, Beinert, and Steidl 2023) introduced two spherical extensions for
the Radon transform to define sliced OT on the sphere: the
vertical slice transform (Rubin 2018), and the normalized
semicircle transform (Groemer 1998). Bonet et al. (Bonet

Spherical Sliced-Wasserstein (SSW) has recently been proposed to measure the discrepancy between spherical data
distributions in various fields, such as geology, medical domains, computer vision, and deep representation learning.
However, in the original SSW, all projection directions are
treated equally, which is too idealistic and cannot accurately
reflect the importance of different projection directions for
various data distributions. To address this issue, we propose a novel data-adaptive Discriminative Spherical SlicedWasserstein (DSSW) distance, which utilizes a projected energy function to determine the discriminative projection direction for SSW. In our new DSSW, we introduce two types of
projected energy functions to generate the weights for projection directions with complete theoretical guarantees. The first
type employs a non-parametric deterministic function that
transforms the projected Wasserstein distance into its corresponding weight in each projection direction. This improves
the performance of the original SSW distance with negligible
additional computational overhead. The second type utilizes a
neural network-induced function that learns the projection direction weight through a parameterized neural network based
on data projections. This further enhances the performance
of the original SSW distance with less extra computational
overhead. Finally, we evaluate the performance of our proposed DSSW by comparing it with several state-of-the-art
methods across a variety of machine learning tasks, including gradient flows, density estimation on real earth data, and
self-supervised learning.

Introduction
In real-world scenarios, more and more tasks involve defining data distributions on the hypersphere, highlighting the
importance and universality of spherical geometry. These
tasks include characterizing the density distribution of geophysical (Di Marzio, Panzera, and Taylor 2014; An et al.
2024; Hu et al. 2023, 2024) or meteorology data (Besombes
et al. 2021), magnetic imaging of the brain in the medical
field (Vrba and Robinson 2001), texture mapping in computer graphics (Dominitz and Tannenbaum 2010), etc, where
the latent representation is mapped to a bounded space commonly known as a sphere (Wang and Isola 2020; Chen et al.
* corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22425

