The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangling Tabular Data Towards Better One-Class Anomaly Detection
Jianan Ye1,2 , Zhaorui Tan1,2 , Yijie Hu1,2 , Xi Yang1 , Guangliang Cheng2 , Kaizhu Huang3 *
2

1
School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
School of Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Computer Science, University of Liverpool
3
Data Science Research Center, Duke Kunshan University
kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn

1.0

Abstract
Tabular anomaly detection under the one-class classification
setting poses a significant challenge, as it involves accurately
conceptualizing “normal” derived exclusively from a single
category to discern anomalies from normal data variations.
Capturing the intrinsic correlation among attributes within
normal samples presents one promising method for learning the concept. To do so, the most recent effort relies on
a learnable mask strategy with a reconstruction task. However, this wisdom may suffer from the risk of producing uniform masks, i.e., essentially nothing is masked, leading to
less effective correlation learning. To address this issue, we
presume that attributes related to others in normal samples
can be divided into two non-overlapping and correlated subsets, defined as CorrSets, to capture the intrinsic correlation
effectively. Accordingly, we introduce an innovative method
that disentangles CorrSets from normal tabular data. To our
knowledge, this is a pioneering effort to apply the concept
of disentanglement for one-class anomaly detection on tabular data. Extensive experiments on 20 tabular datasets show
that our method substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods and leads to an average performance improvement
of 6.1% on AUC-PR and 2.1% on AUC-ROC.

1

0.8

Mask generator
𝑥

Fifteen soft masks

0.6

(a) MCM (performance: 83.0%)
0.4

0.2

Attention module
𝑥

Two attention maps

(b) Ours (performance: 89.4%)

0.0

Figure 1: Visualization of MCM (Yin et al. 2024)’s fifteen soft masks and our two attention maps on the Thyroid dataset (six attributes). The presented masks and attention maps are averages derived from all training samples. In
MCM’s masks, darker colors indicate greater masking ratios
while a higher attention weight in our attention maps.

Introduction

Tabular anomaly detection under the one-class classification
setting presumes the availability of only one-class data, i.e.,
the normal class samples for training, while the goal during
the test is to discern anomalies (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009; Ruff et al. 2021). In practical scenarios, such as financial fraud detection, cyber intrusion detection, and medical diagnosis (Hilal, Gadsden, and Yawney 2022; Malaiya
et al. 2019; Chen and Konukoglu 2018), this method tries
to detect whether new data points conform to the pattern of
observed normal samples, thereby identifying them as either
normal or abnormal. Given that only normal instances are
available during the training, the inherent challenge lies in
extracting the invariant feature of normal data. An instance
observed with patterns deviating from these characteristics
is detected as an anomaly. However, the lack of prior knowledge on structures in tabular data poses a significant challenge for learning such knowledge (Shenkar and Wolf 2022).

One reasonable way to mitigate this challenge is to focus on capturing the intrinsic correlation among attributes
of normal samples. Once one or more attributes of a sample
deviate anomalously, it is an anomaly, and the correlation
among attributes becomes different from that exhibited in
normal samples. The most recent MCM (Yin et al. 2024)
proposes a learnable mask generator module with a diversity loss to create diverse soft masks (i.e., mask values range
from 0 to 1 for input data). A reconstruction task is then designed to restore the original data from its masked variants.
During inference, anomalous attributes will disrupt the correlations observed in the normal class, leading to a failure to
reconstruct the original data from masked instances, thereby
allowing anomalies to be detected. Despite its efficacy, the
diversity loss may generate masks with nearly uniform values, inducing trivial solutions of the learned intrinsic correlations. Empirical evidence in Figure 1(a) suggests that the

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13061

