The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VCR: A “Cone of Experience” Driven Synthetic Data Generation Framework for
Mathematical Reasoning
Sannyuya Liu1,2 , Jintian Feng1,2 , Xiaoxuan Shen1,2 , Shengyingjie Liu1,2 ,
Qian Wan1,2 * , Jianwen Sun1,2 *
2

1
Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
National Engineering Research Center of Educational Big Data, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
{liusy027, shenxiaoxuan, wanq8228, sunjw}@ccnu.edu.cn, {fjt2018, lsyj}@mails.ccnu.edu.cn

Abstract

pected to further enhance their mathematical reasoning capabilities (Ahn et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024a,b;
Zeng et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024a).
Research shows that synthetic data, as an effective data
augmentation method, can expand existing datasets to
achieve data enrichment. For example, MetaMathQA (Yu
et al. 2024) and XwinMathQA (Li et al. 2024a) enhanced
the queries and responses in the GSM8K and MATH using prompts with strong closed-models such as GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4. The quality of synthetic data directly determines the
performance of LLMs (Zhang et al. 2024a; Cao et al. 2024;
Gunasekar et al. 2023), and its construction process must
consider factors such as scale, relevance, accuracy, and diversity (Zeng et al. 2024). Previous works have overly focused on data scale while neglecting quality dimensions,
leading to high construction costs, low-quality density, and
severe data homogenization issues.
To generate high-quality synthetic data, some works drew
an analogy between LLM training and human learning processes, and proposed various methods for generating synthetic data. For instance, LEMA (An et al. 2024) introduced a strategy of learning from mistakes, creating erroneous reasoning data and its correction as training data.
MMIQC (Liu et al. 2024a) and SkyworkMathQA (Zeng
et al. 2024) rewrote the training set questions into other formats to generate synthetic data, somewhat mimicking the
human learning process through diverse practice formats.
However, these simple analogy methods cannot fully transfer the multi-level experience in the human learning process,
hence they struggle to profoundly guide the data synthesis
process.
Human learning is an extremely complex process that includes both observing others and self-practice. The “Cone
of Experience” educational theory (Dale 1947) posits that
human learning consists of three levels of experience: direct
experience (Learning by Doing), iconic experience (Learning through Observation), and symbolic experience (Learning through Abstractions) 1 . Only through the full integration of these three levels of experience can high-quality
learning be achieved. Inspired by “Cone of Experience”, we
design three levels of experiences for LLM training, aiming

Large language models (LLMs) have shown excellent performance in natural language processing but struggle with mathematical reasoning. As the training mode gradually solidifies,
researchers propose a data-centric concept of artificial intelligence, emphasizing the development of higher-quality data
to empower LLMs. Existing studies construct synthetic data
for mathematical reasoning by expanding public datasets,
thereby performing supervised fine-tuning of LLMs. However, these methods mostly focus on quantity while neglecting quality. The challenging samples fail to receive adequate
consideration during data synthesis process, resulting in high
construction costs, low-quality density, and serious data homogenization. This paper proposes a multi-agent environment called Virtual ClassRoom (VCR), which leverages various agents driven by LLM to construct high-quality diversified synthetic data. Inspired by the “Cone of Experience”
educational theory, VCR introduces three experience levels (direct, iconic, and symbolic) into data synthesis process
by analogy with human learning. A user-friendly instruction
set and role-playing system are carefully designed, enabling
VCR to autonomously plan the scale of synthetic data. This
system covers various educational scenarios, including lecture, discussion, problem design and problem-solving. The
Adaboost idea embodied in the global iterative process further promotes steady performance improvement. Extensive
experiments show that the synthetic data generated by VCR
possess higher quality density and generalization capability,
which can give LLMs superior mathematical reasoning performance with the same scale.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in areas such as dialogue and code generation (Minaee et al. 2024; Luo and Yang 2024; OpenAI 2024;
Dubey et al. 2024), but they continue to face challenges in
mathematical reasoning tasks (Ahn et al. 2024).
The rapid development in the field of LLMs has led to a
gradual homogenization of model architectures and training
methods. From the perspective of Data-centric AI (Zha et al.
2023), constructing higher-quality synthetic data for supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Ouyang et al. 2022) of LLMs is ex* The corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, we mainly use doing experience, observation experience, and abstraction experience to enhance readability.

24650

