The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Retrieval-Augmented Visual Question Answering
via Built-in Autoregressive Search Engines
Xinwei Long1 , Zhiyuan Ma1 , Ermo Hua1 , Kaiyan Zhang1 , Biqing Qi2 , Bowen Zhou1 *
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
longxw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Previous RAG Pipelines

I

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged to address the knowledge-intensive visual question answering
(VQA) task. Current methods mainly employ separate retrieval and generation modules to acquire external knowledge
and generate answers, respectively. We propose ReAuSE, an
alternative to the previous RAG model for the knowledgebased VQA task, which seamlessly integrates knowledge retriever into the generative multi-modal large language model,
serving as a built-in search engine. Specifically, our model
functions both as a generative retriever and an accurate answer generator. It not only helps retrieve documents from the
knowledge base by producing identifiers for each document,
but it also answers visual questions based on the retrieved
documents. Furthermore, we also propose a reinforced retrieval calibration module from relevance feedback to improve retrieval performance and align with the preferences for
accurate answer generation. Extensive experiments on two
representative OKVQA and A-OKVQA datasets demonstrate
significant improvements ranging from 2.9% to 9.6% across
all evaluation metrics when compared to strong baselines.

Q

Captioner
Retrievers Top-k docs VQA Model

Our Framework:
ReAuSE
I
Q

Answers

get_doc_by_ids
KB

Retrieval
Prompt
Answer
Prompt

Answer
Scores

constraint_signal
Doc Ids

Our Model

Answers

Figure 1: Comparing with the Paradigm of Previous
Knowledge-Based VQA Methods.

Chen et al. 2022). RAG-based approaches typically consist of two separate stages: retrieval and generation. In the
first retrieval stage, these methods usually integrate multiple discriminative retrievers, each designed for specific purposes such as image-to-text or text-to-text retrieval. Afterward, in the second answer generation stage, these methods
typically use generative multi-modal large language models
(MLLM) to produce the final result. Despite achieving success in some benchmarks (Marino et al. 2019; Schwenk et al.
2022), this workflow still encounters several limitations. 1)
Current methods sequentially invoke models in the pipeline
for feature engineering, retrieval, and answer generation, requiring the integration of multiple heterogeneous models. 2)
Moreover, these methods typically combine generative answer generators with discriminative retrievers. The disparate
model architectures make it challenging for retrievers to further optimize their performance based on the feedback from
the answer generator. Consequently, the research question
arises: how can we integrate knowledge retrieval and answer generation into a homogeneous generative model?
To address the above issue, we propose ReAuSE,
a novel Retrieval-augmented framework with built-in
Autoregressive Search Engines for knowledge-based VQA
tasks, which seamlessly integrates knowledge retrieval into
the generative MLLM. ReAuSE takes advantage of the
fact that MLLMs can serve as virtual knowledge ware-

Introduction
The Visual Question Answering (VQA) task aims to answer questions based on a user-provided image, which
has received significant attention from CV and NLP community (Antol et al. 2015; Hu et al. 2017; Shen et al.
2023b; Sun et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024). Early VQA methods (Mascharka et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2019) mainly focus on
understanding visual elements within the image. Recently,
the research trend of VQA has shifted towards knowledgeintensive scenarios (Shah et al. 2019), requiring the incorporation of external knowledge and joint reasoning over multimodal content to generate accurate answers. However, existing methods generally face challenges in effectively acquiring relevant information from large-scale knowledge bases
using multi-modal queries (Lin et al. 2023).
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Chan et al. 2024;
Chen et al. 2024) has recently emerged as a promising
approach for knowledge-based visual question answering
(KBVQA) tasks (Gao et al. 2022; Lin and Byrne 2022a;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24723

