The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoPRA: Bridging Cross-domain Pretrained Sequence Models with Complex
Structures for Protein-RNA Binding Affinity Prediction
Rong Han1 * , Xiaohong Liu2 * , Tong Pan3,4 , Jing Xu3,4 , Xiaoyu Wang3,4 , Wuyang Lan5 ,
Zhenyu Li1 , Zixuan Wang1 , Jiangning Song3,4† , Guangyu Wang5† , Ting Chen1†
1

BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
UCL Cancer Institute, University College London
3
Monash Data
Futures Institute, Monash University
模型-首页图
4
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University
5
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
hanr21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiaohong.liu@ucl.ac.uk,
Jiangning.Song@monash.edu, guangyu.wang24@gmail.com, tingchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Input Complex

Abstract
Accurately measuring protein-RNA binding affinity is crucial in many biological processes and drug design. Previous computational methods for protein-RNA binding affinity prediction rely on either sequence or structure features,
unable to capture the binding mechanisms comprehensively.
The recent emerging pre-trained language models trained on
massive unsupervised sequences of protein and RNA have
shown strong representation ability for various in-domain
downstream tasks, including binding site prediction. However, applying different-domain language models collaboratively for complex-level tasks remains unexplored. In this paper, we propose CoPRA to bridge pre-trained language models from different biological domains via Complex structure
for Protein-RNA binding Affinity prediction. We demonstrate
for the first time that cross-biological modal language models can collaborate to improve binding affinity prediction. We
propose a Co-Former to combine the cross-modal sequence
and structure information and a bi-scope pre-training strategy for improving Co-Former’s interaction understanding.
Meanwhile, we build the largest protein-RNA binding affinity
dataset PRA310 for performance evaluation. We also test our
model on a public dataset for mutation effect prediction. CoPRA reaches state-of-the-art performance on all the datasets.
We provide extensive analyses and verify that CoPRA can
(1) accurately predict the protein-RNA binding affinity; (2)
understand the binding affinity change caused by mutations;
and (3) benefit from scaling data and model size.

Protein
Language
Model
RNA
Language
Model

Protein Node
RNA Node
Co-Former Complex Node
Node Pair

CPRI
∆G/
∆∆G
MIDM

Structure
Extraction

Figure 1: CoPRA combines Protein and RNA language
models with structure information by pre-training on biscope tasks with different special embeddings. CPRI: Contrastive Protein-RNA interaction modeling; MIDM: Mask
interface distance modeling. The dashed line represents
downstream tasks.

cycle (Zhou et al. 2020). Understanding the mechanism of
protein-RNA binding is the cornerstone of unraveling complex gene regulatory processes and deciphering the genetic
underpinning of diseases, such as neurodegenerative disorders (Gebauer et al. 2021) and kidney disease (Seufert et al.
2022), leading to the advancement of RNA-based therapies
and the design of protein inhibitors that specifically target
these interactions. However, protein-RNA binding is highly
flexible. Some proteins bind with RNA through canonical
regions while others bind with RNA through intrinsically
disordered regions - protein domains characterized by low
sequence complexity and highly variable structures (Seufert
et al. 2022), making it challenging to model the mechanism.
Several computational methods have been proposed
for protein-RNA binding affinity prediction, including sequence-based and structure-based methods. The
sequence-based approaches process the protein and RNA sequence separately with different sequence encoders (Yang
and Deng 2019a; Pandey et al. 2024), and subsequently
model the interactions. However, their performance is often
limited because the binding affinity is mainly determined by

Code — https://github.com/hanrthu/CoPRA
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.03773

Introduction
Protein-RNA interactions are crucial in various biological
processes, including gene expression and regulation (Corley, Burns, and Yeo 2020), protein translocation, and the cell
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

246

