The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Speech Recognition Meets Large Language Model:
Benchmarking, Models, and Exploration
Ziyang Ma1 , Guanrou Yang1 , Yifan Yang1 ,
Zhifu Gao , Jiaming Wang2 , Zhihao Du2 , Fan Yu2 , Qian Chen2 , Siqi Zheng2 ,
Shiliang Zhang2 , Xie Chen1 *
2

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, X-LANCE Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Alibaba Group
{zym.22, chenxie95}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

also proven to be effective (Baevski et al. 2020; Hsu et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024).
The evolution of the ASR paradigm from previous NNbased ASR models to LLM-based ASR models, stresses differences across loss and criterion design, text prior knowledge, and model scale. The architecture of LLM-based ASR
can be conceptualized as consisting of three primary components: a speech encoder, a projector, and an LLM. Recent works in LLM-based ASR often venture into diverse
designs, such as compressing the output temporally from
the speech encoder (Wu et al. 2023; Fathullah et al. 2024),
tackling modal alignment with the projector (Tang et al.
2024; Yu et al. 2024), and fine-tuning the LLM partly or
fully (Wu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Tang et al. 2024; Wang
et al. 2023). This paradigm harnesses pre-existing linguistic
knowledge, enabling a more holistic understanding of language, which in turn, translates to significant improvements
in the speech recognition task.
Despite advancements in the field, existing papers show
a variety of design choices that are frequently either inadequately justified through experiments or only briefly
addressed. This situation makes it challenging to discern
which decisions genuinely contribute to model performance,
thereby hindering meaningful and grounded progress in the
field. Thus, we pose the question: What matters when
building LLM-based ASR models?
In this work, we aim to provide experimental clarity on
these key design decisions, identify optimal model configurations, and explore interesting phenomena. We first benchmark the performance of LLM-based ASR with different
combinations of well-known speech encoders and the latest
released large language models and get a bunch of empirical conclusions. For example, LLMs with supervised finetuning (SFT, a.k.a. chat model) perform better than raw
pre-trained LLMs for the ASR task. Building upon these
insights, we get optimal model configurations and achieve
exciting performance on the Librispeech (Panayotov et al.
2015) and Gigaspeech (Chen et al. 2021) corpus without delicate designs, compared with the previous best-performing
NN-based ASR models and other LLM-based ASR models. Further, our work embarks on an in-depth exploration of
the ability of LLM-based ASR models. Interestingly, we observe the capability emergence phenomenon during LLMbased ASR training. The benchmark, models, and explo-

In this paper, we focus on prompting one of the most important tasks in the field of speech processing, i.e., automatic
speech recognition (ASR), with speech foundation encoders
and large language models (LLM). Despite the growing body
of research in this area, we find that many crucial design decisions in LLM-based ASR systems are often inadequately justified. This lack of clarity impedes the field’s progress, making it challenging to pinpoint which design choices truly improve model performance. To address these challenges, we
conduct a comprehensive series of experiments that explore
various aspects, leading to the optimal LLM-based ASR system. We found that delicate designs are not necessary, while a
clean setup with little task-specific design is competent. The
models achieve strong performance on the Librispeech and
Gigaspeech datasets, compared to both LLM-based models
and non-LLM-based models. Finally, we explore the capability emergence of LLM-based ASR in the process of modal
alignment. We hope that our study can facilitate the research
on extending LLM with cross-modality capacity and shed
light on the LLM-based ASR community.

Codes & Checkpoints —
https://github.com/X-LANCE/SLAM-LLM

1

Introduction

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) stands as a cornerstone
in the realm of intelligent speech technology, enabling machines to understand and transcribe human speech. The significance of ASR in enhancing human-computer interaction
and accessibility makes it a crucial area of research and applications in the field of speech processing.
The evolution of ASR technology has been marked by the
adoption of various paradigms, each representing a leap forward in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and applicability (Li
2022). Among these, supervised methods including connectionist temporal classification (CTC) (Graves et al. 2006),
attention-based encoder-decoder (AED) (Chan et al. 2016),
recurrent neural network transducer (RNN-T) (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013) and their variants have been pivotal. In addition, employing self-supervised methods for pretraining followed by supervised methods for fine-tuning has
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24840

