The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Real-Time Approximate Counting
Yash Pote1 r
⃝ Kuldeep S. Meel2,3 r
⃝ Jiong Yang3 *
1

National University of Singapore
2
University of Toronto
3
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Model counting is the task of counting the number of satisfying assignments of a Boolean formula. Since counting is intractable in general, most applications use (ε, δ)approximations, where the output is within a (1 + ε)-factor
of the count with probability at least 1 − δ. Many demanding
applications make thousands of counting queries, and the stateof-the-art approximate counter, ApproxMC, makes hundreds
of calls to SAT solvers to answer a single approximate counting query. The sheer number of SAT calls poses a significant
challenge to the existing approaches.
In this work, we propose an approximation scheme, ApproxMC7 that is tailored to such demanding applications with
low time limits. Compared to ApproxMC, ApproxMC7 makes
14× fewer SAT calls while providing the same guarantees
as ApproxMC in the constant-factor regime. In an evaluation
over 2,247 instances, ApproxMC7 solved 271 more instances
and achieved a 2× speedup against ApproxMC.

1

Introduction

For a Boolean formula φ : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, the problem of model counting is to compute the size of the set
sol(φ) = {σ|φ(σ) = 1}. Model counting is fundamental to
several domains, including inference on probabilistic graphical models (Chavira and Darwiche 2008; Agrawal, Pote,
and Meel 2021), neural network verification (Bhattacharyya
et al. 2020), computational biology (Sashittal and El-Kebir
2019), and cryptography (Beck, Zinkus, and Green 2020).
In the seminal paper by Valiant (Valiant 1979), the problem of counting was shown to be #P-complete, with #P
being the collection of counting problems whose decision
counterparts are in NP. Subsequently, Toda demonstrated the
complexity-theoretic hardness of this problem by establishing
that a single invocation of a #P oracle can solve any problem
within the polynomial hierarchy; formally, PH ⊆ P#P (Toda
1989).
Due to the intractability of exact model counting, there is
significant interest among researchers and practitioners in the
* The authors decided to forgo the old convention of alphabetical
ordering of authors in favor of a randomized ordering, denoted by
r
⃝.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11318

development of counting algorithms that provide probably approximate correct (PAC) guarantees. In PAC model counting,
given parameters (ε, δ), one seeks to find a (1 + ε) multiplicative estimate of |sol(φ)| with a probability of error at most
δ. In 1983, Stockmeyer introduced a random hashing-based
procedure that approximated the count with (ε, δ)-guarantees
in time polynomial in 1/ε, log(1/δ), and n (the domain size),
when given access to an NP oracle (Stockmeyer 1983). However, practical implementations of Stockmeyer’s approach
were not feasible at the time due to the lack of solvers capable of effectively handling NP problems (Gomes, Sabharwal,
and Selman 2006). In 2013, leveraging the remarkable advancements in SAT solvers, Chakraborty et al. (Chakraborty,
Meel, and Vardi 2013) extended Stockmeyer’s framework to
a scalable (ε, δ)-counting algorithm called ApproxMC. This
development opened the door to practical implementations
of hashing-based techniques for approximate counting. Since
then, there has been a sustained interest in further optimizing
these techniques (Ermon et al. 2013a,b; Chakraborty et al.
2014; Ivrii et al. 2016; Meel et al. 2016; Chakraborty et al.
2016; Soos and Meel 2019; Meel and Akshay 2020; Yang
and Meel 2021; Yang, Chakraborty, and Meel 2022). The
current state-of-the-art in this field is ApproxMC6 (Yang and
Meel 2023), which is a variant of ApproxMC augmented with
rounding techniques.
Driven by advances in theoretical and practical development, approximate model counting has been deployed in
applications (Beck, Zinkus, and Green 2020) where hundreds
of model count estimates are required en route to the final
answer. This increase in the number of calls, albeit with a
relaxed approximation accuracy, still poses a critical challenge to the existing approaches when time availability is
constrained.
The approximation scheme, ApproxMC chooses an integer
m and splits the solution space into 2m many roughly equal
small cells, and uses the number of solutions in a randomly
selected cell scaled by 2m to approximate the exact number
of solutions. We use 2-universal hash functions to ensure a
roughly equal split with low variance, and then we invoke a
SAT solver to check the cell size. We consider a cell as small
enough to estimate the model count when the SAT solver
can only find a number of solutions at most a pre-computed
threshold, thresh. We boost the confidence up to 1 − δ by
repeating the above process independently and returning the

