The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DHMoE: Diffusion Generated Hierarchical Multi-Granular Expertise for Stock
Prediction
Weijun Chen1 , Yanze Wang2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
oncecwj@stu.pku.edu.cn; wangyanze@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

MultiSource
Information

Stock prediction stands as a pivotal research objective within
the Fintech. Existing deep learning research revolves around
the development and scaling of one individual neural network predictor. However, in the dynamic and noisy landscape of the stock market, reliance solely on a single predictor poses risks of limited adaptability to diverse market
conditions and challenges in effectively integrating multisource information. Besides, top-down teaching and bottomup hierarchical decision-making paradigms are critical for robust and accurate stock prediction within successful quantitative firms. Nonetheless, there is scarcely any research that
integrates this workflow into stock prediction. To this end,
we propose Diffusion Generated Hierarchical Mixture-ofExperts (DHMoE) to emulate such workflow in stock prediction. Specifically, DHMoE is crafted as a three-layer tree
structure, where each expert functions as a node within the
tree and their parameters are generated in a top-down, recursive manner. Recognizing the leading role of the top-level
root expert, we harness the robust capabilities of diffusion
models for generating and introduce the Diffusion Inverted
Transformer (DIT) as the root expert. The DIT is tailored to
receive information from various modalities as conditional inputs and allocate parameters to bottom-level experts. These
bottom-level experts are responsible for performing predictions specific to their respective input modalities. The prediction results are then synthesized in a bottom-up manner,
culminating in the final prediction outcomes. Experiments on
three stock trading datasets reveal that DHMoE outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in terms of both cumulative and riskadjusted returns.

Top
Manger

Stock
News

Top
Manger

Top-Down
Teaching

Bottom-Up
Decision-Making

Senior
Mangers
Experts

Senior
Mangers
Experts

MultiSource
Information

Stock
News

Figure 1: The overall pipeline of our proposed method.
The left figure illustrates the top-down teaching paradigm,
which helps enhance the collective professional expertise
of a team. Conversely, the right figure depicts bottom-up
decision-making, highlighting its effectiveness in facilitating robust and precise predictions.
sions. The swift advancement of deep learning leads to the
proposal of various deep models for stock prediction and
quantitative investment. Many models (Wang et al. 2022c;
Feng et al. 2022, 2019a; Wang et al. 2022a; Zhang et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2021), evolving from initial frameworks
like GRU (Chung et al. 2014) and Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017), are enhanced specifically for the stock market to
yield stronger predictive capabilities. While these advanced
models show improved predictive performance compared to
traditional machine learning methods (Wang and Leu 1996;
Zivot and Wang 2006), they overlook diverse data sources,
such as social media information, which hinders their effectiveness in stock prediction and investment profitability.
To address the issue of information loss from relying on
a single source in the diverse stock market, a series of multimodal models (Ang and Lim 2022; Sawhney et al. 2021c;
Wang et al. 2022b; Yang et al. 2023b; Zhao et al. 2022) are
proposed. Despite their meticulous design and commendable performance, they function as individual experts. The
prediction results from individual predictors are typically
marked by high uncertainty, which contrasts sharply with
real-world investment decisions (Sun et al. 2023). Besides,
a single neural network predictor often falls short in diversity and flexibility to process varied information sources
within the stock market. Furthermore, in quantitative trading
firms, it’s common to find multiple teams of trading experts,
each endowed with extensive knowledge in areas such as

Introduction
The global stock market, with over $90 trillion in market
capitalization in 20201 , stands as a key financial ecosystem
where investors actively seek financial assets to meet their
investment objectives. Accurate stock prediction is fundamental in realizing trading returns for both individual investors and financial institutions. Nonetheless, the diverse
market contexts and heterogeneous data sources present significant challenges for investors in making accurate deci* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/CM.MKT.LCAP.CD/

11490

