The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

T-MDML: Triplet-based Multiple Distance Metric Learning for Multi-Instance
Multi-Label Classification with Label Correlation
Dongyeon Kim1 , Yejin Kan1 , Gangman Yi1, 2 *
1

Department of Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence, Dongguk University, Seoul, 04620, Korea
2
Division of AI Software Convergence, Dongguk University, Seoul, 04620, Korea
dongyeon@dgu.ac.kr, kanyj@dgu.ac.kr, gangman@dongguk.edu

Abstract

to represent complex objects (Briggs et al. 2012). Therefore,
the MIML framework is efficient for various applications
such as image classification (Zha et al. 2008), image annotation (Guo et al. 2018), text categorization (Zhang and Zhou
2008), and protein function prediction (Liu et al. 2022).
MIML problems can be solved using two general approaches. The degeneration method transforms the MIML
problem into an MIL or MLL problem by degenerating it to
a lower-dimensional problem (Zhou et al. 2012; Zafra and
Gibaja 2023). The advantage of this approach is that existing
MIL and MLL algorithms can be used to solve the MIML
problem; however, important information may be removed
during the degeneration process (Zafra and Gibaja 2023).
The direct method solves this problem by directly measuring the similarity between bags or using a model-based algorithm (Li et al. 2021). Especially, various distance metrics are used to measure similarity between bags, and nearest
neighbor (NN)-based MIML algorithms have been proposed
(Zafra and Gibaja 2023). However, the proposed metrics are
based on the Euclidean distance, and they cannot measure
similarity reflecting label information. Specifically, in the
complex structures of multiple labels, NN-based algorithms
are dependent on distance, making it difficult to perform efficient classification. To solve this problem, (Jin, Wang, and
Zhou 2009; Hu et al. 2019) introduced the distance metric
learning (DML) to directly learn similarity based on labels.
DML is used to directly learn a metric that measures similarity by reflecting label information (Weinberger and Saul
2009; Guo et al. 2023; Zhao and Yang 2023). Specifically,
it learns a transformation matrix from Mahalanobis distance
to a metric space where data of the same class become more
similar and different classes become more disjoint (Weinberger and Saul 2009). This approach has been extended to
MLL problems and has helped improve the performance of
similarity-based multi-label classification (Sun and Zhang
2021; Mao, Wang, and Zhang 2023). In addition, DMLbased approaches have been proposed in the MIML framework. However, despite the complex structure of the data,
existing approaches use a single metric for multi-label classification (Jin, Wang, and Zhou 2009; Hu et al. 2019). Because a single metric forces samples into a unified metric
space, it does not fully include all label-specific characteristics and has limitations in MIML problems.
To address the limitations of single metric learning in the

The multi-instance multi-label (MIML) problem is a new supervised learning paradigm that has emerged to efficiently
represent complex data. Therefore, various similarity-based
algorithms have been proposed, but existing algorithms commonly measure similarity by considering only the structural
relationships in the feature space without utilizing information from the label space. As these approaches do not adequately reflect the complex properties of MIML data, it is essential to improve the accuracy of MIML classification by utilizing information from both feature and label spaces. Thus,
we propose a new algorithm, T-MDML: triplet-based multiple distance metric learning for MIML. T-MDML defines a
distance metric by learning a global property shared by the
entire label space and a label-specific property for each label.
In addition, we simultaneously consider the structural characteristics of features and label space to extract label correlation
and incorporate it into the optimization process. In experiments, we demonstrate the efficiency of our label correlation
estimation method and verify its performance by applying it
to MIMLkNN. We also demonstrate T-MDML’s relative superiority over existing MIML algorithms, as well as its scalability when applied to similarity-based MIML methods.

Introduction
Multi-instance multi-label learning (MIML) is a new machine learning framework for efficiently representing semantically informative objects (Zhou and Zhang 2006; Zhou
et al. 2012; Qiu et al. 2023). It is a two-way extension of the
general single-instance single-label learning (SISL) framework. The extension to multiple instances enables a flexible representation of the input space, and the extension to
multiple labels enables multiple representations of the output space. In multi-instance learning (MIL), input data are
represented as a bag consisting of multiple instances. In
each bag, the number of instances can be different; however,
the number of attributes is always the same (Amores 2013).
Multi-label learning (MLL) involves the problem of simultaneously assigning multiple labels to each instance (Zhang
and Zhou 2007a, 2014). Specifically, MIML deals with the
problem that multiple labels are simultaneously assigned to
each bag, and only bag-level label descriptions are provided
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17850

