The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Formal Synthesis of Barrier Certificates Using Fourier Kolmogorov-Arnold
Network
Xiongqi Zhang, Junwei Xu, Yang Wang, Dongming Xiang, Wang Lin* , Zuohua Ding
School of Information Science and Technology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China
{xqiii zhang, xjwblackaw, wangy4303}@163.com, {dmxiang, linwang}@zstu.edu.cn, zouhuading@hotmail.com

Abstract

successfully synthesizing a barrier certificate, which is generally not unique, serves as a formal certificate for safety
properties of the dynamical system.
Sum-of-squares (SOS) programming is a traditional
method for synthesizing polynomial barrier certificates (Prajna 2006; Legat, Tabuada, and Jungers 2020). But this
method lacks scalability and expressiveness. Based on the
universal approximation theorem (Leshno et al. 1993), neural networks have the capability to approximate any arbitrary
function, making them suitable for representing barrier certificates. Zhao et al. (2020) first synthesized barrier certificates via neural network training and verification. FOSSIL
(Abate et al. 2021) is a tool for the automated formal synthesis of barrier certificates, using neural networks as templates and Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers as
verification tools. However, traditional feed-forward neural
networks (FNNs) often use fixed activation functions, which
can significantly impact the efficiency of synthesizing barrier certificates.
Liu et al. (2024) proposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
(KANs) as a promising alternative to multi-layer Perceptrons. In contrast to traditional models, KANs use activation functions on the connections between nodes, which can
also learn and adapt during the training process. This architectural breakthrough enables KANs to better capture complex, nonlinear relationships by directly optimizing univariate functions. Initially, these networks used B-spline functions as learnable activation functions. However, due to difficulties in implementation and smoothness concerns, alternative basis functions have been explored. To address the
issues of efficiency and scalability in generating barrier certificates caused by the use of fixed activation functions in
FNNs, in this paper, we propose a new framework using
Fourier KANs instead of FNNs to formally synthesize barrier certificates. Specifically, our proposed framework consists of two parts. In the first part, it uses Fourier KAN to
generate candidate barrier certificates. Fourier KAN uses
Fourier Coefficients as learnable activation functions, and
uses trigonometric functions as basis functions that consist of sines and cosines, can improve the representation
power and are easy to train. In the second part, it checks
whether the candidate barrier certificates, represented by
Fourier KAN, satisfy all the requirements of barrier certificates through SMT-solver dReal and Lipschitz method. The

Barrier certificate generation is an efficient and powerful
technique for formally verifying safety properties of cyberphysical systems. Feed-forward neural networks (FNNs) are
commonly used to synthesize barrier certificates, but the fixed
activation functions limit their efficiency and scalability. In
this paper, we propose a novel method for generating barrier certificates using Fourier Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
(KANs). Specifically, it utilizes Fourier KANs to replace
FNNs as the template of barrier certificates. Since Fourier
KAN has learnable activation functions and uses trigonometric functions as its basis functions, it can efficiently improve
the representation power and is easy to train for neural barrier
certificates. Then, it formally verifies the validity of the candidate Fourier KAN barrier certificates using both the Lipschitz method and the Satisfiability Modulo Theories, improving the efficiency and success rate of verification. We implement the tool KAN4BC, and evaluate its performance over a
set of benchmarks. The experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our method.

Introduction
Ensuring the safety of dynamical systems, which are modeled by ordinary differential equations (ODEs), is crucial
for various applications, including autonomous vehicles,
robotics, aerospace engineering, and industrial process control. These systems form the backbone of cyber-physical
systems (Squires, Pierpaoli, and Egerstedt 2018), featuring
interactions between discrete and continuous dynamics. Formal safety verification, the process of determining whether a
system can avoid reaching dangerous or undesirable states,
is of paramount importance. However, this task is inherently
complex and poses a significant challenge.
Barrier certificate generation is an effective and powerful
technique for formally demonstrating the safety of continuous systems and hybrid systems that include both continuous and discrete states. When a barrier certificate is identified, it divides the model’s state space into two regions. This
division ensures that any system trajectory starting from a
given initial set on one side of the barrier certificate cannot reach a given unsafe set on the other side. Therefore,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1138

