The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Few-Shot, No Problem: Descriptive Continual Relation Extraction
Nguyen Xuan Thanh 1 * , Anh Duc Le2 * , Quyen Tran 3 * , Thanh-Thien Le 3 * ,
Linh Ngo Van 2† , Thien Huu Nguyen 4
1
Oraichain Labs,
Hanoi University of Science and Technology,
3
VinAI Research,
4
University of Oregon
thanh.nx@orai.io
anh.ld204628@sis.hust.edu.vn
{v.quyentt15,v.thienlt3}@vinai.io,
linhnv@soict.hust.edu.vn, thien@cs.uoregon.edu
2

Accuracy (\%)

90

Few-shot Continual Relation Extraction is a crucial challenge for enabling AI systems to identify and adapt to evolving relationships in dynamic real-world domains. Traditional
memory-based approaches often overfit to limited samples,
failing to reinforce old knowledge, with the scarcity of data
in few-shot scenarios further exacerbating these issues by hindering effective data augmentation in the latent space. In this
paper, we propose a novel retrieval-based solution, starting
with a large language model to generate descriptions for each
relation. From these descriptions, we introduce a bi-encoder
retrieval training paradigm to enrich both sample and class
representation learning. Leveraging these enhanced representations, we design a retrieval-based prediction method where
each sample ”retrieves” the best fitting relation via a reciprocal rank fusion score that integrates both relation description vectors and class prototypes. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets demonstrate that our method significantly
advances the state-of-the-art by maintaining robust performance across sequential tasks, effectively addressing catastrophic forgetting.

1

80

SCKD
ConPL
CPL
DCRE (Our)

90
Accuracy (\%)

FewRel (10-way, 5-shot)

Abstract

80
70

TACRED (5-way, 5-shot)
SCKD
ConPL
CPL
DCRE (Our)

60

70
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
Task ID

50

T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
Task ID

Figure 1: Existing FCRE methods face catastrophic forgetting due to the limited and poor quality of old training samples stored in the memory buffer.

ing interest in the field (Chen, Wu, and Shi 2023a; Le et al.
2024c, 2025).
State-of-the-art approaches to FCRE often rely on
memory-based methods for continual learning (Lopez-Paz
and Ranzato 2017; Nguyen et al. 2023; Le et al. 2024b;
Dao et al. 2024). However, these methods frequently suffer from overfitting to the limited samples stored in memory
buffers. This overfitting hampers the reinforcement of previously learned knowledge, leading to catastrophic forgetting—a marked decline in performance on learnt relations
when new ones are introduced (Figure 1). The few-shot scenario of FCRE exacerbates these issues, as the scarcity of
data not only impedes learning on new tasks, but also hinders helpful data augmentation, which are crucial in many
methods (Shin et al. 2017).
In order to improve on these methods, we must not completely disregard them or dwell on their weaknesses, but
rather contemplate their biggest strength. Why do so many
methods use the memory buffer in the first place? The primary objective of these replay buffers is to rehearse and
reinforce past knowledge, providing the model with something to ”look back” at during training. However, these past
samples may not always be representative of the entire class
and can still lead to sub-optimal performance. Based on this
observation, we propose a straightforward: besides relying

Introduction

Relation Extraction (RE) refers to classifying semantic relationships between entities within text into predefined types.
Conventional RE tasks assume all relations are present at
once, ignoring the fact that new relations continually emerge
in the real world. Few-shot Continual Relation Extraction
(FCRE) is a subfield of continual learning (Hai et al. 2024;
Van et al. 2022; Phan et al. 2022; Tran et al. 2024a,b; Le
et al. 2024a) where a model must continually assimilate new
emerging relations while avoiding the forgetting of old ones,
a task made even more challenging by the limited training
data available. The importance of FCRE stems from its relevance to dynamic real-world applications, garnering increas* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25282

