The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Modality-Independent Graph Neural Networks with Global Transformers for
Multimodal Recommendation
Jun Hu1 , Bryan Hooi1 * , Bingsheng He1 , Yinwei Wei2
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
School of Software, Shandong University
jun.hu@nus.edu.sg, {bhooi, hebs}@comp.nus.edu.sg, weiyinwei@hotmail.com

K=1

Abstract

K=2

K=3

K=4

0.040
NDCG@20

Multimodal recommendation systems can learn users’ preferences from existing user-item interactions as well as the
semantics of multimodal data associated with items. Many
existing methods model this through a multimodal user-item
graph, approaching multimodal recommendation as a graph
learning task. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown
promising performance in this domain. Prior research has
capitalized on GNNs’ capability to capture neighborhood information within certain receptive fields (typically denoted by
the number of hops, K) to enrich user and item semantics. We
observe that the optimal receptive fields for GNNs can vary
across different modalities. In this paper, we propose GNNs
with Modality-Independent Receptive Fields, which employ
separate GNNs with independent receptive fields for different
modalities to enhance performance. Our results indicate that
the optimal K for certain modalities on specific datasets can
be as low as 1 or 2, which may restrict the GNNs’ capacity
to capture global information. To address this, we introduce a
Sampling-based Global Transformer, which utilizes uniform
global sampling to effectively integrate global information for
GNNs. We conduct comprehensive experiments that demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing methods.

0.035
0.030
0.025
0.020

Emb

Text
Modality

Visual

Figure 1: Performance of GNNs on Amazon Baby with features of different modalities at varying receptive fields (number of hops, K). “Emb” stands for learnable embeddings.
The optimal K is modality-dependent: Emb and Text perform best at K = 3, while Visual performs best at K = 2.

to model the system, typically with graph vertices representing users and items, vertex features encapsulating multimodal data, and graph edges denoting user-item interactions. GNNs can effectively utilize this information to learn
user/item representations that capture user preferences.
To handle multimodal data, a typical solution is to apply a
separate GNN for each modality and pool their outputs (Wei
et al. 2019). At the feature level, input features of different
modalities need to be encoded differently, e.g., using an image encoder for images. In this work, we show that the differences between modalities lies not just in how the features
should be encoded, but also in how each modality’s information should be propagated over the graph, i.e. the receptive
field used for each modality. This issue is overlooked in the
recent literature, which does not consider differences at the
receptive field level across GNNs for different modalities.
Define the receptive field of GNNs as its number of hops
(K): existing studies default to setting the same K for GNNs
across all modalities. However, we observe that the optimal receptive field for GNNs differs across modalities. We
conduct experiments by applying GNNs with different K
to each modality’s features. When vertices lack features for
a modality (e.g., user vertices usually do not have text and
visual features), we assign them zero vectors. Besides text
and visual, the learnable embeddings are also treated as a
modality. We conduct the experiment with a state-of-the-art
(SOTA) model, MGDN (Hu et al. 2024) (which generalizes the widely used LightGCN (He et al. 2020)). Results on
the Amazon Baby dataset (see Figure 1) show that different

Code — https://github.com/CrawlScript/MIG-GT

Introduction
Recently, multimodal recommendation systems leverage
deep learning techniques to integrate rich multimodal data,
such as texts and images, alongside user-item interactions
to predict user preferences. This approach enables a richer,
more comprehensive understanding of items, thereby enhancing recommendation performance (Zhou and Miao
2024; Sun et al. 2024). Multimodal recommendation systems have been widely used in applications such as ecommerce and micro-video platforms (Liu et al. 2023a;
Shang et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024).
Recently, GNN-based vertex representation learning
has emerged as a powerful technique in multimedia recommendation systems (Zhou et al. 2023a; Wu et al. 2023b; Gao
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023b). These approaches use a graph
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11790

