The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Probability-Density-aware Semi-supervised Learning
Shuyang Liu* ,1 , Ruiqiu Zheng∗,1 , Yunhang Shen†,2 , Zhou Yu†
Ke Li2 , Xing Sun2 , Shaohui Lin1,3

,1,3

,

1

East China Normal University
Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China
3
Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science - MOE, China
zyu@stat.ecnu.edu.cn, shenyunhang01@gmail.com
2

Abstract

In SSL, the assumption of consistency is usually considered by assigning the similarity between neighbor points. An
enormous similarity indicates that the points tend to be in
the same category. Some works use similarity to train a consistent encoder, considering that neighbor input should have
neighbor features (Sohn et al. 2020). Contrastive learning
learns consistent visual representations with unlabeled images (Chen et al. 2020a). Adversarial training (Miyato et al.
2018) and data augmentation (Berthelot et al. 2019; Sohn
et al. 2020) are also widely applied to gain more training
samples and improve the learning of representation. Highconfidence pseudo-labels are propagated with close neighbor points’ predictions and labels (Iscen et al. 2019; Zhao
et al. 2022; Elezi et al. 2018). Combining consistent encoder
and pseudo-labeling significantly improves the model performance (Iscen et al. 2019). Recently, the widely-used SSL
framework often consists of supervised loss to take full consideration of labeled data, unsupervised loss to improve the
quality of pseudo labels, and consistency loss to encourage
a consistent encoder (Zhao et al. 2022; Berthelot et al. 2019;
Zheng et al. 2022).
However, these works fail to fully consider assumption
of consistency, for they do not use the prior of cluster assumption. When calculating the similarity between points,
their measurements seldom consider the cluster prior. Considering that the points close to the decision boundary may
be closer to points from other categories than some points
in the same categories, these algorithms may be misled by
wrongly assigning neighbors’ labels. Our proposed solution,
the Probability-Density-Aware Measurement(PM), has the
potential to fully utilize the cluster assumption through the
incorporation of density information and could address the
limitations of existing algorithms. A natural thought goes
that for two points with different clusters, their path tends
to traverse low-density regions. We statistically prove the
thought and demonstrate that the path probably goes through
low-density areas. The theorem indicates that density information significantly helps to consider the cluster assumption
and severs as the keystone of PM.
With PM, we can better measure the similarity between
points. We deploy PM into Label Propagation to select better neighbors and generate higher-confidence pseudo-labels.
The new algorithm is named Probability-Density-Aware
Label-Propagation(PMLP). To show PM’s superiority and

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) assumes that neighbor points
lie in the same category (neighbor assumption), and points
in different clusters belong to various categories (cluster assumption). Existing methods usually rely on similarity measures to retrieve the similar neighbor points, ignoring cluster
assumption, which may not utilize unlabeled information sufficiently and effectively. This paper first provides a systematical investigation into the significant role of probability density in SSL and lays a solid theoretical foundation for cluster
assumption. To this end, we introduce a Probability-DensityAware Measure (PM) to discern the similarity between neighbor points. To further improve Label Propagation, we also
design a Probability-Density-Aware Measure Label Propagation (PMLP) algorithm to fully consider the cluster assumption in label propagation. Last, but not least, we prove that traditional pseudo-labeling could be viewed as a particular case
of PMLP, which provides a comprehensive theoretical understanding of PMLP’s superior performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PMLP achieves outstanding performance compared with other recent methods.

Introduction
Machine Learning’s remarkable breakthroughs rely on constructing high-quality, complex labeled datasets. However,
dataset annotations are increasingly costly or even infeasible
in many professional areas (e.g., medical and astronomical
fields (Chen et al. 2020b; Xu et al. 2022)). Semi-supervised
learning (SSL) has been proposed to mitigate the demand
for large-scale labels by extracting information from unlabeled data with guidance from a few labeled data. The existing SSL methods are designed based on the widely accepted
assumption of consistency, which assumes that close data
points probably have the same label and data points lie in the
same cluster tend to have the same labels (Zhou et al. 2003;
Chapelle and Zien 2005; Iscen et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020;
Zhao et al. 2022). The latter prior that points from the same
category should lie in the same cluster is specifically called
cluster assumption (Zhou et al. 2003; Iscen et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2020).
* The authors contribute equally to this paper.
†

The corresponding author of this paper.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18943

