The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Selective Uncertainty Propagation in Offline RL
Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy1 , Tanmay Gangwani2 , Sumeet Katariya1 , Branislav Kveton3 ,
Shrey Modi4 , Anshuka Rangi2
1
Meta
Amazon
3
Adobe
4
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
sanathsk@meta.com
2

Abstract

ing (RL) (Sutton 1988; Williams 1992; Sutton and Barto
1998) are two fundamental frameworks for decision-making
under uncertainty. In stochastic CBs, the environment samples the context and corresponding rewards (for each action)
from a fixed but unknown distribution; the agent then observes the context and learns to select the most rewarding
action conditioned on the context.
Finite-horizon RL is a generalization of CBs where contexts become states and a sequence of decisions are to be
made over H steps. Similar to the CB problem, at each step,
the agent observes the current state, selects an action conditioned on the current state, and receives a reward sampled by
the environment from a corresponding conditional distribution. However, unlike the CB problem, while the initial state
is sampled from a fixed but unknown distribution, the next
state at any step depends on the current state and the agent’s
action. Hence, the agent can plan to attain high cumulative
reward by learning to reach high-value future states.
Unfortunately, the fact that actions can influence future
states implies that the agent needs to learn under statedistribution shifts making the RL setting much more statistically harder than CBs in the worst case. For example, (Foster
et al. 2021) show that the worst-case sample complexity to
learn a non-trivial offline RL policy is either polynomial in
the state space size or exponential in other parameters.1 On
the other hand, if actions do not influence next-state distributions at any step, the RL instance would be equivalent to
solving H stochastic CB instances. On such instances, offline bandit algorithms (Foster and Syrgkanis 2019) would
enjoy a polynomial sample complexity for policy learning
with no dependence on state space size. Hence, for such instances, state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms such as pessimistic value function optimization (Jin, Yang, and Wang
2021) may be unnecessarily conservative.
We formalize this dichotomy and show that the statistical
hardness of offline RL instances can be captured by the size
of actions’ impact on the next state’s distribution. To show
this, we consider the high-level structure of dynamic programming (DP) algorithms for offline RL (e.g. Jin, Yang,
and Wang 2021). DP algorithms construct a policy itera-

We consider the finite-horizon offline reinforcement learning
(RL) setting, and are motivated by the challenge of learning
the policy at any step h in dynamic programming (DP) algorithms. To learn this, it is sufficient to evaluate the treatment
effect of deviating from the behavioral policy at step h after
having optimized the policy for all future steps. Since the policy at any step can affect next-state distributions, the related
distributional shift challenges can make this problem far more
statistically hard than estimating such treatment effects in the
stochastic contextual bandit setting. However, the hardness of
many real-world RL instances lies between the two regimes.
We develop a flexible and general method called selective
uncertainty propagation for confidence interval construction
that adapts to the hardness of the associated distribution shift
challenges. We show benefits of our approach on toy environments and demonstrate the benefits of these techniques for
offline policy learning.

1

Introduction

We study the finite-horizon offline reinforcement learning
(RL) problem, focusing on algorithms that adapt to instance
hardness. At a high-level, we study algorithms that provide
better guarantees for contextual bandit (CB) like instances
while being able to plan in more dynamic RL-like instances.
Our work is motivated by real-world RL problems, such
as user interaction with an e-commerce search engine (recommendation system). Here, the state can be a user query,
and the action is the product recommendation from the engine. When the user wants to buy a particular product, the
user often only enters a single product query unrelated to
the previous one; thus resembling a sequence of CB problems. On the other hand, when the user explores products,
the exploration queries are related through the user’s intent,
and the recommendation system may want to steer the user
toward the ideal product. Hence, this resembles the RL setting. This indicates the need to develop unified solutions that
integrate CB and RL techniques – adapting to instance hardness. We now introduce the CB and RL frameworks in more
detail.
Stochastic contextual bandits (CBs) (Langford and Zhang
2008; Li et al. 2010) and finite-horizon reinforcement learn-

1

(Foster et al. 2021) consider the discounted infinite horizon
offline RL formulation. However, one should expect similar lower
bounds for the finite horizon offline RL formulation.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17974

