The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring the Better Multimodal Synergy Strategy for Vision-Language Models
Xiaotian Yin* , Xin Liu* , Si Chen, Yuan Wang, Yuwen Pan, Tianzhu Zhang†
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
{xiaotianyin, xinliu99, cs fisha, wy2016, panyw}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-Language models (VLMs) have shown great potential in enhancing open-world visual concept comprehension.
Recent researches focus on an optimum multimodal collaboration strategy that significantly advances CLIP-based fewshot tasks. However, existing prompt-based solutions suffer from unidirectional information flow and increased parameters since they explicitly condition the vision prompts
on textual prompts across different transformer layers using
non-shareable coupling functions. To address this issue, we
propose a Dual-shared mechanism based on LoRA (DsRA)
that addresses VLM adaptation in low-data regimes. The proposed DsRA enjoys several merits. First, we design an intermodal shared coefficient that focuses on capturing visual and
textual shared patterns, ensuring effective mutual synergy between image and text features. Second, an intra-modal shared
matrix is proposed to achieve efficient parameter fine-tuning
by combining the different coefficients to generate layer-wise
adapters placed in encoder layers. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that DsRA improves the generalizability under
few-shot classification, base-to-new generalization, and domain generalization settings. Our code will be released soon.

Figure 1: The existing paradigm aligns the features between different modalities by using unshareable coupling
functions, which leads to insufficient modal interaction
and increased complexity. Our DsRA effectively enhances
the mutual perception between different features through a
lightweight Dual-shared design.

Introduction
Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) have demonstrated promising
generalization power and transferability on various downstream tasks, including image segmentation (Rao et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022), object detection (Shi and Yang 2023;
Zang et al. 2022), image caption (Wang et al. 2023; Mokady,
Hertz, and Bermano 2021; Shen et al. 2021), and so on,
opening up new possibilities in these fields. Through contrastive training on a web-scale dataset of image-text pairs,
VLMs achieve a global alignment between images and textual descriptions with the help of rich supervision provided
by natural language. This alignment greatly enhances the
representations provided by VLMs, enabling compelling
zero-shot inference even in the absence of training samples.
Although CLIP is highly effective for generalizing to new
concepts, the large scale of VLMs and the limited availability of training data in many downstream tasks (e.g., few-shot

settings) make it difficult to fine-tune the entire model. Previous works (Zhou et al. 2022b; Gao et al. 2023; Shu et al.
2023) reveal that naively fine-tuning CLIP on downstream
few-shot tasks may cause catastrophic forgetting and overfitting. In sample-scarce cross-modal scenarios, the inability to achieve mutual synergy between vision and language
modalities increases the difficulty of aligning features, resulting in unsatisfactory recognition performance (Khattak
et al. 2023a). Therefore, designing a strategy for effective
multimodal collaboration in few-shot settings poses a significant challenge.
To address the challenges mentioned above, recent works
such as MaPLe (Khattak et al. 2023a), ALIGN (Wang et al.
2024), and CoPrompt (Roy and Etemad 2024) adopt a viable prompt-based solution by explicitly conditioning the vision prompts on textual prompts across different transformer
layers. This process involves mapping the textual prompts
into visual prompts using MLPs, thereby aligning the features between different modalities. While this paradigm has

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22182

