The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffExp: Efficient Exploration in Reward Fine-tuning
for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Daewon Chae1 * , June Suk Choi2 * , Jinkyu Kim1† , Kimin Lee2†
1

Korea University, South Korea
2
KAIST, South Korea
cdw098@korea.ac.kr, w choi@kaist.ac.kr, jinkyukim@korea.ac.kr, kiminlee@kaist.ac.kr

DDPO
(baseline)

Abstract
Fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models to maximize rewards has proven effective for enhancing model performance.
However, reward fine-tuning methods often suffer from slow
convergence due to online sample generation. Therefore, obtaining diverse samples with strong reward signals is crucial
for improving sample efficiency and overall performance. In
this work, we introduce DiffExp, a simple yet effective exploration strategy for reward fine-tuning of text-to-image models. Our approach employs two key strategies: (a) dynamically adjusting the scale of classifier-free guidance to enhance sample diversity, and (b) randomly weighting phrases
of the text prompt to exploit high-quality reward signals. We
demonstrate that these strategies significantly enhance exploration during online sample generation, improving the sample efficiency of recent reward fine-tuning methods, such as
DDPO and AlignProp.

DDPO + DiffExp
(ours)

Reward optimization process (prompt : “a dolphin riding a bike”)

Reward optimization process (prompt : “a dolphin riding a bike”)

(a)

Introduction
Reward fine-tuning (Black et al. 2024; Fan et al. 2024; Clark
et al. 2024; Prabhudesai et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2023) has recently emerged as a powerful method for improving text-toimage diffusion models (Podell et al. 2023; Rombach et al.
2022). Unlike the conventional optimization strategy of likelihood maximization, this framework focuses on maximizing reward scores that measure the quality of model outputs, such as image-text alignment (Kirstain et al. 2024; Lee
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024) and image fidelity (Schuhmann et al. 2022). Several methods including
policy gradient (Black et al. 2024; Fan et al. 2024) and direct backpropagation (Clark et al. 2024; Prabhudesai et al.
2023) have been studied for reward maximization. These
methods have shown promising results in improving imagetext alignment (Black et al. 2024; Fan et al. 2024), reducing
undesired biases (Fan et al. 2024), and removing artifacts
from generated images (Wu et al. 2023).
Since this reward-based fine-tuning involves online sample generation, the reward optimization depends on what
samples are produced during the generation process. In other
words, if samples with good reward signals are not obtained during the generation process, the model will con-

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Generated images during the reward optimization process with our proposed method called DiffExp given
the prompt “a dolphin riding a bike,” which is often challenging for existing reward fine-tuning approaches, including our baseline DDPO (Black et al. 2024). (b) We also provide corresponding reward curves against the number of reward queries, where our method indeed improves its sample efficiency during reward optimization process, capturing
good reward signals for reward fine-tuning.

verge slowly due to the lack of these signals. To demonstrate this, we conduct reward-based fine-tuning using the
single prompt “a dolphin riding a bike”, which is known to
be challenging for reward optimization (Black et al. 2024).
In this experiment, we fine-tune Stable Diffusion 1.5 (Rombach et al. 2022) using the policy gradient method (i.e.,

* Equal contribution. † Equal advising.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15696

