The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EmoReg: Directional Latent Vector Modeling for Emotional Intensity
Regularization in Diffusion-based Voice Conversion
Ashishkumar Prabhakar Gudmalwar1 , Ishan Darshan Biyani1 , Nirmesh J. Shah1 ,
Pankaj Wasnik1 , Rajiv Ratn Shah2
1
Media Analysis Group, Sony Research India, Bangalore
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), Delhi, India
{ashish.gudmalwar1,ishan.biyani,nirmesh.shah,pankaj.wasnik}@sony.com, rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in
2

Abstract
The Emotional Voice Conversion (EVC) aims to convert the
discrete emotional state from the source emotion to the target for a given speech utterance while preserving linguistic
content. In this paper, we propose regularizing emotion intensity in the diffusion-based EVC framework to generate
precise speech of the target emotion. Traditional approaches
control the intensity of an emotional state in the utterance via
emotion class probabilities or intensity labels that often lead
to inept style manipulations and degradations in quality. On
the contrary, we aim to regulate emotion intensity using selfsupervised learning-based feature representations and unsupervised directional latent vector modeling (DVM) in the
emotional embedding space within a diffusion-based framework. These emotion embeddings can be modified based on
the given target emotion intensity and the corresponding direction vector. Furthermore, the updated embeddings can be
fused in the reverse diffusion process to generate the speech
with the desired emotion and intensity. In summary, this paper
aims to achieve high-quality emotional intensity regularization in the diffusion-based EVC framework, which is the first
of its kind work. The effectiveness of the proposed method
has been shown across state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines in
terms of subjective and objective evaluations for the English
and Hindi languages.

Figure 1: Conceptual representation of emotional intensity
regularization based on direction vector and intensity value.
Here, Mod. refers to Moderate and Neu refers to Neutral.

the dubbing industry to tackle the complex demands of generating emotionally engaging speech (Gutentag et al. 2017).
This poses challenges in terms of dubbing at a large scale,
turnaround time, and operational costs.
One of the major roadblocks in building emotional speech
synthesis is the unavailability of a large emotional speech
database with diverse emotional expressions and a wide
range of emotion intensities. Even annotating accurate emotional states in the speech requires expert knowledge and is
costly and labor-intensive as labeling each speech file with
the correct emotion and intensity involves detailed subjective assessments. Hence, emotional intensity control or regularization is still an under-explored open research problem.
To this end, we primarily focus on the emotional voice conversion (EVC) task, a sub-topic of emotional speech synthesis for emotional intensity regularization (Zhou et al. 2022c,
2021, 2022a; Shah et al. 2023). In particular, we employ a
self-supervised learning (SSL)-based framework to tackle
the issues related to the unavailability of a large annotated
emotional speech database.
The EVC aims to alter the discrete emotional state of
a speech utterance while preserving linguistic content and
the speaker’s identity (Zhou et al. 2021). Furthermore, emotional intensity regularization involves fine control over in-

Demo Page — https://nirmesh-sony.github.io/EmoReg/

Introduction
Despite significant progress in the field of Generative AI,
speech synthesis models still encounter several challenges
when it comes to the AI-based dubbing of entertainment
content such as movies and serials (Brannon et al. 2023;
Wu et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2021; Mhaskar et al. 2024;
Sahipjohn et al. 2020). AI-based dubbing involves replicating input speech emotion and controlling its intensity depending on the context and emotion of the scene (Brannon
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2022c,a; Amiriparian et al. 2023).
Most of today’s text-to-speech (TTS) systems can produce
high-quality, high-fidelity, natural speech output, but they
still lack expressiveness and fine control over emotional
states (Barakat et al. 2024; Gudmalwar et al. 2024). Hence,
professional voice-over/dubbing artists are still preferred in
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23960

