The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Unlearning with Gradient Descent and Conflict Mitigation
Zibin Pan1 , Zhichao Wang1 , Chi Li1,5 , Kaiyan Zheng4 , Boqi Wang1 ,
Xiaoying Tang* 1,2,3 , Junhua Zhao∗1,2
1

The School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
The Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence
4
Department of Mathematics and Department of Statistics, University of Michigan
5
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
zibinpan@link.cuhk.edu.cn, zhichaowang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, chili@link.cuhk.edu.cn, kaiyanz@umich.edu,
boqiwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, tangxiaoying@cuhk.edu.cn, zhaojunhua@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has received much attention in recent years. However, although clients are not required to share
their data in FL, the global model itself can implicitly remember clients’ local data. Therefore, it’s necessary to effectively
remove the target client’s data from the FL global model to
ease the risk of privacy leakage and implement “the right to be
forgotten”. Federated Unlearning (FU) has been considered
a promising way to remove data without full retraining. But
the model utility easily suffers significant reduction during
unlearning due to the gradient conflicts. Furthermore, when
conducting the post-training to recover the model utility, the
model is prone to move back and revert what has already been
unlearned. To address these issues, we propose Federated Unlearning with Orthogonal Steepest Descent (FedOSD). We
first design an unlearning Cross-Entropy loss to overcome the
convergence issue of the gradient ascent. A steepest descent
direction for unlearning is then calculated in the condition of
being non-conflicting with other clients’ gradients and closest
to the target client’s gradient. This benefits to efficiently unlearn and mitigate the model utility reduction. After unlearning, we recover the model utility by maintaining the achievement of unlearning. Finally, extensive experiments in several
FL scenarios verify that FedOSD outperforms the SOTA FU
algorithms in terms of unlearning and model utility.

Figure 1: A demo of three clients. g1 , g2 , g3 represent the
gradient of clients. d denotes the update direction for unlearning client 3, which is conflicting with g1 and g2 , i.e.,
g1 · d < 0 and g2 · d < 0. dF edOSD represents the direction
obtained by FedOSD, which doesn’t conflict with g1 and g2 .

opt to withdraw from FL. This is known as the right to be forgotten (RTBF) (Liu et al. 2021), which is enacted by privacy
regulations such as the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) (Voigt and Von Bussche 2017) and the California
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) (Harding et al. 2019).
A naive way to achieve this goal is to retrain the FL model.
But it brings large computation and communication costs
(Liu et al. 2023). In contrast, unlearning is a more efficient
way, which has been well studied in centralized machine
learning (Bourtoule et al. 2021). Inspired by it, Federated
Unlearning (FU) has emerged, aiming to remove data from
a trained FL model while trying to maintain model utility.
In this context, numerous FU techniques have been proposed. Federaser (Liu et al. 2021) leverages the norms of
historical local updates in the previous FL training to accelerate retraining. FedKdu (Wu, Zhu, and Mitra 2022) and FedRecovery (Zhang et al. 2023) utilize the historical gradients
to calibrate the model to erase the training data of the target
client (i.e., the client that requests for unlearning). However,
these methods require clients to continuously record historical information during FL training (Yang and Zhao 2023).
Moreover, (Zhao et al. 2023) propose MoDe to unlearn the
target client’s data by momentum degradation, but it requires
simultaneously retraining a model for updating the unlearn-

Code — https://github.com/zibinpan/FedOSD

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has increasingly gained popularity
as a machine learning paradigm in recent years (McMahan
et al. 2017). It allows clients to cooperatively train a global
model without sharing their local data, which helps address
data island and privacy issues (Yu et al. 2022). But previous
studies demonstrate that clients’ local training data is inherently embedded in the parameter distribution of the models trained on it (De and Pedersen 2021; Zhao et al. 2023).
Therefore, in light of privacy, security, and legislation issues, it’s necessary to remove clients’ training data from the
trained model (Zhang et al. 2023), especially when clients
* Xiaoying Tang and Junhua Zhao are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19804

