The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GFlow: Recovering 4D World from Monocular Video
Shizun Wang, Xingyi Yang, Qiuhong Shen, Zhenxiang Jiang, Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
shizun.wang@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

et al. 2023; Luiten et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024; Bansal et al.
2020; Cao and Johnson 2023; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023, 2021b; Pumarola et al. 2021),
while the other estimates camera poses from static scenes
using multi-view stereo techniques (Bian et al. 2023; Fu
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2021a; Wang et al.
2021; Xia et al. 2022; Schönberger et al. 2016; Schonberger
and Frahm 2016; Tian, Du, and Duan 2023; Charatan et al.
2023). This division highlights a missing piece in this field:
the challenge of reconstructing dynamic scenes using only a
single monocular video without any camera parameters.
Addressing this challenge is particularly difficult due to
the inherently ill-posed nature. From a single monocular
video, multiple reconstructions might visually appear correct when projected onto the camera view. However, many
of these reconstructions fail to conform to the physical laws
of the real world. Although NeRF-based (Cao and Johnson 2023; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2023) methods attempt to solve this problem, they often yield poor results. This failure is primarily due to their
implicit representation, which makes it challenging to accurately enforce physical constraints in the reconstruction.
Recent developments in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
(Kerbl et al. 2023) and its extensions (Wu et al. 2023; Luiten
et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023a,b) into dynamic scenes have
emerged as promising alternatives. These techniques have
shown promise in handling the complexities associated with
the dynamic nature of real-world scenes, as well as the
intricacies of camera movement and positioning.Yet, they
still operate under the assumption of known camera poses
(Schönberger et al. 2016; Schonberger and Frahm 2016).
To transcend these limitations and fully leverage the capabilities of 2D foundation models for dynamic scene reconstruction, we offer a novel insight:
Given 2D factors such as RGB, depth and optical flow
from one video, we have enough clues to model the 4D
(3D+t) world behind the video.
Leveraging this insight, we introduce GFlow, a novel
framework that leverages 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl
et al. 2023) to reconstruct the video. It conceptualizes the
video content as a dynamic flow of Gaussian points moving through space and time. We simultaneously optimize the
flow and the camera poses together, to ensure that the projected video adheres to those 2D factors.

Recovering 4D world from monocular video is a crucial yet
challenging task. Conventional methods usually rely on the
assumptions of multi-view videos, known camera parameters,
or static scenes. In this paper, we relax all these constraints
and tackle a highly ambitious but practical task: With only
one monocular video without camera parameters, we aim to
recover the dynamic 3D world alongside the camera poses.
To solve this, we introduce GFlow, a new framework that utilizes only 2D priors (depth and optical flow) to lift a video to a
4D scene, as a flow of 3D Gaussians through space and time.
GFlow starts by segmenting the video into still and moving
parts, then alternates between optimizing camera poses and
the dynamics of the 3D Gaussian points. This method ensures consistency among adjacent points and smooth transitions between frames. Since dynamic scenes always continually introduce new visual content, we present prior-driven
initialization and pixel-wise densification strategy for Gaussian points to integrate new content. By combining all those
techniques, GFlow transcends the boundaries of 4D recovery
from causal videos; it naturally enables tracking of points and
segmentation of moving objects across frames. Additionally,
GFlow estimates the camera poses for each frame, enabling
novel view synthesis by changing camera pose. This capability facilitates extensive scene-level or object-level editing,
highlighting GFlow’s versatility and effectiveness.

Website — https://littlepure2333.github.io/GFlow
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18426

1

Introduction

The quest for accurate reconstruction of 4D scene from
video inputs stands at the forefront of contemporary research
in computer vision and graphics. This endeavor is crucial
for the advancement of virtual and augmented reality, video
analysis, and multimedia applications. The main challenge
lies in capturing the transient essence of dynamic scenes and
the often absent camera pose information.
Traditional approaches are typically split between two
types: the one relies on pre-calibrated camera parameters or
multi-view video inputs to reconstruct dynamic scenes (Wu
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7862

