The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fusing Pruned and Backdoored Models: Optimal Transport-based
Data-free Backdoor Mitigation
Weilin Lin1 , Li Liu1 * , Jianze Li2,3 , Hui Xiong1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
NWCs of Unlearning (BadNets) NWCs of Unlearning (Blended)

Abstract

Clean Unlearning
Random Unlearning

Clean Unlearning
Random Unlearning

NWCs of Poison Unlearning

NWCs of Poison Unlearning

NWC values

Backdoor attacks present a serious security threat to deep
neuron networks (DNNs). Although numerous effective defense techniques have been proposed in recent years, they inevitably rely on the availability of either clean or poisoned
data. In contrast, data-free defense techniques have evolved
slowly and still lag significantly in performance. To address
this issue, different from the traditional approach of pruning followed by fine-tuning, we propose a novel data-free
defense method named Optimal Transport-based Backdoor
Repairing (OTBR) in this work. This method, based on our
findings on neuron weight changes (NWCs) of random unlearning, uses optimal transport (OT)-based model fusion
to combine the advantages of both pruned and backdoored
models. Specifically, we first demonstrate our findings that
the NWCs of random unlearning are positively correlated
with those of poison unlearning. Based on this observation,
we propose a random-unlearning NWC pruning technique
to eliminate the backdoor effect and obtain a backdoor-free
pruned model. Then, motivated by the OT-based model fusion, we propose the pruned-to-backdoored OT-based fusion
technique, which fuses pruned and backdoored models to
combine the advantages of both, resulting in a model that
demonstrates high clean accuracy and a low attack success
rate. To our knowledge, this is the first work to introduce OT
and model fusion techniques to the backdoor defense. Extensive experiments show that our method successfully defends against all seven backdoor attacks across three benchmark datasets, outperforming both state-of-the-art (SOTA)
data-free and data-dependent methods.

Figure 1: Illustration of unlearning NWCs on BadNets (Gu
et al. 2019) and Blended (Chen et al. 2017) attacks. The
NWCs of both clean and random unlearning show a positive
correlation with poison unlearning. The last convolutional
layer is chosen for this illustration.

becomes more widespread, concerns regarding their security
cannot be ignored. Among the numerous threats to DNNs,
backdoor attacks (Gu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021a; Wu et al.
2023a) are particularly concerning. In these attacks, the attackers manipulate a small portion of the training data to
implant a stealthy backdoor into a DNN, resulting in a backdoored model. During inference, the backdoored model behaves anomalously when the input contains a pre-defined
trigger pattern; otherwise, it performs normally. This phenomenon is termed the backdoor effect. Such attacks may
pose hidden security issues to real-world applications, such
as unauthorized access to a system when a company develops its software using a third-party pre-trained model.
In recent years, as backdoor attack methods have evolved,
backdoor defense (Wu et al. 2023b) techniques have also
seen significant growth. Various important techniques have
been developed for backdoor defense, including pruning (Wu and Wang 2021; Zheng et al. 2022b), unlearning (Zeng et al. 2021a), and fine-tuning (Zhu et al. 2023),
etc. However, most of these techniques rely on the availability of clean or poisoned data, which restricts their applicability to the aforementioned scenarios. Recent insights
reveal a promising direction (Lin et al. 2024): using neuron weight changes (NWCs) of clean unlearning1 to catego-

Code — https://github.com/linweiii/OTBR
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.15861

Introduction
Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
become a crucial technology in various applications, including image recognition (Parmar and Mehta 2014; He
et al. 2016a), speech processing (Gaikwad, Gawali, and Yannawar 2010; Maas et al. 2017), and natural language processing (Chowdhary and Chowdhary 2020), etc. However,
as the deployment of DNNs in sensitive and critical domains
* Corresponds to Li Liu (avrillliu@hkust-gz.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

26299

Unlearning the backdoored model on clean data.

