The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Unifying Information-theoretic Perspective on Evaluating Generative Models
Alexis Fox1 , Samarth Swarup2 , Abhijin Adiga2
1

Duke University
University of Virginia
alexis.fox@duke.edu, swarup@virginia.edu, abhijin@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Considering the difficulty of interpreting generative model
output, there is significant current research focused on determining meaningful evaluation metrics. Several recent approaches utilize “precision” and “recall,” borrowed from the
classification domain, to individually quantify the output fidelity (realism) and output diversity (representation of the real
data variation), respectively. With the increase in metric proposals, there is a need for a unifying perspective, allowing for
easier comparison and clearer explanation of their benefits and
drawbacks. To this end, we unify a class of kth-nearest neighbors (kNN)-based metrics under an information-theoretic lens
using approaches from kNN density estimation. Additionally,
we propose a tri-dimensional metric composed of Precision
Cross-Entropy (PCE), Recall Cross-Entropy (RCE), and Recall Entropy (RE), which separately measure fidelity and two
distinct aspects of diversity, inter- and intra-class. Our domainagnostic metric, derived from the information-theoretic concepts of entropy and cross-entropy, can be dissected for both
sample- and mode-level analysis. Our detailed experimental
results demonstrate the sensitivity of our metric components
to their respective qualities and reveal undesirable behaviors
of other metrics.

Figure 1: We visualize the various failure modes (a)-(c) for
a model distribution, where the real (green) distribution is
composed of two modes: sport cars and pickup trucks. (a)
represents a lack of generated pickup trucks, (b) and its corresponding examples show unrealistic points, and (c) depicts
points clustered at the mode average.

Code — https://github.com/NSSAC/PrecisionRecallMetric
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14340

1

Introduction

Need for Metrics. Deep generative models, including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling
2022), and diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015),
are achieving unprecedented realism in their outputs (Ravuri
et al. 2023). Their success highlights an urgent need for robust
methods to evaluate their output quality. Unlike discriminative models, which are evaluated against a clear ground truth
in the form of labeled test sets, generative models produce a
spectrum of plausible outputs based on the learned data distribution. Hence, evaluating generative models is a nontrivial
task.
Traditional 1D Metrics. Often, an important goal of generative models is to produce outputs that human observers
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16630

find realistic (Stein et al. 2024). While human assessment
can be quantified, manual human evaluation is expensive,
time-consuming, and makes continuous assessments impractical. Automatic evaluation metrics such as Inception Score
(IS) (Salimans et al. 2016) and Fréchet Inception Distance
(F ID) (Heusel et al. 2017) address these inefficiencies by
computing the distributional differences of generated and real
content.
Motivation for 2D Metrics. However, as one-dimensional
scores, IS and F ID cannot distinguish various shortcomings, e.g. when outputs are generated in low-probability regions of the real distribution (low fidelity) or insufficiently
represent high-probability regions (low diversity) (Sajjadi
et al. 2018). A recent set of two-dimensional metrics, which
can be broadly categorized as versions of “precision” and “recall,” has emerged to differentiate the several types of failure
modes. Sajjadi et al. (2018) introduce the first of a series of
precision and recall metrics based on decomposing the real
and generated distributions into common and unique components. Subsequent works propose alternatives to precision
and recall, with most utilizing k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN)
methods (Kynkäänniemi et al. 2019; Naeem et al. 2020; Alaa

