The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MOS: Model Surgery for
Pre-Trained Model-Based Class-Incremental Learning
Hai-Long Sun1, 2 , Da-Wei Zhou1, 2 * , Hanbin Zhao3 , Le Gan1, 2 , De-Chuan Zhan1, 2 , Han-Jia Ye1, 2 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{sunhl, zhoudw, zhandc, yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, ganle@nju.edu.cn, zhaohanbin@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Hoiem 2017; Zhou et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2019), contemporary CIL methods are increasingly leveraging PTMs, which
are initially pre-trained on vast datasets using substantial resources (McDonnell et al. 2024; Jung et al. 2023). This pretraining process endows PTMs with robust generalization
abilities. Consequently, designing an effective CIL method
that leverages PTMs and resists catastrophic forgetting has
garnered significant attention from researchers.
Due to the generalization of PTMs, existing works often freeze the pre-trained weights and adapt to incremental tasks using additional lightweight modules (Hu et al.
2022; Chao et al. 2020; Ye, Lu, and Zhan 2022). For example, visual prompt tuning (Jia et al. 2022) customizes
prompts to modify model behavior, facilitating adaptation
to downstream tasks. Specifically, L2P (Wang et al. 2022c)
designs a key-query matching strategy to retrieve instancespecific prompts from a prompt pool. Based on L2P, DualPrompt (Wang et al. 2022b) introduces expert prompts
to encode task-specific information and explores the impact of prompt depth. Furthermore, CODA-Prompt (Smith
et al. 2023) proposes an attention-based weighting method
for prompts to enhance the efficacy of prompt retrieval.
However, as the model learns new concepts, catastrophic
forgetting still occurs. This forgetting phenomenon happens
at both the parameter and retrieval levels. During the training stage, although many methods use lightweight components to adjust the PTM, iterative updates of these components will lead to parameter drift and trigger forgetting.
Moreover, existing works devote to preventing conflicts between prompts or achieving orthogonal projection, which
exacerbates parameter drift between new and old components. During inference, training multiple lightweight modules requires selecting the most relevant one, but the model
may mistakenly retrieve the irrelevant modules, leading to
the performance decay. This motivates us to question if it
is possible to jointly rectify the model to resist catastrophic
forgetting at both the parameter and retrieval levels?
Facing the challenges at both the parameter and retrieval
levels, our model should be able to effectively design
mechanisms to overcome these issues. To address forgetting
at the parameter level, the model needs to develop effective
update methods that ensure the updated parameters remain
discriminative for old data. To overcome forgetting at the
retrieval level, the model requires efficient self-correction

Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) requires models to continually acquire knowledge of new classes without forgetting old
ones. Despite Pre-trained Models (PTMs) have shown excellent performance in CIL, catastrophic forgetting still occurs
as the model learns new concepts. Existing work seeks to utilize lightweight components to adjust the PTM, while the forgetting phenomenon still comes from parameter and retrieval
levels. Specifically, iterative updates of the model result in parameter drift, while mistakenly retrieving irrelevant modules
leads to the mismatch during inference. To this end, we propose MOdel Surgery (MOS) to rescue the model from forgetting previous knowledge. By training task-specific adapters,
we continually adjust the PTM to downstream tasks. To mitigate parameter-level forgetting, we present an adapter merging approach to learn task-specific adapters, which aims to
bridge the gap between different components while reserve
task-specific information. Besides, to address retrieval-level
forgetting, we introduce a training-free self-refined adapter
retrieval mechanism during inference, which leverages the
model’s inherent ability for better adapter retrieval. By jointly
rectifying the model with those steps, MOS can robustly resist catastrophic forgetting in the learning process. Extensive
experiments on seven benchmark datasets validate MOS’s
state-of-the-art performance.

Code — https://github.com/sun-hailong/AAAI25-MOS

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has achieved significant results in many real-world applications (Deng et al. 2009; He
et al. 2015; Cao et al. 2024b; Sun et al. 2024). While in the
open world, data often appears in a streaming format (Golab and Özsu 2003), requiring a machine learning paradigm
capable of incrementally acquiring new class knowledge,
which is denoted as Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2024b). One of the significant challenges in CIL is catastrophic forgetting, where the
model, after learning new classes incrementally, gradually
loses its ability to recognize the old ones (French 1999).
In response to this challenge, the field of CIL is evolving
with the emergence of pre-trained models (PTMs). Unlike
the traditional approach of “training from scratch” (Li and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20699

