The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Scale Contrastive Learning for Video Temporal Grounding
Thong Thanh Nguyen1 , Yi Bin2* , Xiaobao Wu3 , Zhiyuan Hu1 ,
Cong-Duy T Nguyen3 , See-Kiong Ng1 , Anh Tuan Luu3
1

Institute of Data Science (IDS), National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Tongji University, China,
3
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore

Abstract

However, recently the growing availability of long videos,
e.g. on streaming platforms, and demands to query their rich
content have necessitated productive grounding of large volumes of queries in long videos. Because of such short-tolong video paradigm shift, latest methods (Zhang, Wu, and
Li 2022; Mu, Mo, and Li 2024) have utilized local selfattention to restrict attention within a local window, following the intuition that temporal context beyond a certain range
is less helpful for moment localization.
To capture moments at different temporal scales without
enlarging the window size of the local self-attention, recent
methods (Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022; Mu, Mo, and Li 2024)
need to combine several Transformer blocks with downsampling between every two blocks, resulting in a feature
pyramid of moment representations, as illustrated in Figure 2 (left). Unfortunately, due to such downsampling operation, when moment representations are propagated from
lower levels of short-range (local) moments to higher levels of long-range (global) moments, information contained
in representations of longer moments will gradually degrade
(Guo et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2023). This could explain why
performance of these methods tends to degrade as the duration of target moments increase, as shown in Figure 2 (right)
and statistically shown with Intersection-over-Union (IoU)
results in Figure 3, respectively.
To enrich information in video moment representations,
recent works (Panta et al. 2024; Xiao et al. 2024; Ji et al.
2024; Liu et al. 2024) have employed contrastive learning
for temporal grounding. The intuition is to capture mutual
information between video moments and textual query to
preserve salient semantics in moment representations. These
works mainly involve query-moment pairs in which queries
relate to video moments of distinct videos, hence the learned
semantics among moment representations would be independent from each other. However, such approach might
not be suitable for the latest scalable video-centric approach
(Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022; Mu, Mo, and Li 2024), in which
multiple textual queries are related to one video. Therefore,
if the grounding of two textual queries results in temporal overlapping, there might be a conflict in compact moment representations (An et al. 2023). Furthermore, focusing upon moment-query relations limits these works to the
feature space of the final encoder layer, which could not effectively utilize all hidden representations across encoding

Temporal grounding, which localizes video moments related
to a natural language query, is a core problem of visionlanguage learning and video understanding. To encode video
moments of varying lengths, recent methods employ a multilevel structure known as a feature pyramid. In this structure, lower levels concentrate on short-range video moments,
while higher levels address long-range moments. Because
higher levels experience downsampling to accommodate increasing moment length, their capacity to capture information is reduced and consequently leads to degraded information in moment representations. To resolve this problem, we
propose a contrastive learning framework to capture salient
semantics among video moments. Our key methodology is
to leverage samples from the feature space emanating from
multiple stages of the video encoder itself requiring neither
data augmentation nor online memory banks to obtain positive and negative samples. To enable such an extension, we introduce a sampling process to draw multiple video moments
corresponding to a common query. Subsequently, by utilizing these moments’ representations across video encoder layers, we instantiate a novel form of multi-scale and cross-scale
contrastive learning that links local short-range video moments with global long-range video moments. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework for
not only long-form but also short-form video grounding.

Introduction
Temporal video grounding aims to localize moments of interest in an untrimmed video given a free-form textual description. It is a challenging multimodal task since it involves understanding temporal information in videos and
reasoning about their connections to semantic information
in texts. Recently, temporal grounding has drawn increasing attention (Mu, Mo, and Li 2024; Jung et al. 2023; Xu
et al. 2023; Pan et al. 2023), due to its wide range of applications such as surveillance (Zhang, Zhu, and Roy-Chowdhury
2016), robotics (Burgner-Kahrs, Rucker, and Choset 2015),
and autonomous driving (Claussmann et al. 2019).
Previous methods (Zhang et al. 2020b; Soldan et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2020a) for temporal grounding concentrate on
grounding merely a few queries in short video snippets.
* Yi Bin is the corresponding author, yi.bin@hotmail.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6227

