The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AGMixup: Adaptive Graph Mixup for Semi-supervised Node Classification
Weigang Lu1 , Ziyu Guan1 * , Wei Zhao1 , Yaming Yang1 , Yibing Zhan2 , Yiheng Lu1 , Dapeng Tao3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
JD Explore Academy, Xidian University, Beijing, China
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
{wglu@.stu., zyguan@, ywzhao@mail., yym@,}xidan.edu.cn, zhanyibing@jd.com, dapeng.tao@gmail.com

Domain

Abstract
Mixup is a data augmentation technique that enhances model
generalization by interpolating between data points using a
mixing ratio λ in the image domain. Recently, the concept
of mixup has been adapted to the graph domain through
node-centric interpolations. However, these approaches often fail to address the complexity of interconnected relationships, potentially damaging the graph’s natural topology and
undermining node interactions. Furthermore, current graph
mixup methods employ a one-size-fits-all strategy with a randomly sampled λ for all mixup pairs, ignoring the diverse
needs of different pairs. This paper proposes an Adaptive
Graph Mixup (AGMixup) framework for semi-supervised
node classification. AGMixup introduces a subgraph-centric
approach, which treats each subgraph similarly to how images are handled in Euclidean domains, thus facilitating a
more natural integration of mixup into graph-based learning.
We also propose an adaptive mechanism to tune the mixing
ratio λ for diverse mixup pairs, guided by the contextual similarity and uncertainty of the involved subgraphs. Extensive
experiments across seven datasets on semi-supervised node
classification benchmarks demonstrate AGMixup’s superiority over state-of-the-art graph mixup methods.

Image

Graph (ours)

Original
Data
Mixup
Pairs
Mixed
Data
Figure 1: Seamlessly integrating mixup from image domain
into graph domain with our AGMixup.

ing on node-centric interpolations within a graph, extend the
mixup method from Euclidean spaces to graphs by blending features, labels, and connections of node pairs (Lu et al.
2024). However, these methods overlook the complexity of
interconnected relationships, potentially altering the graph’s
natural topology and undermining the node interactions. In
contrast to the isolation of images in mixup as shown in
Fig. 1 (left), where interpolations do not influence other data
points, graph data’s interconnected nature demands an approach to preserve its topological integrity.
Question 2: How can the mixing ratio (λ) be adaptively controlled for different mixup pairs? Prevailing graph
mixup techniques often employ a one-size-fits-all strategy
to control the mixing ratio, applying a randomly sampled
λ across all mixup operations. This approach can inadvertently generate synthetic nodes that starkly contrast with realistic distributions within the graph, especially when merging highly dissimilar node pairs with a mid-range λ. Moreover, this static strategy fails to encourage the model to explore less represented data areas, critical for more confident
predictions.
Present Work. In response to these challenges, we propose an Adaptive Graph Mixup (AGMixup) framework for
semi-supervised node classification. AGMixup innovates a

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a dominant paradigm for learning on graph-structured data, driving significant advances in various graph-based tasks, notably node classification. Despite these successes, a fundamental challenge remains in how to effectively generalize
from limited or sparsely labeled data, a common scenario
in node classification. Mixup (Zhang et al. 2017), an effective data augmentation method originally devised for Euclidean data, enriches the training dataset by linearly interpolating between pairs of labeled samples (a mixup pair)
and their corresponding labels with a mixing coefficient λ.
While mixup has achieved notable success in Euclidean data
domains characterized by regularity, its application to the
complex, non-Euclidean nature of graph data encounters two
significant questions.
Question 1: How can the mixup concept be seamlessly integrated into graphs? Existing graph mixup methods, focus* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19143

