The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LoGoFair: Post-Processing for Local and Global Fairness in Federated Learning
Li Zhang, Chaochao Chen * , Zhongxuan Han, Qiyong Zhong, Xiaolin Zheng
Zhejiang University
zhanglizl80@gmail.com, {zjuccc, zxhan, youngzhong, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has garnered considerable interest
for its capability to learn from decentralized data sources.
Given the increasing application of FL in decision-making
scenarios, addressing fairness issues across different sensitive groups (e.g., female, male) in FL is crucial. Current research often focuses on facilitating fairness at each client’s
data (local fairness) or within the entire dataset across all
clients (global fairness). However, existing approaches that
focus exclusively on either local or global fairness fail to address two key challenges: (CH1) Under statistical heterogeneity, global fairness does not imply local fairness, and
vice versa. (CH2) Achieving fairness under model-agnostic
setting. To tackle the aforementioned challenges, this paper
proposes a novel post-processing framework for achieving
both Local and Global Fairness in the FL context, namely
LoGoFair. To address CH1, LoGoFair endeavors to seek the
Bayes optimal classifier under local and global fairness constraints, which strikes the optimal accuracy-fairness balance
in the probabilistic sense. To address CH2, LoGoFair employs a model-agnostic federated post-processing procedure
that enables clients to collaboratively optimize global fairness
while ensuring local fairness, thereby achieving the optimal
fair classifier within FL. Experimental results on three realworld datasets further illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed LoGoFair framework.

1

FedAvg

FCFL

FedFB

0.5

5

100

5

100

Δ-Global

Δ-Local

0.18
0.12
0.06
0.00
0.18
0.12
0.06
0.00

(a) Local/Global Fairness

0.5

𝛼

(b) Fairness under Heterogeneity

Figure 1: (a) Demonstrates a toy example of local and global
fairness in the context of an one-dimensional classification
problem. These fair classifiers ensure equal gender proportions in classification at local and global level (e.g. Local
classifiers allocate 2/3 of samples from both genders to the
left side for client 1). (b) Presents comparisons between local (FCFL) and global (FedFB) fair FL algorithms across
varying levels of heterogeneity. A smaller α signifies more
heterogeneity across clients, and a smaller ∆ denotes a fairer
model at local or global level.
communication costs and privacy concerns if directly implemented in the FL environment.
To develop fairness guarantees for federated algorithms,
this paper focuses on two key concepts of group fairness in
FL: Local and Global Fairness (Cui et al. 2021; Ezzeldin
et al. 2023; Hamman and Dutta 2024). Local fairness aims
to develop models that deliver unbiased predictions across
specific groups when evaluated on each client’s local dataset.
Since the models are ultimately deployed and applied in local environments, achieving local fairness is indispensable
for promoting fair FL models. Global fairness focuses on
identifying models that ensure similar treatment for sensitive groups within the entire dataset across all clients. In
practice, models trained on large-scale aggregated datasets
are inclined to learn inherent bias in data and exacerbate the
treatment discrepancy of sensitive groups based as shortcuts
to achieving high accuracy. (Geirhos et al. 2020; Chang and
Shokri 2023). These global models typically fail to make
impartial decisions and uphold societal fairness. Figure 1a

Introduction

Federated learning is a distributed machine learning
paradigm that enables multiple clients to collaboratively
refine a shared model while preserving their data privacy (McMahan et al. 2017). With the growing integration of
FL in high-stakes scenarios such as healthcare (Rieke et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2024a), finance (Chouldechova 2017a),
and recommendation systems (Burke 2017), fairness is gaining prominence to prevent machine learning models from
discriminating against any demographic group based on sensitive attributes, e.g. gender and race. Several methods exist
to achieve group fairness in centralized settings (Agarwal
et al. 2018; Alghamdi et al. 2022; Jovanović et al. 2023;
Chen, Klochkov, and Liu 2024), these methods typically require direct access to entire datasets, thereby incurring high
* Chaochao Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22470

