The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MI-CAPTCHA: Enhance the Security of CAPTCHA Using Mooney Images
Jingmeng Li, Lukang Fu, Surun Yang, Hui Wei*
Laboratory of Algorithms for Cognitive Models, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{jmli21, lkfu23, sryang22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, weihui@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

recognition), matching or even outperforming humans (He
et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016). The security of some
image-based CAPTCHAs have been significantly weakened.
CAPTCHAs essentially make use of the ability gaps between machines and humans to distinguish them (Hossen
et al. 2020). As shown in Fig. 1(a), there are still significant gaps between deep neural networks and the human
visual system in terms of robustness and generalization,
and the closed-loop information processing mechanism is
one of the reasons for this gap (Theeuwes 2010; Gilbert
and Li 2013). Fig. 1(b) explains the process of closed-loop
information processing for object recognition in the human visual system. It comprises two iterative components:
feedforward/bottom-up and feedback/top-down (Theeuwes
2010; Cavanagh 1991; Roelfsema 2006). During the bottomup process, the visual system integrates low-level visual signals through perceptual organization to obtain higher-level
visual features and extract crucial cues (e.g., shape, texture).
Our brain combines these cues with rich object knowledge to
generate visual expectations. During the feedback process,
the visual system actively adjusts perceptual organization by
integrating missing information, filtering noise, and reducing redundancy to meet these expectations.
The Mooney image (MI) are a type of stylized image that
consists of discrete speckles with irregular shapes and sizes,
colored only in black and white (Mitra et al. 2009; Hegdé,
Thompson, and Kersten 2007; Mooney 1957; Li and Wei
2024). Fig. 1(c) presents an example of MI. When some
speckles are appropriately organized together, we can perceive a tiger. Compared to natural images, the MI contains
fewer visual cues (e.g., color, luminance, texture), and its
content is partial and discrete. These features enable it to
play an important role in the fields of cognitive science
(Van de Cruys et al. 2021; Hegdé and Kersten 2010; Li and
Wei 2023) and web security (Mitra et al. 2009; Gao et al.
2015). The discrete speckles increase the difficulty of perceptual organization in the bottom-up process. In addition,
MIs miss some visual content and cues, increasing its ambiguity. The emergence of perception on MI emphasizes the
importance of iteration between feedforward and feedback
in visual cognition. Here, we raise an intriguing question:
Can MIs be used to enhance the security of CAPTCHA? Before answering it, we first consider how to generate high-

Completely automated public Turing test to tell humans
apart (CAPTCHA) is an effective mechanism to protect
websites and online applications from malicious bots programs. Image-based CAPTCHA is one of the most widely
used schemes. However, deep learning techniques have
significantly weakened the security of some image-based
CAPTCHA schemes. Mooney images (MIs) are important
research materials in the field of cognitive science. Compared to natural images, MI exhibits fewer visual cues, fragmented content, and greater ambiguity, leading to the perception of MI relying more on the iterative process between feedforward and feedback mechanisms. In this paper, we raise
an intriguing problem: can MIs be used to enhance the security of CAPTCHA? Before this study, we first propose a
novel framework HiMI that generates the high-quality MIs
from natural images and also allows flexible adjustment of
the perceived difficulty. Based on MI, we design two MICAPTCHA schemes related to object detection and instance
segmentation tasks, respectively. We experimentally demonstrate that HiMI performs better than other baseline methods in terms of both image quality and application potential in two MI-CAPTCHA schemes. Additionally, we conduct
experiments to explore the solving performance of humans
and CAPTCHA solvers under different parameter settings of
schemes, providing valuable reference for the practical application.

Introduction
Completely automated public Turing test to tell humans
apart (CAPTCHA) is a defense mechanism against malicious scripts (Shi et al. 2020; Alqahtani and Alsulaiman
2020). According to the format of data, existing CAPTCHA
mechanisms can be generally classified into three types: text,
image, and audio. Text-based and image-based CAPTCHAs
are the most widely used. Images are inherently more complex than text, making image-based CAPTCHA schemes
more robust against automated attacks (Searles et al.
2023). In 2018, Google replaced the popular text-based reCAPTCHA v1 with the image-based reCAPTCHA v2 (?).
However, deep learning techniques have achieved impressive successes in some computer vision tasks (e.g., object
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1383

