The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Calibrating Large Language Models with Sample Consistency
*1

*2

1

1

3

3

Qing Lyu , Kumar Shridhar , Chaitanya Malaviya , Li Zhang , Yanai Elazar , Niket Tandon ,
1
2
1
Marianna Apidianaki , Mrinmaya Sachan , Chris Callison-Burch
1

University of Pennsylvania
2
ETH Zurich,
3
Allen Institute for AI
lyuqing@sas.upenn.edu, shkumar@ethz.ch
Abstract
Accurately gauging the confidence level of Large Language
Models’ (LLMs) predictions is pivotal for their reliable application. However, LLMs are often inherently uncalibrated and
elude conventional calibration techniques due to their proprietary nature and massive scale. In this work, we derive model
confidence from the distribution of multiple randomly sampled
generations, using three measures of consistency. We extensively evaluate eleven open and closed-source models on nine
reasoning datasets. Results show that consistency-based calibration methods outperform existing post-hoc approaches in
terms of calibration error. Meanwhile, we find that factors such
as intermediate explanations, model scaling, and larger sample
sizes enhance calibration, while instruction-tuning makes calibration more difficult. Moreover, confidence scores obtained
from consistency can potentially enhance model performance.
Finally, we offer guidance on choosing suitable consistency
metrics for calibration, tailored to model characteristics such
as the exposure to instruction-tuning and RLHF.

Figure 1: We study three consistency measures, agreementbased, entropy-based, and first-second-distance-based (FSD),
to estimate confidence from model generation distributions.

Code — https://github.com/veronica320/Calibrating-LLMswith-Consistency
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.13904

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in various tasks, yet
it is hard to know when they err. A first step towards making
LLMs more trustworthy is for them to provide a confidence
estimate with predictions (Papadopoulos, Edwards, and Murray 2001). This estimate needs to be calibrated, meaning that
the confidence level is aligned with the likelihood of the prediction being correct (Brier 1950). A well-calibrated system
can enable model developers to provide selective predictions,
help users decide when to trust or distrust model responses,
and potentially facilitate performance improvement through
human intervention or self-refinement (Madaan et al. 2023;
Shridhar et al. 2023).
Unfortunately, LLMs are not well-calibrated off-the-shelf
— the probability logits of model predictions are often poorly
aligned with performance (Jiang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗ Equal contribution. Qing Lyu did her work while interning at
Allen Institute for AI.

19260

While traditional calibration methods (Guo et al. 2017; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Gal and Ghahramani 2016, i.a.) can be used on open-source LMs, for recent
LLMs, these methods become formidably costly because of
the need to retrain multiple copies of the model, and might
even be inapplicable due to inaccessible training data, model
weights, and output probabilities in closed-source LLMs.
In light of these issues, a recent line of work measures
the consistency of model generations to calibrate confidence
(Wang et al. 2023; Xiong et al. 2023, i.a.), with the advantage
of being fully post-hoc and requiring no additional calibration
data. However, existing work has only used the agreement
between the original generation and multiple randomly sampled generations as a metric for consistency, ignoring the rich
information from the distribution of generations.
In this work, we investigate the research question: How
can we best elicit a model’s confidence from the consistency
of multiple generations? As shown in Figure 1, we consider
three ways to measure consistency, focusing on different
characteristics of the distribution: agreement-based, as mentioned before; entropy-based, which is based on the normalized entropy of the generation distribution; and FSD-based,
which measures the percentage difference in samples agreeing with the majority and second-majority answers. For exam-

