The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Alternative Theory of Stable Revision for Nondeterministic Approximation
Fixpoint Theory and the Relationships
Spencer Killen1 , Jia-Huai You1 , Jesse Heyninck2,3
1

University of Alberta, Canada
Open Universiteit, the Netherlands
3
University of Cape Town, South-Africa
sjkillen@ualberta.ca, jyou@ualberta.ca, jesse.heyninck@ou.nl
2

Abstract

Fink (2013); Denecker, Marek, and Truszczynski (2003);
Liu and You (2022); Marynissen, Bogaerts, and Denecker
(2021).
However, the original AFT is unsuitable for nondeterministic semantics, which are essential for capturing uncertainty.
While functions in AFT map lattice values to other values in the same lattice, nondeterminism requires mappings
from lattice elements to higher-order structures, such as a
set of lattice elements. This mismatch of domain and range
prompts the development of a framework with the broad applicability of AFT that can express nondeterministic semantics.
Heyninck et al. (2024) tackle this challenge by formalizing a new theory of nondeterministic AFT, which has already proven useful in providing semantics for disjunctive
logic programs (Heyninck, Arieli, and Bogaerts 2024), aggregate disjunctive logic programs (Heyninck and Bogaerts
2023) and choice programs (Heyninck 2024). They build
their theory from the ground up, establishing new definitions
that generalize those from deterministic AFT of Denecker et
al. (2000). Their theory of nondeterministic AFT is highly
suitable for characterizing disjunctive semantics.
However, their theory departs significantly from standard
AFT. Namely, it introduces its own notion of fixpoints, exactness, and monotonicity. The framework also relies on different orderings than deterministic AFT. Though nondeterministic AFT faithfully generalizes deterministic AFT, that
is, nondeterministic AFT can express deterministic AFT,
further questions remain as to how these theories are related.
It is natural to ask whether a nondeterministic operator can
be alternatively viewed as a family of deterministic operators. More generally, the question is whether we can provide
the lattice-theoretic characterizations of a nondeterministic
semantics by relying only on the notations and constructions
of deterministic AFT.
Because stable revision is at the center of AFT, we focus
on the following critical question - whether nondeterministic stable revision can be defined by deterministic AFT. Our
proposed solution lifts deterministic stable revision to a nondeterministic setting using sets of approximators and simplifies the application of AFT to nondeterministic semantics by requiring fewer definitions. Our approach clarifies
the relationship between deterministic and nondeterministic AFT. Namely, we generalize a prior idea that disjunctive

Approximation fixpoint theory (AFT) is a robust and popular
mathematical framework that characterizes many nonmonotonic semantics, where the construction of stable fixpoints,
called stable revision, plays a central role. Nondeterministic
AFT is a recent development that redefines AFT for a nondeterministic setting to capture disjunctive semantics. This
theory departs from traditional AFT by introducing distinct
definitions, thus raising the question of whether deterministic AFT can be adopted directly to define nondeterministic
stable revision. This work proposes such an alternate theory
and creates a new way to study disjunctive semantics in terms
of normal (non-disjunctive) knowledge bases. To demonstrate
the viability of our framework, we show how to capture stable
and partial stable models for disjunctive logic programs. We
then study the relationships between this alternative theory
and the state-of-the-art nondeterministic AFT.

1

Introduction

Nonmonotonic semantics allow new facts to invalidate previously established conclusions. This feature accurately reflects certain aspects of human reasoning. Thus, it is vital for
descriptions of our knowledge to capture nonmonotonicity.
Fixpoint theory, an elegant method of capturing semantics,
requires monotonicity (Tarski 1955), so is not immediately
apparent how to represent a nonmonotonic knowledge base
using fixpoint functions. A widely adopted branch of fixpoint theory, Approximation Fixpoint Theory (AFT) (Denecker, Marek, and Truszczyński 2000), leverages intervals
(approximations) to monotonically capture fixpoints of nonmonotonic functions. In AFT, this construction is called
stable revision, and the corresponding fixpoints are called
the stable fixpoints of the underlying approximator (a.k.a.
an approximating operator). Stable revision is the key to
capturing the minimality principle commonly adopted in
knowledge representation. In general, to apply AFT to a semantics is to formulate an approximator whose stable fixpoints characterize the intended semantics. Due to its relative ease of use and generality, AFT has been used for the
comparison, refinement, and the creation of semantics; see,
e.g., Marynissen, Bogaerts, and Denecker (2024); Vanbesien, Bruynooghe, and Denecker (2022); Antic, Eiter, and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15033

