The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UFID: A Unified Framework for Black-box Input-level Backdoor Detection on
Diffusion Models
Zihan Guan* 1,2 , Mengxuan Hu* 3 , Sheng Li†3 , Anil Kumar Vullikanti†1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
2
Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia
3
School of Data Science, University of Virginia
{bxv6gs, qtq7su, shengli, vsakumar}@virginia.edu

Abstract

via an API or to download them directly from the internet.
This approach is known as Model-as-a-Service (MaaS).
However, it has recently been found that diffusion models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Gu 2024; Huang
et al. 2024; Chen, Song, and Li 2023; Chou, Chen, and Ho
2023a,b; Struppek, Hintersdorf, and Kersting 2022; Guan
et al. 2023), where malicious attackers poison certain training samples with a predefined trigger pattern in the training stage. Consequently, the behavior of diffusion models
can be adversarially manipulated whenever the trigger pattern appears in the input query, while it remains normal with
clean input queries. This vulnerability poses a serious threat
to real-world applications in the MaaS setting, e.g., the online third-party diffusion models may have been backdoored
to generate inappropriate images for children or to generate images that bypass copyright restrictions when a specific
trigger appears in the query (Wang et al. 2024a). More seriously, the traditional training-phase defense methods (Li
et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023) cannot be
deployed in the MaaS setting due to the defenders’ inaccessibility to the training pipeline and training data.
To mitigate the above threat, black-box input-level backdoor detection has recently drawn great interest. In this scenario, input-level indicates that defenders aim to build a
firewall-style detector in the inference stage to filter out and
reject backdoored inputs while allowing clean inputs to generate predictions. Black-box means that defenders only have
access to user queries and the generated results from the deployed models, without any prior information (e.g., model
weights, architectures) assumed by the previous works (Ma
et al. 2022; Qiu et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021, 2019).
Prior methods for backdoor detection in image classification, e.g., (Guo et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2024)
cannot be adopted for generative tasks due to two major
challenges: ❶ More Diverse Failures: Unlike merely generating a fixed target image (e.g., a Hello-Kitty image), backdoored diffusion models can be manipulated to produce a
specific class of images (e.g., cat images), or even images
with a specified abstract concept (e.g., erotic images). This
implies that the target images are not necessarily unique but
can vary as long as they belong to the designated target class.
This variability substantially complicates the detection in the
generative task. ❷ Multi-Modality Attack Surface: Unlike
traditional image classifiers, which involve a single modal-

Diffusion models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where
malicious attackers inject backdoors by poisoning certain
training samples during the training stage. This poses a significant threat to real-world applications in the Model-as-aService (MaaS) scenario, where users query diffusion models through APIs or directly download them from the internet. To mitigate the threat of backdoor attacks under MaaS,
black-box input-level backdoor detection has drawn recent interest, where defenders aim to build a firewall that filters out
backdoor samples in the inference stage, with access only to
input queries and the generated results from diffusion models. Despite some preliminary explorations on the traditional
classification tasks, these methods cannot be directly applied
to the generative tasks due to two major challenges: (1) more
diverse failures and (2) a multi-modality attack surface. In
this paper, we propose a black-box input-level backdoor detection framework on diffusion models, called UFID. Our defense is motivated by an insightful causal analysis: Backdoor
attacks serve as the confounder, introducing a spurious path
from input to target images, which remains consistent even
when we perturb the input samples with Gaussian noise. We
further validate the intuition with theoretical analysis. Extensive experiments across different datasets on both conditional
and unconditional diffusion models show that our method
achieves superb performance on detection effectiveness and
run-time efficiency.

Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song and
Ermon 2020; Song et al. 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020) have emerged as the new state-of-the-art family of
generative models due to their superior performance (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021) and wide applications across a variety of domains, ranging from computer vision (Baranchuk
et al. 2021; Brempong et al. 2022), natural language processing (Austin et al. 2021; Hoogeboom et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022), and robust machine learning (Blau et al. 2022; Carlini
et al. 2022). Despite their success, training diffusion models
requires significant time and computational resources. Consequently, it is common practice to utilize third-party models
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Co-corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27312

