The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EMControl: Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models via
Expectation-Maximization
He Wang, Longquan Dai* , Jinhui Tang
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{wanghe, dailongquan, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

(Chung et al. 2023b), person synthesis (Shen et al. 2023;
Shen and Tang 2024), image editing (Choi et al. 2021).
Conditional diffusion models generally employ two techniques: classifier-guided (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021) and
classifier-free (Ho and Salimans 2021) diffusion models. Despite their effectiveness, these methods encounter challenges
related to learning cost and model generality, as they require
additional training and data for conditional generation. Recent advances (Chung et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2023; Yu et al.
2023; Bansal et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024a) have addressed
these issues by developing training-free methods that leverage off-the-shelf loss guidance.
Yu et al. (2023) decomposed the latent code zt into two
components: unconditional sample ut and conditional correction ϕ. Given the guidance image Ic , their objective is to
minimize ∥A(D(zt ))−Ic ∥2 , where zt = C′ϕ (ut ) = ut +ϕ,
D(zt ) is the decoder, and A(xt ) denotes the forward operator that maps the noisy image xt to the guidance domain.
However, there is the divergence between the clean data
manifold and the noisy latent zt . Existing approaches typically utilize an off-the-shelf forward operator A(xt ), which
is trained on clean images like D(z0 ). Applying it to noisy
images xt = D(zt ) often leads to suboptimal performance.
To mitigate this, researchers (Chung et al. 2023b; Yu et al.
2023; Bansal et al. 2024) have developed methods to refine
ϕ, minimizing the gap between A(xt ) and Ic .
Our approach advocates for a paradigm shift in guidance,
moving from the pixel domain to the latent domain to refine ϕ.
Central to this method is the introduction of a learnable latent
forward operator Aθ (zt , t), designed to minimize expression
minθ ∥Aθ (zt , t) − E(Ic )∥2 . Here, E(Ic ) represents the latent
encoding of the guidance image Ic . Note that this approach
operates within the latent domain, contrasting with the pixeldomain comparison ∥A(D(zt )) − Ic ∥2 .
Both A(xt ) and A(zt , t) are often simplified, omitting
complexities of systems that are difficult to capture. Inversion algorithms (Bertero and Boccacci 2020), suffer from
forward model mismatches, leading to biased reconstructions.
For example, in non-blind deconvolution results (Cho, Wang,
and Lee 2011), these biases manifest themselves as reconstruction artifacts due to the use of an inaccurate blur kernel.
Similarly, the latent forward operator A(zt , t) also exhibits
mismatches in conditional diffusion models. To mitigate the
impact of model mismatch, we propose a correctional opera-

Recent advances in diffusion models focus on efficiently handling conditional generative tasks without extra training. The
process involves decomposing the result into two components:
1. unconditional sample, generated in the absence of conditions; 2. condition correction, adjusting unconditional sample
to include the guidance image. This adjustment is quantified
by the pixel-level measure, where the latent is decoded back
into a pixel image, and the forward operator translates the
noisy image into the guidance domain for comparison with
the guidance image. To enhance the fidelity of condition correction, we propose a learnable latent forward operator, focusing on latent-space consistency with the expectation that this
latent-space consistency approximates the pixel-level fidelity
measure. The encoder translates the guidance image into the
latent space, and a correctional operator is proposed to rectify
model mismatching in the latent guidance model. The determination of the condition term and the correction estimation
is akin to solving a blind inverse problem. Our EMControl
employs the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm to
solve the blind inverse problem during the reverse sampling
process. This technique ensures that samples, once consistent
with the guidance, are accurately mapped back onto the noisy
data manifold, adhering to the data’s inherent distribution. The
EMControl has proven its effectiveness by delivering superior
performance in conditional diffusion generation tasks compared to previous approaches. Moreover, its application to
multiple-condition scenarios underscores its versatility and
robustness across a range of generative tasks.

Introduction
Over the past few years, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al. 2015; Song and Ermon 2019; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Song et al. 2021b) have achieved remarkable success,
particularly in the domain of conditional diffusion models
(Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Rombach et al. 2022; Zhang,
Rao, and Agrawala 2023), due to their powerful expressive and re-editing capabilities. These models have demonstrated exceptional performance across a range of generative
tasks, such as: image generation (Nichol and Dhariwal 2021;
Song and Ermon 2020; Song et al. 2021a), image inpainting
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7691

