The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Collapse Inspired Knowledge Distillation
Shuoxi Zhang, Zijian Song, Kun He*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{zhangshuoxi,songzijian88,brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn,

Abstract
Existing knowledge distillation (KD) methods have demonstrated their ability to achieve student network performance
on par with their teachers. However, the knowledge gap between the teacher and student remains significant and may
hinder the effectiveness of the distillation process. In this
work, we introduce the structure of Neural Collapse (NC)
into the KD framework. NC typically occurs in the final phase
of training, resulting in a graceful geometric structure where
the last-layer features form a simplex equiangular tight frame.
We hypothesize that NC can alleviate the knowledge gap in
distillation, thereby enhancing student performance. This paper begins with an empirical analysis to bridge the connection between KD and NC. Through this analysis, we establish that transferring the teacher’s NC structure to the student
benefits the distillation process. Therefore, instead of merely
transferring instance-level logits or features, as done by existing distillation methods, we encourage students to learn
the teacher’s NC structure. We propose the new distillation
paradigm termed Neural Collapse-inspired Knowledge Distillation (NCKD). Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that NCKD is simple yet effective, improving the generalization of all distilled student models and achieving state-of-theart accuracy performance.

fk :
wk :

Figure 1: Description of the structure of Neural Collapse.
All class features collapse toward their centroids, forming
an equiangular structure. Also, classifier w will align with
its corresponding last-layer normalized centroid f̃ .

(KD) has emerged as a crucial technique for model compression and performance improvement. By transferring knowledge encapsulated in a large, well-trained teacher model to a
smaller student model, KD may achieve comparable performance in a resource-efficient manner. This process is particularly beneficial in scenarios where deploying large models
is impractical due to computational constraints. Despite its
widespread adoption, the efficacy of KD is often limited by
a persistent knowledge gap between the teacher and student
models, resulting in suboptimal student performance.
Meanwhile, a parallel line of research has uncovered the
phenomenon of Neural Collapse (Papyan, Han, and
Donoho 2020) (NC), where the final layer representations of
a deep neural network exhibit a surprisingly symmetric and
structured geometry as training progresses. Neural collapse
is characterized by the alignment of within-class feature vectors, which converge to their respective class means, forming
a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF) (see Figure 1). The
occurrence and prevalence of NC have been empirically verified through experiments with various datasets and network
architectures(Zhou et al. 2022).
The study of NC arguably provides a better understanding on the properties of deep features. Nonetheless, existing
research has not addressed the following questions: Are desirable KD methods the result of inducing a better simplex
ETF structure? Can we improve the distillation process by

Introduction
In recent decades, deep learning has made remarkable
strides in the field of computer vision, resulting in significant
advancements in performance and generalization across various downstream tasks, including image classification (He
et al. 2016; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018; Dosovitskiy et al.
2020), object recognition (Lin et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019),
and semantic segmentation (Poudel, Liwicki, and Cipolla
2019), etc.
These remarkable achievements have been largely attributed to the effectiveness of over-parameterized networks.
However, the cumbersome deep models typically require
substantial computation and memory resources during training and inference stages, making it challenging to deploy on
mobile devices with limited resources. To address this issue,
knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015)
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22542

