The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GeoBEV: Learning Geometric BEV Representation
for Multi-view 3D Object Detection
Jinqing Zhang1 , Yanan Zhang1 , Yunlong Qi2 , Zehua Fu3 , Qingjie Liu1,3,4 * , Yunhong Wang1,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Jingwei Hirain Technologies Co., Inc.
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{zhangjinqing, zhangyanan}@buaa.edu.cn, yunlong.qi@hirain.com,
{zehua fu, qingjie.liu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) representation has emerged as a
mainstream paradigm for multi-view 3D object detection,
demonstrating impressive perceptual capabilities. However,
existing methods overlook the geometric quality of BEV representation, leaving it in a low-resolution state and failing
to restore the authentic geometric information of the scene.
In this paper, we identify the drawbacks of previous approaches that limit the geometric quality of BEV representation and propose Radial-Cartesian BEV Sampling (RCSampling), which outperforms other feature transformation
methods in efficiently generating high-resolution dense BEV
representation to restore fine-grained geometric information.
Additionally, we design a novel In-Box Label to substitute
the traditional depth label generated from the LiDAR points.
This label reflects the actual geometric structure of objects
rather than just their surfaces, injecting real-world geometric information into the BEV representation. In conjunction
with the In-Box Label, Centroid-Aware Inner Loss (CAI
Loss) is developed to capture the inner geometric structure
of objects. Finally, we integrate the aforementioned modules
into a novel multi-view 3D object detector, dubbed GeoBEV,
which achieves a state-of-the-art result of 66.2% NDS on the
nuScenes test set.

(a) Baseline

(b) Larger BEV size

(c) Applying RC-Sampling

(d) Applying In-Box Label

Figure 1: Comparison between BEV representations.
BEVDepth is chosen as the baseline. Larger BEV size, RCSampling and In-Box Label are added in turn. The boxes
represent the ground truth of the scene and brightness reveals the norm of the features. The background is filtered
out to show the difference in the foreground.

Code — https://github.com/mengtan00/GeoBEV.git

Introduction
Multi-view 3D object detection stands as a prominent perception paradigm for cost-effective autonomous driving.
Presently, many camera-only detectors (Huang et al. 2021;
Huang and Huang 2022a; Li et al. 2023c, 2022, 2023b; Yang
et al. 2023) transform image features into Bird’s-Eye-View
(BEV) space and directly perform detection on the BEV
features, demonstrating competitive performance. This illustrates the substantial advantages of BEV representation
in preserving comprehensive scene information, making it
more adept for vision-centric autonomous driving perception than isolated image features in perspective space (Park
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021, 2022a,b).

As the cornerstone of BEV-based approaches, the BEV
representation embodies both contextual semantic information and depth geometric information. The former is derived
from image features, while the latter originates from the
correlation between image features and BEV features. Both
types of information are indispensable for precise 3D object
detection. However, the geometric quality of BEV representation has never received sufficient attention, and the limitation of low-resolution representation always arises. LSSbased methods (Xie et al. 2022; Philion and Fidler 2020;
Huang et al. 2021; Huang and Huang 2022a) pool pseudopoints into BEV representation, leaving the positions without pseudo-points to have vacant features. The sparsity will
further increase along with the BEV resolution as shown in
Fig. 1(b). For Transformer-based methods (Li et al. 2022;

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9960

