The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

X C OT: Cross-lingual Instruction Tuning for Cross-lingual

Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
Linzheng Chai1 , Jian Yang1 * , Tao Sun1 , Hongcheng Guo1 , Jiaheng Liu1 ,
Bing Wang1 , Xinnian Liang1 , Jiaqi Bai2 , Tongliang Li3 , Qiyao Peng4 , Zhoujun Li1
1

The State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University
2
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University
3
Beijing Information Science and Technology University
4
School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University
{chailinzheng, jiaya}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Chain-of-thought (CoT) has emerged as a powerful technique to elicit reasoning in large language models and improve a variety of downstream tasks. CoT mainly demonstrates excellent performance in English, but its usage in
low-resource languages is constrained due to poor language
generalization. To bridge the gap among different languages,
we propose a cross-lingual instruction fine-tuning framework
(X C OT) to transfer knowledge from high-resource languages
to low-resource languages. Specifically, the multilingual instruction training data (X C OT-I NSTRUCT) is created to encourage the semantic alignment of multiple languages. We
introduce cross-lingual in-context few-shot learning (xICL)
to accelerate multilingual agreement in instruction tuning,
where some fragments of source languages in examples are
randomly substituted by their counterpart translations of target languages. During multilingual instruction tuning, we
adopt the randomly online CoT strategy to enhance the multilingual reasoning ability of the large language model by
first translating the query to another language and then answering in English. To further facilitate the language transfer,
we leverage the high-resource CoT to supervise the training
of low-resource languages with cross-lingual distillation. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of
X C OT in reducing the gap among different languages, highlighting its potential to reduce the cross-lingual gap.

Code-switched Context
Multilingual Question
Think in English

Multilingual
Question

LLM

Answer

Align
Th

Fr

De

Zh

En

Figure 1: Illustration of X C OT. The cross-lingual instruction
tuning is used to align representations of different languages.
narios. Recent works (Shi et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2023) endeavor to simply use prompt engineering to improve the language generalization ability of
the model without any fine-tuning. These prompt-based
methods ignore the potential of representation-based crosslingual alignment derived from the cross-lingual supervised
fine-tuning (cross-lingual SFT). Supervised fine-tuning has
been shown to perform at a satisfactory level across various tasks, such as FLAN (Wei et al. 2022a) and InstructGPT
(Ouyang et al. 2022). Therefore, how to encourage crosslingual alignment in supervised fine-tuning still requires
further exploration.
To minimize the gap among different languages, we propose a Cross-lingual Chain-of-Thought reasoning (X C OT)
framework using cross-lingual supervised instruction finetuning. Specifically, we first construct the multilingual instruction training data (X C OT-I NSTRUCT) by translating
English to other languages. Then, we randomly substitute some fragments of source languages in examples by
their counterpart translations of target languages. To transfer high-resource languages to low-resource languages, we
mix the tokens of the source and target language in the same
query to enable the LLMs to handle different languages.
The code-switched examples and the query can be applied
to cross-lingual in-context learning in supervised instruction tuning. During multilingual instruction tuning, we adopt

Introduction
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Touvron et al. 2023; Touvron and Louis Martin 2023; Patel
et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023; Bai et al. 2023; Hui et al. 2024)
in natural language processing (NLP) have intensively engaged the interests of researchers. LLMs (Wei et al. 2022c;
Zhang et al. 2023; Kojima et al. 2022) are further equipped
with the chain-of-thought (CoT) technique to gain impressive performance in complex reasoning tasks, where LLMs
first produce intermediate reasoning steps and infer the final
answer.
However, existing studies related to the CoT methods
are mainly constrained in high-resource languages (e.g. English) and deliver little consideration into multilingual sce* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23550

