The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TrojanDec: Data-free Detection of Trojan Inputs in Self-supervised Learning
Yupei Liu, Yanting Wang, Jinyuan Jia
The Pennsylvania State University
{yzl6415, ykw5450, jinyuan}@psu.edu

Abstract

Despite the success of self-supervised learning, many existing studies show that it is vulnerable to trojan attacks (Jia,
Liu, and Gong 2022; Saha et al. 2022; Carlini and Terzis
2022). Specifically, an adversary can inject a trojan to selfsupervised learning encoders by either poisoning the pretraining dataset (Saha et al. 2022; Liu, Jia, and Gong 2022;
Carlini and Terzis 2022) or directly manipulating pre-trained
encoders’ parameters (Jia, Liu, and Gong 2022). The trojaned
encoder will produce normal feature vectors for clean inputs,
but output feature vectors similar to the feature vector of an
attacker-chosen reference object for any test inputs with the
attacker-chosen trigger. Furthermore, the trojan behavior will
be conveyed to downstream classifiers built upon the trojaned
encoder, leading those classifiers to predict the test inputs
with the trigger to the ground-truth label (called target label)
of the attacker-chosen reference object.

An image encoder pre-trained by self-supervised learning
can be used as a general-purpose feature extractor to build
downstream classifiers for various downstream tasks. However, many studies showed that an attacker can embed a trojan
into an encoder such that multiple downstream classifiers built
based on the trojaned encoder simultaneously inherit the trojan behavior. In this work, we propose TrojanDec, the first
data-free method to identify and recover a test input embedded with a trigger. Given a (trojaned or clean) encoder and
a test input, TrojanDec first predicts whether the test input is
trojaned. If not, the test input is processed in a normal way
to maintain the utility. Otherwise, the test input will be further restored to remove the trigger. Our extensive evaluation
shows that TrojanDec can effectively identify the trojan (if
any) from a given test input and recover it under state-of-theart trojan attacks. We further demonstrate by experiments that
our TrojanDec outperforms the state-of-the-art defenses.

Many defenses (Tran, Li, and Madry 2018; Chen et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2019; Doan, Abbasnejad, and
Ranasinghe 2020; Li et al. 2021b) were proposed to mitigate
trojan attacks to machine learning models. Depending on
which stage those defenses are used, we categorize them into
training-phase defenses (Tran, Li, and Madry 2018; Chen
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021b) and testing-phase defenses (Doan, Abbasnejad, and Ranasinghe 2020; Li et al.
2021b). A training-phase defense either trains a robust model
on a poisoned training dataset or detects/removes the trojan
in a trained model. As a result, they require access to the
training dataset or the model parameters of the model. In
other words, they are not applicable when a defender only
has black-box access to a pre-trained model. In our work, we
consider a defender (i.e., user) has black-box access to an encoder (we discuss more details in our threat model) and thus
those defenses are not applicable in general. Moreover, when
extending to self-supervised learning, some of these defenses
are ineffective even if we assume the defender has white-box
access to the encoder as shown in previous studies (Jia, Liu,
and Gong 2022) (we also confirm this in our experiments).
Testing-phase defenses (Doan, Abbasnejad, and Ranasinghe
2020; Li et al. 2021b) aims to detect whether a test input is
trojaned. When extended to self-supervised learning, those
defenses are either ineffective or require a defender to have
a clean validation dataset, which is less practical in the real

Introduction
Traditional transfer/supervised learning trains a feature extractor using a labeled training dataset, which incurs large
costs and human effort to annotate the training dataset. Moreover, it cannot leverage a large amount of unlabeled data
that can be collected from the Internet. Self-supervised learning (Devlin et al. 2019; Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006;
He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Hjelm et al. 2019; Grill
et al. 2020) has been designed to address those challenges. In
particular, a model provider can use self-supervised learning
to pre-train an encoder using a large set of unlabeled data
(called pre-training dataset). This paradigm can significantly
save the labeling effort and thus enables the model provider
to significantly increase the size of its pre-training dataset.
For example, CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) was pre-trained by
OpenAI on 400 million (image, text) pairs collected from
the Internet. The model provider can monetize its encoder
by deploying it as a cloud service via providing an API to
users (Liu et al. 2022). Suppose a user has some training/test
inputs for a downstream task. The user can query the API to
obtain their feature vectors and then use those feature vectors
to train/test a downstream classifier for its downstream task.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

532

