The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ConDo: Continual Domain Expansion for Absolute Pose Regression
Zijun Li1 * , Zhipeng Cai2 * † , Bochun Yang1 , Xuelun Shen1 ,
Siqi Shen1 , Xiaoliang Fan1 , Michael Paulitsch2 , Cheng Wang1†
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Intel Labs
{lizijun;yangbc;xuelun}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,{zhipeng.cai;michael.paulitsch}@intel.com,
{siqishen;fanxiaoliang;cwang}@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Visual localization is a fundamental machine learning problem.
Absolute Pose Regression (APR) trains a scene-dependent
model to efficiently map an input image to the camera pose in
a pre-defined scene. However, many applications have continually changing environments, where inference data at novel
poses or scene conditions (weather, geometry) appear after
deployment. Training APR on a fixed dataset leads to overfitting, making it fail catastrophically on challenging novel data.
This work proposes Continual Domain Expansion (ConDo),
which continually collects unlabeled inference data to update
the deployed APR. Instead of applying standard unsupervised
domain adaptation methods which are ineffective for APR,
ConDo effectively learns from unlabeled data by distilling
knowledge from scene-agnostic localization methods. By sampling data uniformly from historical and newly collected data,
ConDo can effectively expand the generalization domain of
APR. Large-scale benchmarks with various scene types are
constructed to evaluate models under practical (long-term)
data changes. ConDo consistently and significantly outperforms baselines across architectures, scene types, and data
changes. On challenging scenes (Fig. 1), it reduces the localization error by > 7x (14.8m vs 1.7m). Analysis shows the
robustness of ConDo against compute budgets, replay buffer
sizes and teacher prediction noise. Comparing to model retraining, ConDo achieves similar performance up to 25x faster.

Figure 1: Teaser. We propose Continual Domain Expansion
(ConDo) for APR, which utilizes unlabeled data seen during
inference to expand the generalization domain of APR. Novel
benchmarks are proposed to study practical scenarios where
images are captured at novel poses or continually changing
environments (left). The x-axis of histograms represents test
data from various scans and y-axis indicates the estimated
position median error. Trained only on data from spring,
the deployed APR cannot handle summer and winter data
(top). ConDo updates the model continually with unlabeled
inference data and limited computation budgets, effectively
expanding the generalization domain over time (bottom).

Code — https://github.com/ZijunLi7/ConDo

1

Introduction

Localizing an image in a given scene is a fundamental machine learning problem. The scene is defined by a set of
reference images with known camera poses, and the task is
to return the camera pose of a query image.
Different types of methods have been developed for visual
localization. Retrieval-based methods search for reference
images similar to the input and use their poses as the output (Torii et al. 2015; Arandjelovic et al. 2016). These methods require storing the reference images during inference,
which introduces memory overheads. There are also methods
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14628

applying explicit geometric optimizations to obtain more finegrained poses (Sarlin et al. 2019; Hyeon, Kim, and Doh 2021;
Kim, Koo, and Kim 2023). Though more accurate, geometric
optimization introduces computational overheads, making
them limited when facing real-time applications. Absolute
pose regression (APR) (Kendall, Grimes, and Cipolla 2015;
Brahmbhatt et al. 2018) is an important type of visual localization methods. It trains a light-weight scene-dependent neural
network to directly output the camera pose of the query image.
Such direct image-to-pose mapping makes APR highly efficient for both computation and memory (see Appendix A.1
for comparisons), suitable for real-time applications on edge
devices. Comparing to multi-view methods like SLAM (Campos et al. 2021), APR can derive camera poses from a single

