The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-View Pedestrian Occupancy Prediction with a Novel Synthetic Dataset
Sithu Aung1 , Min-Cheol Sagong1 , Junghyun Cho1,2,3
1
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
AI-Robotics, KIST School, University of Science and Technology
3
Yonsei-KIST Convergence Research Institute, Yonsei University
{sithu, mcsagong, jhcho}@kist.re.kr

2

Abstract
We address an advanced challenge of predicting pedestrian
occupancy as an extension of multi-view pedestrian detection
in urban traffic. To support this, we have created a new synthetic dataset called MVP-Occ, designed for dense pedestrian
scenarios in large-scale scenes. Our dataset provides detailed
representations of pedestrians using voxel structures, accompanied by rich semantic scene understanding labels, facilitating visual navigation and insights into pedestrian spatial information. Furthermore, we present a robust baseline model,
termed OmniOcc, capable of predicting both the voxel occupancy state and panoptic labels for the entire scene from
multi-view images. Through in-depth analysis, we identify
and evaluate the key elements of our proposed model, highlighting their specific contributions and importance.

Scene with Multi-Cameras
Field
Alley

Plaza

Park

Facade

3D Semantic Occupancy

3D Panoptic Occupancy

Free
Pedestrian
Individuals
Background
Ground
Walls
Others

Multi-view Pixel-level Annotations
RGB

Project page — https://sithu31296.github.io/mvpocc

Depth

Semantic

Instance

Figure 1: Visualizations of the proposed dataset. The primary objective is to predict the semantic and instance labels of the voxels and determine each pedestrian’s location
within the scene. The dataset includes five expansive scenes
with dense pedestrian activity. (Best viewed in color.)

Introduction
Recognition of crowded pedestrians in large-scale environments, particularly in surveillance systems with multiple
CCTV cameras, has been an important area of research. Various multi-view tasks including multi-view crowd counting
(Zhang and Chan 2019; Zhang, Lin, and Chan 2021), multitarget multi-camera tracking (Gan et al. 2021; Jeon et al.
2023; Luna et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2023), multi-view human pose estimation (Dong et al. 2019; Tu, Wang, and Zeng
2020; Zhang et al. 2021), and multi-view pedestrian detection (Hou, Zheng, and Gould 2020; Song et al. 2021; Hou
and Zheng 2021; Aung et al. 2024) have emerged in this
area. However, these tasks are still limited to the 2D ground
plane when estimating crowd density and global positions
of individuals. Although multi-view pose estimation methods yield 3D poses of pedestrians, they are yet constrained
to small environments with a limited number of people and
struggle with regressing metric-level 3D joint locations.
To address these limitations, we propose extending multiview pedestrian detection to multi-view pedestrian occupancy prediction, as illustrated in Fig. 1, where the occupancy status has to be predicted for every voxel in the entire scene and every grid cell within the bird’s eye view
plane. Predicting occupancy status within the ground plane

allows us to identify each pedestrian instance, while voxellevel occupancy prediction provides rich geometric information about the scene and a more articulate representation of
pedestrians, including their heights. Additionally, estimating
the semantic label of each voxel enables us to gain insight
into the surrounding contexts, which is an added advantage.
However, as highlighted in Table 1, existing datasets do not
provide this level of information, underscoring the need for
more comprehensive datasets tailored for spacious scenes
with crowded pedestrians.
Hence, we propose a novel synthetic Multi-View
Pedestrian Occupancy dataset, MVP-Occ, comprising five
large-scale scenes, designed to mimic real-world environments. In our dataset, the entire scene is represented by voxels, and each voxel is annotated with one of five classes, indicating whether it belongs to a pedestrian, the background
environment, or is empty. Furthermore, our dataset goes beyond occupancy prediction, offering a variety of perception
tasks such as segmentation, pose estimation, semantic scene
completion, depth estimation, and more, spanning both 2D
and 3D domains. To the best of our knowledge, our dataset

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1782

