The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Anchor Learning with Potential Cluster Constraints for Multi-view Clustering
Yawei Chen1 , Huibing Wang1 * , Jinjia Peng2 , Yang Wang3*
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Martime University, Dalian, China
2
School of Cyber Security and Computer, Hebei University, Baoding, China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
{cyw,huibing.wang}@dlmu.edu.cn, pengjinjia@hbu.edu.cn, yangwang@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract

among which subspace learning has received extensive attention and examination as a particularly compelling research issue. MVC methods based on subspace learning usually learn the self-representation matrix and then perform
spectral clustering. However, multi-view subspace
 cluster2
ing usually
has
high
time
complexity,
O
n
or even

O n3 . The high time complexity comes mainly from the
construction of the self-representation matrix and the computation of the spectral embedding in the spectral clustering
(Cui et al. 2024; Ling et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2016).
In order to address this problem, anchor-based multi-view
clustering has been proposed in recent years, which aims to
learn representative anchors from multiple samples, and then
learn the anchor graph through the relationship between the
samples and the anchors and thus perform clustering. Obviously, how to learn high-quality anchors is essential. Existing anchor learning strategies can be categorized into two
ways: static selection and dynamic learning. The static selection strategies include random sampling and k-means, where
random sampling aims to randomly select data from all the
samples to be used as anchors, while k-means directly utilizes the sample center of mass as an anchor. Although the
above methods are simple and effective in the process of selecting anchors, the result of selecting anchors is random,
which leads to inferior quality of anchors, thus reducing the
clustering performance. In order to improve the quality of
anchors, dynamic anchor learning become popular. For example, (Wang et al. 2022a) integrates anchor selection and
subspace graph construction in a unified framework so that
the two processes negotiate with each other to improve the
quality of the anchors, avoiding the need to select anchors
directly from the original samples. (Sun et al. 2021a), on the
other hand, adaptively learns the consensus anchor graph of
all samples in the projection space to be used for clustering.
Although MVC methods for dynamic anchor learning
achieve excellent performance, they only learn anchors dynamically through simple low-rank constraints, which may
lead to uneven anchor distribution, i.e., some anchors will
be scattered outside the data clusters or some data clusters
lack corresponding anchors. That is, these methods ignore
the reality of anchors, i.e., high-quality anchors should be
naturally generated from different data clusters and share the
underlying clustering structure with the original data, rather
than being scattered outside the data clusters.

Anchor-based multi-view clustering has received extensive
attention due to its efficient performance. Existing methods
only focus on how to dynamically learn anchors from the
original data and simultaneously construct anchor graphs describing the relationships between samples and perform clustering, while ignoring the reality of anchors, i.e., high-quality
anchors should be generated uniformly from different clusters of data rather than scattered outside the clusters. To deal
with this problem, we propose a noval method termed Anchor
Learning with Potential Cluster Constraints for Multi-view
Clustering (ALPC) method. Specifically, ALPC first establishes a shared latent semantic module to constrain anchors to
be generated from specific clusters, and subsequently, ALPC
improves the representativeness and discriminability of anchors by adapting the anchor graph to capture the common
clustering center of mass from samples and anchors, respectively. Finally, ALPC combines anchor learning and graph
construction into a unified framework for collaborative learning and mutual optimization to improve the clustering performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method compared to some state-of-the-art
MVC methods.

Code — https://github.com/whbdmu/ALPC

Introduction
With the advent of the big data generation, there is an increasing diversity and complexity of data, which this data
often exists in multiple forms (Ren et al. 2014; Cui et al.
2023; Wei et al. 2021). For example, news can be reported
in a variety of formats, including text, images and videos.
Due to these multiple sources of data, multi-view learning
has attracted extensive attention (Huang et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024a). Multi-view clustering is a fundamental task in
multi-view learning, which tries to explore complementary
information between views, discover the intrinsic structure
of clusters, and group information from multiple sources
(Qian et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2024b).
In previous investigations, researchers have contributed
a vast number of Multi-view clustering (MVC) methods,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15939

