The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive-Grained Label Distribution Learning
Yunan Lu1 , Weiwei Li2 , Dun Liu3 , Huaxiong Li4 , Xiuyi Jia1 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
3
School of Economics and Management, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
4
Department of Control Science and Intelligence Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{luyn, jiaxy}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Label polysemy, where an instance can be associated with
multiple labels, is common in real-world tasks. LDL (label
distribution learning) is an effective learning paradigm for
handling label polysemy, where each instance is associated
with a label distribution. Although numerous LDL algorithms
have been proposed and achieved satisfactory performance
on most existing datasets, they are typically trained directly
on the collected label distributions which often lack quality guarantees in real-world tasks due to annotator subjectivity and algorithm assumptions. Consequently, direct learning from such uncertain label distributions can lead to unpredictable generalization performance. To address this problem, we propose an adaptive-grained label distribution learning framework whose main idea is to extract relatively reliable supervision information from unreliable label distributions, and thus the label distribution learning task can be decomposed into three subtasks: coarsening label distributions,
learning coarse-grained labels and refining coarse-grained labels. In this framework, we design an adaptive label coarsening algorithm to extract an optimal coarsen-grained labels
and a label refining function to enhance the coarse-grained
label into the final label distributions. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets to demonstrate the
advantages of our proposal.

1

Figure 1: An example of why CGL mitigates noise.

the corresponding label describes the instance. The process
of learning a mapping from features to a label distribution
is called LDL (label distribution learning). So far, LDL has
been applied in many practical tasks, such as sentiment analysis (Jia et al. 2019b; Machajdik and Hanbury 2010; Yang,
She, and Sun 2017) and facial age estimation (Gao et al.
2018; Geng, Smith-Miles, and Zhou 2013; Wen et al. 2020).
Until now, a large number of algorithms have been proposed to handle the LDL task, such as (Geng 2016; Jia et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2021; Wang and Geng 2023). We refer the
readers to Section 2 for more details. Although these algorithms have achieved satisfactory performance on various
existing datasets, they typically learn a predictive model directly from the collected label distributions. However, the
quality of the collected label distributions is unguaranteed
in real-world tasks. On the one hand, the label distributions
annotated by humans are susceptible to various factors, such
as the subjectivity and expertise of the annotators, as well
as the incentives for the annotation task. On the other hand,
the label distributions generated by label enhancement algorithms (Xu, Tao, and Geng 2018), which aims to recover
label distributions from logical labels by mining potential
information, are susceptible to the algorithm assumptions
or data distributions. These factors collectively contribute to
the challenge of ensuring the quality of collected label distributions. Consequently, direct learning such collected label
distributions can yield unreliable predictive performance.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose an Adaptive-Grained
Label Distribution Learning framework called AGLDL. The
main idea is to adaptively extract the coarse-grained label
(abbr. CGL) information from unreliable label distributions.
Since CGL contains a range of potential fine-grained label distributions, it is possible that the noise-disturbed label
distributions and the ground truth label distribution correspond to the same CGL. As shown in Figure 1, if the value

Introduction

Label polysemy, where an instance is relevant to multiple labels, is ubiquitous in the real world. The most direct method
for addressing label polysemy is to assign a vector of logical
values (either 0 or 1) to each instance, where each logical
value indicates whether the instance is relevant to the corresponding label or not; the process of learning a mapping
from features to a vector of logical values is called MLL
(multi-label learning (Tsoumakas and Katakis 2006)). However, MLL only gives which labels can describe the instance
but cannot answer a question with more polysemy, i.e., how
much does each label describe the instance. Therefore, label
distribution (Geng 2016) is introduced to answer this question. Label distribution is a real-valued vector analogous to
a probability distribution, where each element, called LDD
(label description degree), represents the degree to which
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19161

