The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Measuring Error Alignment for Decision-Making Systems
Binxia Xu* , Antonis Bikakis, Daniel F.O. Onah, Andreas Vlachidis, Luke Dickens*
Dept. of Information Studies, University College London, United Kingdom
{b.xu, l.dickens}@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Given that AI systems are set to play a pivotal role in future decision-making processes, their trustworthiness and reliability are of critical concern. Due to their scale and complexity, modern AI systems resist direct interpretation, and
alternative ways are needed to establish trust in those systems, and determine how well they align with human values.
We argue that good measures of the information processing
similarities between AI and humans, may be able to achieve
these same ends. While Representational alignment (RA) approaches measure similarity between the internal states of
two systems, the associated data can be expensive and difficult to collect for human systems. In contrast, Behavioural
alignment (BA) comparisons are cheaper and easier, but questions remain as to their sensitivity and reliability. We propose two new behavioural alignment metrics misclassification agreement which measures the similarity between the errors of two systems on the same instances, and class-level
error similarity which measures the similarity between the
error distributions of two systems. We show that our metrics
correlate well with RA metrics, and provide complementary
information to another BA metric, within a range of domains,
and set the scene for a new approach to value alignment.

Figure 1: Different levels of representations. From left to
right, it enables the comparison of the decision-making process of two systems at the latent representation level, confidence level, instance level and class level.

a model more closely aligned with the internal mechanism
of the human brain can improve the robustness of visualbased decision-making tasks (Dapello et al. 2020). Methods for comparing the internal representations of systems are
called representational alignment (RA). RA approaches are
often presented as the gold-standard, as similarities between
representational structures of systems can provide deep insights about the alignment between the information processing of these systems (Kriegeskorte et al. 2008; Hermann and
Lampinen 2020). Nonetheless, RA studies are often limited by the high costs and practical challenges associated
with collecting and comparing complex, heterogeneous and
difficult-to-access internal representations, e.g. via fMRI in
humans. In contrast, the study of how a system behaves
can also inform us about both animal and human systems
(Staddon and Cerutti 2003; Ghodrati et al. 2014; Rajalingham et al. 2015), as well as computational systems (Geirhos
et al. 2019, 2021). However, questions remain about how
much behavioural alignment (BA) approaches can tell us
about deeper similarities in the internal processing of systems (Hermann et al. 2020; Sucholutsky et al. 2023).
The separation between RA and BA is not a strict one (Sucholutsky et al. 2023), and there are finer distinctions in the
types of observations on a system’s information processing
pipeline used to evaluate alignment. Figure 1 shows different levels at which observations can be drawn from a typical machine system, with analogous choices for human or
animal models. Left of the dotted line are what we might
call internal representations and right might be termed behaviours. Here we describe RA approaches as those based

Code — https://github.com/xubinxia/error align
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13919

Introduction
With significant advancements in AI development, the alignment of AI with human values has increasingly drawn attention within the community. Generally, AI alignment focuses
on aligning the performance of AI systems towards goals
(Zhuang and Hadfield-Menell 2020; Ngo et al. 2022; Sanneman and Shah 2023 ), preferences (Stray 2020), and social
norms (Irving and Askell 2019; Gabriel and Ghazavi 2021)
intended by humans. Improved human alignment can help
build more reliable and trustworthy AI systems. Considering
the potential for AI systems to play a crucial role in future
decision-making processes, the trustworthiness and reliability of these systems emerge as critical concerns, particularly
in applications such as medical diagnosis and autonomous
driving. Studies in cognitive science have demonstrated that
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27731

