The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Effective and Efficient Representation Learning for Flight Trajectories
Shuo Liu1,2 , Wenbin Li2,3 , Di Yao2* , Jingping Bi2 *
1

School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{liushuo22s,liwenbin20z,yaodi,bjp}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Flight trajectory data plays a vital role in the traffic management community, especially for downstream tasks such as trajectory prediction, flight recognition, and anomaly detection.
Existing works often utilize handcrafted features and design
models for different tasks individually, which heavily rely
on domain expertise and are hard to extend. We argue that
different flight analysis tasks share the same useful features
of the trajectory. Jointly learning a unified representation for
flight trajectories could be beneficial for improving the performance of various tasks. However, flight trajectory representation learning (TRL) faces two primary challenges, i.e.
unbalanced behavior density and 3D spatial continuity, which
disable recent general TRL methods. In this paper, we propose F LIGHT 2V EC, a flight-specific representation learning
method to address these challenges. Specifically, a behavioradaptive patching mechanism is used to inspire the learned
representation to pay more attention to behavior-dense segments. Moreover, we introduce a motion trend learning technique that guides the model to memorize not only the precise
locations, but also the motion trend to generate better representations. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
F LIGHT 2V EC significantly improves performance in downstream tasks such as flight trajectory prediction, flight recognition, and anomaly detection.

Figure 1: The motivation of F LIGHT 2V EC

utilize handcrafted features or design representation models
for one specified task. We argue that different flight tasks
may share the same useful features of trajectory. Jointly
learning a unified representation for flight trajectories could
be beneficial for boosting the performance of various tasks,
which motivates this work.
Learning unified trajectory representation for different
tasks has been well-studied on vehicle and human mobility
trajectories (Yao et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021;
Jiang et al. 2023). Deep sequential models, such as Recurrent Neural Networks (Yao et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018) and
Transformer (Chen et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2022; Jiang et al.
2023) are employed to encode the spatial-temporal correlations and transform raw trajectories into generic representation vectors. Nevertheless, existing solutions are hard to extend to represent flight trajectories due to the two challenges,
i.e. unbalanced behavior density and 3D spatial continuity.
Unbalanced behavior density. Flight trajectories are
characterized by high point density but sparse behavior information. As shown in Figure 1(a), the aircraft usually fly
in a straight line with a fixed attitude. The representative activities, such as turns, holding patterns, and takeoff/landing
phases, only account for a relatively small part, e.g. 5%, of
the whole trajectory. Existing TRL methods usually treat every point equally without considering the density of behaviors, leading to inconsequential representations.

Code — https://github.com/liushuoer/FLIGHT2VEC

Introduction
With the continual development of air transportation, flights
tend to broadcast their current locations for safe and efficient air traffic control (Zhang et al. 2023). The collected
flight trajectories are one of the most critical data sources for
air traffic management, attracting increasing attention from
both academic and industrial fields. Recent works show that
deep representation learning has become the dominant technique and achieved significant performance for various flight
trajectory-related tasks, such as trajectory prediction (Liu
and Hansen 2018; Wu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Guo
et al. 2024), flight monitoring (Zhang et al. 2016; Fernández
et al. 2019), and anomaly detection (Olive and Basora 2020;
Memarzadeh, Matthews, and Templin 2022; Memarzadeh,
Matthews, and Weckler 2023). However, these works either
* Corresponding authors.

12211

