The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constrained Offline Black-Box Optimization via
Risk Evaluation and Management
Yiyi Zhu1 , Huakang Lu1 , Yupeng Wu1 , Shuo Liu1 , Jing-Wen Yang2 , Hong Qian1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
2
Intelligent NPC Team, Game AI Center, Tencent Inc, Shenzhen 518057, China
{yiyizhu, huakang.lu, 51215901031, shuoliu}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, jingwenyang@tencent.com, hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Recently, researchers propose to access only prior data, i.e.,
offline datasets (Trabucco et al. 2022; Xue et al. 2024). They
build a model via an offline dataset without access to the unknown objective function or any form of active interaction,
and use the model to guide the search for suitable designs
and evaluate. This can greatly reduce the budget for costly
active interaction if properly utilized. This manner is known
as offline optimization.
Offline optimization (Jin, Wang, and Sun 2021; Gong,
Zhong, and Huang 2024) aims to find better (higher-scoring
in this paper) designs than that in offline datasets by training a surrogate model to approximate the unknown objective function and performing optimization. Specifically,
a common approach first trains a deep neural network
(DNN) (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011) on the offline
dataset to serve as a surrogate model. Optimization then begins from the optimal designs of the offline dataset, employing methods such as gradient ascent to identify the
best possible designs in the unknown objective function.
The best designs found by such a naı̈ve method are usually
far from the offline dataset. Regrettably, the regime of designs far from the offline dataset is often not well-trained,
which results in out-of-distribution (OOD) issue, as mentioned by (Qi et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022, 2023). For instance, as shown in Figure 1 (d), the blue dots represent the
points that are overestimated due to the OOD issue. As the
optimization proceeds, the optimization method might favor
designs deemed high-scoring by the surrogate but perform
poorly on the unknown objective function because of the gap
between the surrogate and the unknown objective function.
Related Work. To address this issue, recent studies have
proposed a range of approaches, which mainly include two
broad classes: involving conservatism into the surrogate
model or regularization in generative model. For the former, COMs (Trabucco et al. 2021) integrates a regularization
term into the modeling of conservative objectives to depress
adversarial designs. ROMA (Yu et al. 2021) overcomes the
non-smooth nature of DNN by utilizing a local smoothness
prior to achieving conservatism. IOM (Qi et al. 2022) enforces the surrogate to learn invariant representations and
makes a conservative estimation. ARCOO (Lu et al. 2023)
develops an energy model to quantify and manage OOD risk
during optimization to obtain stable, high-scoring designs.
For the latter, CbAs (Brookes, Park, and Listgarten 2019)

Offline black-box optimization aims to identify the optimal
solution of a black-box objective function under the guidance
of a surrogate model constructed solely from a pre-collected
dataset. It is commonly used in industrial scenarios, which
often involve constraints, i.e., constrained offline optimization (COO). Offline optimization has progressed in addressing the out-of-distribution (OOD) issue caused by its inherent inability to interact with the objective function. However, there is not enough research in addressing more difficult scenarios, which must simultaneously address OOD issues and constrained issues to find stable, high-quality (i.e.,
high-scoring and feasible) solutions. To bridge this gap, this
paper proposes a method called constrained offline optimization via risk evaluation and management (COOREM),
which is capable of consistently surpassing the offline dataset
under the condition of satisfying constraints. Specifically,
COOREM employs a dual-energy model to separately evaluate OOD risk and constrained risk. This separation strategy
aims to distinguish and address two difficult cases: the infeasible but not OOD solutions and the feasible but OOD
solutions. Moreover, COOREM effectively manages OOD
risk and constrained risk, ensuring the identification of highquality solutions. Extensive experiments on real-world tasks,
e.g., space missions, process synthesis, and design problems,
showcase COOREM’s effectiveness in managing both OOD
risk and constrained risk. Furthermore, our findings indicate
that COOREM could outperform online methods that need to
access the objective function in certain space missions.

Introduction
Real-world design problems in numerous domains encounter widespread challenges spanning diverse fields such
as materials science (Trabucco et al. 2022), robotics (Liao
et al. 2019), credit risk assessment (Gu et al. 2024), and
protein (Brookes, Park, and Listgarten 2019). Many methods generate new designs by optimizing an unknown objective function with active interaction to map designs to
their property scores. Unfortunately, evaluating the objective function can be costly, risky, or even infeasible, such
as synthesizing protein structures often depends on simulations, requiring extensive effort across multiple domains.
* Corresponding Author: hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23063

