The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Cancer Gene Identification by Enhancing Common Information
Between the PPI Network and Gene Functional Association
Chao Deng1,2 , Hongdong Li1,2 * , Jianxin Wang1,2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, 410083, China
Hunan Provincial Key Lab on Bioinformatics, Central South University, Changsha, 410083, China
3
Xinjiang Engineering Research Center of Big Data and Intelligent Software, School of Software, Xinjiang University,
Urumqi 830091, China
{deng chao, hongdong}@csu.edu.cn, jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

of known cancer genes is insufficient to fully account for the
characteristics observed in the majority of cancer samples.
Accurate identification of cancer genes from many candidate genes remains a critical challenge.
Recent computational methods for cancer gene identification can be categorized into manual feature-based, biological network-based, and functional association-based approaches. Manual feature-based methods typically use statistical results from sequencing data as rules for identifying cancer genes or as features of genes to train machine
learning models, such as MutSigCV (Lawrence et al. 2013),
20/20+ (Tokheim et al. 2016) and DORGE (Lyu et al. 2020).
Biological network-based methods use the association information between genes in biological networks to predict
cancer genes (Reyna, Leiserson, and Raphael 2018; Barel
and Herwig 2020; Schulte-Sasse et al. 2021; Peng et al.
2022). Among those methods, one of the most representative is EMOGI (Schulte-Sasse et al. 2021); it proposes integrating multi-omics features of genes and the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network with the graph neural network to
identify cancer genes. Functional association-based methods
use machine learning or hypergraph neural networks to extract higher-order functional association information among
genes in annotated gene sets to predict cancer genes, such as
predCAN (Althubaiti et al. 2019) and DISHyper (Deng et al.
2024).
Biological network and functional association-based
methods typically focus on binary gene associations (e.g.,
PPI) or higher-order functional associations (e.g., signaling
pathways). Previous studies have demonstrated that cancer
genes tend to cluster in specific biological processes, hallmark signaling pathways, and interacting subnetworks (Vogelstein et al. 2013; Creixell et al. 2015; Reyna et al. 2020).
This observation suggests that integrating binary and functional gene association information could enhance the accuracy of cancer gene identification. Indeed, methods like
MODIG (Zhao et al. 2022) have begun to explore this integration through the use of multiple gene networks and graph
attention networks. However, a significant limitation of these
methods is that they ignore the information interactions between different types of gene association data. Specifically,
there may be shared neighborhood structure information between PPI networks and gene functional associations. This
common information could provide more accurate and im-

Identifying cancer genes is crucial for treatment and understanding pathogenesis. Recent methods typically leverage protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks or gene functional association data from annotated gene sets. There may
be some shared neighborhood structure information between
these two types of gene association data. While this common
information may contain more accurate gene association information, existing methods often overlook this potential. To
address this gap, we introduce DISFusion, which integrates
multi-omics cancer data, PPI networks, and gene functional
associations to identify cancer genes. A key innovation of
DISFusion is the cross-view decorrelation loss, which enhances the common information between PPI networks and
gene functional associations, thereby improving prediction
accuracy. Extensive experiments indicate that DISFusion outperforms state-of-the-art methods and exhibits greater generalization ability. Moreover, analysis of CPTAC pan-cancer
proteomic data highlights significant associations between
the 30 novel cancer genes predicted by DISFusion and multiple cancer types, underscoring its practical utility. These findings validate the effectiveness of enhancing common information and provide new insights into cancer gene identification.

Code —
https://github.com/CharlesDeng0814/DISFusion.git

Introduction
Cancer arises from the accumulation of alterations in critical genes, leading to dysregulation of the balance between
cell division and apoptosis. Therefore, a key goal of cancer genomic research is to identify the genes that drive cancer initiation and progression (Garraway and Lander 2013;
Lawrence et al. 2014; Alexandrov et al. 2013). The identification of cancer genes is the key to exploring the complex
pathogenesis and targeted therapy of cancer (Garraway and
Lander 2013; Lawrence et al. 2014; Alexandrov et al. 2013;
Nofech-Mozes et al. 2023). Although the Network of Cancer
Genes (NCG) (Repana et al. 2019) and the COSMIC Cancer
Gene Census (CGC) (Sondka et al. 2018) have been used to
annotate some cancer genes. However, the current catalog
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

137

