The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Increased Compute Efficiency and the Diffusion of AI Capabilities
Konstantin F. Pilz* 1† , Lennart Heim* 2 , Nicholas Brown3
1

2

Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., United States
Centre for the Governance of AI, Oxford, United Kingdom
3
Independent Researcher

Abstract

contribute to increased model performance for the foreseeable future (Sevilla et al. 2022; Villalobos 2023).2

Training advanced AI models requires large investments in
computational resources, or compute. Yet, as hardware innovation reduces the price of compute and algorithmic advances
make its use more efficient, the cost of training an AI model to
a given performance falls over time — a concept we describe
as increasing compute efficiency. We find that while an access
effect increases the number of actors who can train models to
a given performance over time, a performance effect simultaneously increases the performance available to each actor.
This potentially enables large compute investors to pioneer
new capabilities, maintaining a performance advantage even
as capabilities diffuse. Since large compute investors tend to
develop new capabilities first, it will be particularly important
that they share information about their AI models, evaluate
them for emerging risks, and, more generally, make responsible development and release decisions. Further, as compute
efficiency increases, governments will need to prepare for a
world where dangerous AI capabilities are widely available
— for instance, by developing defenses against harmful AI
models or by actively intervening in the diffusion of particularly dangerous capabilities.

1.1

As compute budgets have surged, the cost of training an AI
model to a given performance has fallen continuously. In
2017, training an image classifier to 93% classification accuracy on the ImageNet dataset cost over $1,000; by 2021, it
cost only $5 — a reduction of over 99% (Zhang et al. 2022,
p. 97). In 2020, OpenAI’s GPT-3 cost at least $4.6 million in
cloud compute to train (Li 2020); two years later, the company Mosaic claimed to achieve the same performance for a
tenth of the price (Venigalla and Li 2022).
The cost of training falls due to two primary factors: (a)
improvements in the price performance of AI hardware and
(b) improvements in the efficiency of AI algorithms.

1.2

Hardware Price Performance

Hardware price performance determines the quantity of
computational resources available for a given monetary investment. Innovations in hardware manufacturing and design increase price performance over time. For example,
consumer prices for Intel’s processors fell by 42% annually from 2004 to 2013, while their performance improved
by 29% each year; both trends increased the computational performance available per dollar (Byrne, Oliner, and
Sichel 2017). In the context of AI accelerators, Hobbhahn,
Heim, and Aydos (2023) found that GPUs used in machine
learning doubled in price performance approximately every two years. In addition, increased specialization, such
as hardware-supported lower-precision number formats, further increased price performance by up to an order of magnitude (Hobbhahn, Heim, and Aydos 2023).

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.15377

1

Falling Training Cost

Introduction

Over the past decade, computational resources (compute)
emerged as a major driver of rapid advances in the field
of artificial intelligence (AI). The amount of computational operations used in training the largest AI models
has doubled approximately every six months since 2010
(Sevilla et al. 2022), enabling powerful new applications
like high-quality image generators, coding assistants, and
conversational chatbots (Yu et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023). Researchers have discovered empirical scaling laws that formalize the relationship between increased training compute and improved model performance across numerous domains.1 These scaling laws and the current pace of training
compute growth suggest that compute will likely continue to

tion, acoustic modeling, and recommendation models (Chen et al.
2023; Droppo and Elibol 2021; Ardalani et al. 2022).
2
Our model assumes that compute is a main determinant of an
AI model’s capabilities. However, training AI models with large
amounts of compute is a sophisticated engineering challenge that
requires talented researchers. Thus, simply having access to large
amounts of compute does not guarantee a powerful AI model. We
discuss additional factors and limitations in Section 4.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corr.: lennart.heim@governance.ai, kfp15@georgetown.edu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Scaling laws occur in a variety of domains, such as natural language processing (Hoffmann et al. 2022), protein structure predic-

27582

