The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Capturing the Unseen: Vision-Free Facial Motion Capture
Using Inertial Measurement Units
Youjia Wang1,2 * , Yiwen Wu1,2 * , Hengan Zhou1,2 , Hongyang Lin1,3 , Xingyue Peng1 , Jingyan
Zhang1 , Yingsheng Zhu1 , YingWenQi Jiang1 , Yatu Zhang1 , Lan Xu1 , Jingya Wang1 , Jingyi Yu1†
1

ShanghaiTech University
2
LumiAni Technology
3
Deemos Technology
{wangyj2, wuyw2023, zhouha, linhy, pengxy2023, zhangjy7,
zhuysh, jiangywq, zhangyt2023, xulan1, wangjingya, yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Abstract

(a)

We present Capturing the Unseen (CAPUS), a novel facial
motion capture (MoCap) technique that operates without visual signals. CAPUS leverages miniaturized Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) as a new sensing modality for facial
motion capture. While IMUs have become essential in fullbody MoCap for their portability and independence from environmental conditions, their application in facial MoCap remains underexplored. We address this by customizing microIMUs, small enough to be placed on the face, and strategically positioning them in alignment with key facial muscles to
capture expression dynamics. CAPUS introduces the first facial IMU dataset, encompassing both IMU and visual signals
from participants engaged in diverse activities such as multilingual speech, facial expressions, and emotionally intoned
auditions. We train a Transformer Diffusion-based neural
network to infer Blendshape parameters directly from IMU
data. Our experimental results demonstrate that CAPUS reliably captures facial motion in conditions where visual-based
methods struggle, including facial occlusions, rapid movements, and low-light environments. Additionally, by eliminating the need for visual inputs, CAPUS offers enhanced
privacy protection, making it a robust solution for vision-free
facial MoCap.

(c)

(d)
(e)

(b)

(f)

Figure 1: We introduce CAPUS, an innovative facial capture system based on IMUs. Using flexible electronic materials, we fabricate miniature IMUs that attach to the human
face. Without relying on any visual signals, CAPUS can accurately reconstruct facial expressions.

mobile phone camera based solutions require the user facing the camera all the time, which is impractical in outdoor
activities. Existing algorithms are also vulnerable to occlusions, motion blurs, and noise. In fact, for privacy protection,
the use of images may even be deliberately avoided.
In this work, we explore using a new type of data modality for facial motion capture. We observe full-body motion
capture using visual signals encounters similar challenges
but the latest successes unanimously resorted to the Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) as the input signal Loper
et al. (2015). By attaching the IMUs to various body joints,
these solutions manage to capture essential acceleration and
axis angle data for modeling body motion. Yi, Zhou, and
Xu (2021) manages to achieve comprehensive body motion
capture using as few as six IMUs whereas Li, Liu, and Wu
(2023) leverages the stability and generative capabilities of
Transformer Diffusion to further improve the robustness. It
is not an exaggeration that IMUs have now become as integral as visual-based methods owing to their exceptional
portability and minimal spatial demands. In particular, IMUs
neither require using visual sensors nor rely on external envi-

Introduction
In the data-driven AI era, the efficacy of analytics tools is
directly tied to their ability to adapt to the unique characteristics of different data modalities. For facial motion capture,
the success of now widely adopted tools such as 3DDFA
(Zhu et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2020), DECA (Feng et al. 2021)
and Apple’s ARKit (Apple 2023) are largely attributed to the
availability of RGB and RGBD cameras by mobile devices.
Using the captured images as the sole modality, these solutions offer a rapid means of acquiring facial geometry and
expression to support various downstream tasks such as editing, relighting, animation, etc (Zhang et al. 2022). However,
image as a modality has its own limitations. For example,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8096

