The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Frequency-Masked Embedding Inference: A Non-Contrastive Approach for Time
Series Representation Learning
En Fu1 , Yanyan Hu1,2, * ,
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Science and Technology Beijing
fuen@xs.ustb.edu.cn, huyanyan@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract

the optimization difficulty of deep models on small sample
datasets(Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg 2021; Zerveas
et al. 2021). This has become a consensus in the deep learning community, particularly in the fields of computer vision
(CV)(Han et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021; LeCun 2022) and natural language processing (NLP)(Devlin et al. 2019; Fang et al.
2020; Yan et al. 2021).
However, in the field of time series analysis, selfsupervised representation learning has not yet become to a
community standard due to the insufficient generalization
performance. Contrastive learning strategies have shown
certain advantages and have become the foundational framework for much research in recent years(Yue et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2023). Contrastive learning optimizes models by constructing positive and negative samples for anchor sample. Positive samples are created using
data augmentation techniques to provide different views under similar semantics to the anchor sample, while negative
samples are selected or constructed to have opposing semantics to the anchor sample. The main issue with this framework is the difficulty in defining appropriate positive and
negative samples for time series data.
Due to the inherent continuity of time series, key characteristics such as trends and frequencies change continuously
and cannot be fully enumerated. This makes the boundaries between semantics in time series less clear compared to other data formats. For example, it is easy to define a picture of a cat and a picture of a dog as opposites, but
it is challenging to define whether a series with a 7-day cycle
and that with a 6.5-day cycle are similar or opposite. They
have differences but are not fundamentally opposed. Contrastive learning uses a discrete modeling approach to define
absolute opposite semantics for all samples, which contradicts the inherent continuity of time series.
Some methods(Luo et al. 2023; Liu and Chen 2024) have
developed more reasonable and flexible strategies for constructing positive and negative samples to mitigate the issues
mentioned above. However, they still operate within the discrete modeling framework of contrastive learning, failing to
address the root cause of the problem. Therefore, this study
aims to define the semantic differences in time series in a
completely new way.
In this paper, a novel non-contrastive time series representation learning framework, Frequency-masked Embed-

Contrastive learning underpins most current self-supervised
time series representation methods. The strategy for constructing positive and negative sample pairs significantly affects the final representation quality. However, due to the
continuous nature of time series semantics, the modeling approach of contrastive learning struggles to accommodate the
characteristics of time series data. This results in issues such
as difficulties in constructing hard negative samples and the
potential introduction of inappropriate biases during positive
sample construction. Although some recent works have developed several scientific strategies for constructing positive
and negative sample pairs with improved effectiveness, they
remain constrained by the contrastive learning framework. To
fundamentally overcome the limitations of contrastive learning, this paper introduces Frequency-masked Embedding Inference (FEI), a novel non-contrastive method that completely eliminates the need for positive and negative samples.
The proposed FEI constructs 2 inference branches based on a
prompting strategy: 1) Using frequency masking as prompts
to infer the embedding representation of the target series with
missing frequency bands in the embedding space, and 2) Using the target series as prompts to infer its frequency masking embedding. In this way, FEI enables continuous semantic relationship modeling for time series. Experiments on 8
widely used time series datasets for classification and regression tasks, using linear evaluation and end-to-end fine-tuning,
show that FEI significantly outperforms existing contrastivebased methods in terms of generalization. This study provides
new insights into self-supervised representation learning for
time series.

Code/Appendix —
https://github.com/USTBInnovationPark/Frequencymasked-Embedding-Inference

Introduction
Time series data is crucial in various industries’ production processes and economic activities, serving as a foundational data format(Trirat et al. 2024; Ozyurt, Feuerriegel, and Zhang 2023). Effective representation methods
are essential for building highly transferable and generalizable pattern recognition modules, significantly reducing
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16639

