The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fuzzy Collaborative Reasoning
Huanhuan Yuan1,2 , Pengpeng Zhao1 * , Jiaqing Fan1 , Junhua Fang1 , Guanfeng Liu2 , Victor S.
Sheng3
1

Soochow University,
Macquarie University,
3
Texas Tech University
hhyuan@stu.suda.edu.cn, {ppzhao, jqfan, jhfang}@suda.edu.cn, guanfeng.liu@mq.edu.au, victor.sheng@ttu.edu
2

Abstract

dataset (Shi et al. 2020). Moreover, recommendation systems are designed to serve subjective human needs. The process of generating recommendations needs to have the ability to emulate human reasoning and cognitive processes, as
few people choose recommended items by merely calculating their similarities in reality (Shi et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021, 2022; Tang et al. 2023). For these reasons, some recent Collaborative Reasoning (CR) works have resorted to
symbolic learning for recommendation tasks from the perspective of the cognitive process (Shi et al. 2020, 2022;
Zhang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2023; Yuan
et al. 2023). These methods enhance recommendation performance by combining the strengths of symbolic learning
and deep neural learning, enabling end-to-end training of the
symbolic learning and reasoning process. In addition, they
benefit from the artificial incorporation of effective logic priors into the neural network, allowing the model to achieve
better results (Chen et al. 2021).
Nevertheless, current CR approaches are constrained by
two limitations: (1) Existing CR methods (Shi et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2021, 2022; Liang et al. 2023) rely on parameterized networks to simulate logical operations within the
reasoning process, requiring a large amount of training data
containing such logical operations to learn the parameters.
That restricts the generalizability of these approaches, i.e.,
it’s hard for these models to be applied to situations that
rarely appear in the training set. (2) The logical operators in
these CR models do not fully satisfy basic logic rules (such
as, the associative law (ψ1 ∧ ψ2 ) ∧ ψ3 ≡ ψ1 ∧ (ψ2 ∧ ψ3 ) for
logical formulae ψ1 , ψ2 , ψ3 ), and are often defined ad-hoc.
For example, some models (Shi et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021,
2022) require a set of regularizers to constrain them to approximate the expected logical operations, rather than naturally satisfying logical rules as prior conditions. Box embedding based method Cbox4CR (Liang et al. 2023) can not
handle logical operations such as ∨ and ¬, which limits its
applicability for logic inference.
To address these limitations, we propose a Fuzzy logic
model tailored for Collaborative Reasoning (FuzzCR) to
endow recommendation models with cognitive abilities.
Specifically, we first transform the sequential recommendation task into a First-Order Logic (FOL) query answering
problem (Ren, Hu, and Leskovec 2020; Ren and Leskovec
2020; Chen, Hu, and Sun 2022), to facilitate the reasoning

Collaborative reasoning enhances recommendation performance by combining the strengths of symbolic learning and
deep neural learning. However, current collaborative reasoning models rely on parameterized networks to simulate logical operations within the reasoning process, which (1) do
not comply with all axiomatic principles of classical logic
and (2) limit the model’s generalizability. To address these
limitations, a Fuzzy logic approach tailored for Collaborative Reasoning (FuzzCR) is proposed in this work, aiming to
augment the recommendation system with cognitive abilities.
Specifically, this method redefines the sequential recommendation task as a logical query answering process to facilitate a
more structured and logical progression of reasoning. Moreover, learning-free fuzzy logical operations are implemented
for the designed reasoning process. Taking advantage of the
inherent properties of fuzzy logic, these logical operations
satisfy fundamental logical rules and ensure complete reasoning. After training, these operations can be applied to flexible
reasoning processes, rather than being confined to fixed computation graphs, thereby exhibiting good generalizability. Extensive experiments conducted on publicly available datasets
demonstrate the superiority of this method in solving the sequential recommendation task.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning approaches to Sequential Recommendations (SRs) have predominantly focused on learning user, item, or sequence embeddings, and determine recommendations through matching functions (Hidasi et al.
2016; Kang and McAuley 2018; Tang and Wang 2018; Qiu
et al. 2022). The key assumption of these models is that a
user’s future behavior can be accurately predicted based on
the similarity to their previous behaviors. By utilizing various deep learning techniques (e.g., self-attention), they effectively model intricate patterns and behaviors of users over
time, and consequently achieve impressive performance.
However, these deep learning methods often rely on extensive samples and data training. They are effective for
pattern recognition, particularly for common and widely
occurring patterns in the training set. That makes these
methods usually challenging to capture rare patterns in the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13124

