The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Data-driven Precipitation Nowcasting Using Satellite Imagery
Young-Jae Park1 , Doyi Kim2 , Minseok Seo2 , Hae-Gon Jeon1 * and Yeji Choi2∗
1

Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Korea
2
SI Analytics, Korea

Abstract

2024-03-18 18:00 UTC

2024-03-18 18:00 UTC

Accurate precipitation forecasting is crucial for early warnings of disasters, such as floods and landslides. Traditional
forecasts rely on ground-based radar systems, which are
space-constrained and have high maintenance costs. Consequently, most developing countries depend on a global numerical model with low resolution, instead of operating their
own radar systems. To mitigate this gap, we propose the Neural Precipitation Model (NPM), which uses global-scale geostationary satellite imagery. NPM predicts precipitation for
up to six hours, with an update every hour. We take three key
channels to discriminate rain clouds as input: infrared radiation (at a wavelength of 10.5 µm), upper- (6.3 µm), and lower(7.3 µm) level water vapor channels. Additionally, NPM introduces positional encoders to capture seasonal and temporal
patterns, accounting for variations in precipitation. Our experimental results demonstrate that NPM can predict rainfall in
real-time with a resolution of 2 km.

(a) Our forecasting

(b) IMERG observation

Figure 1: (a) Our +6 hour forecasting results without radar.
(b) NASA IMERG observation for March 18, 2024, Papua
New Guinea flood case. (Note that NASA GPM IMERGlate run is accessible only 14 hours after observation.)

about billions of dollars. Furthermore, algorithms like IFS
and ERA5 require supercomputers, making them challenging to operate in countries with limited budgets and resources.
To overcome these issues, numerous data-driven
weather forecasting methods have been proposed. PanguWeather (Bi et al. 2023) and GraphCast (Lam et al. 2023)
demonstrate superior performance compared to traditional
NWP models like IFS, even when running in a single GPU
environment. Similarly, a series of MetNet (Andrychowicz
et al. 2023; Sønderby et al. 2020) shows high accuracy in
precipitation forecasting while also operating efficiently on
a single GPU. However, these global weather forecasting
models still rely on NWP data for their initial conditions,
meaning they have not fully eliminated the dependency
on supercomputers. Additionally, with a resolution of 25
km, they remain insufficient for predicting localized heavy
rainfall events, such as flash floods.
The MetNet series and various radar-to-radar benchmark (Veillette, Samsi, and Mattioli 2020) models take radar
data as input, and produce radar-based outputs, making radar
infrastructure essential. Moreover, radar-to-radar models are
unable to detect developing precipitation types that do not
appear in radar signals yet, further reducing their effectiveness in certain situations.
To address the challenges of supercomputer dependency,
radar-only systems, and the difficulty of predicting precipi-

Introduction
As global warming accelerates, the damage caused by natural disasters is on the rise. Particularly with increasing temperatures, the intensity of extreme precipitation events escalates (Ombadi et al. 2023), leading to significant human casualties due to disasters such as floods, landslides, and soil
erosion. To mitigate the loss of life from these disasters, accurate and real-time precipitation forecasting is essential.
Traditionally, precipitation forecasting relies on various
observational equipment such as radar systems and numerical weather prediction (NWP) models. For instance, the
HRRR model (Dowell et al. 2022) utilizes radar data, satellite data, surface observations, aircraft data, weather buoys
and ships, model initialization data, and fire/smoke data to
provide forecasts at a resolution of approximately 3 km. Additionally, global NWP models such as ECMWF Reanalysis
v5 (ERA5) (Hersbach et al. 2020) and integrated forecasting system (IFS) (Wedi et al. 2015) perform forecasts at a
resolution of around 25 km.
Despite advancements in the observational equipment and
the NWP models, essential tools for precipitation forecasting involve installation and maintenance costs that can reach
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28284

