The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Correcting Large Language Model Behavior via Influence Function
Han Zhang1,2 , Zhuo Zhang1,2 , Yi Zhang2 , Yuanzhao Zhai3 , Hanyang Peng2 , Yu Lei2 , Yue Yu2 , Hui
Wang2 , Bin Liang4 , Lin Gui*5 , Ruifeng Xu* 1,2,6
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen),
2
Pengcheng Laboratory,
3
National University of Defense Technology,
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
5
King’s College London,
6
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
hanlardresearch@gmail.com, iezhuo17@gmail.com, zhangy12@pcl.ac.cn, yuanzhaozhai@nudt.edu.cn, penghy@pcl.ac.cn,
leiy01@pcl.ac.cn, yuy@pcl.ac.cn, wangh06@pcl.ac.cn, bin.liang@cuhk.edu.hk, lin.1.gui@kcl.ac.uk, xuruifeng@hitsz.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent advancements in AI alignment techniques have significantly improved the alignment of large language models
(LLMs) with static human preferences. However, the dynamic
nature of human preferences can render some prior training
data outdated or even erroneous, ultimately causing LLMs to
deviate from contemporary human preferences and societal
norms. Existing methodologies, either curation of new data for
continual alignment or manual correction of outdated data for
re-alignment, demand costly human resources. To address this,
we propose a novel approach, LLM BehAvior Correction with
INfluence FunCtion REcall and Post-Training (LANCET),
which needs no human involvement. LANCET consists of two
phases: (1) using a new method LinFAC to efficiently identify
the training data that significantly impact undesirable model
outputs, and (2) applying an novel Influence-driven Bregman
Optimization (IBO) technique to adjust the model’s outputs
based on these influence distributions. Our experiments show
that LANCET effectively and efficiently corrects inappropriate
behaviors of LLMs while preserving model utility. Furthermore, LANCET exhibits stronger generalization ability than
all baselines under out-of-distribution harmful prompts, offering better interpretability and compatibility with real-world
applications of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in AI alignment techniques, such as
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Stiennon et al. 2020; Bai et al. 2022a; Ouyang et al. 2022)
and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al.
2023), have made significant strides in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences using static
alignment datasets. However, human preferences are inherently dynamic, evolving over time and rendering some training data outdated or erroneous, particularly those reflecting
values now deemed inappropriate (Carroll et al. 2024; Zhang
et al. 2024). For example, the film "Gone with the Wind,"
once celebrated, has since faced criticism for its portrayal
of race. Such discrepancies can cause model behaviors to
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14477

diverge from contemporary human preferences and societal
norms. Correcting the anachronistic behavior of LLMs due
to learned outdated preferences is critical to enhancing their
real-world applicability and ensuring adherence to evolving
human values and norms.
Existing methodologies for correcting LLMs behaviors
typically involve the meticulous curation of new preference
data for continual alignment (Carroll et al. 2024; Zhang
et al. 2024) or the manual correction of outdated data for
re-alignment (Jaques et al. 2020; Kreutzer et al. 2018; Bai
et al. 2022b). It remains uncertain whether newly curated
data can "really" override the influences of outdated data
on LLMs. In practice, both methods demand significant human resources, which are expensive and time-consuming.
In response to these limitations, we propose investigating
a novel and practical problem: how can we correct LLMs
behavior without costly human resources? We seek a promising approach to address this challenge: enabling LLMs to
autonomously retrieve inappropriate data from the original
training dataset that significantly impacts the undesirable
outputs of LLMs. Subsequently, the LLMs self-correct their
behavior after training on retrieved data. This process is illustrated in Figure 1, given the misaligned behaviors of LLMs,
LLMs identify the data responsible for these behaviors and
use it for self-correction.
Following this spirit of this idea, we propose a practical
model behavior correction algorithm, LLM behAvior correction with iNfluence funCtion rEcall and post-Training,
abbreviated as LANCET. LANCET comprises two phases:
(1) it leverages influence functions (Hampel 1974) to identify training data that most significantly affects undesirable
model behavior. Traditional influence functions often suffer from prohibitive computational costs when applied to
LLMs (Grosse et al. 2023). We propose a new influence
function calculation method, LinFAC, which employs linear
approximations (Jacot, Hongler, and Gabriel 2018; OrtizJiménez, Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Frossard 2021) to reduce
computational overhead and time complexity significantly.
(2) We introduce an innovative Influence-driven Bregman
Optimization (IBO) technique, which utilizes the distribution
of influence scores to rectify inappropriate model behavior. In
contrast to previous gradient ascent-driven model unlearning

