The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Incomplete and Unpaired Multi-View Graph Clustering with Cross-View Feature
Fusion
Liang Zhao, Ziyue Wang, Xiao Wang, Zhikui Chen, Bo Xu
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{liangzhao, zkchen, BoXu}@dlut.edu.cn, wangziyue6306@mail.dlut.edu.cn, AlanWang 1024@163.com

Abstract

representation learning (Wang, Yang, and Liu 2020; Kang
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020b, 2017). For example, CSMSC
(Luo et al. 2018) derives the optimal consensus graph matrix
from view-specific graph structure of each view through linear combination.
However, due to the sensor difference or corruption,
multi-view data is often incomplete and unpaired in real applications. Most existing multi-view methods are impractical for problematic multi-view data because they assume
that all samples are complete and paired. The visualization
of complete, incomplete, unpaired, both incomplete and unpaired multi-view data is shown as Fig. 1, respectively.
Multi-view data with missing views are called incomplete multi-view data, which means the feature representation of samples on partial views is missing(Xu, Tao, and Xu
2015; Liu et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2024). Some approaches
have been proposed to solve incomplete multi-view data.
iCmSC (Wang et al. 2021) maximizes the intrinsic correlations among different views by deep Canonical Correlation
Analysis (CCA) and explores the consistent graph structure
for spectral clustering.
Multi-view data with incorrect alignment information between views is termed unpaired multi-view data, which implies, for a given unpaired multi-view dataset, the xm
i from
view m and xni from view n may represent different objects (Zong, Zhang, and Liu 2018). In order to deal with
this issue, some unpaired multi-view methods are proposed.
PVC(unpaired) (Huang et al. 2020) delves the mapping relationship of the unpaired data in the latent subspace based
on deep neural networks (DNNs) by improving the Hungarian algorithm. MvCLN (Yang et al. 2021) designs a noiserobust contrastive loss to explore the alignment information
cross different views. MVC-UM (Yu et al. 2021) unifies
Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) and local structure constraints into a novel unpaired multi-view clustering
framework.
Although remarkable success has been made, the above
methods suffer from dealing with both incomplete and unpaired multi-view data. When directly facing and tackling
incomplete and unpaired multi-view data, incomplete multiview methods will misguidedly fuse multi-view features of
different samples by obtaining incorrect cross-view mapping
relationships, and unpaired multi-view methods will be unsuitable due to missing feature representations.

Due to its effectiveness and efficiency, graph-based multiview clustering has recently attracted much attention. However, the multi-view data are often incomplete and unpaired
in real-world applications as a consequence of data loss or
corruption. Although efforts have been made through a series of methods to address the problems of incomplete or unpaired multi-view data, the following issues still persist: 1)
Most existing methods only focus on the incomplete multiview data or unpaired multi-view data, and exhibit weaknesses when addressing both incomplete and unpaired multiview data simultaneously. 2) Some methods neglect the graph
information of the data from different views during the learning process. To tackle these issues, we propose the Multiview Graph Clustering framework with Cross-view Feature
Fusion (MGCCFF), a novel approach for clustering incomplete and unpaired multi-view data. Specifically, MGCCFF
learns soft clustering label information from complete data
and utilizes this to capture category-level cross-view correspondences. It then learns latent representation enriched with
cross-view information based on the established mappings.
To obtain a multi-view graph structure under conditions of
incomplete and unpaired data, MGCCFF innovatively integrates the concept of self-expression with the autoencoder architecture and exploits the latent relationships between labels
and the graph structure, thereby enabling the generation of
sparse and accurate graphical structure under multi-view conditions for the final clustering task. The experiments on incomplete and unpaired multi-view datasets demonstrate that
MGCCFF outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In recent real-world applications, the information of objectives is increasingly collected from different domains or
multiple models. And multi-view learning has recently attracted much attention. Due to the effectiveness of graph
information by signifying the relationships between different samples, multi-view graph learning has become a hot
research topic (Gao et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2023; Zhu, Lu,
and Zhou 2019; Nie et al. 2011; Li et al. 2022a; Nie, Li,
and Li 2017; Zhan et al. 2018). Generally speaking, most
multi-view graph learning methods aim to explore a consistent graph structure from multi-view data based on selfCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22786

