The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gradient-Based Sample Selection for Black-Box Universal Domain Adaptation
Qiuyan He1 , Minghua Deng1,2,3 * ,
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
3
Center for Quantitative Biology, Peking University
heqy@pku.edu.cn, dengmh@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

(UniDA) (You et al. 2019; Saito et al. 2020) only assumes
Lt ∩ Ls ̸= ∅ to tackle all kinds of category-shift.
Traditional UniDA methods train with both domain data.
Due to security concerns and other restrictions, source data
can be inaccessible when training. Moreover, training with
both domain data is computational heavy when datasets are
large-scale. It’s also inefficient to retrain all data once new
target data is obtained. Therefore, source-free universal domain adaptation (SF-UniDA) (Kundu et al. 2020; Liang et al.
2021) tackles the UniDA problem when only pre-trained
models on Ds are available. However, only utilizing source
models can still suffer from attacks such as model-inversion
attack (Zhang et al. 2020) and membership inference attack
(Hu et al. 2022) leading to information leakage. A more
practical setting is the black-box universal domain adaptation (B2 -UniDA) (Deng et al. 2021), where only the interface of pre-trained models is available. Querying target data
through the interface returns test results of pre-trained models. B2 -UniDA uses these results to label target data when
unknown domain-shift and category-shift exist.
Compared with traditional UniDA and SF-UniDA, B2 UniDA is more practical and safer, but also more challenging. Firstly, test results of pre-trained models provide less
knowledge of Ds . Initialization of target models can’t use
source information. Secondly, limited source information increases the difficulty of tackling shifts. Different from traditional UniDA methods (You et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2022a,b,c), B2 -UniDA methods can’t use cross-domain
samples to eliminate domain-shift and find common classes.
B2 -UniDA also inherits challenges of UniDA. First, class
imbalance (Johnson and Khoshgoftaar 2019) may occur in
both domains. Due to domain-shift, conditions of class imbalance are different between domains even for common
classes. Moreover, since all target-private classes are regarded as unknown when labelling, imbalance may exist between the unknown category and each known class or the
known category overall. Such imbalance may lead to model
collapse. Besides, negative transfer (Wang et al. 2019) may
occur especially when there’re many source-private classes.
Nowadays, UniDA has attracted much attention but B2 UniDA is seldom studied (Deng et al. 2021). Current UniDA
works mainly detect unknown classes by comparing selfdefined statistics with given thresholds (You et al. 2019;
Saito et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2021). Perfor-

Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) transfers knowledge
from a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target domain under domain-shift and category-shift for annotation.
In reality, due to privacy protection or other limits, not only
source data but also pre-trained models on it may be unavailable when training on target data. In this paper, we go a step
further to explore the black-box universal domain adaptation
(B2 -UniDA) problem. It requires tackling the labelling task
under shifts by only accessing the interface of pre-trained
source models. To this end, we introduce GSS which proposes a novel sample selection criterion based on gradient
descent and Bayes’ Theorem to identify samples of potential
unknown classes. This criterion doesn’t require manually-set
thresholds depending on data used and is suitable for various datasets. GSS builds an open-set classifier and enables
it to estimate probabilities of belonging to each class including the unknown category and adjust estimates adaptively. To
overcome class imbalance, especially imbalance between the
unknown and known classes, we propose a balancing mechanism by measuring training status and estimating DA type. In
addition to distilling knowledge from source model outputs,
we focus on mining the categorical structure of target domain
by self-training. Experiments on benchmarks show the stateof-the-art performance of GSS compared to typical methods,
including source models or source data dependent methods.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Ben-David et al.
2010) transfers knowledge from a labelled source domain
(Ds ) to an unlabelled target domain (Dt ) for annotation under domain-shift (Wilson and Cook 2020). Let Ls and Lt be
label sets of Ds and Dt . UDA generally assumes Ls = Lt
(Ganin and Lempitsky 2015), which is also named closedset DA (CDA). This doesn’t consider category-shift between
domains. Therefore, partial DA (PDA) (Cao et al. 2018a,b;
Zhang et al. 2018b) assumes Lt ⊂ Ls , while the widelyused open-set DA (ODA) (Saito et al. 2018) assumes Ls ⊂
Lt . Early version of ODA (Busto and Gall 2017) assumes
Lt ∩ Ls ̸= ∅ and both domains have private classes, which
is called open-partial DA (OPDA) now. In fact, the relationship of Ls and Lt is usually unknown. Thus universal DA
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17114

