The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Subspace Matrix Recovery from Permuted Data
Liangqi Xie, Jicong Fan*
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
222041028@link.cuhk.edu.cn, fanjicong@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

more general scenario where the ground-truth matrix can be
full-rank (Fan and Chow 2018; Fan and Udell 2019; Fan,
Zhang, and Udell 2020), leading us to explore Permuted Matrix Recovery with Multi-Subspace Data.

This paper aims to recover a multi-subspace matrix from
permuted data: given a matrix, in which the columns are
drawn from a union of low-dimensional subspaces and some
columns are corrupted by permutations on their entries, recover the original matrix. The task has numerous practical applications such as data cleaning, integration, and deanonymization, but it remains challenging and cannot be well
addressed by existing techniques such as robust principal
component analysis because of the presence of multiple subspaces and the permutations on the elements of vectors. To
solve the challenge, we develop a novel four-stage algorithm
pipeline including outlier identification, subspace reconstruction, outlier classification, and unsupervised sensing for permuted vector recovery. Particularly, we provide theoretical
guarantees for the outlier classification step, ensuring reliable
multi-subspace matrix recovery. Our pipeline is compared
with state-of-the-art competitors on multiple benchmarks and
shows superior performance.

1
1.1

1.2

Related Work

While several studies address label-entity mismatches, only
two focus on matrix recovery. The first, (Yao, Peng, and
Tsakiris 2021), combines robust PCA (Candès et al. 2011)
with unlabeled sensing, estimating the ground-truth subspace first and using it to recover permuted data. The second,
(Tang et al. 2021), estimates the permutation matrix within
a Birkhoff polytope, minimizing an objective inspired by
nuclear norm minimization. This reformulates the problem
into continuous optimization within the polytope, solved via
proximal gradient methods and the Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi 2013).
Each method has strengths and limitations. The method
proposed by (Yao, Peng, and Tsakiris 2021) works well for
sparsely permuted data or low-dimensional subspaces but
struggles with missing data, whereas the method proposed
by (Tang et al. 2021) handles such data but assumes permuted clusters of outliers, a condition that may not always
hold. Additionally, the method of (Tang et al. 2021) is sensitive to initial conditions and assumes a low-rank subspace,
with a time complexity of O(n2 ), limiting its scalability in
high-dimensional scenarios. Importantly, both methods focus on a single ground-truth subspace, overlooking the more
complex scenario involving multi-subspace data (widely existing in many areas such as computer vision and signal processing), which we aim to address. While the robust kernel PCA proposed by (Fan and Chow 2019) removes sparse
noise from high-rank matrices, it does not effectively handle
permuted data.

Introduction

Background and Motivation

Permutation is a critical form of data corruption in many applications such as computer vision, data integration, and privacy protection, and hence therefore requires significant attention. This section highlights two key applications: record
linkage and de-anonymization, related to data integration
and privacy protection, respectively. In record linkage, the
goal is to integrate data from different sources for analysis (Fellegi and Sunter 1969; Muralidhar 2017). Columns
of a data matrix, gathered independently, may not correspond to the same entity in each row. Thus, reordering or
recovering these columns is essential for accurate analysis.
In de-anonymization, data providers anonymize information
by shuffling the columns of the ground-truth data matrix before release. Recovering the original data becomes a reverse
process of data protection (Domingo-Ferrer and Muralidhar
2016). This has practical implications, especially in healthcare and finance, where data integrity is crucial.
Typically, the ground-truth data matrix has a lower rank
than the permuted version. However, our study addresses a

1.3

Contributions of This Work

We generalize the traditional single-subspace permuted matrix recovery problem into multi-subspace scenarios and
propose a four-step pipeline for recovering a multi-subspace
matrix corrupted by permutation. Within the pipeline, we introduce an efficient method for the outlier classification step
and provide theoretical guarantees to support the algorithm
and practical applications.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21670

