The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Equirectangular Point Reconstruction for Domain Adaptive Multimodal 3D
Object Detection in Adverse Weather Conditions
Jae Hyun Yoon* , Jong Won Jung* , Seok Bong Yoo†
Department of Artificial Intelligence Convergence, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Korea
sbyoo@jnu.ac.kr

Abstract

and images have limitations. For example, existing methods are primarily optimized for ideal conditions, such as
clear weather, but are vulnerable to adverse weather conditions. Fig. 1(a) illustrates the 3D average precision of
an existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) model, VirConv-S (Wu
et al. 2023b), in diverse weather conditions. The model was
trained and evaluated on the Dense dataset (Bijelic et al.
2020) consisting of diverse weather conditions. This model
performs well in clear weather conditions, but its performance degrades by 9.85%p, 10.62%p, and 12.87%p in snow,
rain, and fog, respectively. This degradation is attributed
to brightness variations, signal attenuation, and occlusion
caused by weather noise affecting the object of interest.
For LiDAR emitting lasers centered around a sensor, the
laser signals are reflected by weather noise before reaching
an object, generating noisy points, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
The attenuated pulsed lasers can fail to return signals, resulting in empty spaces (hole points) where points should
represent the object corresponding to the laser path. Thus,
the sparsity of the object points increases, corrupting object
shapes and decreasing detection performance.
Additionally, Fig. 1(c) presents our observation of detection performance variations over the number of points
by distance. We observed that there is an optimal number
of points (⋆) for detection at each distance. Moreover, the
change in performance along the number of points becomes
more extensive as the distance increases and more gradual
as the distance decreases.
Another limitation is that the amount of real-world adverse weather data is limited due to the difficulty of data
collection (Hahner et al. 2022). The weather datasets synthesized by simulator (Kilic et al. 2021; Hahner et al. 2021)
can be an alternative to address this issue, and the simulator
provides a benefit for restoration by offering a corresponding clean data. However, no weather simulator has been designed for multimodal purposes. Dong et al. (2023) used
simulators to synthesize the point cloud and images to evaluate multimodal detection performance in adverse weather
conditions. However, weather-element alignment is inconsistent because the point cloud and images are synthesized
independently. Fig. 1(d) compares these synthesized data
with real-world data by measuring the matching accuracy as
the degree of overlap between the weather noise points and
masks in the projected 2D space. The inconsistently synthe-

A multimodal fusion technique using LiDAR-camera has
been developed for precise 3D object detection in autonomous driving and provides acceptable detection performance in ideal conditions with clear weather. However, the
existing multimodal methods are still vulnerable to adverse
weather conditions, such as snow, rain, and fog. These factors increase the point cloud sparsity due to occlusion and
attenuation of the laser signal. A point cloud becomes sparser
with increased distance, posing a challenge for object detection. To address these problems, we propose a point reconstruction network using equirectangular projection for
multimodal 3D object detection. This network consists of
distance-constrained denoising to remove adverse weather
noise and an object-centric ray generator to generate distant object points flexibly. We propose a domain adaptation method that injects feature perturbations to improve detection performance by reducing the domain gap between
different datasets. Furthermore, we propose a multimodal
weather noise matching method for realistic data synthesisbased training to align the adverse weather noise between
synthetic point clouds and images. The experimental results
on adverse weather datasets confirm that the proposed approach outperforms the existing methods.

Code — https://github.com/jhyoon964/EquiDetect

Introduction
3D object detection has received significant attention in numerous applications and has achieved substantial advancements. Particularly, multimodal 3D object detection with
complementary information from multiple sources has contributed to this advancement. Fusing the light detection and
ranging (LiDAR) and camera data is one promising approach. Moreover, LiDAR provides precise distance information using light signals, and the camera offers rich texture
information in images. Fusing these modalities enhances the
ability to identify objects and their positions accurately.
Despite these advancements, existing multimodal detection methods (Wu et al. 2022b, 2023a) using the point cloud
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9553

