The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Private Blotto: Viewpoint Competition with Polarized Agents
Kate Donahue1 , Jon Kleinberg1, 2 ,
1
2

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Information Science, Cornell University
kdonahue@cs.cornell.edu, kleinberg@cornell.edu

Abstract

solutions, including using the platforms and users themselves to curate and annotate content. For example, the Community Notes tool on X.com (formerly known as the Birdwatch tool on Twitter (Wojcik et al. 2022)) has the goal of
identifying misinformation by allowing X users to vote on
“notes” with added context that are used to annotate posts.
In this work, we will draw on game-theoretic tools to
help analyze scenarios like this, where multiple strategic,
biased agents compete over several different items1 . In particular, over a century ago, before modern game theory
was fully established, Émile Borel proposed a family of
related zero-sum games that study a similar problem to
ours, in the centralized setting. Specifically, this models
centrally-coordinated competition using military conflict as
a metaphor (Borel 1921):

Social media platforms are responsible for collecting and disseminating vast quantities of content. Recently, however, they
have also begun enlisting users in helping annotate this content - for example, to provide context or label disinformation.
However, users may act strategically, sometimes reflecting biases (e.g. political) about the “right” label. How can social
media platforms design their systems to use human time most
efficiently? Historically, competition over multiple items has
been explored in the Colonel Blotto game setting. However, they were originally designed to model two centrallycontrolled armies competing over zero-sum “items”, a specific scenario with limited modern-day application. In this
work, we propose and study the Private Blotto game, a variant with the key difference that individual agents act independently, without being coordinated by a central “Colonel”. We
completely characterize the Nash stability of this game and
how this impacts the amount of “misallocated effort” of users
on unimportant items. We show that the outcome function
(aggregating multiple labels on a single item) has a critical
impact, and specifically contrast a majority rule outcome (the
median) as compared to a smoother outcome function (mean).
In general, for median outcomes we show that instances without stable arrangements only occur for relatively few numbers
of agents, but stable arrangements may have very high levels of misallocated effort. For mean outcome functions, we
show that unstable arrangements can occur even for arbitrarily large numbers of agents, but when stable arrangements
exist, they always have low misallocated effort. We conclude
by discussing implications our results have for motivating examples in social media platforms and political competition.

1

Definition 1 (Colonel Blotto). Two players, A and B, are
competing over M different fronts, with Na , Nb units of effort at their disposal respectively. A player wins a front if
they allocate more effort to the front than their opponent
does, and each player wishes to win as many fronts as possible. Are there Nash stable arrangements of effort over fronts,
and if so, which are they?
The name “Colonel Blotto” comes from the fact that a
colonel controls multiple individual soldiers, which they allocate across the battlefields in order to serve their overall
objective. The Colonel Blotto game has been the focus of
extensive exploration, including variants that allow for battlefields to have different values, for effort to be allocated
probabalistically, and for smoother utility functions (Golman and Page 2009; Hart 2008; Osorio 2013) (see Appendix
A.1 for more works). One common thread has been the relative scarcity of pure Nash equilibria, which has centered the
literature around exploration of mixed Nash equilibria. The
game has also found many applications in areas far removed
from warfare (Merolla, Munger, and Tofias 2005), such as
national politics, but always with centralized entities competing over multiple items.

Introduction

Over the last several decades, social media platforms have
become hubs of information, responsible for collecting and
disseminating vast quantities of content. The sheer scale of
content means that traditional sources of annotation and curation (e.g. traditional fact-checking) has become borderline
infeasible, even as these platforms have become primary
sources of information for many people (e.g. see (Nielsen
and Schrøder 2014; Gil de Zúñiga, Jung, and Valenzuela
2012)). Instead, some of these platforms have turned to other

Modeling decentralized conflicts. However, the Colonel
Blotto framing is at odds with the modern type of disaggregated competition, such as our motivating example of social
1
Other settings where this occurs include political competition
over multiple issues: see Section 1.1 for a discussion.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13771

