The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Memorize and Rank: Elevating Large Language Models for Clinical Diagnosis
Prediction
Mingyu Derek Ma1 , Xiaoxuan Wang1 , Yijia Xiao1 , Anthony Cuturrufo1 ,
Vijay S Nori2 , Eran Halperin1,2 , Wei Wang1
1

University of California, Los Angeles
2
Optum AI
{ma, xw27, yijia.xiao, acc, weiwang}@cs.ucla.edu, vijay.nori@optum.com, eran.halperin@uhg.com
Abstract

works initialize concept embeddings from natural language
descriptions (Wu et al. 2023b; Bornet et al. 2023), or enrich
patient representation with external disease ontologies (An
et al. 2023; Cheong et al. 2023). However, a significant gap
persists between the primary knowledge modality, i.e. natural language, and the model’s hidden representation. Second, how can we handle the large candidate space when
making predictions and exploit the supervisory signals induced from this candidate space? The commonly used International Classification of Diseases (ICD) coding system
encodes 13k+ diseases (Cartwright 2013). Existing works
typically treat the task as k-way classification where k is the
number of possible diseases, and then apply cross entropy
loss for each disease individually. These approaches often
overlook the dependencies among diseases and the structural
nuances within the diagnosis coding system.

Clinical diagnosis prediction models, when provided with
a patient’s medical history, aim to detect potential diseases
early, facilitating timely intervention and improving prognostic outcomes. However, the inherent scarcity of patient data
and large disease candidate space often pose challenges in developing satisfactory models for this intricate task. The exploration of leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) for encapsulating clinical decision processes has been limited. We
introduce M ERA, a clinical diagnosis prediction model that
bridges pertaining natural language knowledge with medical practice. We apply hierarchical contrastive learning on a
disease candidate ranking list to alleviate the large decision
space issue. With concept memorization through fine-tuning,
we bridge the natural language clinical knowledge with medical codes. Experimental results on MIMIC-III and IV datasets
show that M ERA achieves the state-of-the-art diagnosis prediction performance and dramatically elevates the diagnosis
prediction capabilities of generative LMs.

1

Generative Language Models (LM), especially the Large
Language Models (LLM), are trained to predict the next token, adhere to task instructions (Brown and et al. 2020; Ma
et al. 2024a), and align with human preferences (Ouyang
and et al 2022). These models exhibit superior capabilities
in language understanding and reasoning, as shown by their
performance on science-based benchmarks (Ma et al. 2024b;
Wu et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2024). During the pretraining
stage, LLMs assimilate a large amount of knowledge extracted from literature and online corpora. However, there
remains an underexplored domain in using LLM for clinical
diagnosis prediction, due to the aforementioned gap between
natural language and medical code, as well as the disparity
between the token-level optimization process and the large
candidate outcome space. These challenges impede the effective application of generative LMs to diagnosis prediction tasks, even as the state-of-the-art models predominantly
rely on graph neural networks without fully harnessing natural language knowledge (Yang et al. 2023b; Wu et al. 2023b;
An et al. 2023). Fine-tuning generative LM LLaMA2 (Touvron and et al. 2023) directly on diagnosis prediction yields
almost 20-point lower recall@20 than GNN-based existing
best model (Yang et al. 2023b) as shown in Table 1. There
are some studies that use transformer-based LM for clinical
outcome prediction, but they either do not support structured
data as input (Niu et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023a), not compatible with mainstream LLMs (Rupp, Peter, and Pattipaka
2023; Guo et al. 2023), or only work for narrow output space

Introduction

Electronic Health Records (EHR), containing patient status and diagnoses, embody valuable domain expertise and
clinical operation patterns (Caufield et al. 2019). Clinicians
make diagnosis judgments based on their extensive medical
knowledge, acquired through years of education from textbooks and literature, as well as their accumulated experience
derived from clinical practice. Clinical diagnosis prediction
aims to predict patients’ diseases that are highly likely to
be diagnosed in the upcoming hospital admission by analyzing the patients’ past diagnoses. The input and output
are both presented in sequences of medical codes, which do
not directly convey semantic information nor disease property. The resulting AI-enhanced diagnosis system (Morid,
Sheng, and Dunbar 2023) may enable early warning of diseases (Rochefort, Buckeridge, and Forster 2015), optimized
clinical resource allocation (Yadav et al. 2013), and better
risk estimation for sustainable insurance (Hsu et al. 2016).
Two primary challenges in diagnosis prediction have
driven various research efforts (Wornow et al. 2023b) but
remain unsolved. First, what would be the best practice
to incorporate clinical knowledge into the model? Existing
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24786

