The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Together Securely: Prototype-Based Federated Multi-Modal Hashing for
Safe and Efficient Multi-Modal Retrieval
Ruifan Zuo1,2 , Chaoqun Zheng1,2 * , Lei Zhu3 , Wenpeng Lu1,2 , Yuanyuan Xiang4 , Zhao Li1,5 ,
Xiaofeng Qu6
1
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education, Shandong Computer
Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
2
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computing Power Internet and Service Computing, Shandong Fundamental
Research Center for Computer Science
3
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
4
Shandong Branch of National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team/Coordination Center (CNCERT/SD)
5
Evay Info
6
School of Information Science and Engineering, University of Jinan
{zrfan9928, leizhu0608}@gmail.com, {cqzhengwork, luwpeng, qquan 2014, ise quxf}@163.com, liz@sdas.org

Abstract
With the proliferation of multi-modal data, safe and efficient
multi-modal hashing retrieval has become a pressing research
challenge, particularly due to concerns over data privacy
during centralized processing. To address this, we propose
Prototype-based Federated Multi-modal Hashing (PFMH),
an innovative framework that seamlessly integrates federated learning with multi-modal hashing techniques. PFMH
achieves fine-grained fusion of heterogeneous multi-modal
data, enhancing retrieval accuracy while ensuring data privacy through prototype-based communication, thereby reducing communication costs and mitigating risks of data
leakage. Furthermore, using a prototype completion strategy,
PFMH tackles class imbalance and statistical heterogeneity
in multi-modal data, improving model generalization and performance across diverse data distributions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of PFMH
within the federated learning framework, enabling distributed
training for secure and precise multi-modal retrieval in realworld scenarios.

Centralized Multi-modal Hashing

Federated Multi-modal Hashing

Client 1 Client 2 Client 3

Client 1 Client 2 Client3

Privacy
Leakage

Client-side multi-modal model

Aggregated data
multi-modal
model

Privacy
Protected

Figure 1: Centralized vs Federated multi-modal hashing.
become critical in this field (Wang et al. 2017; Li et al. 2023;
Zhu et al. 2024; Cohen et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2024).
Fortunately, federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2020; Li, He, and Song 2021; Tan et al. 2022c; Li
et al. 2023) presents a compelling solution to tackle this
pressing challenge. Its core advantage lies in enabling effective model collaboration across multiple participants, without the need for directly transmitting users’ private data. By
training models on local devices, federated learning can significantly reduce the risk of data leakage, safeguard the security of local client data, and thus provide a theoretical and
practical bridge for secure multi-modal retrieval.
However, it still faces a series of urgent issues and challenges in real-world applications. 1) Although federated
learning aims to ensure data security through parameter
sharing rather than directly exchanging raw data, the protection of parameter transmission remains a significant challenge. Attackers still can intercept multi-modal information
or even infer original data from model parameters through
reverse engineering, posing a serious threat to the security
of the federated learning process. Ensuring that information
during the parameter transmission process is not illegally accessed has become a critical issue that needs urgent resolution. 2) The characteristics of class imbalance and statistical
heterogeneity in multi-modal data pose a major challenge
for federated learning. In real-world scenarios, data often exhibits an imbalanced distribution where certain classes have
far more samples than others. This can lead to model training that is biased towards classes with larger sample sizes,

Code — https://github.com/vindahi/PMFH

Introduction
The geometric increase in multi-modal data has drawn considerable attention to multi-modal hashing in the field of
information retrieval, owing to its advantages of efficient
querying and low-cost storage (Wang et al. 2023b; He et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023a; Shi et al. 2023). As shown in Figure 1, previous methods have primarily focused on centralized training scenarios, where data from various sources is
aggregated for model training and optimization. While these
methods have shown encouraging performance, they also
raise prominent concerns regarding data security and privacy protection. Consequently, achieving efficient and accurate multi-modal retrieval while ensuring data privacy has
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23108

