The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TimeCMA: Towards LLM-Empowered Multivariate Time Series Forecasting via
Cross-Modality Alignment
Chenxi Liu1 , Qianxiong Xu1 * , Hao Miao2 , Sun Yang3 , Lingzheng Zhang4 , Cheng Long1 ,
Ziyue Li5∗ , Rui Zhao 6
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Aalborg University, Denmark
3
Peking University, China
4
HKUST (Guangzhou), China
5
University of Cologne, Germany
6
SenseTime Research, China
{chenxi.liu, qianxiong.xu, c.long}@ntu.edu.sg, haom@cs.aau.dk, 2201210484@stu.pku.edu.cn,
lingzhengzhang01@gmail.com, zlibn@wiso.uni-koeln.de, zhaorui@sensetime.com
Abstract
Multivariate time series forecasting (MTSF) aims to learn
temporal dynamics among variables to forecast future time
series. Existing statistical and deep learning-based methods
suffer from limited learnable parameters and small-scale training data. Recently, large language models (LLMs) combining
time series with textual prompts have achieved promising
performance in MTSF. However, we discovered that current
LLM-based solutions fall short in learning disentangled embeddings. We introduce TimeCMA, an intuitive yet effective
framework for MTSF via cross-modality alignment. Specifically, we present a dual-modality encoding with two branches:
the time series encoding branch extracts disentangled yet weak
time series embeddings, and the LLM-empowered encoding
branch wraps the same time series with text as prompts to
obtain entangled yet robust prompt embeddings. As a result,
such a cross-modality alignment retrieves both disentangled
and robust time series embeddings, “the best of two worlds”,
from the prompt embeddings based on time series and prompt
modality similarities. As another key design, to reduce the
computational costs from time series with their length textual
prompts, we design an effective prompt to encourage the most
essential temporal information to be encapsulated in the last
token: only the last token is passed to downstream prediction.
We further store the last token embeddings to accelerate inference speed. Extensive experiments on eight real datasets
demonstrate that TimeCMA outperforms state-of-the-arts.

Code — https://github.com/ChenxiLiu-HNU/TimeCMA

Introduction
With the proliferation of scalable mobile sensing, large
amounts of time series data, collected across domains such
as traffic (Xiao et al. 2022; Miao et al. 2024) and environment (Liu et al. 2024a, 2022), have driven applications such
as multivariate time series forecasting (MTSF). MTSF aims
to mine temporal dynamics among variables from historical
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18780

data to predict future time series, enabling users to make
proactive decisions, e.g., investment choice (Niu et al. 2020)
or weather preparation (Liu et al. 2023).
MTSF methods can be divided into statistical methods (Smith and Demetsky 1997) and deep learning-based
methods (Wu et al. 2023; Miao et al. 2022). However, the
limited number of learnable parameters and the small-scale
training data prevent these methods from achieving better
performance and being more robust (Jin et al. 2024b; Liu
et al. 2021c,b). Recent advances (Zhou et al. 2023) have incorporated pre-trained LLMs (Radford et al. 2019, 2018) into
time series to benefit from the robust embeddings learned
from abundant language data (Liang et al. 2024).
Existing LLM-based methods for time series forecasting
can be categorized by input data types. (1) Time series-based
LLMs (Zhou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024b) replace the LLM’s
tokenizer with a randomly initialized embedding layer to process time series data. However, this embedding layer initialized with random weights often results in weak embeddings
due to a domain gap between time series and language data.
(2) Prompt-based LLMs (Jin et al. 2024b) introduce prompts
with text as additional input to help the LLMs understand the
time series forecasting task. The prompts are contextualized
within time series with text descriptions to facilitate the datato-text transformation (Jin et al. 2024a; Xue and Salim 2023)
or directly summarize the time series information using pure
text (Liu et al. 2024c; Jia et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024).
These prompts are then processed by pre-trained LLMs to
obtain robust embeddings, allowing the prompt-based LLMs
to outperform existing methods, as evidenced in Table 1.
Although prompt-based LLMs have achieved notable performance, they were challenged by the data entanglement
issue (Chang et al. 2024). Specifically, existing methods (Liu
et al. 2024c; Jia et al. 2024) concatenate disentangled yet
weak time series embeddings (Fig. 1(a), upper) with text
prompt embeddings (Fig. 1(a), lower). As one stream of existing methods shown in Fig. 1(b), these fused embeddings
are then fed into subsequent time series processing stages.
However, the output embeddings are entangled, which de-

