The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ConfigX: Modular Configuration for Evolutionary Algorithms
via Multitask Reinforcement Learning
Hongshu Guo1 * , Zeyuan Ma1 * , Jiacheng Chen1 , Yining Ma2 ,
Zhiguang Cao3 , Xinglin Zhang1 , Yue-Jiao Gong1†
1

South China University of Technology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
3
Singapore Management University

2

configuration space C of an evolutionary algorithm A, across
a set of BBO problem instances I:
c∗ = arg max E [P erf (A, c, p)]
(1)

Abstract
Recent advances in Meta-learning for Black-Box Optimization (MetaBBO) have shown the potential of using neural networks to dynamically configure evolutionary algorithms (EAs), enhancing their performance and adaptability
across various BBO instances. However, they are often tailored to a specific EA, which limits their generalizability and
necessitates retraining or redesigns for different EAs and optimization problems. To address this limitation, we introduce
ConfigX, a new paradigm of the MetaBBO framework that
is capable of learning a universal configuration agent (model)
for boosting diverse EAs. To achieve so, our ConfigX first
leverages a novel modularization system that enables the flexible combination of various optimization sub-modules to generate diverse EAs during training. Additionally, we propose a
Transformer-based neural network to meta-learn a universal
configuration policy through multitask reinforcement learning across a designed joint optimization task space. Extensive
experiments verify that, our ConfigX, after large-scale pretraining, achieves robust zero-shot generalization to unseen
tasks and outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. Moreover,
ConfigX exhibits strong lifelong learning capabilities, allowing efficient adaptation to new tasks through fine-tuning. Our
proposed ConfigX represents a significant step toward an automatic, all-purpose configuration agent for EAs.

1

c∈C

p∈I

where P erf () denotes the performance of a configuration
for the algorithm under a given problem instance.
Traditionally, the primary research focus in AC for EAs
has centered on human-crafted AC mechanisms. These
mechanisms, including algorithm/operator selection (Fialho 2010) and parameter control (Aleti and Moser 2016),
have demonstrated strong performance on well-known BBO
benchmarks (Hansen et al. 2010), as well as in various eye-catching real-world scenarios such as ProteinDocking (Hwang et al. 2010), AutoML (Vanschoren et al.
2014), and Prompting Optimization of Large Language
Models (Chen, Dohan, and So 2024). However, a major limitation of manual AC is its heavy reliance on deep expertise.
To address a specific problem, one often needs to consult experts with the necessary experience to analyze the problem
and then design appropriate AC mechanisms (as depicted in
the top of Figure 1). This impedes the broader application of
EAs in diverse scientific or industrial applications.
Recently, a novel paradigm called Meta-learning for
Black-Box Optimization (MetaBBO) (Ma et al. 2023), has
emerged in the learning-to-optimize community. MetaBBO
aims to reduce the reliance on expert-level knowledge in designing more automated AC mechanisms. As shown in the
middle of Figure 1, in MetaBBO, a neural network is metatrained as a meta-level policy to maximize the expected performance (Eq. (1)) of a low-level algorithm by dictating suitable configuration for solving each problem instance. By
leveraging the data-driven features of deep models and the
generalization strengths of meta-learning (Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017) across a distribution of optimization problems,
these MetaBBO methods (Ma et al. 2024c; Li et al. 2024;
Song et al. 2024) have shown superior adaptability compared to traditional human-crafted AC baselines.
Despite these advancements, there remains significant
potential to further reduce the expertise burden. Current
MetaBBO methods often need custom neural network designs, specific learning objectives, and frequent retraining or
even complete redesigns to fit different backbone EAs, overlooking the shared aspects of AC across multiple EAs. This

Introduction

Over the decades, Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) such as
Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Holland 1992), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy and Eberhart 1995) and Differential Evolution (DE) (Storn and Price 1997) have been
extensively researched to tackle challenging Black-Box Optimization (BBO) problems, where neither the mathematical formulation nor additional derivative information is accessible. On par with the development of EAs, one of the
most crucial research avenues is the Automatic Configuration (AC) for EAs (Ansótegui, Sellmann, and Tierney 2009;
Huang, Li, and Yao 2019). Generally speaking, AC for EAs
aims at identifying the optimal configuration c∗ from the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author. (E-mail: gongyuejiao@gmail.com)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26982

