The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HS-FPN: High Frequency and Spatial Perception FPN for Tiny Object Detection
Zican Shi1 , Jing Hu12 * , Jie Ren1 , Hengkang Ye1 , Xuyang Yuan1 , Yan Ouyang3 , Jia He4 , Bo Ji4 ,
Junyu Guo4
2

1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-Spectral Information Processing, Wuhan, China
3
Air Force Early Warning Academy, Wuhan, China
4
Chinese People’s Liberation Army 95841 troops, China
{misaka10043, by6040130, jieren, yehengkang, lucasxyyuan}@hust.edu.cn
{oyy 01, hugh120007, jibo 2006, henry rocky 1999}@163.com

Abstract

large vision models (Zeng et al. 2023; Zhong et al. 2022)
have mostly been studied only on the general COCO dataset
(Lin et al. 2014), without giving extra attention to tiny objects. Due to these reasons, tiny object detection has gradually become a challenging research direction in the field of
computer vision.
Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) (Lin et al. 2017) has
already become an indispensable part of object detection
models (Ren et al. 2015). FPN leverages multi-scale feature
maps produced by the backbone network (typically ResNet
(He et al. 2016)), propagating the strong semantics of deep
feature maps to shallow feature maps, significantly enhancing the information content of the shallow features.
Although experiments have shown that FPN significantly
improves object detection performance, there are still some
challenges when it comes to detecting tiny objects, as described below:
Tiny objects have limited usable features. Although
FPN integrates deep and shallow features, it does not directly increase the feature content for tiny objects. Due to
the small pixel area of tiny objects, frequent downsampling
by the backbone network continually compresses the feature
size of tiny objects, resulting in only a few pixels of feature
representation for tiny objects in the final feature map. Weak
feature responses are not enough for precise detection and
location.
Tiny objects lack network attention. The feature responses of tiny objects are relatively weak and susceptible
to interference, requiring extra attention. However, FPN applies the same processing method to features at each layer:
1 × 1 convolutions to reduce the number of channels, todown features fusion and 3 × 3 convolutions to integrate
outputs, without providing special treatment for tiny objects
features.
FPN lacks spatial perception ability. By merging upper
and lower layer features in a pixel-by-pixel addition manner, FPN lacks spatial perception ability around tiny targets.
The pixel offset caused by recursive upsampling in FPN results in misalignment of tiny target features between upper
and lower layers. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance the
spatial perception ability of FPN and enrich the contextual
information of tiny target features.
In fact, many traditional methods for detecting tiny objects are based on frequency domain techniques (Achanta

The introduction of Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) has significantly improved object detection performance. However,
substantial challenges remain in detecting tiny objects, as
their features occupy only a very small proportion of the feature maps. Although FPN integrates multi-scale features, it
does not directly enhance or enrich the features of tiny objects. Furthermore, FPN lacks spatial perception ability. To
address these issues, we propose a novel High Frequency and
Spatial Perception Feature Pyramid Network (HS-FPN) with
two innovative modules. First, we designed a high frequency
perception module (HFP) that generates high frequency responses through high pass filters. These high frequency responses are used as mask weights from both spatial and channel perspectives to enrich and highlight the features of tiny
objects in the original feature maps. Second, we developed
a spatial dependency perception module (SDP) to capture
the spatial dependencies that FPN lacks. Our experiments
demonstrate that detectors based on HS-FPN exhibit competitive advantages over state-of-the-art models on the AI-TOD
dataset for tiny object detection.

1

Introduction

Tiny Object Detection (TOD), a subtask of general object
detection, focuses on detecting tiny-sized objects that AITOD (Wang et al. 2021) defines as being less than 16 × 16
pixels. TOD plays an important role in scenarios such as
traffic sign detection, scene monitoring, unmanned aerial
vehicle analysis, pedestrian detection, autonomous driving,
and maritime rescue.
Despite the development of deep learning bringing forth
many outstanding object detection frameworks that have
achieved impressive performance on regular-sized objects,
the performance of these frameworks drops significantly
when it comes to detecting tiny objects. Based on recent
reviews and surveys on tiny object detection (Cheng et al.
2023; Li et al. 2022; Tong and Wu 2022), we infer that the
performance decline can be attributed to three factors: tiny
objects have limited usable features, their features are easily interfered with, and general network architectures do not
adequately focus on tiny objects. Moreover, in recent years,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6896

