The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prototypical Replay with Old-class Focusing Knowledge Distillation for
Incremental Named Entity Recognition
Zesheng Liu1,2 , Qiannan Zhu4,5 ,Cuiping Li1,2 * , Hong Chen1,3
1

School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, MOE, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Database and Business Intelligence, MOE, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
5
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology and Educational Application, MOE, China
{lzs2022,licuiping,chong}@ruc.edu.cn, zhuqiannan@bnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Recognition (INER) (Parisi et al. 2019; Thrun 1998). A challenge arises as traditional NER methods struggle to handle
entity types not seen during training, necessitating the development of effective INER techniques (Monaikul et al. 2021;
Xia et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022) that can incrementally
learn NER models using training samples containing only
new entity types.

Catastrophic forgetting is a key challenge in incremental
named entity recognition (INER). Existing methods often address this issue through distillation-based approaches, which
involve transferring previously learned knowledge from the
old model to the new one. However, these methods may not
fully equip the new model with an adequate understanding
of the characteristics about old entity types, leading to confusion when classifying tokens associated with these entity
types. To address this challenge, we propose a novel method
called Prototypical Replay with Old-class Focusing Knowledge Distillation (POF) for INER. Our approach focuses on
preserving the main characteristics of each previous entity
type by storing compact prototypes and replaying them with
appropriate frequency. This replay strategy makes the new
model review the knowledge of old entity types while minimizing storage needs. Additionally, we introduce an old-class
focusing knowledge distillation (OFKD) loss, which distills
features only in old-class regions to maintain the quality of
old-class prototypes and prevent ineffective prototypical replay while preserving sufficient plasticity for learning new
entity types. We conduct experiments on three benchmark
datasets (i.e., Few-NERD, I2B2 and OntoNotes5), and the results demonstrate that our method outperforms all previous
state-of-the-art methods.

1

INER must address a major challenge: catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al. 2013; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Robins 1995), which it inherits
from incremental learning. This occurs because fine-tuning
only on new data can cause previously learned knowledge to
be forgotten. Consequently, previous INER methods (Zhang
et al. 2023a; Zheng et al. 2022; Monaikul et al. 2021; Qiu
et al. 2024) have adopted distillation-based approaches to
effectively tackle this challenge by transferring knowledge
from the old model to the new one. However, these methods
fall short in enabling the new model to fully understand the
characteristics of the old entity types. Because these methods mainly rely on constraints on top-level model parameters and lack the process of relearning low-level features
of old entity types. As the learning steps increase, the new
model will gradually weaken its memory about old entity
types, leading to confusion when classifying tokens from
these entity types and resulting in numerous false positives.
That would mean that a token of an old entity type may
be incorrectly recognized as non-entity type, other old entity types, or new entity types. A simple solution is to save
raw texts of all previous steps and replay them in subsequent
steps, but this way requires a significant amount of storage.

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER) plays a crucial role in
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), benefiting
various downstream applications such as question answering (Li et al. 2019; Longpre et al. 2021), web search (Fetahu
et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2009; Mokhtari et al. 2019), sentiment
analysis (Yasavur et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2018), and more.
NER involves extracting entities from unstructured text and
categorizing them into predefined entity types or non-entity
type (Ma and Hovy 2016). In traditional NER approaches,
it is typically assumed that no new entity types will emerge
during the testing phase, and all predefined entity types are
learned simultaneously during training. However, real-world
scenarios often demand continuous recognition of newly encountered entity types, namely Incremental Named Entity

To address aforementioned issue, we propose a novel
method called Prototypical Replay with Old-class Focusing
Knowledge Distillation (POF) for Incremental Named Entity Recognition (INER). Our method employs a prototypical replay (PR) strategy, which involves the storage of key
information after each training step. Specifically, we retain a
compact prototype for each entity type, generated from associated features, as well as relevant statistical data linked
to these prototypes. This enables the PR strategy to replay
previously learned entity types at strategic intervals during
subsequent steps, facilitating a revisit of old entity types. In
contrast to save and replay raw texts, PR strategy also significantly reduces storage requirements duo to it only stores

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24705

