The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Simple Graph Contrastive Learning Framework for Short Text Classification
Yonghao Liu1 , Fausto Giunchiglia2 , Lan Huang1 , Ximing Li1 ,
Xiaoyue Feng1 * , Renchu Guan1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of the Ministry
of Education, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
University of Trento
yonghao20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, fausto.giunchiglia@unitn.it, liximing86@gmail.com,
{huanglan, fengxy, guanrenchu}@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

nificant research enthusiasm among researchers. Recently,
some studies (Liu et al. 2024b) have explored the combination of graph neural networks (GNNs) and contrastive learning (CL) to address STC tasks, aiming to utilize the strengths
of both to learn informative text features, with impressive
performance. These models generally start by constructing
a corpus-level heterogeneous graph and perform GNNs on it
to obtain text embeddings. Subsequently, they leverage CL
techniques to aim to maximize the utilization of valuable
information contained in numerous unlabeled short texts,
which can facilitate the model to learn discriminative text
representations.
Despite their fruitful success, there are some limitations
that hinder further performance improvements. First, these
models almost need to perform explicit data augmentation
to generate contrastive views of short texts for CL. However,
on the one hand, the optimal data augmentation configuration largely depends on extensive empirical trials, such as
selecting combinations of data augmentations and the hyperparameter settings (Li et al. 2023). Additionally, the increasing number of hyperparameters for data augmentation
exponentially expands the search space for data augmentation approaches, undoubtedly adding significant difficulty.
Therefore, finding an optimal data augmentation configuration requires numerous time and computational resources.
On the other hand, an inappropriate data augmentation can
even have a detrimental effect. Specifically, these models either perform random word insertion or deletion operations
on the original text to obtain augmented text (Chen et al.
2022), or they perform perturbation operations on nodes or
edges of the constructed text graph to obtain augmented one
(Su et al. 2022). However, in either way, it inevitably damages the semantic information of the text and introduces
noise. For example, if we randomly insert a negation word
into a short text like “this is a good movie”, it becomes “this
is a not good movie”. This completely changes the original
semantics and even turning it into a negative sample with
dissimilar semantics, which can have a negative impact on
the subsequent CL, leading to suboptimal results. Hence, a
natural question arises: is there an elegant method to generate contrasting views of text without performing data augmentation?
Second, typically, the information provided by different
views complements each other, allowing the model to cap-

Short text classification has gained significant attention in the
information age due to its prevalence and real-world applications. Recent advancements in graph learning combined with
contrastive learning have shown promising results in addressing the challenges of semantic sparsity and limited labeled
data in short text classification. However, existing models
have certain limitations. They rely on explicit data augmentation techniques to generate contrastive views, resulting in semantic corruption and noise. Additionally, these models only
focus on learning the intrinsic consistency between the generated views, neglecting valuable discriminative information
from other potential views. To address these issues, we propose a Simple graph contrastive learning framework for Short
Text Classification (SimSTC). Our approach involves performing graph learning on multiple text-related component
graphs to obtain multi-view text embeddings. Subsequently,
we directly apply contrastive learning on these embeddings.
Notably, our method eliminates the need for data augmentation operations to generate contrastive views while still leveraging the benefits of multi-view contrastive learning. Despite
its simplicity, our model achieves outstanding performance,
surpassing large language models on various datasets.

Introduction
In the era of information, we are surrounded by large
amounts of short texts, such as tweets, news headlines, and
product reviews. Efficiently extracting valuable information
from short texts is not easy. Compared to regular texts,
on the one hand, short texts typically have limited contextual information and serious semantic sparsity issues (Wang
et al. 2021). They may only contain a few words, which
increases the difficulty of correctly understanding their semantics (Phan, Nguyen, and Horiguchi 2008). On the other
hand, unlabeled short texts far outnumber labeled ones, leading to a severe label scarcity problems (Hu et al. 2019). Short
text classification (STC), as a fundamental task of natural
language processing, has wide applications in real life, such
as sentiment analysis (Liu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2024), social media analysis (Wu et al. 2014; Guan et al. 2021), and
intent recognition (Chen et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2023b). Compared to regular text classification, STC has sparked sig* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19015

