The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diffusion-Based Active Learning for Distributed Client Manifolds
Kwang In Kim
POSTECH
kimkin@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
In privacy-preserving distributed learning environments, data
stored on local clients cannot be shared with other clients or
servers. We consider a new active learning problem setup for
these environments, where the server aims to build a centralized model by distributing labeling budgets across different
clients. Our algorithm identifies which clients and their data
points warrant annotation by estimating the global impact of
the resulting labels. We evaluate this impact by embedding
the clients into the manifold of learner parameters, formed by
the task learner’s predictions on unlabeled data, and diffusing
the reduction in predictive uncertainties caused by labeling.
The algorithm effectively selects clients with high estimated
impact while achieving diversity in client selection, all without accessing local client data. In experiments, our approach
demonstrates substantial advancements when compared to
adaptations of existing active learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Active learning (AL) attempts to optimize the use of limited
labeling budgets by selecting and labeling the most useful
data instances. Typically, AL is initialized with only a few
training data points having ground-truth labels, while the
remaining data points are unlabeled. Then, an AL algorithm
iteratively identifies unlabeled subsets and queries their labels
to an oracle based on the learning progress made by the
learner network, e.g. how uncertain the learner is about its
prediction on unlabeled data.
Beyond centralized learning scenarios, AL can also be
beneficial in distributed collaborative learning environments,
where data is divided among local clients and not shared
externally to ensure data privacy and protection. In such
environments, we envisage an AL scenario where initially,
only a small set of clients possess labeled data. Subsequently,
in each round, an AL algorithm selects a subset of clients and
queries the labels of all or part of each client’s data, while
ensuring no data is shared between clients.
Adapting centralized AL strategies for distributed learning
by selecting clients with the highest average uncertainties of
their local data may appear to be a straightforward approach.
However, this setting is sub-optimal as it does not account
for the relationships between individual clients. The global

model is trained on all labeled data from different clients,
and since these local data are not statistically independent,1
labeling points in one client can influence all clients. To
improve the overall performance of the learner, it is sensible
to select clients that most effectively contribute to reducing
the uncertainty of all clients when labeled.
Assessing the global impact of labeling a client before
selecting labels and training the learner is challenging as the
underlying client relationships are not accessible. Ideally, the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between local data distributions
of clients would serve as a measure of these relationships, but
this information is often not shared among clients. Instead,
we use the learner parameters locally updated by each client
as representations of individual clients and parameter similarities as a proxy for relationships. Using this structure, our
algorithm embeds clients into a graph as a sample approximation of an underlying parameter manifold and assesses the
effect of providing labels of a client node into the entire graph
via conducting anisotropic diffusion therein. This enables us
to trade-off between exploring less populated areas via diffusion and exploiting learners’ progress via their uncertainty
estimates at the client level.
To our knowledge, this represents the first instance of
distributed active learning algorithms focusing on client-level
selection. In experiments with five datasets, our algorithm
demonstrated significant performance improvements over
adaptations of existing AL algorithms.

2

Related Work

Active Learning (AL). Existing approaches can be categorized into three groups (Ren et al. 2022). Distributionbased methods aim to identify subsets of data that cover the
underlying data-generating distributions well. For example,
CoreSet algorithm by (Sener and Savarese 2018) selects data
points that provide even coverage of data distributions, while
(Nguyen and Smeulder 2004) proposed pre-clustering data
to achieve diversity in data selection. (Sinha, Ebrahimi, and
Darrell 2019)’s VAAL attempts to make the distributions of
labeled and unlabeled data identical in a latent space, while
(Guo 2010) maximizes the mutual information between labeled and unlabeled data. These methods are useful in iden1
Otherwise, distributed learning becomes learning separate local
models.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17904

