The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Causal Prompting: Debiasing Large Language Model Prompting Based on
Front-Door Adjustment
Congzhi Zhang* 1 Linhai Zhang* 2 Jialong Wu* 1 Yulan He2, 3 Deyu Zhou†1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer Network
and Information Integration, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, China
2
Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK
3
The Alan Turing Institute, UK
{zhangcongzhi, jialongwu, d.zhou}@seu.edu.cn
{linhai.zhang, yulan.he}@kcl.ac.uk

Original

Abstract
Despite the notable advancements of existing prompting methods, such as In-Context Learning and Chain-of-Thought for
Large Language Models (LLMs), they still face challenges
related to various biases. Traditional debiasing methods primarily focus on the model training stage, including approaches
based on data augmentation and reweighting, yet they struggle with the complex biases inherent in LLMs. To address
such limitations, the causal relationship behind the prompting
methods is uncovered using a structural causal model, and a
novel causal prompting method based on front-door adjustment is proposed to effectively mitigate LLMs biases. In specific, causal intervention is achieved by designing the prompts
without accessing the parameters and logits of LLMs. The
chain-of-thought generated by LLM is employed as the mediator variable and the causal effect between input prompts and
output answers is calculated through front-door adjustment to
mitigate model biases. Moreover, to accurately represent the
chain-of-thoughts and estimate the causal effects, contrastive
learning is used to fine-tune the encoder of chain-of-thought
by aligning its space with that of the LLM. Experimental
results show that the proposed causal prompting approach
achieves excellent performance across seven natural language
processing datasets on both open-source and closed-source
LLMs.

1

IO

ReverseTarget

standard ICL

ReverseNonTarge

CoT

AddDiff

CoT-SC

Figure 1: Performance of different prompting methods on
ABSA (Pontiki et al. 2016) and its adversarial datasets
on LLaMA-7b. ReverseTarget, ReverseNonTarget, and AddDiff denote three different adversarial transformations by
TextFlint (Wang et al. 2021). IO denotes the zero-shot setting
where only the input question outputs the answer.

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable emergent abilities, including In-Context Learning
(ICL) (Brown et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024)
and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022), which allow LLMs to perform natural
language tasks based on only a few instances without weight
updating. These prompting methods have achieved significant
results across many traditional natural language processing
tasks, including sentiment analysis, natural language inference, and machine reading comprehension (Kojima et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25842

However, recent studies have shown that these advanced
prompting methods are not robust enough (Ye et al. 2023)
and can lead LLMs to produce hallucinatory results with
incorrect or unfaithful intermediate reasoning steps (Lyu et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023b; Bao et al. 2024; Turpin et al. 2024;
Wu et al. 2024d,e,c; Qin, Fang, and Xue 2024).
Some studies (Mallen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023d) believe that this phenomenon is due to the a conflict between
the internal knowledge bias of LLMs and the external knowledge. Therefore, an effective solution is to interact with an
external knowledge base to validate and adjust the reasoning
process of LLMs (Wang et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2023).
Moreover, recent work debiases the chain-of-thoughts of
LLMs by incorporating counterfactual knowledge and causal
interventions (Wu et al. 2024a). However, these methods
are specifically tailored for knowledge-intensive tasks. Bias
problems are also observed in other NLP tasks. As shown in
Figure 2, in aspects-based sentiment analysis, mathematical
reasoning, and multi-hop question-answering tasks, LLMs
sometimes overly depend on certain text spans in the prompts,
leading to wrong reasoning and answers. Notably, the first

