The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Guidance: Training-free Acceleration of Conditional Diffusion Models
Angela Castillo1 * , Jonas Kohler2 * , Juan C. Pérez2,3 * , Juan Pablo Pérez1 , Albert Pumarola2 ,
Bernard Ghanem3 , Pablo Arbeláez1 , Ali Thabet2
1

Center for Research and Formation in Artificial Intelligence, Universidad de los Andes
2
GenAI, Meta
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

Abstract

cific criteria such as a class, a text, or an image (Nichol et al.
2021). DMs perform conditional generation by replacing unconditional denoising steps with conditional ones, in which
the neural network processes both the input and the condition. While conditional denoising steps provide competitive
results, Ho et al. proposed Classifier-Free Guidance (C FG)
(Ho and Salimans 2022) as a technique to enhance sample
quality. C FG enriches the conditional denoising process by
leveraging implicit priors of the diffusion model itself. Despite its simplicity, C FG significantly improves sample quality in tasks such as text-to-image generation (Nichol et al.
2021; Peebles and Xie 2023; Dai et al. 2023), image editing (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023; Meng et al. 2021;
Sheynin et al. 2023), and text-to-3D (Poole et al. 2022; Lin
et al. 2023). Yet, the benefits of C FG come at the cost of duplicating the Number of Function Evaluations (NFEs), since
each denoising iteration requires evaluating the neural network both conditionally and unconditionally. Adding to the
problem, neural networks used in practice for DMs exceed
the parallelization capacity of production-grade GPUs. For
instance, with bfloat16 precision and a batch size of 1, an
EMU-768 model requires 1,553 ms on an A100 GPU without C FG and nearly doubles to 2,865 ms with C FG. This fact
prevents simultaneous computation of the conditional and
unconditional function evaluations.
In this paper, we improve the efficiency of text-to-image
DMs that use C FG. Our analysis reveals that not all denoising steps contribute equally to image quality, suggesting that the traditional policy of applying C FG in all steps
is sub-optimal. Instead, we search for policies offering
more desirable trade-offs between quality and NFEs by employing techniques from differentiable neural architecture
search (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018). Our search uncovers that unnecessary function evaluations occur in the latter part of the denoising process. based on this we propose
“Adaptive Guidance” (AG), an adaptive version of C FG that
maintains image quality while reducing NFEs by 25%. See
Fig. 1 for AG’s generation quality.
Compared to the popular alternative of Guidance Distillation (G D) (Meng et al. 2023), AG is easy to implement,
training-free, and preserves the capacity to handle negative
prompts and image conditioning, which are useful capabilities for editing tasks. Finally, we propose L INEAR AG, a fast
version of AG that estimates updates required by AG as a

This paper presents a comprehensive study on the role of
Classifier-Free Guidance (C FG) in text-conditioned diffusion
models from the perspective of inference efficiency. In particular, we relax the default choice of applying C FG in all
diffusion steps and instead propose to search for more efficient guidance policies. We formulate the discovery of such
policies in the framework of differentiable neural architecture
search. Our findings suggest that, as denoising progresses,
the updates produced by C FG become increasingly aligned
with simple conditional steps, which renders C FG’s additional neural network evaluation redundant, especially in the
second half of the denoising process. Building upon this insight, we propose “Adaptive Guidance” (AG), an efficient
variant of C FG that adaptively omits network evaluations
when the denoising process displays convergence. Our experiments demonstrate that AG preserves C FG’s image quality
while reducing computation by 25%. Thus, AG constitutes a
plug-and-play alternative to Guidance Distillation, achieving
50% of the speed-ups of the latter, while being training-free
and retaining the capacity to handle negative prompts. We
conclude by uncovering further redundancies of C FG in the
first half of the diffusion process, showing that entire neural
network evaluations can be replaced by simple affine transformations of past score estimates1 .

Introduction
Diffusion Models (DMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song
et al. 2020) exhibit outstanding generative capacities across
domains such as images (Rombach et al. 2022), video (Ho
et al. 2022a), audio (Kong et al. 2020), human pose estimation (Castillo et al. 2023), and even cosmological simulations (Schanz, List, and Hahn 2023). DMs generate data
by sampling noise and iteratively denoising it with a neural
network. The sequential nature of this denoising operation
makes sampling from DMs a slow and expensive process. In
particular, the time required to sample from a given DM is
a function of (i) the latency of each denoising iteration, and
(ii) the number of denoising steps.
Many practical applications target “conditional generation”, where DMs synthesize samples conditioned on spe* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Find more at bcv-uniandes.github.io/adaptiveguidance-wp/

1962

