The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prediction-Based Adaptive Variable Ordering Heuristics for Constraint
Satisfaction Problems
Jitao Xu1,2 , Yaling Wu1 , Hongbo Li1 * , Minghao Yin1
1

College of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal Univerisity, Changchun, China.
2
Department of Computer Science, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia 23508.
{lihb905, ymh}@nenu.edu.cn

Abstract

that minimizes the size of the search tree is difficult (Liberatore 2000). Therefore, the ordering is usually determined by
variable ordering heuristics (VOH) in practice.

Variable ordering heuristics (VOH) play a central role in
solving Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP). The performance of different VOHs may vary greatly when solving the
same CSP instance, so identifying an efficient candidate VOH
for a given CSP has been a key issue in the community. In this
study, we propose a prediction-based approach to adaptively
select efficient VOHs for different CSPs from a set of candidates. Our work demonstrates that efficient candidate VOHs
can be identified by learning from the topology of search
trees. Specifically, we propose to represent the topology of
a binary search tree by the sequence of the Numbers of Positive Decisions (NPD) made before each failure occurs. Based
on the representation, we predict the total failure number of a
search tree from its beginning part. When solving a CSP, we
run a probing procedure to obtain the NPD sequences generated by candidate VOHs and select an efficient one for the resolution according to the prediction results. Our experiments
show that the Long Short Term Memory model and Gradient Boosting Decision Tree models trained with the search
trees sampled from easy instances are effective in identifying
efficient VOHs for hard instances. The models capture some
common structure properties hidden in the search trees of different problems. Our approach outperforms the state-of-theart adaptive VOHs in terms of the number of solved instances
and the PAR2 score of runtime.

In the past decades, much effort has been made in developing effective variable ordering heuristics (Boussemart
et al. 2004; Refalo 2004; Michel and Van Hentenryck 2012;
Wang, Xia, and Yap 2017; Habet and Terrioux 2019; Wattez
et al. 2019; Li, Yin, and Li 2021; Audemard, Lecoutre, and
Prud’homme 2023). Different VOHs have different performances when solving different problems. The performances
of different VOHs can vary greatly while solving the same
CSP instance. Thus, if we can find the best VOHs for different CSP instances, then the overall performance of blackbox CSP solvers will be significantly improved. In recent
years, adaptive variable ordering heuristics that identify efficient VOHs for different CSP instances have attracted much
attention. For instance, a reinforcement learning technique,
Multi-armed Bandit (MAB), has been used to design adaptive
VOHs for CSPs. Xia and Yap proposed the first MAB-based
adaptive VOH that applies the Upper Confidence Bound algorithm (UCB1) and Thompson Sampling (TS) algorithm to
select a candidate VOH to make a decision at each search
tree node (Xia and Yap 2018). The reward of a candidate
Hi is updated with the numbers of children of the search
tree nodes generated by Hi . Wattez et al. proposed to apply the exponentially weighted forecaster for exploration
and exploitation (EXP3), UCB1 and TS to estimate the best
VOH for given CSPs (Wattez et al. 2020). The method exploits a restart mechanism with the MAB-based framework,
and the candidate VOHs are switched only after restarts.
The Adaptive Single Tournament (AST) algorithm (Koriche
et al. 2022) uses an ingenious strategy utilizing the different
restart cutoffs in Luby sequence (Luby, Sinclair, and Zuckerman 1993) to cope with the exploitation and exploration
of the bandits. It explores different candidates at restart runs
with initial failure limits and exploits efficient ones at restart
runs with increased failure limits. Another approach named
SEVOH (Li et al. 2022) runs a probing procedure to sample search trees built by candidate VOHs and uses a scoring
function considering search tree depth to select an efficient
candidate for the input CSP. The probing procedure is simple yet efficient to solve the instances that are easy for the
candidate VOHs, and the scoring function is effective in selecting candidates to solve some hard CSPs.

Introduction
Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) is one of the foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Many real-world problems
can be modeled with CSP, such as Resource Allocation,
Scheduling, Vehicle Routing, Configuration, etc. A CSP is
NP-hard in its general form. The challenge in a CSP is to
find an assignment of values to all variables that satisfies the
constraints defined over the variables, or otherwise, to prove
that there is no such an assignment. Backtracking search is
a complete method for solving CSPs. It performs a depthfirst traversal of a search tree to solve CSPs. At each node of
the search tree, an unassigned variable is selected to assign
a value. The ordering in which the variables are assigned is
crucial to the efficiency of backtracking search in solving
CSPs. However, determining an optimal variable ordering
* Hongbo Li and Minghao Yin are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11390

