The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DreaMark: Rooting Watermark in Score Distillation Sampling Generated Neural
Radiance Fields
Xingyu Zhu1,2 , Xiapu Luo2 , Xuetao Wei1 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
12150086@mail.sustech.edu.cn, csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk, weixt@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract

Internal Staff

Recent advancements in text-to-3D generation can generate
neural radiance fields (NeRFs) with score distillation sampling, enabling 3D asset creation without real-world data capture. With the rapid advancement in NeRF generation quality,
protecting the copyright of the generated NeRF has become
increasingly important. While prior works can watermark
NeRFs in a post-generation way, they suffer from two vulnerabilities. First, a delay lies between NeRF generation and
watermarking because the secret message is embedded into
the NeRF model post-generation through fine-tuning. Second, generating a non-watermarked NeRF as an intermediate
creates a potential vulnerability for theft. To address both issues, we propose D R E A M A R K to embed a secret message by
backdooring the NeRF during NeRF generation. In detail, we
first pre-train a watermark decoder. Then, D R E A M A R K generates backdoored NeRFs in a way that the target secret message can be verified by the pre-trained watermark decoder
on an arbitrary trigger viewport. We evaluate the generation
quality and watermark robustness against image- and modellevel attacks. Extensive experiments show that the watermarking process will not degrade the generation quality, and
the watermark achieves 90+% accuracy among both imagelevel attacks (e.g., Gaussian noise) and model-level attacks
(e.g., pruning attack).

NeRF Generation

Diffusion
Unet

Leak
Post-generation Watermark
010101
Fine-tuning

Non-watermarked
Watermarked
SDS Guidance
During-generation Watermark
Generation with watermark
Diffusion
Unet
SDS Guidance +

Decoder

Watermarked

Figure 1: Attack scenario. If company-generated content is
considered company property, internal staff could steal nonwatermarked intermediates in the post-generation pipeline
(top row). However, such intermediates do not exist in the
during-generation pipeline (bottom row).

NeRFs. This paper focuses on NeRF generation since NeRF
can represent 3D models more compactly. Given a textual
description, recent text-to-3D methods generate NeRFs by
distilling pre-trained diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022). This remarkable progress is
grounded in the use of Score Distillation Sampling (SDS).
With SDS, NeRF training can be conducted without realistic
images. Thus, the research question we address in this paper
is: how to protect the score distillation sampling generated
neural radiance fields?
One way to protect the generated NeRF is to apply
post-generation watermarking methods, such as CopyRNeRF (Luo et al. 2023) and WateNeRF (Jang et al. 2024),
to watermark NeRF after it is generated. However, these
methods exhibit two problems. First, post-generation methods pose a risk of data leakage. As shown in Figure 1,
since non-watermarked intermediates are generated in the
post-generation pipeline, a malicious user could leak the
non-watermarked version of the generated content. Second,
CopyRNeRF increases the watermarking expense since it
requires an additional message feature field in the NeRF
structure. Integrating CopyRNeRF with an arbitrary text-

Introduction
Digital 3D content has become indispensable in Metaverse
and virtual and augmented reality, enabling visualization,
comprehension, and interaction with complex scenes that
represent our real lives. Recent progress in 3D content generation (Poole et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024;
Liang et al. 2024) can generate high-quality 3D assets that
need a lot of time, computational resources, and skilled expertise. Therefore, protecting the ownership of generated 3D
content has become more critical.
We focus on Text-to-3D generation (Poole et al. 2022;
Lin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024; Liang et al. 2024) and
the neural radiance field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021;
Müller et al. 2022), which have emerged into the spotlight
in 3D content modeling. Current trending 3D generation algorithms generate 3D representations such as meshes and
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11013

