The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-Supervised Multi-View Multi-Label Learning with View-Specific
Transformer and Enhanced Pseudo-Label
Quanjiang Li1 , Tingjin Luo1 * , Mingdie Jiang1 , Zhangqi Jiang1 , Chenping Hou1 , Feijiang Li2
1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, Hunan, China
2
Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, Shanxi, China
liquanjiang@nudt.edu.cn, tingjinluo@hotmail.com, jiangmingdie20@nudt.edu.cn, jiangzq@nudt.edu.cn,
hcpnudt@hotmail.com, fjli@sxu.edu.cn
Abstract

data from cameras, LiDAR, and radar to enhance environmental perception and driving safety (Xin et al. 2023). Besides, multi-view data encompasses abundant perspectives
(Hu et al. 2024b), which can be combined with multi-label
to convey the rich semantic structure of complex data (Xiao
et al. 2024). Therefore, this paper focuses on the multi-view
multi-label classification (MvMLC) task.
For traditional MvMLC methods, they assume that the
given data is complete, which is often violated in practice
(Zhu et al. 2023). Due to the limitation of technical capability and resource cost, the acquisition of perfectly labeled
data is not light-hearted. To handle the issue of insufficient
labels under multi-view, MVEL-ILD (Zhang et al. 2013)
utilized label correlations to achieve consistent outcomes,
while DD-IMvMLC (Wen et al. 2023) introduced a missing indicator matrix to focus on the available label information. These MvMLC methods under incomplete data mainly
address the partial absence of multiple labels, leveraging
the available subset to infer the missing ones. However, in
reality, multi-view data tends to suffer from unlabeled instances. For example, in the healthcare diagnostics (Miller
and Lowengrub 2022), factors such as resource availability,
patient condition diversity, and diagnostic complexity can
result in many records remaining unlabeled, potentially decreasing the diagnostic accuracy and reliability. The numerous views and label categories, coupled with a lack of sufficient labeled samples, severely hinder the information demands of model deployment and inflict a significant blow
to MvMLC methods. Therefore, few methods available today can well address the tricky issue. In fact, solving the
semi-supervised problem primarily involves utilizing large
amounts of unsupervised data and extracting substantial supervised information (Sun et al. 2021). For MvMLC, the
goal is to obtain advanced feature representations that align
with label semantics, establish fine-grained associations between features and specific labels in the limited annotation
space, and uncover internal correlations between label categories and additional annotations with minimal noise.
To tackle these problems, we propose a semi-supervised
multi-view multi-label learning method with view-specific
transformer and enhanced pseudo-label named SMVTEP.
The motivation for SMVTEP arises from the following aspects: 1) The emphasis of multi-view learning is on capturing shared information across various views while pre-

Multi-view multi-label learning has become a research focus for describing objects with rich expressions and annotations. However, real-world data often contains numerous
unlabeled instances, due to the high cost and technical limitations of manual labeling. This crucial problem involves
three main challenges: i) How to extract advanced semantics
from available views? ii) How to build a refined classification
framework with limited labeled space? iii) How to provide
more high-quality supervisory information? To address these
problems, we propose a Semi-Supervised Multi-View MultiLabel Learning Method with View-Specific Transformer and
Enhanced Pseudo-Label named SMVTEP. Specifically, Generative Adversarial Networks are employed to extract informative shared and specific representations and their consistency and distinctiveness are ensured through the adversarial
mechanism and information theory based contrastive learning. Then we build specific classifiers for each extracted feature and apply instance-level manifold constraints to reduce
bias across classifiers. Moreover, we design a transformerstyle fusion approach that simultaneously captures the imbalance of expressive power among views, mapping effects on
specific labels, and label dependencies by incorporating confidence scores and category semantics into the self-attention
mechanism. Furthermore, after using Mixup for data augmentation, category-enhanced pseudo-labels are leveraged to
improve the reliability of additional annotations by aligning
the label distribution of unlabeled samples with the true distribution. Finally, extensive experimental results validate the
effectiveness of SMVTEP against state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Multi-label learning has garnered increasing attention due
to its broad applications in text classification (Chang et al.
2020), image annotation (Sun and Xie 2024), and computer
vision tasks (Jung et al. 2024). Since the proliferation of
data sources and advancements in feature extraction methods, multi-view data has become widely available and provides greater opportunities for comprehensive descriptions
of observed targets (Hu et al. 2023; Guan et al. 2024; Hu
et al. 2024a). For example, autonomous vehicles integrate
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18430

