The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ITP: Instance-Aware Test Pruning for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Haonan Xu1 , Yang Yang1,2 *
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
{xhnxhn, yyang}@njust.edu.cn

1.0

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for ensuring
the reliable deployment of deep models in real-world scenarios. Recently, from the perspective of over-parameterization,
a series of methods leveraging weight sparsification techniques have shown promising performance. These methods
typically focus on selecting important parameters for indistribution (ID) data to reduce the negative impact of redundant parameters on OOD detection. However, we empirically
find that these selected parameters may behave overconfidently toward OOD data and hurt OOD detection. To address
this issue, we propose a simple yet effective post-hoc method
called Instance-aware Test Pruning (ITP), which performs
OOD detection by considering both coarse-grained and finegrained levels of parameter pruning. Specifically, ITP first estimates the class-specific parameter contribution distribution
by exploring the ID data. By using the contribution distribution, ITP conducts coarse-grained pruning to eliminate redundant parameters. More importantly, ITP further adopts a finegrained test pruning process based on the right-tailed Z-score
test, which can adaptively remove instance-level overconfident parameters. Finally, ITP derives OOD scores from the
pruned model to achieve more reliable predictions. Extensive
experiments on widely adopted benchmarks verify the effectiveness of ITP, demonstrating its competitive performance.

0.8

1

Parameter contribution distribution
ID: CIFAR-10 (airplane)
OOD: Textures

Parameter #287

Frequency

Abstract

0.6

0.05

0.4

0.00

0.2
0.0

2

0

2

2

4

6

Overconfidence
4

Contribution

6

8

Figure 1: The distribution of parameter contributions to ID
prediction for the CIFAR-10 class (’airplane’) on both ID
and OOD data. The parameter is selected from the subset
of weight parameters that are important for ID prediction
in the last layer of DenseNet-101, with pre-ReLU activations utilized for visualization. Since the model outputs are
determined by the parameter contribution, overconfident behaviors in the parameters increase the risk of misclassifying
OOD data as ID and hurt OOD detection.
Many techniques have been developed for OOD detection to enhance the discrimination between ID and OOD
data. The training-based methods (Malinin and Gales 2018;
Monteiro et al. 2023; Ghosal, Sun, and Li 2024) necessitate model training or fine-tuning, whereas post-hoc methods (Bendale and Boult 2016; Sun et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022; Yang et al. 2023b, 2024) can be applied directly to
pre-trained models off-the-shelf, eliminating the need for retraining process. This paper primarily focuses on post-hoc
methods, which are easy to use, low-cost, and generally applicable. Early post-hoc methods, such as MSP (Hendrycks
and Gimpel 2017), Energy (Liu et al. 2020), and GradNorm
(Huang, Geng, and Li 2021), focus on devising a suitable
OOD scoring function based on model outputs or gradients
to indicate the likelihood that a sample originates from the
OOD distribution. However, these methods overlook the fact
that DNNs are typically over-parameterized to fit complex
data distributions. This design makes the model more susceptible to noise from redundant parameters (Sun and Li
2022), leading to the brittleness of OOD detection.
To address this issue, a series of post-hoc methods that use

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently achieved remarkable success, driving significant progress in various
fields, particularly in computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2021, 2023a) and natural language processing (Radford et al. 2018; Achiam et al. 2023). However, when deployed in open-world environments, DNNs
may fail by producing confident yet erroneous predictions
for OOD data. Such unreliable behavior could lead to disastrous consequences, particularly in safety-critical fields like
autonomous driving (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012) and
medical diagnosis (Litjens et al. 2017). Therefore, detecting
and rejecting predictions on OOD inputs is crucial for ensuring the reliability of AI systems. This task, referred to as
OOD detection, has gained widespread attention.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21743

