The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PLATYPUS: Progressive Local Surface Estimator for Arbitrary-Scale
Point Cloud Upsampling
Donghyun Kim1 , Hyeonkyeong Kwon2 , Yumin Kim1 , Seong Jae Hwang1 *
1

Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
{danny0103, yumin, seongjae}@yonsei.ac.kr, rhaxod9513@korea.ac.kr
2

Abstract
3D point clouds are increasingly vital for applications like
autonomous driving and robotics, yet the raw data captured
by sensors often suffer from noise and sparsity, creating challenges for downstream tasks. Consequently, point cloud upsampling becomes essential for improving density and uniformity, with recent approaches showing promise by projecting
randomly generated query points onto the underlying surface
of sparse point clouds. However, these methods often result in
outliers, non-uniformity, and difficulties in handling regions
with high curvature and intricate structures. In this work, we
address these challenges by introducing the Progressive Local
Surface Estimator (PLSE), which more effectively captures
local features in complex regions through a curvature-based
sampling technique that selectively targets high-curvature areas. Additionally, we incorporate a curriculum learning strategy that leverages the curvature distribution within the point
cloud to naturally assess the sample difficulty, enabling curriculum learning on point cloud data for the first time. The
experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms existing methods, achieving high-quality,
dense point clouds with superior accuracy and detail.

Input

Dis-PU

Ours

GT

Input

APU-LDI

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Comparative visualization of 4× point cloud upsampling results on PU1K. Point cloud upsampling is the
task of generating a denser point cloud (i.e., rightmost column) that accurately reflects the underlying geometry of a
sparse point cloud (i.e., leftmost column). Our method successfully upsamples intricate areas where existing methods
struggle to perform well.

Introduction
Recently, autonomous driving, robotics, and other technologies that utilize 3D data have attracted significant interest,
leading to the growing popularity of 3D point clouds as a
representation of 3D data. However, the raw point clouds
captured by sensors such as LiDAR, depth cameras often
contain significant noise, and the distribution becomes particularly sparse for points that are farther from the sensor.
Therefore, point cloud upsampling, the task of increasing
the density points of a sparse 3D point cloud to be of dense
(e.g., Fig. 1 sparse Input to dense GT) is vital for effectively
using raw data in tasks like classification and segmentation,
leading to various methods to tackle this challenge.
Starting with early works (Alexa et al. 2003; Lipman
et al. 2007; Huang et al. 2009) that employed optimizationbased methods, the rise of deep learning has led to the proposal of various learning-based methods (Yu et al. 2018; Li
et al. 2019; Qian et al. 2021a), for training point cloud upsampling networks. Existing learning-based methods have

demonstrated excellent performance but they have several
drawbacks. These methods typically split the sparse input
point cloud into multiple patches, upsample each patch, and
then recombine them. This approach (i.e., split-and-combine
process), which fails to consider the relationships between
patches during upsampling, often results in issues such as
holes, outliers, and non-uniformity, especially at the boundaries where the patches are combined.
To address the issues arising from the split-and-combine
process, recent studies (He et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024) have
proposed a pipeline that moves randomly generated points
(i.e., query points) onto the surface that the point cloud
inherently represents. In the upsampling process of this
pipeline, initial query points are generated around the sparse
point cloud (i.e., input point cloud). Next, these query points
are projected onto the underlying surface of the sparse point
cloud. To accurately determine the underlying surface, it is
necessary to know the unsigned distance field of the groundtruth point cloud, but during upsampling, the ground-truth

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4239

