The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motion Decoupled 3D Gaussian Splatting for Dynamic Object Representation
Xiao Hu, Libo Long, Jochen Lang
University of Ottawa, Canada,
{xhu008, llong014, jlang}@uottawa.ca

Abstract

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021)
introduced the volume rendering technique to bridge 3D
scenes with projected 2D images. This differentiable rendering strategy allows NeRF to implicitly represent a 3D scene
with a function based on the view pose, which can be fitted
by a deep learning model.
NeRF represents the scene continuously, enabling highprecision 3D scene generation. However, the main bottleneck of NeRF is the training and rendering costs. The original NeRF requires hours or even days to be trained for a
single scene. Multiple variants of NeRF (Chen et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022, 2023; Yu et al. 2021) have been published
to increase training speed, but it is still challenging to find
the balance between speed and accuracy. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) represents a 3D scene with
a set of 3D Gaussian points and uses a differentiable splatting technique to project the 3D scene into a 2D image. This
approach represents the scene explicitly and saves memory
by describing only the occupied points, making it easier for
visualization and editing. 3D-GS achieves comparable accuracy with NeRF but reduces time complexity significantly,
allowing for real-time rendering.
Various follow-up works to NeRF (Li et al. 2023, 2022a)
explore using NeRF for dynamic scenes. Different 3D
graphic structures, including voxel-grids (Fang et al. 2022;
Shao et al. 2023) and planes (Cao and Johnson 2023;
Fridovich-Keil et al. 2023), have been used to boost the
training speed and provide extra spatial constraints. However, they still suffer from slow processing speeds, and low
accuracy. Dynamic 3D-GS (Wu et al. 2024; Yang et al.
2024b; Sun et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024a; Huang et al. 2024)
incorporate deformation fields into static scenes. These approaches mostly share the fundamental idea of maintaining
a static canonical space to represent the 3D structure and
a time-related deformation field to represent motion. Both
components are optimized together to achieve state-of-theart performance, which leads to potential problems in large
motion scenarios. First, large motion increases the difficulty
of establishing a canonical space. Second, this joint optimization strategy can lead to ambiguities in understanding
large motions and it can easily converge to local minima.
To overcome the limitations of 3D-GS in large motion
scenes, we propose Motion Decoupled Dynamic 3D Gaussian Splatting (M5D-GS), which separates the learning of

Dynamic object modeling is a critical challenge in 3D scene
reconstruction. Previous methods typically maintain a canonical space to represent the object model, and a deformation
field to express the object motion. However, this approach
fails when the object undergoes large motions. The position
variation caused by significant motion not only complicates
the establishment of a canonical space, but also misleads
the interpretation of the deformation field. To overcome the
above weaknesses, we propose Motion Decoupled Dynamic
3D Gaussian Splatting (M5D-GS), the first 3D-GS model that
separates motion and deformation modeling for dynamic object representation with large motion from a monocular camera. M5D-GS increases the practicality of 3D-GS, as it is
common for objects to move, rotate, and deform simultaneously. Current datasets only contain object deformations
with slight motions. We introduce a pipeline to reuse current datasets by adding large motions into the scene. We also
introduce a new benchmark featuring several new synthetic
scenes with complex motions, some scenes augmented from
previous datasets, and some real world recorded scenes. Our
M5D-GS significantly increases the accuracy under large motion while maintaining high rendering speed, which makes it
suitable for dynamic object representation tasks including 4D
novel view synthesis and real-time rendering.

Code — https://github.com/haliphinx/M5D-GS

1

Introduction

3D scene representation is the foundation of many 3D computer vision tasks, including but not limited to novel view
synthesis (Debevec, Yu, and Borshukov 1998), 3D modeling (Schonberger and Frahm 2016), and motion/animation rendering. These tasks are commonly involved in augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and potentially
autonomous driving, where real-time rendering and dynamic objects are two critical challenges. Traditional methods usually use point clouds (Lin, Kong, and Lucey 2018),
meshes (Gao et al. 2020), occupancy grids (Mescheder et al.
2019), or polygons (Nan and Wonka 2017) to represent the
3D scene. Although these representations may provide additional physical attributes, they are either expensive to acquire or lacking precision, especially in dynamic scenes.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3590

