The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymmetric Cross-Modal Hashing Based on Formal Concept Analysis
Yinan Li, Jun Long, Zhan Yang *
Big Data Institute, Central South University, Changsha, China
{liyinan, junlong, zyang22}@csu.edu.cn

Abstract

Zhong et al. 2023) methods depending on whether semantic labels are used or not. In the absence of semantic information, unsupervised methods rely solely on original data
for training the model, resulting in unsatisfactory accuracy.
FSH (Liu et al. 2017) integrates fusion similarity based on
graph structure within the Hamming space to optimize hash
code learning. JIMFH (Wang et al. 2020) derives the semantic representation relations from diverse modalities through
matrix factorization. CUH (Wang et al. 2021a) maps multimodal data into a latent space through multi-view clustering,
enabling the learning of linear hash function, and thus generating compact hash codes. However, the above methods
are unable to capture the actual semantic relevance among
heterogeneous modalities.
In contrast, supervised methods employ semantic annotation to improve the discriminative capacity of hash codes,
leading to superior retrieval performance. SMFH (Liu et al.
2016) establishes the architecture between graph regularization and matrix factorization preserving sample similarity.
SCRATCH (Chen et al. 2020) gets the utmost out of semantic annotation to derive the correlation from diverse modalities, and utilizes the two-step learning strategy to decrease
the training cost of model. With the aid of label information,
recent supervised methods can accurately represent the relevance among multimodal data, and perform superior in semantic alignment. SRLCH (Shen et al. 2021) leverages label
information to adjust the relations within the Hamming subspace and utilizes a symmetric framework to minimize the
gap between binary representation and corresponding correlations, ensuring similar data that come from diverse modalities are positioned nearer to one another within the Hamming space. The label is regarded as an additional modality in conjunction with image and text in BATCH (Wang
et al. 2021b), facilitating the embedding of similar information into binary codes through the minimization of distance
discrepancy. ASCSH (Meng et al. 2021) factorizes the projection matrix into common and specific components to investigate the inherent correlations among diverse types of
data through the asymmetric framework. DSCMH (Sun et al.
2024a) mimics human beings in constructing hashing algorithms from “easy” to “hard” and thus can reduce the negative impact of the learning process.
Although the above methods have achieved considerable results, humanized similarity reconstruction schemes

Hashing has been widely applied in large-scale multimodal
retrieval by mapping heterogeneous modalities data into binary codes. However, most cross-modal hashing methods
cannot make the most of semantic information to construct
the association relations of sample pairs, resulting in unsatisfactory retrieval accuracy. Concept lattice is a powerful
tool for data mining and information retrieval, and for all we
know, this is the first time to combine formal concept analysis
and hash learning to improve cross-modal hashing retrieval
performance. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for
Asymmetric Cross-modal Hashing based on Formal Concept
Analysis, denoted as ACHFCA. Initially, a flash-projection
three-layer semantic enhancement descriptor is designed to
extract latent representations from heterogeneous modalities.
Subsequently, an asymmetric hash learning framework is established to enhance the semantics of different layers based
on the fine-grained similarity values reconstructed from concept lattice to reinforce the discriminative competence of the
model. Finally, an effective discrete optimization algorithm
is proposed, which can directly learn compact hash codes.
Comprehensive experiments on MIRFlickr, NUS-WIDE and
IAPR-TC12 datasets demonstrate the superior performance
of ACHFCA to state-of-the-art hashing approaches.

Introduction
With the explosive increase in multimodal data, conventional information retrieval methodologies are encountering
significant obstacles (Bin et al. 2023; Song, Chen, and Jiang
2023; Zhao et al. 2023). To improve retrieval efficiency,
hashing-based encoding mechanisms have become popular,
particularly for dealing with data from diverse modalities
(Liu et al. 2023; Tu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b). Hashing
intends to project high-dimensional data into binary formats
within a Hamming space, by which sample similarity is calculated via Hamming distances. Taking advantage of the
above benefits, researchers have designed plenty of crossmodal hashing approaches from various perspectives.
Existing cross-modal hashing can be separated into supervised (Luo et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2024b)
and unsupervised (Liu et al. 2020; Li, Zheng, and Sun 2022;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1392

