The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Reasoning Networks: Efficient Interpretable Neural Networks with
Automatic Textual Explanations
Stephen Carrow1 , Kyle Erwin1 , Olga Vilenskaia1 , Parikshit Ram1 ,
Tim Klinger1 , Naweed Khan1 , Ndivhuwo Makondo1 , Alexander G. Gray2
1

IBM,
Centaur AI Institute
{steve.carrow, kyle.erwin, olga.vilenskaia, parikshit.ram, naweed.khan, ndivhuwo.makondo}@ibm.com,
tklinger@us.ibm.com, alexander.gray@centaurinstitute.org
2

Abstract

P1

Recent advances in machine learning have led to a surge in
adoption of neural networks for various tasks, but lack of
interpretability remains an issue for many others in which
an understanding of the features influencing the prediction
is necessary to ensure fairness, safety, and legal compliance.
In this paper we consider one class of such tasks, tabular
dataset classification, and propose a novel neuro-symbolic architecture, Neural Reasoning Networks (NRN), that is scalable and generates logically sound textual explanations for
its predictions. NRNs are connected layers of logical neurons
that implement a form of real valued logic. A training algorithm (R-NRN) learns the weights of the network as usual
using gradient descent optimization with backprop, but also
learns the network structure itself using a bandit-based optimization. Both are implemented in an extension to PyTorch
that takes full advantage of GPU scaling and batched training. Evaluation on a diverse set of 22 open-source datasets for
tabular classification demonstrates performance (measured
by ROC AUC) which improves over Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) and is statistically similar to other state-of-the-art approaches such as Random Forest, XGBoost and Gradient
Boosted Trees, while offering 43% faster training and a more
than 2 orders of magnitude reduction in the number of parameters required, on average. Furthermore, R-NRN explanations
are shorter than the compared approaches while producing
more accurate feature importance scores.

1

P2
P3

..
.

∧1

∨1

..
.

..
.

∧n

∧1

∨n

Pm
Figure 1: A two layer sparsely connected NRN for the RNRN training algorithm with dropped edges in red.

2016) have been shown to be susceptible to adversarial attacks (Yuan and Dasgupta 2023; Slack et al. 2020) and fail
to effectively explain neural networks and generalized additive models (GAMs) (Carmichael and Scheirer 2023). As
a result, these post-hoc explainers can produce misleading
explanations, especially when users misunderstand or over
trust them. Recent work even considers the use of black-box
models to explain other black-box models, such as with a
pre-trained LLM (Kroeger et al. 2023) or Diffusion model
(Madaan and Bedathur 2023), further obfuscating the explanation generation process.
One potential solution to address these drawbacks is
to use inherently interpretable models, which can produce
their own explanations that faithfully represent the model’s
computation (Rudin 2019). This approach is explored in,
for example, Neural Additive Models (NAM) (Agarwal
et al. 2021), and CoFrNet (CFN) (Puri et al. 2021), which
have performance that is statistically similar to deep-treeensemble-based methods that are known to perform well for
tabular classification.
However, inherently interpretable models are not all equal
in their explanation quality, predictive accuracy, or practical
utility such as training speed or parameter counts. For example, our experiments show that the best NAM and CFN models after hyper-parameter tuning have approximately 861K
and 37K parameters respectively. In this paper, we introduce
the NRN architecture and the R-NRN supervised classifi-

Introduction

Classifying tabular data has long been a fundamental task
in ML/AI and recent advances in AI have led to increased
adoption in various industries, but the complexity of these
systems has made them black boxes that are difficult to understand and interpret (Adadi and Berrada 2018; Linardatos,
Papastefanopoulos, and Kotsiantis 2021; Barredo Arrieta
et al. 2020). This lack of transparency is a major obstacle
to the adoption of AI in sensitive domains such as healthcare, and increasingly practitioners and researchers aim to
explain black-box model predictions (Rudin 2019). A variety of tools have been designed towards that end (Guidotti
et al. 2018), however popular methods such as SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017) and LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15669

