The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evaluating Mathematical Reasoning Beyond Accuracy
Shijie Xia1,2,5 , Xuefeng Li1,2,5 , Yixin Liu3 , Tongshuang Wu4 * , Pengfei Liu1,2,5 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Yale University
4
Carnegie Mellon University
5
Generative AI Research Lab (GAIR)
{shijiexia, xuefengli, pengfei}@sjtu.edu.cn, yixin.liu@yale.edu, sherryw@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract
The leaderboard of Large Language Models (LLMs) in mathematical tasks has been continuously updated. However, the
majority of evaluations focus solely on the final results, neglecting the quality of the intermediate steps. This oversight
can mask underlying problems, such as logical errors or unnecessary steps in the reasoning process. To measure reasoning
beyond final-answer accuracy, we introduce R EASON E VAL, a
new methodology for evaluating the quality of reasoning steps.
R EASON E VAL employs validity and redundancy to characterize the reasoning quality, as well as accompanying LLMs
to assess them automatically. We explore different design
options for the LLM-based evaluators and empirically demonstrate that R EASON E VAL, when instantiated with base models
possessing strong mathematical knowledge and trained with
high-quality labeled data, consistently outperforms baseline
methods in the meta-evaluation datasets. We also highlight
the strong generalization capabilities of R EASON E VAL. By
utilizing R EASON E VAL to evaluate LLMs specialized in math,
we find that an increase in final-answer accuracy does not necessarily guarantee an improvement in the overall quality of the
reasoning steps for challenging mathematical problems. Additionally, we observe that R EASON E VAL can play a significant
role in data selection. We open-source the best-performing
model, meta-evaluation script, and all evaluation results to
facilitate future research.

Code — https://github.com/GAIR-NLP/ReasonEval

1

Introduction

Mathematical reasoning, a core cognitive skill, is crucial
for resolving complex problems and making informed decisions (Hendrycks et al. 2021; Lewkowycz et al. 2022),
playing a significant role in large language models (LLMs)
research (Azerbayev et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2023). Given its
significance, reliably evaluating mathematical reasoning in
LLMs becomes crucial. Current methodologies to evaluate
mathematical reasoning in LLMs focus primarily on the final
result (Luo et al. 2023; Chern et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023),
neglecting the intricacies of the reasoning process. For example, the OpenLLM leaderboard, a relatively well-recognized
benchmark for LLMs, uses overall accuracy to assess models’
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27723

mathematical reasoning. Despite being effective to some degree, such evaluation practice could mask underlying issues
such as logical errors or unnecessary steps that compromise
accuracy and efficiency of reasoning steps. In this work, we
argue that a desirable evaluation criterion for mathematical
reasoning encompasses not only the accuracy of the final
answer but also the correctness and efficiency of each step
in the reasoning process. Moreover, it is imperative that the
evaluation metrics be open-source and replicable to ensure
transparency and reliability.
Our design philosophy stems from the fact that a correct
final answer does not guarantee a flawless reasoning process (Lewkowycz et al. 2022; Uesato et al. 2022), and excessive or irrelevant reasoning steps can lead to potential errors
as well as increased computational costs (Zhang et al. 2023).
Once these issues go unnoticed, they can cause problems in
many application scenarios. For example, in K12 mathematics education, incorrect or redundant solution steps provided
by LLMs could mislead students. There have been some
recent works related to the above evaluation principle. Specifically, Uesato et al. (2022); Lightman et al. (2023); Wang
et al. (2023) present process reward models for mathematical
reasoning, which focus on their utility as verifiers (Cobbe
et al. 2021) to boost the accuracy (i.e., by generating many
candidate solutions and selecting the one ranked highest by
the verifier), leaving its underlying potential to identify reasoning errors and redundancy. Clinciu, Eshghi, and Hastie
(2021); Golovneva et al. (2022) rely on embedding-based
methods to measure the quality of general reasoning explanation, which has limitations in handling diverse reasoning
steps from various models.
In response to these challenges, we propose R EA SON E VAL, a suite comprising a new evaluation methodology
with defined metrics for assessing mathematical reasoning
quality and corresponding LLM-based evaluators for automated calculation. As illustrated in Figure 1, R EASON E VAL
emphasizes the validity (i.e., the step contains no mistakes
in calculation and logic) of each reasoning step, and evaluates the redundancy (i.e., the step lacks utility in solving
the problem but is still valid) of steps to ensure efficiency.
We explore different design options for the LLM-based evaluators and show training such a high-quality evaluator for
mathematical reasoning is not a straightforward task, which
requires an LLM with strong mathematical knowledge as

