The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Re-Attentional Controllable Video Diffusion Editing
Yuanzhi Wang1,2 , Yong Li1,3 , Mengyi Liu2 , Xiaoya Zhang1, * ,
Xin Liu4 , Zhen Cui1, * , Antoni B. Chan3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Department of Content Security, Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
SeetaCloud, Nanjing, China
Source Video

Abstract

Two dolphins are swimming in the blue ocean.

Ours

Common Method

Editing videos with textual guidance has garnered popularity
due to its streamlined process which mandates users to solely
edit the text prompt corresponding to the source video. Recent studies have explored and exploited large-scale text-toimage diffusion models for text-guided video editing, resulting in remarkable video editing capabilities. However, they
may still suffer from some limitations such as mislocated objects, incorrect number of objects. Therefore, the controllability of video editing remains a formidable challenge. In this
paper, we aim to challenge the above limitations by proposing a Re-Attentional Controllable Video Diffusion Editing
(ReAtCo) method. Specially, to align the spatial placement
of the target objects with the edited text prompt in a trainingfree manner, we propose a Re-Attentional Diffusion (RAD) to
refocus the cross-attention activation responses between the
edited text prompt and the target video during the denoising
stage, resulting in a spatially location-aligned and semantically high-fidelity manipulated video. In particular, to faithfully preserve the invariant region content with less border
artifacts, we propose an Invariant Region-guided Joint Sampling (IRJS) strategy to mitigate the intrinsic sampling errors
w.r.t the invariant regions at each denoising timestep and constrain the generated content to be harmonized with the invariant region content. Experimental results verify that ReAtCo
consistently improves the controllability of video diffusion
editing and achieves superior video editing performance.

A jellyfish and a goldfish are swimming in the blue ocean,
with the jellyfish is to the left of the goldfish.

Figure 1: Edited samples from the common video diffusion
editing method (classic Tune-A-Video (Wu et al. 2023a) as
an example) and our proposed ReAtCo.

(T2I) (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022) and text-tovideo (T2V) (Ho et al. 2022a; Blattmann et al. 2023) generation capabilities, which provides a great opportunity to
manipulate video content via text guidance. To edit videos
with low computational costs, some studies utilize largescale pretrained T2I diffusion models, e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) to develop various text-guided
video editing methods (Wu et al. 2023a; Qi et al. 2023).
The main idea of these methods is to flatten the temporal
dimensionality of the source video and diffuse the flattened
video into noise, and then the inverted noise is gradually
denoised to the edited videos by the T2I-based video diffusion editing model under the condition of the edited text
prompt. Moreover, due to the inherent absence of temporal awareness in T2I diffusion models, off-the-shelf methods tend to incorporate some additional modules or mechanisms to construct a well-designed video diffusion editing
model, thus preserving the temporal consistency of edited
videos. For example, Tune-A-Video (Wu et al. 2023a) incorporated the temporal attention modules and spatio-temporal
attention modules into the T2I models for temporal coherence. FateZero (Qi et al. 2023) proposed a fusing attention
mechanism to fuse the attention maps from the diffusion and

Code — https://github.com/mdswyz/ReAtCo
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11710

Introduction
Text-guided video editing is a specialized facet of content
creation, which can edit video content, including but not limited to manipulating objects, changing backgrounds, by manipulating the text prompt describing the source video. This
task exemplifies the potential to augment and polish content
within diverse domains, encompassing advertising design,
marketing, and social media content (Zhao et al. 2023).
Recently, diffusion-based generative paradigm (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020) has shown astonishing text-to-image
* Corresponding authors: Xiaoya Zhang and Zhen Cui
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8123

