The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S³-Mamba: Small-Size-Sensitive Mamba for Lesion Segmentation
Gui Wang1,2 , Yuexiang Li3 , Wenting Chen4 , Meidan Ding1 , Wooi Ping Cheah2 , Rong Qu5 ,
Jianfeng Ren2 * , Linlin Shen1 *
1

Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham Ningbo China, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China
3
Medical AI ReSearch (MARS) Group, University Engineering Research Center of Digital Medicine and Healthcare, Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China
4
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
5
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom
scxgw1@nottingham.edu.cn, yuexiang.li@sr.gxmu.edu.cn, wentichen7-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,
dingmeidan2023@email.szu.edu.cn, wooi-ping.cheah@nottingham.edu.cn, rong.qu@nottingham.ac.uk,
jianfeng.ren@nottingham.edu.cn, llshen@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
Small lesions play a critical role in early disease diagnosis
and intervention of severe infections. Popular models often
face challenges in segmenting small lesions, as it occupies
only a minor portion of an image, while down-sampling operations may inevitably lose focus on local features of small
lesions. To tackle the challenges, we propose a Small-SizeSensitive Mamba (S³-Mamba), which promotes the sensitivity to small lesions across three dimensions: channel, spatial,
and training strategy. Specifically, an Enhanced Visual State
Space block is designed to focus on small lesions through
multiple residual connections to preserve local features, and
selectively amplify important details while suppressing irrelevant ones through channel-wise attention. A Tensor-based
Cross-feature Multi-scale Attention is designed to integrate
input image features and intermediate-layer features with
edge features and exploit the attentive support of features
across multiple scales, thereby retaining spatial details of
small lesions at various granularities. Finally, we introduce a
novel regularized curriculum learning to automatically assess
lesion size and sample difficulty, and gradually focus from
easy samples to hard ones like small lesions. Extensive experiments on three medical image segmentation datasets show
the superiority of our S³-Mamba, especially in segmenting
small lesions.

Figure 1: Segmentation results of CNN-based Unet (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015), transformere-based
H2Former (He et al. 2023), Mamba-based VmUnet (Ruan
and Xiang 2024), and the proposed S3 -Mamba for lesions of
varying sizes. All models perform well in segmenting large
and medium lesions, but S3 -Mamba exhibits superior performance in segmenting small lesions, capturing fine details
and contours of small lesions with higher accuracy.

Existing models for medical image segmentation such as
U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015), ViTSeg (Du
et al. 2023), and MedT (Valanarasu et al. 2021; Tang et al.
2022) have made significant strides in segmenting large objects in medical images. However, these models often struggle with the segmentation of small lesions. Fig. 1 shows the
results of several models for segmenting lesions. It is evident
that small lesions are inaccurately segmented due to their
subtle textures and morphology. A key challenge arises from
the common down-sampling operations in network architectures, which unintentionally eliminates crucial local features
associated with small lesions. As these lesions only occupy
a small portion of the image, they may be overlooked or inadequately represented in the segmentation output, requiring
more advanced techniques to handle small lesions.
To tackle the challenges, we propose a Small-SizeSensitive Mamba (S3 -Mamba) to effectively and efficiently
segment small lesions. In view of the balance performance
of Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023) between accuracy and speed,

Introduction
As the earliest indicators of severe diseases, small lesions
play a pivotal role in clinical outcomes, where timely and
precise identification can dramatically improve patient prognosis (Qureshi et al. 2023). These lesions, despite their small
size, often signal the onset of significant health issues, making their segmentation essential for effective treatment planning (de Teresa-Trueba et al. 2023; Ma and Wang 2023).
Many images from different modalities in medical imaging
(Greenwald et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2024) contain numerous
lesions that occupy less than 10% of the image area (Duering
et al. 2023; Ali et al. 2023), e.g., early tumors, micrometastases in lymph nodes, and small vascular abnormalities.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Corresponding Authors: Linlin Shen and Jianfeng Ren.

7655

