The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SUMO: Search-Based Uncertainty Estimation for Model-Based Offline
Reinforcement Learning
Zhongjian Qiao1 , Jiafei Lyu1 , Kechen Jiao1 , Qi Liu 2 , Xiu Li 1
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{qzj22, lvjf20, jkc22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, qiliu8827@stu.hit.edu.cn, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The performance of offline reinforcement learning (RL) suffers from the limited size and quality of static datasets.
Model-based offline RL addresses this issue by generating synthetic samples through a dynamics model to enhance overall performance. To evaluate the reliability of the
generated samples, uncertainty estimation methods are often employed. However, model ensemble, the most commonly used uncertainty estimation method, is not always
the best choice. In this paper, we propose a Search-based
Uncertainty estimation method for Model-based Offline RL
(SUMO) as an alternative. SUMO characterizes the uncertainty of synthetic samples by measuring their cross entropy
against the in-distribution dataset samples, and uses an efficient search-based method for implementation. In this way,
SUMO can achieve trustworthy uncertainty estimation. We
integrate SUMO into several model-based offline RL algorithms including MOPO and Adapted MOReL (AMOReL),
and provide theoretical analysis for them. Extensive experimental results on D4RL datasets demonstrate that SUMO can
provide accurate uncertainty estimation and boost the performance of base algorithms. These indicate that SUMO could
be a better uncertainty estimator for model-based offline RL
when used in either reward penalty or trajectory truncation.

Figure 1: Left: The key idea of SUMO. For a synthetic sample, we calculate its KNN distance within the dataset as the
uncertainty estimation. Right: An example of combining
SUMO with AMOReL for trajectory truncation. Thanks to
the accurate uncertainty estimation provided by SUMO, the
agent can explore ID regions while avoiding OOD regions.

these samples. This significantly enhances the performance
and generalization of the agent. However, synthetic samples generated by the dynamics model may not be reliable
(Lyu, Li, and Lu 2022), as the dynamics model’s reliability
in OOD regions is not guaranteed. Training the policy with
unreliable samples can lead to a performance decline. Therefore, evaluating the reliability of generated samples is critical. It is common to assess the reliability with uncertainty
estimation (Lockwood and Si 2022; An et al. 2021). Current model-based offline RL methods often employ model
ensemble-based techniques for uncertainty estimation, such
as max aleatoric (Yu et al. 2020) and max pairwise diff (Kidambi et al. 2020). Subsequently, the estimated uncertainty
can be used for trajectory truncation (Kidambi et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2023b) or reward penalties (Yu et al. 2020) to
mitigate OOD issues. However, model ensemble-based uncertainty estimation methods may be unreliable (Yu et al.
2021) because the models can be poorly learned, making
their uncertainty estimation questionable. We wonder: Can
we design a better uncertainty estimation method for modelbased offline RL?
In this paper, we propose a Search-based Uncertainty
estimation method for Model-based Offline RL (SUMO).
SUMO characterizes the uncertainty of synthetic samples as
the cross entropy between model dynamics and true dynamics, which can be shown as a more reasonable uncertainty

Code — https://github.com/qzj-debug/SUMO.git

Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al. 2020; Prudencio, Maximo, and Colombini 2023) aims to learn the optimal policy from a static dataset collected in advance, avoiding the risks and costs associated with environmental interaction in typical RL (Sutton and Barto 2018). Nevertheless,
since the datasets cannot cover the entire state-action space,
the offline agent cannot accurately estimate the Q-value for
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, ultimately leading to a
degradation in the agent’s performance.
Model-based offline RL (Yu et al. 2020, 2021; Kidambi
et al. 2020) employs a promising idea to address OOD issues. By leveraging an environmental dynamics model obtained by supervised learning, the agent can collect samples within the dynamics model and train the policy using
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20033

