The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Inductive Learning of Logical Theories with LLMs:
An Expressivity-graded Analysis
João Pedro Gandarela de Souza1 , Danilo Carvalho2 , André Freitas1,2,3
1

Idiap Research Institute
National Biomarker Centre, CRUK-MI, University of Manchester
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
{firstname.lastname}@idiap.ch, {firstname.lastname}@manchester.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Still, the properties delivered by LLMs w.r.t. inductive learning, in particular regarding logic rules and theory induction,
are not well understood and quantified.
This paper presents a systematic methodology to evaluate the inductive learning properties (in the context of logic
theory induction) of LLMs. It is aimed at answering the following research questions (RQs):
RQ1. To what extent the combination of an LLM with feedback from a formal inference engine can compare to a SOTA
inductive logic programming (ILP) system in logic theory
induction, w.r.t. inference quality at different expressivity
levels?
RQ2. How does the expressivity of the target theories affect
inference quality of LLMs for inductive reasoning?

This work presents a novel systematic methodology to analyse the capabilities and limitations of Large Language Models (LLMs) with feedback from a formal inference engine,
on logic theory induction. The analysis is complexity-graded
w.r.t. rule dependency structure, allowing quantification of
specific inference challenges on LLM performance. Integrating LLMs with formal methods is a promising frontier in
the Natural Language Processing field, as an important avenue for improving model inference control and explainability. In particular, inductive learning over complex sets of facts
and rules, poses unique challenges for current autoregressive
models, as they lack explicit symbolic grounding. While they
can be complemented by formal systems, the properties delivered by LLMs regarding inductive learning, are not well
understood and quantified. Empirical results indicate that the
largest LLMs can achieve competitive results against a SOTA
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) system baseline, but also
that tracking long predicate relationship chains is a more difficult obstacle than theory complexity for LLMs.

In order to address these RQs, we propose a method
for combining iterative theory refinement on stock LLMs
(i.e., zero-shot inference (Brown et al. 2020; Radford et al.
2019)), a formal ILP inference engine and a synthetic generator for inductive reasoning datasets, in order to perform
systematic evaluations of the LLM induced theories, using
state-of-the-art ILP solvers as a baseline. Moreover, to quantify the extent in which LLMs can address ILP tasks, the
evaluation is graded w.r.t. the expressivity of the target rulesets. Figure 1 schematises the proposed approach.
This work’s main contributions are as follows:

Introduction
The integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) with formal methods stands out as a promising frontier in the field
of Natural Language Processing. It is an avenue for improving model inference control and explainability, by both complementing the content flexibility of Large Language Models (LLMs) with the systematicity of symbolic/formal systems (Quan et al. 2024a,b) and by using well-defined formal
settings to assess the underlying inference properties of the
model.
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) is a subfield of symbolic AI which focuses on methods that can derive (generalise) theories to explain observed facts and rules (Muggleton 1991; Nienhuys-Cheng and de Wolf 1997). Addressing
inductive learning over complex sets of facts and rules, poses
unique challenges for current autoregressive LLMs, as they
do not operate over data symbolically, rather combining an
extensive set of structural an semantic signals to approximate the most probable answer in a generative fashion.
While such means of problem solving might lack explicit
symbolic grounding, LLMs can leverage its large-scale internal representation to support inductive-style inference.

1. (Methodological) A novel method for systematic evaluation of LLM induced logic theories with feedback from a
formal inference engine.
2. (Empirical) A detailed empirical analysis on the
strengths and limitations of SOTA LLMs regarding logic
theory induction generation, according to target ruleset
expressivity.
3. (Resources) A reusable and extensible framework for extending and assessing the inductive capabilities of LLMs.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section “Inductive Learning, Expressive Power & Datasets”
formalises the relevant ILP concepts, dataset generation, and
LLM used in the paper. Section “Proposed Approach” describes the proposed method and algorithms. Section “Experiments” presents the experimental procedures, results and
discussion, followed by related work and conclusions.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23752

