The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M2OST: Many-to-one Regression for Predicting Spatial Transcriptomics from
Digital Pathology Images
Hongyi Wang1 , Xiuju Du2 , Jing Liu2 , Shuyi Ouyang1 , Yen-Wei Chen3* , Lanfen Lin1*
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
3
Ritsumeikan University, Osaka, Japan
chen@is.ritsumei.ac.jp, llf@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

…

5×

The advancement of Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) has facilitated the spatially-aware profiling of gene expressions based
on histopathology images. Although ST data offers valuable
insights into the micro-environment of tumors, its acquisition
cost remains expensive. Therefore, directly predicting the ST
expressions from digital pathology images is desired. Current
methods usually adopt existing regression backbones along
with patch-sampling for this task, which ignores the inherent multi-scale information embedded in the pyramidal data
structure of digital pathology images, and wastes the interspot visual information crucial for accurate gene expression
prediction. To address these limitations, we propose M2OST,
a many-to-one regression Transformer that can accommodate the hierarchical structure of the pathology images via
a decoupled multi-scale feature extractor. Unlike traditional
models that are trained with one-to-one image-label pairs,
M2OST uses multiple images from different levels of the digital pathology image to jointly predict the gene expressions
in their common corresponding spot. Built upon our manyto-one scheme, M2OST can be easily scaled to fit different
numbers of inputs, and its network structure inherently incorporates nearby inter-spot features, enhancing regression
performance. We have tested M2OST on three public ST
datasets and the experimental results show that M2OST can
achieve state-of-the-art performance with fewer parameters
and floating-point operations (FLOPs).

10×
…

…
40×
Tissue

Tissue

Scanning
(a)

Spot Sampling & Profiling
(b)

WSI

ST Map

Figure 1: (a) WSIs are obtained by scanning the glass slide
tissues at different magnifications, resulting in a multi-scale
pyramid data structure. (b) ST maps are generated by sampling spots on the glass slide tissues, followed by comprehensive profiling of gene expressions within each spot.

Code — https://github.com/Dootmaan/M2OST
Mrabah et al. 2023), ST technologies have been developed
recently, facilitating such spatially-aware profiling of gene
expressions within tissues (Rodriques et al. 2019; Lee et al.
2021; Bressan, Battistoni, and Hannon 2023).
A detailed illustration of the acquisition process of WSIs
and ST maps is presented in Figure 1. As shown, WSIs are
obtained by scanning the glass slide tissues at various magnification factors, resulting in a multi-scale hierarchical data
structure (Ryu et al. 2023). Correspondingly, ST maps are
obtained by firstly sampling spots with a fixed interval on
the glass slide tissues. Each spot contains two to dozens
of cells depending on different ST technologies (Song and
Su 2021). Subsequently, the accumulated gene expressions
of the cells within the spots are profiled, forming a spatial
gene expression map. Such gene expression maps can be
used along with their corresponding WSIs for multi-modal
computational pathology analysis, leading to higher perfor-

Introduction
Digital pathology images, as a kind of Whole Slide Images (WSIs), have witnessed widespread utilization in research nowadays, as they can be more easily stored and analyzed compared to traditional glass slides (Niazi, Parwani,
and Gurcan 2019). However, besides the spatial organization of cells presented in these pathology images, the spatial variance of gene expressions is also very important for
unraveling the intricate transcriptional architecture of multicellular organisms (Rao et al. 2021; Tian, Chen, and Macosko 2023; Cang et al. 2023). As the extended technologies
of single-cell RNA sequencing (Kolodziejczyk et al. 2015;
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7709

