The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Provable Discriminative Hyperspherical Embedding
for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Zhipeng Zou1,2,3 , Sheng Wan1,2,3 * , Guangyu Li1,2,3 , Bo Han4 ,
Tongliang Liu5 , Lin Zhao1,2,3 , Chen Gong6 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, China
3
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, China
4
Hong Kong Baptist University, China
5
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney
6
Department of Automation, Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
chen.gong@sjtu.edu.cn, wansheng315@hotmail.com

2

Abstract

(OOD) examples that deviate from the training distribution (Rawat and Wang 2017). As a result, the model will
be confused and incorrectly attribute the OOD examples into
ID classes, leading to risks in practically implementing AI
algorithms (Ulmer, Meijerink, and Cinà 2020; Yang et al.
2022).

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to identify the test
examples that do not belong to the distribution of training data.
The distance-based methods, which identify OOD examples
based on their distances from the centroids of in-distribution
(ID) examples, have demonstrated promising OOD detection
performance. However, the objectives utilized in prior approaches are typically designed for classification and thus
might not yield sufficient discriminative power to distinguish
between ID and OOD examples. Therefore, this paper proposes a prototype-based contrastive learning framework for
OOD detection, which is termed provable Discriminative
Hyperspherical Embedding (DHE). The proposed framework
provides a theoretical analysis of inter-class dispersion, which
is proved to be fundamental in reducing the false positive
rate (FPR) on OOD examples. Based on this, we devise an
angular spread loss to achieve the maximal dispersion of the
prototypes of different classes prior to training. Subsequently,
a prototype-enhanced contrastive loss is introduced to align
embeddings of ID examples closely with their corresponding prototypes. In our proposed DHE, the maximal prototype
dispersion is theoretically proved, thereby avoiding the pitfalls of local optima commonly encountered by most existing
methods. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed DHE, which showcases a remarkable reduction in FPR95 (i.e., 5.37% on CIFAR-100) and more than
doubling the computational efficiency when compared with
the state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/Canoeszzp/DHE.

Introduction
Machine learning models are typically trained with the implicit assumption that training data and test data share the
same distribution, which forms in-distribution (ID) scenario.
However, in many practical scenarios, a deployed neural
model could be inevitably exposed to the out-of-distribution
* Corresponding authors: Chen Gong, Sheng Wan.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13483

To mitigate the risk caused by OOD data, OOD detection has been developed, which aims to determine whether
an input example is ID or OOD. The existing OOD detection techniques can be roughly divided into four main
types, i.e., the confidence score-based methods (Hendrycks
and Gimpel 2017; Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018; Liu et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2022; Morteza and Li 2022), the densitybased methods (Grathwohl et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2019),
data augmentation-based methods (DeVries and Taylor 2017;
Yun et al. 2019; Tack et al. 2020; Hendrycks et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2023; Vishwakarma, Lin, and Vinayak 2024), and
the distance-based methods (Lee et al. 2018; Sehwag, Chiang, and Mittal 2020; Sun et al. 2022; Ming et al. 2023;
Lu et al. 2024). Among these, the distance-based methods
have shown very encouraging performance by assuming that
OOD examples should be distant from the clusters of ID
data in the embedding space. This assumption enables the
learning of discriminative embeddings, which facilitates the
accurate identification of OOD examples. Previous methods, such as SSD+ (Sehwag, Chiang, and Mittal 2020) and
KNN+ (Sun et al. 2022), directly employ the existing contrastive loss (i.e., SupCon) (Khosla et al. 2020) to structurize
the embedding space. However, since SupCon loss is not
designed specifically for OOD detection tasks, it might not
yield sufficiently discriminative embeddings to distinguish
between ID and OOD examples. Most recently, Ming et al.
(2023) proposed a distance-based OOD detection method
termed CIDER, which employs the class-conditional von
Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution (Mardia, Jupp, and Mardia
2000) to model the embeddings of ID inputs. In the training
phase, CIDER utilizes a compactness loss to drive the embeddings of ID examples around their corresponding prototypes,
where a dispersion loss is employed to ensure separation
among different prototypes.

