The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Evidential Hashing for Trustworthy Cross-Modal Retrieval
Yuan Li1 , Liangli Zhen2 , Yuan Sun1,3 , Dezhong Peng1,3 , Xi Peng1 , Peng Hu1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
3
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu 610095, China
{blackant1997, llzhen}@outlook.com, sunyuan work@163.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn, {pengx.gm, penghu.ml}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Cross-modal hashing provides an efficient solution for retrieval tasks across various modalities, such as images and
text. However, most existing methods are deterministic models, which overlook the reliability associated with the retrieved results. This omission renders them unreliable for determining matches between data pairs based solely on Hamming distance. To bridge the gap, in this paper, we propose
a novel method called Deep Evidential Cross-modal Hashing
(DECH). This method equips hashing models with the ability to quantify the reliability level of the association between
a query sample and each corresponding retrieved sample,
bringing a new dimension of reliability to the cross-modal
retrieval process. To achieve this, our method addresses two
key challenges: i) To leverage evidential theory in guiding the
model to learn hash codes, we design a novel evidence acquisition module to collect evidence and place the evidence
captured by hash codes on a Beta distribution to derive a binomial opinion. Unlike existing evidential learning approaches
that rely on classifiers, our method collects evidence directly
through hash codes. ii) To tackle the task-oriented challenge,
we first introduce a method to update the derived binomial
opinion, allowing it to present the uncertainty caused by conflicting evidence. Following this manner, we present a strategy to precisely evaluate the reliability level of retrieved results, culminating in performance improvement. We validate
the efficacy of our DECH through extensive experimentation
on four benchmark datasets. The experimental results demonstrate our superior performance compared to 12 state-of-theart methods.

Figure 1: An example of our observation and our basic idea.
The figure displays three image results retrieved from the
MS-COCO dataset using a sentence query. The Hamming
similarity between each image and the sentence, which is
the ranking criterion for retrieval, is shown in the lowerleft corner of the image. The reliability level, estimated by
our method, is shown below the image. From the figure,
one can see that the second image is the only one that truly
matches the query text, even though the other images have
higher Hamming similarity scores (i.e., smaller Hamming
distance). This shows the limitation of using similarity as
the only criterion for cross-modal retrieval. However, our
method can provide a reliability level for each retrieved result, which reflects the confidence/reliability of the match,
thereby embracing more reliable and accurate retrieval.

binary codes, enabling fast retrieval via simple logical operations (e.g., XOR) (Jiang and Li 2017; Fang, Zhang, and
Ren 2019; Hu, Peng, and Peng 2024). Although these methods achieve promising performance, almost all of them are
deterministic, limiting their ability to account for retrieval
reliability. This limitation would lead to unreliable matching results based solely on the Hamming distance as shown
in Figure 1, particularly in practical scenarios where deep
neural networks tend to overestimate their predictions (Guo
et al. 2017).
To address reliability estimation, numerous methods have
been presented by introducing various uncertainty modeling techniques into deep neural networks, such as Bayesian
networks (Sahlin, Helle, and Perepolkin 2021), deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017), evidential deep learning (EDL) (Sensoy, Kaplan, and Kandemir
2018; Jøsang 2016). Among these approaches, EDL has
gained attention due to its outstanding efficiency, as it views
the class predictions of neural networks as subjective opin-

Code — https://github.com/blackant-dev/DECH

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval, a crucial task in information retrieval,
involves searching for semantically related data across heterogeneous modalities, such as images and texts (Hu et al.
2023b,a; Feng et al. 2023). To this end, cross-modal hashing methods have gained popularity due to their computational and storage efficiency in handling large-scale multimodal data (Hu et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2023, 2024a,b). These
methods typically map high-dimensional data into compact
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18566

