The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Federated Prototype Learning: Learnable Semantic Anchors with
Hyperspherical Contrast for Domain-Skewed Data
Lele Fu1,2 , Sheng Huang1,2 , Yanyi Lai1 , Tianchi Liao1 , Chuanfu Zhang2 , Chuan Chen1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{fulle, huangsh253, laiyy28, liaotch}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {zhangchf9, chenchuan}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Federated prototype learning is in the spotlight as global prototypes are effective in enhancing the learning of local representation spaces, facilitating the ability to generalize the
global model. However, when encountering domain-skewed
data, conventional federated prototype learning is susceptible to two dilemmas: 1) Local prototypes obtained by averaging intra-class embedding carry domain-specific markers,
the margins among aggregated global prototypes could be attenuated and detrimental to inter-class separation. 2) Local
domain-skewed embedding may not exhibit a uniform distribution in Euclidean space, which is not conductive to the
prototype-induced intra-class compactness. To address the two drawbacks, we go beyond conventional paradigm of federated prototype learning, and propose learnable semantic
anchors with hyperspherical contrast (FedLSA) for domainskewed data. Specifically, we eschew the pattern of yielding
prototypes via averaging intra-class embedding and directly
learn a set of semantic anchors aided by the global semanticaware classifier. Meanwhile, the margins between anchors are
augmented via pulling apart them, ensuring decent inter-class
separation. To guarantee that local domain-skewed representations can be uniformly distributed, local data is projected into the hyperspherical space, and the intra-class compactness
is achieved by optimizing the contrastive loss derived from
the von Mises-Fisher distribution. Finally, extensive experimental results on three multi-domain datasets show the superiority of the proposed FedLSA compared to existing typical
and state-of-the-state methods.

Figure 1: Margin comparison of prototypes/anchors in local
clients, FedProto, and FedLSA on Office Caltech dataset.
Margin is defined as the minimum L2 -norm distance between a prototype/anchor and other prototypes/anchors. The
maximum margin in all local clients is the baseline, which is
compared with the margins of global prototypes in FedProto and anchors in FedLSA. It can be seen that the margins
between global prototypes in FedProto are diminished while
the margins between anchors in FedLSA are enhanced.

How to conquer the negative influence caused by heterogeneous distributions has become a widely discussed topic.
Most of existing works (Li et al. 2020; Li, He, and Song
2021; Zhang et al. 2024c) adopt contrastive learning, knowledge distillation, meta learning, etc. to strengthen the generalization of global model. Essentially, they expect to converge on the optimization directions of different local models via certain regularization. Notably, a fundamental assumption exists in above approaches that local data in diverse clients suffers from the label skew yet is sampled from
the same domain. Conversely, in real-world scenarios, local data could be drawn from varying domains (Zhang et al.
2023a; Gong et al. 2022). To be specific, the statistics information of local data features is quite distinctive, which is
more likely to result in large divergences in local model parameters, seriously jeopardizing the generalization of global
model. Adversarial training is first introduced into federated
learning with domain skew (Peng et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2021, 2024b) due to its versatility in aligning various data distributions, but its difficulty in training appears as well.
(Yan et al. 2024; Bai et al. 2024) aim to explore the represen-

Introduction
Artificial intelligence models rely on massive data for training to yield superior performance, which is often collected from many private devices. However, data privacy security increasingly renders data centralization impossible,
severely hindering model evolution. Federated learning (Ye
et al. 2023) is a promising way to break through data barrier dilemma, which collaboratively trains a global model
among multiple participants with not revealing local data. It
is worth emphasizing that data distributions among different
clients are likely non-independent and identically distributed (Non-IID), harming the generalizability of global model.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16648

