The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Task-Level Optimal Prompts for Visual In-Context Learning
Yan Zhu1 * , Huan Ma1 * , Changqing Zhang1†
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China

Abstract

construct prompts is the key challenge in enhancing VICL
performance (Li et al. 2024; Dedhia et al. 2024).
Currently, there are primarily two ways to select demonstrations for constructing prompts: the rule-guided strategy
and the reward-model-based strategy. The former strategy
involves selecting demonstrations based on rules, like UnsupPR (Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2023) and prompt-SelF (Sun
et al. 2023), which calculate the similarity between the query
samples and the training samples using features extracted
by the pretrained CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) model to select prompts. Although this type of method is very simple,
these heuristic methods struggle to guarantee performance.
To solve the issue, another strategy is to train a reward model
that can predict performance under different prompts. For
example, both SupPR (Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2023) and InMeMo (Zhang et al. 2024) train an additional reward model
on the validation set to predict the compatibility between
prompts and query samples. However, to obtain such a reward model, it requires a large amount of labeled data and
incurs a high computational cost, or the reward model will
suffer from severe overfitting. Unfortunately, this high computational cost severely hinders the deployment of VICL.
Is it really necessary to spend a significant amount of
computation to find the optimal prompt for each individual sample? Perhaps it is not actually needed. As shown in
Fig. 1(d), we find that under a specific task, the prompts resulting in the best performance for different samples are always the same. The prompt that performs best on the task,
even if it cannot achieve optimal performance for some samples, can still obtain relatively good results compared with
most prompts. In other words, there is no need to spend a
massive amount of computational effort at the risk of overfitting to select different demonstrations to form a prompt for
distinct samples (experimental results show that using a single prompt for all samples performs even better than those
costly sample-level methods).
In this paper, we propose a reward-based, training-free approach to find the optimal task-level prompt. This strategy
not only lessens the time taken during inference but also sustains performance when compared to more time-consuming
methods. Specifically, we present two new strategies for effectively searching for the best demonstrations: (1) Top-K
strategy and (2) Greedy search strategy. We concentrate on a
general setting where a labeled set of size N is provided. The

With the development of Vision Foundation Models (VFMs)
in recent years, Visual In-Context Learning (VICL) has become a better choice compared to modifying models in most
scenarios. Different from retraining or fine-tuning model,
VICL does not require modifications to the model’s weights
or architecture, and only needs a prompt with demonstrations to teach VFM how to solve tasks. Currently, significant computational cost for finding optimal prompts for every test sample hinders the deployment of VICL, as determining which demonstrations to use for constructing prompts
is very costly. In this paper, however, we find a counterintuitive phenomenon that most test samples actually achieve
optimal performance under the same prompts, and searching for sample-level prompts only costs more time but results
in completely identical prompts. Therefore, we propose tasklevel prompting to reduce the cost of searching for prompts
during the inference stage and introduce two time-saving yet
effective task-level prompt search strategies. Extensive experimental results show that our proposed method can identify
near-optimal prompts and reach the best VICL performance
with a minimal cost that prior work has never achieved.

Introduction
With the development of Vision Foundation Models(VFMs),
many tasks in visual scenes no longer require training new
models but can be solved by VLFs provided by model
service providers, which are more affordable and convenient (Li et al. 2023; Wu, Sun, and Ouyang 2023). However, the performance of directly deploying VFMs for specific tasks is often unsatisfactory, and task-specific adaptation is necessary for better performance. In comparison
to modifying model weights, Visual In-Context Learning
(VICL) (Yang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024) is a better
choice. Unlike retraining or fine-tuning models, VICL does
not necessitate modifying the model’s weights or architecture, but only needs to teach VFMs how to solve problems using prompts with a set of demonstrations. However,
VICL does not always achieve good results under arbitrary
prompts, so determining the appropriate demonstrations to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding to zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11031

