The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BGHR: Bridging the Gap Between HBox-Supervised and RBox-Supervised
Oriented Object Detection via Adaptive Fine-Grained Sample Mining
Chenlin Fu, Yingying Zhu*
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
fuchenlin2021@email.szu.edu.cn, zhuyy@szu.edu.cn

Label assignment

Abstract

Label assignment for H2Rbox

Oriented object detection is crucial for complex scenes such
as aerial images and industrial inspection, providing precise delineation by minimizing background interference. Recently, the weakly-supervised detector paradigm H2RBox
has demonstrated promise in learning rotated bounding box
(RBox) from the more readily available horizontal bounding
box (HBox), alleviating the scarcity and high cost of RBox
annotations. However, these H2RBox-based methods have
primarily focused on the gap in orientation information between HBox- and RBox-supervised approaches, overlooking
the gap in training sample selection. In response, we propose
the Adaptive Fine-grained Sample Mining (AFSM) strategy,
which improves the selection of fine-grained training samples in HBox-supervised methods. AFSM assigns the bestmatching prediction RBox to each ground truth (GT) HBox
and selects positive samples based on these paired boxes.
Furthermore, to effectively filter the best-matching prediction RBox for AFSM, we introduce the Prediction Rbox Assignment (PRA) scheme, employing Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KLD) as a localization quality metric. Additionally,
we introduce an improved self-supervised branch loss (Lss∗ )
to address the symmetry of weakly-supervised branch prediction boxes. Incorporating these core components (AFSM,
PRA, and Lss∗ ), we develop an end-to-end network architecture (BGHR) to further bridge the gap between HBox- and
RBox-supervised oriented object detection. Extensive experiments on DOTA-v1.0 and DIOR-R demonstrate that BGHR
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to HBoxsupervised methods without additional overhead. Even when
benchmarked against fully supervised FCOS, our method still
exhibits a slight performance advantage.

AFSM Strategy

(a) Original image (b) Training sample selection (c) Detection results

Figure 1: (a) is the original image in which the region of interest is locally magnified. (b) illustrates the differences in
training sample selection between the H2RBox (Yang et al.
2023) and AFSM. The red, green, and yellow rectangles represent ground truth HBox, best-matching prediction RBox,
and detection RBox, respectively, while the red dots represent the selected samples. (c) displays the detection results
output by H2RBox (top row) and our BGHR (bottom row).

enables the model to more accurately delineate regions of
interest by reducing extraneous background interference.
Although re-annotating labeled datasets allows for the
training of oriented detectors, two limitations remain:
HBox annotations are more commonly available in existing datasets, and RBox or Mask annotations are more costly
to produce. Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2023) explored these
limitations and proposed the first general solution called
HBox-to-RBox (H2RBox) in 2023. H2RBox gives an effective paradigm and outperforms potential alternatives HBoxMask-RBox (generating RBox from segmentation mask)
such as BoxInst (Tian et al. 2021), SAM (Kirillov et al.
2023) and BoxLevelSet (Li et al. 2022b). Furthermore, EIE
(Wang et al. 2024) proposed a bounding box regression
method based on the Tanimoto coefficient to address the issue of inconsistency in evaluating rotation variations.
Supervised information plays two main roles in object detection: 1) providing the optimization objective, and
2) selecting training samples. However, previous methods
have predominantly focused on the gap in orientation optimization objectives between HBox-supervised and RBoxsupervised approaches, neglecting the gap in training sam-

Code — https://github.com/clin-fu/BGHR.git

Introduction
Object detection has been extensively studied, with early research primarily focused on horizontal detection (Liu et al.
2020; Zhao et al. 2019). However, when fine-grained bounding boxes are required, oriented object detection emerges as
the preferred approach, especially in complex scenes such
as aerial images, scene text, retail scenes, and industrial inspection (Wen et al. 2023). This fine-grained representation
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3022

