The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Sequential Recommendation with Global Diffusion
Mingxuan Luo1 , Yang Li2 , Chen Lin1 * ,
1

2

School of Informatics,Xiamen University,Xiamen,China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence,Xiamen University,Xiamen,China
chenlin@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing sequential recommendation models are mostly based
on sequential models, which can be misled by inconsistent
items in the local sequence. This study proposes GlobalDiff, a plug-and-play framework to enhance the performance
of sequential models by utilizing a diffusion model to restore the global non-sequential data structure of the item universe and compensate for the local sequential context. Several
novel techniques are proposed, including training construction, guided reverse approximator, and inference ensemble,
to seamlessly integrate the diffusion model with the sequential model. Extensive experiments on various datasets demonstrate that GlobalDiff can enhance advanced sequential models by an average improvement of 9.67%.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of Sequential Recommendation: (a) inconsistent item selection in a sequence; (b) traditional assumption that item selection solely relies on personal interest, encoded by the sequential model; (c) our assumption
that item is generated based on personal interest and global
data structure, which naturally leads to a framework stacking a diffusion model on the sequential model.

Introduction

Sequential Recommendation (SR) aims to predict the next
items a user prefers based on the interaction sequence.
By leveraging sequential patterns in historical interactions,
SR provides more accurate and timely recommendations
and enhances user satisfaction and engagement (Kang and
McAuley 2018; Sun et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2024).
Most existing SR methods rely on sequential models,
such as Markov Chain (Rendle, Freudenthaler, and SchmidtThieme 2010), GRU (Tan, Xu, and Liu 2016), and Transformer (Kang and McAuley 2018), to capture the temporal dependencies in the interaction sequence. Recent studies point out the non-sequential item selection problem, i.e.,
items in an interaction sequence may not follow strict sequential assumptions (Wang et al. 2017, 2018; Sun et al.
2019). Thus, unidirectional models from left to right are insufficient for learning the representation of an interaction sequence. Bidirectional Transformer encoder has become the
state-of-the-art, which fulfills a cloze task in the training
phase, i.e., masks a random item in the interaction sequence
and predicts the masked item based on the surrounding context (Sun et al. 2019; Du et al. 2022).
Unfortunately, the sequential model is limited in handling item selection inconsistent with personal interest due
to external factors (Schnabel and Bennett 2020; Zhang et al.
2021). For example, Figure 1(a) depicts Alice, who loves

horror movies, selecting ’Mad Max’ between ’Puppet Master ’ and ’Puppet Master III’. The selection of ’Mad Max’ is
affected by external factors such as social media or movie
promotion and is not driven by Alice’s personal interest.
The presence of ’Mad Max’ in the context window misleads
CBiT (Du et al. 2022) to predict ’Mad Max II’ incorrectly1 .
The illustration in Figure 1(b) reveals the limitation from
the model viewpoint, i.e., sequential models assume the item
selection is conditioned only on personal interest. Thus, they
encode personal interest from the context window by discriminating an observed item with negative samples. However, from a generative perspective, we argue that there are
two types of priors: personal interest and external factors.
The external factors are not observable in the local interaction sequence, but they can be inferred from the nonsequential, global data structure, e.g., which item is popular,
which items correlate with each other, etc.
As shown in Figure 1 (c), instead of purely relying on the
sequential models to encode personal interest in the interac-

* Corresponding Author chenlin@xmu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12309

Example obtained by CBiT on the MovieLens dataset

