The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Debiased Active Learning with Variational Gradient Rectifier
Weiguo Chen1 * , Changjian Wang1 * † , Shijun Li1 , Kele Xu1† , Yanru Bai2 , Wei Chen1 , Shanshan Li1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2
Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University
{chenweiguo, wangcj, lishijun, chenwei}@nudt.edu.cn, xukelele@163.com, yr56 bai@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
The strategy of selecting “most informative” hard samples
in active learning has proven a boon for alleviating the challenges of few-shot learning and costly data annotation in deep
learning. However, this very preference towards hard samples
engenders bias issues, thereby impeding the full potential of
active learning. It has witnessed an increasing trend to mitigate this stubborn problem, yet most neglect the quantification of bias itself and the direct rectification of dynamically
evolving biases. Revisiting the bias issue, this paper presents
an active learning approach based on the Variational Gradient
Rectifier (VaGeRy). First, we employ variational methods to
quantify bias at the level of latent state representations. Then,
harnessing historical training dynamics, we introduce Uncertainty Consistency Regularization and Fluctuation Restriction, which asynchronously iterate to rectify gradient backpropagation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed methodology effectively counteracts bias phenomena
in a majority of active learning scenarios.

Introduction
The substantial success of many deep networks across diverse tasks is largely attributed to the availability of vast
amounts of labeled data, yet this comes at a cost of annotation proportional to both the volume of data and the intricacy of labeling. Active learning has long been devoted to
realizing the fastest possible convergence rate of deep networks with minimal labeling budget, thereby attaining the
desired generalization performance (Liu et al. 2022; Zhang,
Strubell, and Hovy 2022; Wan et al. 2023).
The objective of active learning strategies lies in the selective querying of “most informative” samples within a
human-in-loop (Mosqueira-Rey et al. 2023) iterative framework. The quantification of “most informative” currently encompasses uncertainty-aware (Cao et al. 2019; Pleiss et al.
2020; Roth and Small 2006; Wu, Chen, and Huang 2022),
variety-aware (Guo 2010), representation-aware (Sener and
Savarese 2018), and predicting-auxiliary or synthesizing
(Kye et al. 2023; Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019; Yoo
and Kweon 2019) approaches. However, the combination

Figure 1: Comparison of bias phenomenon of the 1th, 5th
and 9th iterations of (I) Entropy based active learning with
bias phenomenon and (II) VeGeRy with rectified bias, corresponding to the three instances highlighted within boxes
on the accuracy curves on Newsgroup dataset. The two intuitive frameworks in the blue and red dashed boxes respectively denote standard entropy based active learning and
its VaGeRy-enhanced counterpart. The gray, blue, and red
points in the scatter diagrams represent the unlabeled (XU ),
labeled (XL ) samples and hard (XH ) samples respectively
of a current iteration. The stars represent the approximated
posterior distribution. It is obvious that the hard samples in
(I) are clustered and the approximated posterior distribution
has a large shift between iterations and behaves unstable. On
the contotary, the hard samples in (II) are more evenly distributed and the approximated posterior distribution is rubust
with a small shift between iterations.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15884

