The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

K-ON: Stacking Knowledge On the Head Layer of Large Language Model
Lingbing Guo1,2 , Yichi Zhang1,2 , Zhongpu Bo3 , Zhuo Chen1,2 , Mengshu Sun3 ,
Zhiqiang Zhang3 , Wen Zhang4,2 * , Huajun Chen1,2,5*
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-Ant Group Joint Lab of Knowledge Graph
3
Ant Group
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
5
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing
{lbguo, zhangyichi2022, zhang.wen, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Most existing methods compromise on this dilemma and
apply LLMs only to simple KG tasks (Yang et al. 2023;
Guan et al. 2024; Pan et al. 2023, 2024), such as verifying
the correctness of a triplet (Zhang et al. 2023) or predicting
the target from a limited number of candidates (Yao et al.
2023). In contrast, we propose K-ON to employ K head layers for predicting entities at one shot and stack knowledge on
these heads by entity-level contrastive learning.
As shown in Figure 1b, K-ON adapts K different head
layers from the original LLM head, where the k-th head is
responsible for predicting the k-th token for all entities. For
example, an entity Matt Damon is tokenized into K input
token IDs t0:K−1 , with t0 representing Matt and tK−1 being
the last token Damon or padding token. We then extract the
the probability of the first token from the first head layer, and
so forth. For the other entities that may serve as negative
examples in contrastive learning, we can reuse the K-step
probability estimations to extract their scores.
The risk underlying the prediction of the next K tokens
is over-optimization. The model may over-optimize for predicting just the next K tokens, dropping the fact that these
tokens form the target entity. For instance, while minimizing
cross-entropy loss for the first token, with Matt as the positive label, many negative entries (tokens) are not constituent
elements of an entity. Moreover, increasing the probability
of Matt does not always equate to maximizing the probability of Matt Damon. To tackle this issue, K-ON employs an
entity-level contrastive loss, which treats the K-step predictions as an integrity and estimates the joint probabilities.
Another risk in next-K-token prediction is distribution
corruption. In the original schema, the probability of the second token “Damon” is conditioned on the first token “Matt”.
However, this conditioning is absent in the next-K-tokens
schema. Such discrepancy may degrade the performance as
well as inference ability of the original LLM.
To address this issue, we propose head trajectory tuning
(HTT) to align the distribution trajectories between the original LLM’s prediction and the next-K-token predictions. We
first leverage a conditional attention layer to process the hidden states from K head layers to reconstruct the sequential dependencies between different steps. Then, we compute a standard sequence prediction loss with the original
LLM head layer as target. Finally, we can align the output
probability sequence of our next-k-token predictions with

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have
significantly improved various natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. Typically, LLMs are trained to predict the next
token, aligning well with many NLP tasks. However, in
knowledge graph (KG) scenarios, entities are the fundamental units and identifying an entity requires at least several tokens. This leads to a granularity mismatch between KGs and
natural languages. To address this issue, we propose K-ON,
which integrates KG knowledge into the LLM by employing
multiple head layers for next k-step prediction. K-ON can
not only generate entity-level results in one step, but also enables contrastive loss against entities, which is the most powerful tool in KG representation learning. Experimental results
show that K-ON outperforms state-of-the-art methods that incorporate text and even the other modalities.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are trained on vast amounts
of corpora and store world knowledge within billions of
neurons (Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023). Despite
of the prosperity in LLM-based applications, unleashing its
power for knowledge graph (KG) tasks remains challenging.
Tokens are the basic elements for language models, but it
needs to take at least several tokens to describe and identify
different entities in a KG. Creating new token identifiers for
each entity and learning them during fine-tuning is an alternative choice, however, which is extremely time-consuming
and may negatively affect the native performance of LLMs.
In this paper, we explore how to effectively and efficiently
use multiple tokens to describe entities in a given KG. Evidently, directly optimizing the sequence prediction objective will results in the out-of-KG problem as LLM lacks
awareness of the KG’s entities, while enumerating all entities in the input instruction is unrealistic. Take Figure 1a
as an example, the task is to predict the target entity Matt
Damon given the incomplete triplet (The Bourne Identity
(2002 film), starring, ?). The vanilla learning schema is inefficient because generating a single entity requires multiple
steps and cannot be parallelized across entities.
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11745

