The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sum of Squares Circuits
Lorenzo Loconte1 , Stefan Mengel2 , Antonio Vergari1
1

2

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
University of Artois, CNRS, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens (CRIL), France
l.loconte@sms.ed.ac.uk, mengel@cril-lab.fr, avergari@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

computational graphs have certain structural properties (Vergari et al. 2021). Expressiveness, on the other hand, can be
theoretically characterized in terms of the circuit size (and
hence number of learnable parameters) (Shpilka and Yehudayoff 2010). Furthermore, one can precisely characterize
that two model classes can capture the same probability distributions, if we can reduce one to the other in polytime.
Conversely, to separate two model classes in terms of expressiveness, one has to prove that a function can be exactly
captured by a circuit class but not by the other, unless this
one has exponential size (de Colnet and Mengel 2021).
To ensure that a circuit outputs non-negative values only
– the minimum requirement to model a valid density – PCs
are classically represented and learned with non-negative parameters only, i.e., they are monotonic (Shpilka and Yehudayoff 2010). This prominent circuit class can only represent
mixture models whose component densities are added. To
fill this gap, Loconte et al. (2024a) introduced a special class
of non-monotonic PCs, i.e., circuits with negative parameters, thus allowing to subtract mixture components as well.
Non-negativity of the circuit outputs is ensured by tractably
squaring the PCs (Vergari et al. 2021). Loconte et al. (2024a)
proved an exponential separation between monotonic and
non-monotonic squared circuits, showing that the latter can
be more expressive than the former. However, one question
remains open: can squared circuits compactly compute all
functions compactly encoded by monotonic circuits?
In this paper, we provide a negative answer, by proving another separation that goes in the opposite direction:
certain distributions that can be captured by polynomiallysized monotonic circuits require a squared circuit of exponential size. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a
larger model class that can be more expressive than both:
sum of squares PCs. While sum of squares forms are a staple in modeling non-negative polynomials (Marshall 2008),
understanding when and how they lead to compact circuit representations is still not well understood. We close
this gap by building a fine-grained expressiveness hierarchy around the class of squared PCs and their sums as illustrated in Fig. 1. We not only precisely characterize how
other tractable models such as PSD models (Rudi and Ciliberto 2021), Born Machines (Glasser et al. 2019), squared
neural families (Tsuchida, Ong, and Sejdinovic 2023), and
Inception PCs (Wang and Van den Broeck 2024) belong to

Designing expressive generative models that support exact
and efficient inference is a core question in probabilistic
ML. Probabilistic circuits (PCs) offer a framework where this
tractability-vs-expressiveness trade-off can be analyzed theoretically. Recently, squared PCs encoding subtractive mixtures via negative parameters have emerged as tractable models that can be exponentially more expressive than monotonic
PCs, i.e., PCs with positive parameters only. In this paper,
we provide a more precise theoretical characterization of the
expressiveness relationships among these models. First, we
prove that squared PCs can be less expressive than monotonic
ones. Second, we formalize a novel class of PCs – sum of
squares PCs – that can be exponentially more expressive than
both squared and monotonic PCs. Around sum of squares
PCs, we build an expressiveness hierarchy that allows us to
precisely unify and separate different tractable model classes
such as Born Machines and PSD models, and other recently
introduced tractable probabilistic models by using complex
parameters. Finally, we empirically show the effectiveness of
sum of squares circuits in performing distribution estimation.

Code — https://github.com/april-tools/sos-npcs
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11778

1

Introduction

We design and learn expressive probabilistic models to compactly represent the complex distribution we assume has
generated the data we deal with. At the same time, a key
requirement to effectively reason about such a distribution
is that we can perform inference exactly and efficiently,
i.e., tractably. This is especially relevant in safety-critical
real-world applications where reliable inference is required
(Ahmed et al. 2022; Marconato et al. 2024b,a).
Quantifying this trade-off between tractability and expressiveness can be done within the framework of probabilistic circuits (PCs) (Vergari, Di Mauro, and Van den Broeck
2019), which are deep computational graphs that generalize
many tractable representations in ML and AI (Choi, Vergari,
and Van den Broeck 2020). For example, within the framework of PCs, guaranteeing the tractability of certain inference scenarios, e.g., marginals, MAP inference, or computing divergences, directly translates into ensuring that these
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19077

