The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging Sequence-Structure Alignment in RNA Foundation Models
Heng Yang1 , Renzhi Chen2 , Ke Li1 *
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, EX4 4QF, Exeter, UK
2
Qiyuan Lab, Beijing, China
{hy345, k.li}@exeter.ac.uk, {chengrenzhi1989}@gmail.com

Abstract

genome encoding processes. Existing FMs have been widely
employed as basic sequence feature extractors to improve
the performance of diverse genome analysis tasks, such
as secondary structure prediction (Tan et al. 2017; Danaee
et al. 2018; Mathews 2019; Kalvari et al. 2021), degradation
rate prediction (Yaish and Orenstein 2022; Wayment-Steele
et al. 2022), and mRNA vaccine design (Corbett et al. 2020;
Runge et al. 2023). In RNA, it is intriguing that the functionality and stability are intertwined with its complex structures
in molecular biology (Ganser et al. 2019). However, the role
of the structure as a second ‘genomic language’ to interact
with sequences and solve various RNA downstream tasks
has been largely ignored.

The alignment between RNA sequences and structures in
foundation models (FMs) has yet to be thoroughly investigated. Existing FMs have struggled to establish sequencestructure alignment, hindering the free flow of genomic information between RNA sequences and structures. In this study,
we introduce OmniGenome, an RNA FM trained to align
RNA sequences with respect to secondary structures based
on structure-contextualised modelling. The alignment enables free and bidirectional mappings between sequences and
structures by utilising the flexible RNA modelling paradigm
that supports versatile input and output modalities, i.e., sequence and/or structure as input/output. We implement RNA
design and zero-shot secondary structure prediction as case
studies to evaluate the Seq2Str and Str2Seq mapping capacity
of OmniGenome. Results on the EternaV2 benchmark show
that OmniGenome solved 74% of puzzles, whereas existing
FMs only solved up to 3% of the puzzles due to the oversight of sequence-structure alignment. We leverage four comprehensive in-silico genome modelling benchmarks to evaluate performance across a diverse set of genome downstream
tasks, where the results show that OmniGenome achieves
state-of-the-art performance on RNA and DNA benchmarks,
even without any training on DNA genomes.

Sequence-Structure Alignment in GFMs We define
alignment between sequences and secondary structures1
as the bidirectional information flows. Current FMs have
been struggling to establish an alignment between RNA nucleotide sequences and their folded structures, thus impeding bidirectional genomic information flows. There has been
a deep scientific challenge to align RNA sequences with
structures because it is not deterministic to predict sequences
from structures and vice versa. In other words, an identical sequence may be folded into different sub-optimal structures because the folding patterns of RNA sequences depend
on various in-vivo factors (Tinoco Jr and Bustamante 1999).
Further, a structure can be folded from different sequences
composed of variational combinations of nucleotide bases.
The oversight of such alignment in existing FMs causes outstanding issues in understanding and leveraging RNA structures, such as mRNA design. For example, recent state-ofthe-art RNA FMs, RNA-FM (Chen et al. 2022) and RNAMSM (Zhang et al. 2024), only solved 3 out of 100 puzzles in in-silico RNA design (Lee et al. 2014). This is because they fail to decipher corresponding sequences based
on structures to guide RNA design.
To address the above two problems, we propose sequencestructure alignment in RNA FMs, which leverages the largescale annotations of sequences and structures to build reliable structure to sequence (Str2Seq) and sequence to
structure (Seq2Str) mappings, leading to an aligned FM
dubbed OmniGenome. The sequence-structure alignment

Code — https://github.com/yangheng95/OmniGenBench
Datasets — https://huggingface.co/spaces/yangheng/
OmniGenomeLeaderboard/tree/main/benchmarks
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11242

1

Introduction

RNA is a critical type of molecule that encodes a vast array
of biological regulatory elements that orchestrate crucial aspects of plant growth, development, and adaptation to environmental stresses. To decipher the genomic code in RNA
and manipulate RNA engineering and design, current research mainly uses bioinformatics in solving RNA genomeoriented challenges. Recent advancements in large-scale
pre-trained foundation models (FMs) have demonstrated
their unprecedented potential to back up existing genome
analysis, as FMs are capable of learning and predicting the
complex ‘genomic language’ (Nguyen et al. 2023) hidden in
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, all structures are referred to as the secondary
structures.

21929

