The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MEDSAGE: Enhancing Robustness of Medical Dialogue Summarization to ASR
Errors with LLM-generated Synthetic Dialogues
†

†

†

Kuluhan Binici1,2,3* , Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap4 , Viktor Schlegel5,6 , Andy T. Liu1 ,
†
†
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi7 , Thanh-Tung Nguyen1 , Xiaoxue Gao8 , Nancy F. Chen8 , Stefan Winkler1,3
1

ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services (AICS)
2
SAP
3
National University of Singapore
4
Crayon Software
5
Imperial College London, Imperial Global Singapore
6
University of Manchester, Department of Computer Science
7
Stanford University
8
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
Abstract

Guo et al. 2024), which limits their application in highstake domains where correctness of the summaries is important. The synthesis of Electronic Medical Records (EMRs)
from doctor-patient dialogues (Krishna et al. 2021) is among
such summarization tasks where accuracy is critical. Here,
ASR errors can lead to inaccuracies in transcribing clinical terms, medication, or procedure names, resulting in erroneous medical notes (Hodgson and Coiera 2016), which
can lead to misdiagnosis, incorrect treatment plans, and potentially harmful patient outcomes.
One way to improve dialogue summarization is to improve the ASR systems. However, this requires large
amounts of supervised data (Radford et al. 2022), which
is often unavailable in the healthcare domain due to privacy and ethical concerns. Consequently, clinical summarization systems often treat ASR systems as black boxes,
mandating that overall improvements must arise either from
post-processing ASR outputs, or making down-stream methods robust to ASR errors. Recent works propose postprocessing ASR outputs using LLMs to correct erroneous
ASR transcripts (Radhakrishnan et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2024).
Nonetheless, based on prior studies, using prompting techniques to clear noise only proves effective only when using LLMs of large sizes, typically those that exceed 100B
parameters (Yang et al. 2023). Moreover, LLMs are prone
to hallucinations (Maynez et al. 2020; Nagar et al. 2024),
which can introduce irrelevant symptoms or medication
names into the dialogue transcript, potentially degrading
summarization quality while attempting to clear noise.
Alternatively, the summarization robustness to ASR errors can be improved through data augmentation techniques
(Fabbri et al. 2021). However, the conventional augmentation approach of exposing the summarization model to erroneous ASR dialogues during the training phase is not feasible either, again due to the limited availability of medical
dialogue audio preventing the generation of ASR dialogue
transcripts (Nanayakkara et al. 2022). Heuristic approaches
for augmentation, such as randomly applying a set of corruption operations, are not ideal either, as they fail to ac-

Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems are used to
transcribe speech into text, yet the errors they introduce can
significantly degrade the performance of downstream tasks
like summarization. This issue is particularly pronounced
in clinical dialogue summarization, a low-resource domain
where supervised data for fine-tuning is scarce, necessitating the use of ASR models as black-box solutions. Employing conventional data augmentation for enhancing the noise
robustness of summarization models is not feasible either
due to the unavailability of sufficient medical dialogue audio
recordings and corresponding ASR transcripts. To address
this challenge, we propose MEDSAGE, an approach for generating synthetic samples for data augmentation using Large
Language Models (LLMs). Specifically, we leverage the incontext learning capabilities of LLMs and instruct them to
generate ASR-like errors based on a few available medical
dialogue examples with audio recordings. Experimental results show that LLMs can effectively model ASR noise, and
incorporating this noisy data into the training process significantly improves the robustness and accuracy of medical dialogue summarization systems. This approach addresses the
challenges of noisy ASR outputs in critical applications, offering a robust solution to enhance the reliability of clinical
dialogue summarization.

1

Introduction

Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) (Yu and Deng 2016)
is the task of transcribing speech signals into text, enabling a
wide range of applications from voice-activated assistants to
automated customer service systems. ASR systems significantly aid various downstream tasks such as dialogue summarization (Liu et al. 2019; Zhong et al. 2022), where the
goal is to distill key information from spoken interactions.
However, errors introduced by ASR systems can degrade the
performance of these summarization tasks (Li et al. 2014;
* Author was an intern at AICS.
†

Authors were employees of AICS.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23496

