The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

JoVALE: Detecting Human Actions in Video Using Audiovisual and Language
Contexts
Taein Son1 * , Soo Won Seo2 * , Jisong Kim1 , Seok Hwan Lee1 , Jun Won Choi2†
1

Hanyang University
Seoul National University
tison@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, swseo@spa.snu.ac.kr, jskim@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, shlee@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, junwchoi@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

recognition performance (Kazakos et al. 2019; Gao et al.
2020; Xiao et al. 2020; Nagrani et al. 2021). Audio, in particular, offers valuable information, providing both direct and
indirect contextual cues for action recognition. For example, sounds directly linked to actions, like speech, gunshots,
or music, can help identify corresponding actions. Additionally, environmental sounds can indirectly suggest relevant
actions, such as the sound of waves indicating beach-related
activities. Therefore, incorporating audio data alongside visual data can improve the performance and robustness of
VAD. Several action recognition methods have successfully
utilized both audio and visual data (Gao et al. 2020; Xiao
et al. 2020; Nagrani et al. 2021).
While multi-modal information has shown promise for
action recognition tasks, its application in VAD presents
significant challenges. Action instances in videos are dispersed across both temporal and spatial dimensions, and
the contextual cues necessary for their detection are similarly spread throughout the video. It is crucial to accurately
link these actions and contextual features to ensure robust
VAD performance. For example, the sound of a piano might
help identify a ‘playing piano’ action but would be irrelevant for detecting a ‘talking with others’ action within the
same scene. Therefore, the piano sound should be selectively
used to detect the ‘playing piano’ action and not the ‘talking
with others’ action. Moreover, effectively integrating multimodal information from various sources is another key to
enhancing VAD performance. Despite its potential, the use
of audio-visual information for VAD is still relatively unexplored in current research.
Another valuable resource for VAD identified in this study
is the prior general scene-descriptive knowledge gained
through vision-language foundation models. Vision Language Pre-training (VLP) models have shown substantial
success by leveraging extensive multi-modal data sourced
from the web, public databases, and various corpora. These
models excel in capturing complex relational structures between text and images, enabling them to adapt to a variety of
downstream tasks in either a zero-shot or one-shot manner.
With their ability to understand images, the features derived
from VLP can significantly enhance VAD performances. In
this research, we further investigate a VAD approach that
capitalizes on the rich language context provided by VLP
models.

Video Action Detection (VAD) entails localizing and categorizing action instances within videos, which inherently consist of diverse information sources such as audio, visual cues,
and surrounding scene contexts. Leveraging this multi-modal
information effectively for VAD poses a significant challenge,
as the model must identify action-relevant cues with precision. In this study, we introduce a novel multi-modal VAD
architecture, referred to as the Joint Actor-centric Visual, Audio, Language Encoder (JoVALE). JoVALE is the first VAD
method to integrate audio and visual features with scene descriptive context sourced from large-capacity image captioning models. At the heart of JoVALE is the actor-centric aggregation of audio, visual, and scene descriptive information, enabling adaptive integration of crucial features for recognizing
each actor’s actions. We have developed a Transformer-based
architecture, the Actor-centric Multi-modal Fusion Network,
specifically designed to capture the dynamic interactions
among actors and their multi-modal contexts. Our evaluation
on three prominent VAD benchmarks—AVA, UCF101-24,
and JHMDB51-21—demonstrates that incorporating multimodal information significantly enhances performance, setting new state-of-the-art performances in the field.

Code — https://github.com/taeiin/AAAI2025-JoVALE

Introduction
Video action detection (VAD) is a challenging task that
aims to localize and classify human actions within video sequences. VAD generates bounding boxes with action scores
for a keyframe by analyzing the sequential frames around
the keyframe. This task differs from Action Recognition
task, which classifies the action for a given video clip, and
from Temporal Action Detection task, which identifies the
intervals of particular actions within a video clip.
Humans rely on various sources of information to detect actions, including visual appearance, motion sequences,
actor postures, and interactions with their environment.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that leveraging such
multi-modal information can significantly enhance action
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author. Email: junwchoi@snu.ac.kr
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6940

