The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Granularity Video Object Segmentation
Sangbeom Lim1 * , Seongchan Kim1 * , Seungjun An2 * , Seokju Cho3 ,
Paul Hongsuck Seo1† , Seungryong Kim3†
1

Korea University
Samsung Electronics
3
KAIST
{limsbeom, 2020320120, phseo}@korea.ac.kr1 , sjun.an@samsung.com2 , {seokju.cho, seungryong.kim}@kaist.ac.kr3 ,
2

Abstract

2017) or interactive video object segmentation (Benard and
Gygli 2017) provide additional references for the target by
giving segmentation mask at the first frame or giving iterative refinement to clarify it. Unfortunately, these tasks also
encounter performance degradation when they aim to segment non-salient objects, as they are only trained on specific
targets, such as objects and stuff, according to the training
dataset. Their utility in real-world applications often struggles in certain cases, such as interactive video editing and
open-world video understanding, which require to return
valid segmentation mask tracks for any given segmentation
prompt.
Regardless of the model’s architecture, segmenting anything in a video scene requires extensive data. SA-1B (Kirillov et al. 2023), an image segmentation dataset for the Segment Anything task, averages 100 masks per image. In contrast, most video segmentation datasets (Athar et al. 2023b)
have far fewer mask tracks per video and rely on costly human annotation, which, while reliable, is resource-intensive.
In this work, we introduce Multi-Granularity Video
Object Segmentation (MUG-VOS) dataset to extend the
success of segment anything to the video domain. Our goal
is to provide annotations of varying granularity for target
masks, covering a range of objects, parts, and backgrounds.
MUG-VOS fundamentally differs from previous video segmentation datasets (Xu et al. 2018; Pont-Tuset et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2021) by addressing limitations of traditional
Video Instance Segmentation and Video Panoptic Segmentation, which often relies on a closed vocabulary, such as the
40 categories in YouTube-VIS (Yang, Fan, and Xu 2019) or
the 124 classes in VIPSeg (Miao et al. 2022a). While Openvocab Video Segmentation (Wang et al. 2023) manages unlimited classes via natural language descriptions, it typically
focuses on salient objects and often miss background elements or partial objects.
To build a large-scale video segmentation dataset capable
of segmenting various targets, we utilized SAM, which can
segment anything in images. We propose a SAM-based data
collection pipeline that leverages a simple IoU-based tracking method to generate diverse training data. This resulted in
a new dataset with 77k video clips and 47M masks, designed
to train and evaluate segmentation and tracking at multiple granularities masks. MUG-VOS includes diverse mask
tracks—salient, non-salient, and partial objects—enabling

Current benchmarks for video segmentation are limited to annotating only salient objects (i.e., foreground instances). Despite their impressive architectural designs, previous works
trained on these benchmarks have struggled to adapt to realworld scenarios. Thus, developing a new video segmentation dataset aimed at tracking multi-granularity segmentation target in the video scene is necessary. In this work, we
aim to generate multi-granularity video segmentation dataset
that is annotated for both salient and non-salient masks. To
achieve this, we propose a large-scale, densely annotated
multi-granularity video object segmentation (MUG-VOS)
dataset that includes various types and granularities of mask
annotations. We automatically collected a training set that assists in tracking both salient and non-salient objects, and we
also curated a human-annotated test set for reliable evaluation. In addition, we present memory-based mask propagation model (MMPM), trained and evaluated on MUG-VOS
dataset, which leads to the best performance among the existing video object segmentation methods and Segment SAMbased video segmentation methods.

Code — https://cvlab-kaist.github.io/MUG-VOS

Introduction
Video segmentation has been one of fundamental tasks in
computer vision, aimed at predicting and tracking the masks
corresponding to specified targets in video data (Yang, Fan,
and Xu 2019; Kim et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021). Video
segmentation showed great performance on identifying object and consistently tracking the object, however has shown
poor performance on unknown class that has not trained on
supervised stage. To develop a model capable of detecting
and segmenting a wide range of categories, it is necessary
to construct a larger dataset that includes as many classes as
possible. However, this approach is cost-inefficient and challenging, making it difficult to create a model that can handle
various types of object masks.
To alleviate this burden, several video segmentation tasks
such as video object segmentation (VOS) (Caelles et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5200

