The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RI-MAE: Rotation-Invariant Masked AutoEncoders for Self-Supervised
Point Cloud Representation Learning
Kunming Su1 , Qiuxia Wu1 * , Panpan Cai1 , Xiaogang Zhu2 ,
Xuequan Lu3 , Zhiyong Wang4 , Kun Hu4
1

South China University of Technology
2
The University of Adelaide
3
The University of Western Australia
4
The University of Sydney
kunmingsu07@gmail.com, {qxwu, caipp}@scut.edu.cn, xiaogang.zhu@adelaide.edu.au,
bruce.lu@uwa.edu.au, {zhiyong.wang, kun.hu}@sydney.edu.au
𝐩𝒊

Abstract

+

Masked point modeling methods have recently achieved great
success in self-supervised learning for point cloud data.
However, these methods are sensitive to rotations and often exhibit sharp performance drops when encountering rotational variations. In this paper, we propose a novel RotationInvariant Masked AutoEncoders (RI-MAE) to address two
major challenges: 1) achieving rotation-invariant latent representations, and 2) facilitating self-supervised reconstruction in a rotation-invariant manner. For the first challenge,
we introduce RI-Transformer, which features disentangled
geometry content, rotation-invariant relative orientation and
position embedding mechanisms for constructing rotationinvariant point cloud latent space. For the second challenge,
a novel dual-branch student-teacher architecture is devised.
It enables the self-supervised learning via the reconstruction
of masked patches within the learned rotation-invariant latent space. Each branch is based on an RI-Transformer, and
they are connected with an additional RI-Transformer predictor. The teacher encodes all point patches, while the student
solely encodes unmasked ones. Finally, the predictor predicts
the latent features of the masked patches using the output latent embeddings from the student, supervised by the outputs
from the teacher. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method is robust to rotations, achieving the state-of-the-art
performance on various downstream tasks.

𝐩𝒋

∆𝐑
+

𝐩′𝒊

𝐩′𝒋

𝐑𝒊

𝐩ഥ𝒋

𝐏

𝐑𝒋

Equal

𝐩ഥ𝒊

+

𝐑′𝒊

+

𝐑′𝒋

∆𝐑′

𝐩ഥ𝒋

𝐏′

Figure 1: Illustration of the consistent relative orientation
between point patches. A point cloud can be partitioned
into several point patches, each of which can be regarded
as an aligned patch rotated from a canonical pose with a
specific rotation. While the overall pose of the point cloud
can undergo various rotations, the relative rotation ∆R between any two patches remains constant and thus is rotationinvariant.

tasks, achieving notable success in the fields of natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV). Inspired
by this success, many self-supervised point cloud representation learning approaches have been proposed (Yang et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2019; Afham et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2021;
Poursaeed et al. 2020; Rao, Lu, and Zhou 2020; Sanghi
2020; Tsai et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2022). They learn to acquire point cloud representations through a variety of tasks,
such as diverse forms of point cloud reconstruction and contrastive learning tasks.
Recently, building on the success of masked language
modeling (MLM) and masked image modeling (MIM), as
exemplified by BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) and Masked AutoEncoder (MAE) (He et al. 2021), several studies have introduced transformer-based masked point modeling (MPM)
approaches (Yu et al. 2022; Pang et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022; Dong et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Qi et al. 2024;
Chen et al. 2024a; Qi et al. 2023). They divide the input
point cloud into point patches and apply a substantial mask-

Code — https://github.com/kunmingsu07/RI-MAE.
Technical Appendices — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.00353.

1

𝐩ഥ𝒊

Introduction

Pioneered by PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a), deep neural networks have achieved great success in point cloud representation learning, and shown impressive results on various
downstream tasks such as point cloud classification and segmentation (Qi et al. 2017b; Wang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2018).
However, such approaches are supervised and necessitate
data annotated with labor-intensive efforts for training models. In contrast, self-supervised learning methods learn to derive representation from unlabeled data by designing pretext
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7015

