The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

InverseCoder: Self-improving Instruction-Tuned Code LLMs with Inverse-Instruct
Yutong Wu1, 2 , Di Huang1 , Wenxuan Shi1, 2 , Wei Wang3 , Yewen Pu4 , Lingzhe Gao3
Shihao Liu3 , Ziyuan Nan1, 2 , Kaizhao Yuan1, 2 , Rui Zhang1 , Xishan Zhang1 ,
Zidong Du1 , Qi Guo1 , Dawei Yin3 , Xing Hu1 , Yunji Chen1, 2 *
1

SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
4
Autodesk Research
wuyutong22s@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in open-source code large language
models (LLMs) have been driven by fine-tuning on the data
generated from powerful closed-source LLMs, which are expensive to obtain. This paper explores whether it is possible to
use a fine-tuned open-source model to generate additional data
to augment its instruction-tuning dataset. We make two observations: (1) A code snippet can serve as the response to different instructions. (2) Instruction-tuned code LLMs perform
better at translating code into instructions than the reverse.
Based on these observations, we propose Inverse-Instruct, a
data augmentation technique that uses a fine-tuned LLM to
generate additional instructions of code responses from its
own training dataset. The additional instruction-response pairs
are added to the original dataset, and a stronger code LLM
can be obtained by fine-tuning on the augmented dataset. We
empirically validate Inverse-Instruct on a range of open-source
code models (e.g., CodeLlama-Python and DeepSeek-Coder)
and benchmarks (e.g., HumanEval(+), MBPP(+), DS-1000
and MultiPL-E), showing it consistently improves the base
models.

Code — https://github.com/wyt2000/InverseCoder
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.05700

1

Introduction

Code generation, which aims to generate code that satisfies
the user’s intent from inputs/outputs or natural language, has
been a significant challenge in computer science. Recently,
closed-source LLMs like GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023)
have enabled the generation of general-purpose code (like
Python) based on natural language, making them broadly
applicable in the fields of programming assistance (Microsoft
2023), computer vision (Surı́s, Menon, and Vondrick 2023;
Gupta and Kembhavi 2023), science (Nejjar et al. 2023), and
embodied intelligence (Liang et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023;
Tang, Key, and Ellis 2024; Wang et al. 2023).
To develop high-performance open-source models, researchers have leveraged these closed-source LLMs to generate datasets of instructions and code, then distilled these
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25525

datasets into smaller, open-source code LLMs via instruction tuning (Luo et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023;
Song et al. 2024). For example, Code Alpaca (Chaudhary
2023) was fine-tuned on 20K instruction-code pairs generated based on GPT-3.5 with S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al.
2022). Luo et al. (2023) used Evol-Instruct (Xu et al. 2023),
a method that creates a diverse set of instruction data from
GPT-3.5 for code generation via evolution heuristics. OSSI NSTRUCT (Wei et al. 2023) first creates coding problems
from the source code snippet, then queries strong LLMs for
their corresponding solutions. Fine-tuned with 75K GPT3.5 OSS-I NSTRUCT data and 110K GPT-4 Evol-Instruct
data (i.e. evol-codealpaca-v1) (theblackcat102 2023),
MagicoderS series achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) results
among open-source code models. These approaches have one
thing in common: they heavily rely on generating data by
querying stronger closed-source LLMs (e.g., GPT-4), which
incurs significant additional expenses. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a self-improvement method for open-source
models without relying on stronger guidance.
This paper explores how to improve an instruction-tuned
code LLM by querying itself (rather than querying a closedsource LLM). We make the following two observations :
1. A single code snippet can serve as a valid response to
multiple instructions.
2. Instruction-tuned code LLMs perform better at translating
code into instructions than translating instructions into
code (see Section 3).
The first observation suggests that an instruction-tuned LLM
can generate a new instruction for each response code in its
training dataset, thereby expanding the original dataset. The
second observation confirms that generating data in this way
(Code-to-NL) is more effective than NL-to-Code.
Therefore, we develop Inverse-Instruct, a simple yet effective instruction tuning approach based on self-generating
instructions from code snippets (Figure 1). Inverse-Instruct
starts with an instruction-code corpus, and a code LLM finetuned on it. We first clean and extract code snippets from the
corpus, then let the code LLM translate these code snippets
into new instructions. Next, we use the code LLM to evaluate
and filter consistent instruction-code pairs from the newly
generated data. Finally, the filtered dataset is combined with
the original instruction dataset to fine-tune a new model. The

