The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Expressive Power of Temporal Message Passing
Przemysław Andrzej Wał˛ega1,2 , Michael Rawson3
1

Queen Mary University of London, UK
2
University of Oxford, UK
3
University of Southampton, UK
p.walega@qmul.ac.uk, michael@rawsons.uk

Abstract

ral component in the messages, we arrive at various temporal
message-passing mechanisms. In this paper we distinguish
two main groups of MP-TGNNs: global, where messages
can be passed between nodes stamped with different times
and local, where messages are passed only between nodes
stamped with the same time, while information about other
times is encoded within messages.
Although several variants of global (Longa et al. 2023;
Xu et al. 2020; Luo and Li 2022) and local (Rossi et al.
2020; Qu et al. 2020) MP-TGNNs have been designed and
successfully applied, we still lack a good understanding of
modelling capabilities dictated by their temporal messagepassing mechanisms, and do not have answers to the following fundamental questions. What tools can we use to analyse
the expressive power of global and local MP-TGNNs? Are
there limits to the expressive power of either type? Which
type can express more? How does the difference in expressiveness affect practical performance? Answers to these
questions are key when choosing an appropriate temporal
message-passing mechanism for a particular task and when
designing new MP-TGNNs. The importance of answering
such questions has been clearly shown by research on expressive power of static MP-GNNs, which equipped us with
powerful tools and gave rise to a whole new research direction (Morris et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Cai, Fürer, and
Immerman 1992; Grohe 2023; Barceló et al. 2020). In the
temporal setting, however, such an analysis is still missing.
We aim to fill this urgent gap.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently been adapted to
temporal settings, often employing temporal versions of the
message-passing mechanism known from GNNs. We divide
temporal message passing mechanisms from literature into
two main types: global and local, and establish WeisfeilerLeman characterisations for both. This allows us to formally
analyse expressive power of temporal message-passing models. We show that global and local temporal message-passing
mechanisms have incomparable expressive power when applied to arbitrary temporal graphs. However, the local mechanism is strictly more expressive than the global mechanism
when applied to colour-persistent temporal graphs, whose
node colours are initially the same in all time points. Our
theoretical findings are supported by experimental evidence,
underlining practical implications of our analysis.

Introduction
Message-passing graph neural networks (or MP-GNNs)
(Gilmer et al. 2017) are prominent models for graph learning, which have achieved state-of-the art performance in
tasks of link prediction as well as in node and graph classification. Importantly, they proved successful in a number of real-world applications including social networks,
protein-protein interactions, and knowledge graphs (Zhou
et al. 2020).
In recent years, there has been growing interest in adapting MP-GNNs to process temporal graphs (for an example
of a temporal graph see the left part of Figure 1) which
are particularly well-suited for dynamic applications such
as recommender systems (Wu et al. 2023), traffic forecasting (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018), finance networks (Pareja et al.
2020), and modelling the spread of diseases (Kapoor et al.
2020). Research in this direction gave rise to various temporal MP-GNNs (MP-TGNNs) obtained by introducing temporal variants of the message-passing mechanism (Longa
et al. 2023; Skarding, Gabrys, and Musial 2021; Gao and
Ribeiro 2022). This can be obtained by assigning to graph
nodes different embeddings (feature vectors) for different
time points and then passing messages between timestamped
nodes. Depending on the routes of messages-passing between timestamped nodes and on the encoding of the tempo-

Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We formalise the two main types of MP-TGNNs, global
and local, depending on the form of the adopted temporal
message-passing mechanism.
• We characterise the expressive power of both types. To
determine which temporal nodes can be distinguished by
MP-TGNNs, we construct a knowledge graph and then
apply the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman test (1-WL).
As depicted in Figure 1, our construction of the knowledge graph is different for global and local MP-TGNNs,
but in both cases this approach allows us to precisely
capture the expressive power of MP-TGNNs. For example, given the temporal graph T G in Figure 1, global and
local MP-TGNNs distinguish the same nodes, since the
colourings in the rightmost graphs are the same.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21000

