The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can Go AIs Be Adversarially Robust?*
Tom Tseng1 , Euan McLean1 , Kellin Pelrine†1,2 , Tony T. Wang†3 , Adam Gleave†1
1

FAR.AI
2
Mila
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{tom, kellin, adam}@far.ai, emc031@gmail.com, twang6@mit.edu

Abstract

valid moves available to the adversary each turn. Third, unlike many non-game domains, Go is inherently adversarial
and zero-sum, and there is no fundamental trade-off between
clean and robust accuracy (Tsipras et al. 2019). Furthermore,
there is even a clear initial target: robustness to the “cyclic
attack” found by Wang et al. (2023a). This class of attacks
is well-defined and consistent enough for humans to understand it, replicate it, and easily tell novice players how to defend against it—suggesting it should be feasible for a superhuman AI to defend against it. The Go models Wang et al.
(2023a) attacked were not designed with robustness in mind,
giving us hope that with more effort they could be made robust.
So, in this paper, we study if it is possible to make superhuman agents robust—that is, to make them have good
worst-case performance—by focusing on the domain of Go.
Go has a proven track record of driving progress in AI, motivating the development of algorithms like AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2016) and MuZero (Schrittwieser et al. 2020). If
we could solve robustness here, it would provide a natural
starting point for designing robust AI systems more broadly.
In particular, we aim for a Go AI that a) does not make mistakes that humans can easily correct and b) cannot be reliably defeated by adversaries trained with a small amount of
compute. These criteria, elaborated in Section 2, reflect two
critical types of robustness: assurance that a system will not
open up new vulnerabilities that humans could avoid, and
that it will not be cheaply exploitable.
Leveraging the state-of-the-art open-source Go AI
KataGo (Wu 2021), we investigate three natural defenses
(Figure 1). But we find that all three are ineffective— given
query access to the defended systems, it is relatively cheap
to train new adversaries that reliably defeat them and cause
them to blunder in ways that humans would not. In fact,
never mind all attacks—each defended system is still vulnerable to cyclic attacks, demonstrating the defenses’ poor
generalization even in the favorable domain of Go.
More specifically, the first defense we study is positional
adversarial training, which augments KataGo’s training
data with examples of Wang et al. (2023a)’s cyclic attack
(Section 3). This intervention produces a defended agent that
never loses against Wang et al.’s adversary. Unfortunately,
we find that adaptively fine-tuning Wang et al.’s adversary
against the defended agent brings its win rate from 0% back

Prior work found that superhuman Go AIs can be defeated
by simple adversarial strategies, especially “cyclic” attacks.
In this paper, we study whether adding natural countermeasures can achieve robustness in Go, a favorable domain for
robustness since it benefits from incredible average-case capability and a narrow, innately adversarial setting. We test
three defenses: adversarial training on hand-constructed positions, iterated adversarial training, and changing the network architecture. We find that though some of these defenses
protect against previously discovered attacks, none withstand
freshly trained adversaries. Furthermore, most of the reliably
effective attacks these adversaries discover are different realizations of the same overall class of cyclic attacks. Our results suggest that building robust AI systems is challenging
even with extremely superhuman systems in some of the most
tractable settings, and highlight two key gaps: efficient generalization of defenses, and diversity in training.

Website — https://goattack.far.ai
Code — https://github.com/AlignmentResearch/go attack

1

Introduction

It is essential that AI systems work robustly, especially when
they are deployed at a societal scale or are used in safetycritical systems. Unfortunately, although the average-case
performance of AI systems is rapidly improving, building
AI systems with good worst-case performance remains an
unsolved problem. Indeed, Go AIs (Wang et al. 2023a), image classifiers (Liu et al. 2023; Croce et al. 2021), and large
language models (Mazeika et al. 2024) all fail catastrophically when presented with adversarial inputs.
However, Go seems like it ought to be especially favorable for robustness. First, unlike computer vision models
and LLMs where average-case performance struggles to surpass humans, Go AIs’ average-case play massively outstrips
human ability (Silver et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2023a). Second, the attack surface is narrow, with only a limited set of
* See the full version (Tseng et al. 2024) of this paper for appen-

dices, which also contain some referenced figures and tables.
†
Equal advising contribution.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27662

