The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Voter Priming Campaigns: Strategies, Equilibria, and Algorithms
Jonathan Shaki 1 , Yonatan Aumann 1 , Sarit Kraus 1
1

Bar-Ilan University
jonath.shaki@gmail.com, yaumann@gmail.com, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

and hence assumed to be limited to a single malicious actor.
We view priming in the context of campaigning and study
equilibria thereof.

Issue salience is a major determinant in voters’ decisions. Candidates and political parties campaign to shift salience to their
advantage - a process termed priming. We study the dynamics, strategies and equilibria of campaign spending for voter
priming in multi-issue multi-party settings. We consider both
parliamentary elections, where parties aim to maximize their
share of votes, and various settings for presidential elections,
where the winner takes all. For parliamentary elections, we
show that pure equilibrium spending always exists and can
be computed in time linear in the number of voters. For two
parties and all settings, a spending equilibrium exists such that
each party invests only in a single issue, and an equilibrium
can be computed in time that is polynomial in the number of
issues and linear in the number of voters. We also show that
in most presidential settings no equilibrium exists. Additional
properties of optimal campaign strategies are also studied.

1

1.1

Introduction

Political parties and candidates invest substantial resources
in campaigns aimed at winning over voters. Interestingly,
research reveals that these campaigns often do not directly
alter voters’ views or attitudes toward candidates and issues.
Rather, campaigns tend to influence the relative salience of
various topics, thereby shaping the importance voters assign
to these issues (Moniz and Wlezien 2020; Macdonald 2023;
Druckman 2004). Consequently, an essential element in political campaigns involves strategically guiding the salience
of issues to the candidates’ advantage, a process known in
political science as priming (Bartels 2006). Political campaigns are costly, and candidates have limited budgets. Thus,
from a strategic perspective, the question is how to best invest
the available campaign budget in order to obtain the most
beneficial priming for a given candidate, and whether an
equilibrium investment profile exists. From a computational
perspective, the question is how to compute the optimal and
equilibrium investments, if they exist. These are the topics of
this paper.
The importance of issue salience in voting has recently
gained attention in the context of election control and manipulation (Lu et al. 2019; Estornell et al. 2020). In these works,
priming is viewed in the context of election manipulation

Summary of Results

We consider two core settings, which we term parliamentary
and presidential. In the parliamentary setting, parties aim to
maximize their share of votes. In the presidential case, the primary goal is to be ranked first. For the presidential setting, we
consider several variants, which relate to a possible secondary
goal of increasing the share of votes.1 The different variants,
formally defined in detail in Section 2, are: (i) uind : the sole
goal is to be ranked first, with no secondary goal, (ii) uplus : a
weighted average the goal of being ranked first and increasing
the share of votes, with the weight highly skewed towards the
former, (iii) umax : the primary goal is to be ranked first, only
if this cannot be achieved then increasing the share is considered as a goal, with significantly lesser utility. Throughout,
we consider plurality ballot form, wherein each voter casts
one vote for its most favorable candidate/party (Meir et al.
2010).
For each setting and variant, we consider the question of
whether a Nash equilibrium necessarily exists and whether,
knowing the strategies of the other players, a best-response
necessarily exists. Our main results are summarised in Table
1. For the parliamentary setting, both a Nash equilibrium (in
pure strategies) and best-response always exist. When there
are only two candidates, it is further the case that in equilibrium each candidate invests its entire budget in priming of
a single issue. For the presidential setting, for both variants
that include a secondary goal, a Nash equilibrium need not
exist in the general case, and not even a best-response. For
the variant where the sole goal is winning, with no other considerations, a best response does exists, and we do not know
if a Nash equilibrium necessarily exists. We note, however,
that the Nash equilibria in this variant may be unnatural, in
the sense that they require candidates to invest not for their
own good, but rather for the benefit of others. In all presidential variants, if there are only two candidates, an equilibrium
exists wherein each candidate invests its entire budget in
priming of a single issue.
1
without such a secondary goal, unnatural behavior can emerge
wherein candidates invest against their own good.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14103

