The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HaCore: Efficient Coreset Construction with Locality Sensitive Hashing for
Vertical Federated Learning
Qinbo Zhang1 * , Xiao Yan2 * , Yukai Ding1 , Fangcheng Fu3 , Quanqing Xu4 ,
Ziyi Li1 , Chuang Hu1† , Jiawei Jiang1†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII)
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
OceanBase, Ant Group
{qinbo zhang, yukai.ding, lzy0323, handc, jiawei.jiang}@whu.edu.cn, yanxiaosunny@gmail.com,
ccchengff@pku.edu.cn, xuquanqing.xqq@oceanbase.com
2

Abstract

they can collaborate using VFL to train a model to predict
the financial risks of customers.
VFL typically employs the SplitNN (Vepakomma et al.
2018) framework to avoid direct data sharing, which divides
the machine learning model into two parts, i.e., a top part and
a bottom part. Each client processes local data using its bottom model to generate activations, which are sent to a server.
The server concatenates the activations from all clients to
train the top model and sends the gradients of the activations back to the clients to perform backward propagation.
SplitNN conducts sample-wise communication because it
needs to transfer activation and gradient for each training
sample, and thus its communication cost increases linearly
with the size of the training set. To reduce the communication cost and training time, we can reduce the number of
training samples. This is achieved by constructing a coreset
that contains representative training samples (Bachem, Lucic, and Krause 2017; Feldman, Schmidt, and Sohler 2020)
and often does not compromise model accuracy.

Vertical federated learning (VFL) trains model when the features of data samples are scattered over multiple clients. To
improve efficiency, a promising approach is to find a coreset
of the data samples and use it as a smaller training set. However, existing methods produce a large coreset when there are
many clients and have long running time. To address these
problems, we propose HaCore for efficient coreset construction in VFL setting. HaCore first employs locality sensitive
hashing (LSH) to map features to bit signatures locally on the
clients, and then merges the local signatures for k-medoids
clustering. Data samples that correspond to the medoids are
added to the coreset. The core idea is that the distance of original data samples can be approximated by the Hamming distance between their LSH-based bit signatures. To accelerate
k-medoids, we utilize an inverted index to search the nearest
medoid and a bit-counting method to quickly compute the aggregate distance from many signatures to a medoid. We evaluate HaCore on 5 datasets and compare with state-of-the-art
coreset construction methods for VFL. The results show that
HaCore accelerates the best-performing baseline by over 45×
and matches the accuracy of training with all samples.

Existing researches. V-coreset (Huang et al. 2022) and
TreeCSS (Zhang et al. 2024) extend coreset to VFL. Vcoreset uses the orthogonal basis and local sensitivity as selection weights to choose training samples for the coreset.
TreeCSS employs a clustering-based method to generate fingerprints for each sample on the clients and constructs the
coreset by selecting the most valuable samples that share the
same fingerprints. However, the two methods have critical
limitations. ❶ V-coreset tailors coreset construction for each
machine learning model and supports only linear regression and unsupervised clustering but classification models
are also popular in practice. ❷ TreeCSS can produce an excessively large coreset when there are many clients. This is
because to represent some samples using one representative,
TreeCSS requires the samples to share identical signatures
over all the clients. The large coreset harms efficiency but
using a smaller coreset degrades accuracy. ❸ When dealing
with high feature dimension and large data volume, the kmeans clustering on each client becomes slow for TreeCSS.
Given the shortcomings of existing researches, we pose the
following research question:
Is it possible to design a coreset construction method that

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; Li et al. 2020;
Zhu et al. 2021) is a distributed machine learning paradigm
where data are partitioned over participants and cannot be
shared due to privacy concerns. FL has two categories, i.e.,
horizontal FL (HFL) (Zhang et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2020) and
vertical FL (VFL) (Yang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019, 2024).
In HFL, the participants have different data samples; while
in VFL, the participants have different features for the same
set of data samples. We focus on VFL, which arises when
different institutions hold distinct data about the same entities. VFL has applications in many areas such as healthcare,
finance, and the Internet of Things (IoT). For instance, each
bank maintains its own financial records of customers, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22515

