The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalized Zero-Shot Learning for Point Cloud Segmentation with
Evidence-Based Dynamic Calibration
Hyeonseok Kim, Byeongkeun Kang, Yeejin Lee*
Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{khslab, byeongkeun.kang, yeejinlee}@seoultech.ac.kr

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot semantic segmentation of 3D point
clouds aims to classify each point into both seen and unseen classes. A significant challenge with these models is
their tendency to make biased predictions, often favoring the
classes encountered during training. This problem is more
pronounced in 3D applications, where the scale of the training
data is typically smaller than in image-based tasks. To address
this problem, we propose a novel method called E3DPCGZSL, which reduces overconfident predictions towards seen
classes without relying on separate classifiers for seen and unseen data. E3DPC-GZSL tackles the overconfidence problem
by integrating an evidence-based uncertainty estimator into
a classifier. This estimator is then used to adjust prediction
probabilities using a dynamic calibrated stacking factor that
accounts for pointwise prediction uncertainty. In addition,
E3DPC-GZSL introduces a novel training strategy that improves uncertainty estimation by refining the semantic space.
This is achieved by merging learnable parameters with textderived features, thereby improving model optimization for
unseen data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on generalized zero-shot semantic segmentation datasets, including
ScanNet v2 and S3DIS.

Figure 1: An illustration of E3DPC-GZSL. E3DPC-GZSL
mitigates the challenge of the overconfidence problem, as
shown in the bottom figures, by using a dynamic calibration (η). The upper figure shows how η is obtained from the
uncertainty estimate (u), which is parameterized by the evidence (α), resulting in an adaptive calibration for both the
seen (bottom left) and unseen (bottom right) datasets.
gories. However, even with zero-shot learning, achieving accurate segmentation for these novel categories remains a significant challenge. This is particularly critical in high-stakes
3D applications such as autonomous driving and medical
imaging, where precise segmentation is crucial for safety
and reliability.
Despite its significant potential impact in various applications, research on ZSL in the 3D domain has received limited attention in the literature. Early efforts to apply ZSL
to point clouds (Cheraghian, Rahman, and Petersson 2019)
focused on a classification task by learning to map point
cloud features into a word embedding space. Subsequent
studies (Cheraghian et al. 2019) introduced an unsupervised
skewness loss to address the hubness problem, which arises
from the phenomenon that the nearest neighbors of many
data points converge to a single hub in a high-dimensional
space.
To address more practical scenarios, these techniques
have been extended to generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL). GZSL seeks to recognize both seen and unseen
categories during inference. There are two different configurations to achieve GZSL: transductive and inductive settings. Transductive settings allow the use of unlabeled data,

Introduction
Semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds refers to a task
that classifies each point into a specific semantic category.
Most existing methods for this task mainly use supervised
learning techniques that rely on a labeled dataset where
each point is already categorized (Graham, Engelcke, and
van der Maaten 2018; Zhao et al. 2021). Although these supervised models perform well at segmenting categories they
have been trained on, they face challenges when dealing
with novel or previously unseen categories, reducing their
effectiveness in real-world scenarios. This limitation arises
because these methods heavily rely on labeled training data,
which may not cover all possible real-world scenarios or objects.
To overcome this limitation, zero-shot learning (ZSL)
provides a valuable alternative by enabling models to generalize learned knowledge to novel, previously unseen cate* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4248

