The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ReactGPT: Understanding of Chemical Reactions via In-Context Tuning
Zhe Chen1,2 , Zhe Fang1,2 , Wenhao Tian1,2 , Zhaoguang Long1 , Changzhi Sun3 , Yuefeng Chen4 , Hao
Yuan4 , Honglin Li2 * , Man Lan1 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Innovation Center for Artificial Intelligence and Drug Discovery, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
4
Shenzhen Transsion Holdings CO.,LTD.
{zhechen666, zhefang, wenhao tian, zglong}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
czsun@chinatelecom.cn, yuefeng.chen@transsion.com, hao.yuan@transsion.com
hlli@hsc.ecnu.edu.cn, mlan@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Edwards et al. (2022) proposed the task of translation between molecules and natural language, and put forward
MolT5 to solve the task.
However, most of the previous work focused on
molecules and ignored chemical reactions, they focus solely
on the interaction between individual molecules and text
(Edwards, Zhai, and Ji 2021a; Edwards et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023; Lu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024), lacking an engagement with text from the perspective of chemical reactions.
Liu et al. (2024b) focuses on reaction-text modeling, proposing the ReactXT method for pretraining large language models specifically for chemical reactions, and applying it to a
downstream task of experimental procedure prediction. Additionally, the detailed description of chemical reactions is
an essential part in biochemical patents and scientific literature. Therefore, we are committed to bridging chemical reactions and natural language text by proposing a new task:
reaction captioning. As shown in Figure 1, the goal of reaction captioning is to generate a text caption describing the reaction process. Specifically, the description of a chemical reaction is a detailed account of a series of chemical changes,
including the exact names of compounds, their molecular
weights, and molar amounts. Additionally, it includes specific information about the reaction conditions, such as temperature range, pressure, and stirring. Moreover, the characterization of the product is also an essential part of the reaction description, typically encompassing spectroscopic data,
such as NMR and mass spectrometry. These standardized
descriptions are common practice in patents and scientific
literature, enabling other researchers to accurately replicate
the experimental results. Our proposed task would promote
research in the scientific field by enabling chemical domain
researchers to generate the experimental steps of a chemical
reaction and have a better understanding of chemical reactions.
Though our proposed reaction-caption task is similar to
the molecular caption task in some aspects, we also face inherent significant challenges. First, the description of chemical reactions is very long and complex, including many details of reactants and reaction conditions, so it is difficult to
generate an accurate description. Second, the same chemical reaction can be described in different ways, leading to a
situation where current evaluation metrics that rely on refer-

The interdisciplinary field of chemistry and artificial intelligence (AI) is an active area of research aimed at accelerating scientific discovery. Large language Models (LLMs)
have shown significant promise in biochemical tasks, especially the molecule caption translation, which aims to align
between molecules and natural language texts. However, existing works mainly focus on single molecules, while alignment between chemical reactions and natural language text
remains largely unexplored. Additionally, the description of
reactions is an essential part in biochemical patents and literature, and research on this aspect not only can help better understand chemical reactions but also promote research on automating chemical synthesis and retrosynthesis. In this work,
we propose ReactGPT, a framework aiming to bridge the gap
between chemical reaction and text. ReactGPT allows a new
task: reaction captioning, by adapting LLMs to learn reactiontext alignment from context examples via In-Context Tuning. Specifically, ReactGPT jointly leverages a Fingerprintsbased Reaction Retrieval module, a Domain-Specific Prompt
Design module, and a two-stage In-Context Tuning module.
We evaluate the effectiveness of ReactGPT on reaction captioning and experimental procedure prediction, both of these
tasks can reflect the understanding of chemical reactions.
Experimental results show that compared to previous models, ReactGPT exhibits competitive capabilities in resolving
chemical reactions and generating high-quality text with correct structure.

Introduction
With the prosperity of large language models(LLMS), artificial intelligence technology is increasingly applied in a
variety of fields(Wu et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023; Dan et al.
2023; Ahn et al. 2024; Azerbayev et al. 2024; Rozière et al.
2024; Luo et al. 2024). Especially in the field of chemical
molecules, the development of large language models has facilitated a lot of meaningful work, as molecules can be represented as Simplified Molecular-Input Line-Entry System
(SMILES) strings (Weininger 1988; Weininger, Weininger,
and Weininger 1989), which can be comprehended and generated by LLMs in a similar manner to natural languages.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

84

