The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CriSPO: Multi-Aspect Critique-Suggestion-guided
Automatic Prompt Optimization for Text Generation
Han He* , Qianchu Liu* , Lei Xu* , Chaitanya Shivade,
Yi Zhang, Sundararajan Srinivasan, Katrin Kirchhoff
Amazon AWS AI Labs
{hankcs, liufqian, leixx, shivadc,
yizhngn, sundarsr, katrinki}@amazon.com
Abstract

et al. 2023; Sordoni et al. 2024). These methods focus on
optimizing task prompts for a single metric on a single aspect.
The process typically involves instructing an LLM optimizer
with a meta-prompt to generate new task prompts based on
previously sampled task prompts and their corresponding
scores. By iteratively exploring candidates and selecting the
task prompt with the highest score, performance on the target
metric improves over numerous iterations. However, applying these methods directly to text generation tasks, such as
summarization, is sub-optimal due to challenges in obtaining effective optimization signals. Unlike classification tasks,
where metrics are straightforward (eg. accuracy), automatic
metrics for text generation, like ROUGE (Lin 2004), provides
limited guidance for prompt refinement. For example, a lower
ROUGE score may result from aspects such as mismatched
length, differences in word choice due to formality, or varying
writing formats, making it difficult to guide LLMs in prompt
modification without fine-grained feedback targeting these
individual aspects. Furthermore, evaluating text generation
involves multiple metrics (Fabbri et al. 2021; Gao and Wan
2022; Elangovan et al. 2024). In addition to reference similarity, other metrics such as factual consistency, which can
be assessed using metrics like AlignScore (Zha et al. 2023),
are also important. Balancing or utilizing these multiple metrics is not fully addressed by existing prompt engineering
methods that focus on optimizing a single metric.

Existing automatic prompt engineering methods are typically
designed for discriminative tasks, where new task prompts
are iteratively refined with limited feedback from a single
metric reflecting a single aspect. However, these approaches
are suboptimal for generative tasks, which require more nuanced guidance beyond a single numeric metric to improve
the prompt and optimize multiple aspects of the generated text.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel multi-aspect
Critique-Suggestion-guided automatic Prompt Optimization
(CriSPO) approach. CriSPO introduces a critique-suggestion
module as its core component. This module spontaneously
discovers aspects, and compares generated and reference texts
across these aspects, providing specific suggestions for prompt
modification. These clear critiques and actionable suggestions
guide a receptive optimizer module to make more substantial
changes, exploring a broader and more effective search space.
To further improve CriSPO with multi-metric optimization,
we introduce an Automatic Suffix Tuning (AST) extension
to enhance the performance of task prompts across multiple
metrics. We evaluate CriSPO on 4 state-of-the-art Large Language Models (LLMs) across 4 summarization and 5 Question
Answering (QA) datasets. Extensive experiments show 3-4%
ROUGE score improvement on summarization and substantial
improvement of various metrics on QA.

Code — https://github.com/amazon-science/CriSPO
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02748

1

Introduction

LLMs have emerged as powerful tools for various natural
language processing tasks, including text generation (Brown
et al. 2020). To fully leverage their capabilities, a critical step
is to design a precise task prompt which specifies the desired
behavior of the LLM to solve a task. Manual prompt engineering is often laborious, skill-intensive and sub-optimal,
motivating the need for automatic prompt engineering techniques which automatically tune the task prompt.
Recent research has made notable progress in automatic
prompt engineering for discriminative tasks, such as text
classification (Zhou et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Pryzant
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24014

To address these challenges, we introduce CriSPO, a
multi-aspect Critique-Suggestion-guided automatic Prompt
Optimization (CriSPO) approach. Overall, our approach employs LLMs to automatically identifies multi-aspect prompt
revision suggestions, based on which prompts are automatically designed and refined (Table 8 in Appendix shows a
working example of how a prompt gets revised in CriSPO).
Inspired by recent self-reflection studies, where LLMs generate verbal feedback to aid in self-improvement (Gero et al.
2023; Shinn et al. 2023; Madaan et al. 2024), we designed the
first key component of CriSPO: the multi-aspect critiquesuggestion meta-prompt. It automatically discovers proper
aspects to compare generated text with reference, write critiques of flaws (Pryzant et al. 2023) and suggestions to improve the task prompt (Figure 2 shows a word cloud of aspects identified by CriSPO, including number of words, style,
and precision). Both critiques and suggestions, written in
natural language, are more helpful for prompt improvement

