The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GENTEEL - NEGOTIATOR: LLM-Enhanced Mixture-of-Expert-Based

Reinforcement Learning Approach for Polite Negotiation Dialogue
Priyanshu Priya1 , Rishikant Chigrupaatii1 , Mauajama Firdaus2 , Asif Ekbal1,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Patna, India
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines) Dhanbad, India
3
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India
{priyanshu 2021cs26, rishikant 2101cs66}@iitp.ac.in, mauajama@iitism.ac.in, asif@{iitp,iitj}.ac.in
Abstract
Developing intelligent negotiation dialogue systems that resolve conflicts and promote equitable, inclusive, and sustainable outcomes is at the forefront of advancing automated negotiation technology for social good. Negotiation involves
balancing cooperation and competition to maximize value
without causing offense. Using polite language fosters mutual
understanding and creates a respectful and collaborative environment essential for successful negotiations in various domains. Considering this, in this paper, we propose a polite negotiation dialogue system, GENTEEL - NEGOTIATOR for social
good applications to boost the overall quality of negotiation
outcomes. We focus on developing a negotiation dialogue
system for two key application areas, namely tourism and ecommerce. We begin by curating a unique negotiation dialogue dataset, N E G O C HAT for tourism. We further enrich the
N E G O C HAT and Integrative Negotiation Dataset (IND) for ecommerce with various negotiation strategies. These datasets
are then used to develop the GENTEEL - NEGOTIATOR, leveraging the Large Language Model (LLM) and mixture-ofexpert (MoE)-based reinforcement learning approach. The
proposed MoE-based method employs heuristic experts dedicated to negotiation, politeness, and dialogue coherence to facilitate the learning of diverse semantics by analyzing the dialogue context. A novel reward function with negotiation strategy congruence, politeness, dialogue coherence, and engagingness rewards is designed to guide the policy’s learning for
generating responses. Automatic and human evaluations on
N E G O C HAT and IND datasets validate the effectiveness of
GENTEEL - NEGOTIATOR in generating polite responses during negotiation while maintaining conversation goals, including coherence and engagingness.

Figure 1: A conversation snippet demonstrating the use of
appropriate strategy (gradual concession-making) and politeness during negotiation to improve the final outcome.

creation of systems that can simulate human-like negotiation strategies (Lewicki, Barry, and Saunders 2016), making them more adaptable and effective in complex scenarios.
The inherent complexity of human negotiation (Morris and
Gelfand 2004), which involves a nuanced interplay of negotiation strategies (Schoenfield 1983), and contextual understanding (Horton 2012), presents an intellectually stimulating challenge.
One critical aspect of successful negotiation in human and
automated systems is the strategic use of politeness (Lee,
Mason, and Malcomb 2021). Politeness (Terada, Okazoe,
and Gratch 2021) plays a vital role in maintaining a cooperative atmosphere and fostering mutual respect between negotiating parties. In negotiation dialogue systems, incorporating politeness strategies (Brown and Levinson 1987) contributes to mitigating conflicts by reducing the likelihood of
offending opponents, thereby maintaining or enhancing sociopsychological closeness. Figure 1 depicts a conversation
snippet showcasing the relevance of negotiation strategy and
politeness modeling during negotiation.
Influenced by the importance of strategies and politeness in negotiation, we introduce GENTEEL - NEGOTIATOR, a
novel polite negotiation dialogue system to infuse politeness
into negotiation conversations while being coherent and engaging using an LLM-enhanced Mixture-of-Expert (MoE)-

Introduction
Negotiation dialogue systems have garnered significant interest in recent years due to their wide-ranging real-world
applications (Yamaguchi, Iwasa, and Fujita 2021; Priya
et al. 2024b). These systems can potentially revolutionize
fields, such as e-commerce (Sree et al. 2023), conflict resolution (Kaur et al. 2022), and customer service (Stock,
Petukhova, and Klakow 2022), where effective negotiation is critical. Techniques like reinforcement learning
(RL) (Zhao, Xie, and Eskenazi 2019) and using large language models (LLMs) (Chen et al. 2023) have enabled the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25010

