The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GraphMoRE: Mitigating Topological Heterogeneity via
Mixture of Riemannian Experts
Zihao Guo1 , Qingyun Sun1 * , Haonan Yuan1 , Xingcheng Fu2 , Min Zhou3 , Yisen Gao4 , Jianxin Li1
1

2

SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
3
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd, China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
guozh@act.buaa.edu.cn, {sunqy, yuanhn, gaoys, lijx}@buaa.edu.cn, fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn, zhoumin27@huawei.com
Abstract

representation learning methods (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018; Ying et al. 2021; Hou et al. 2024),
including existing works on graph foundation models(Liu
et al. 2023b; Sun et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2024; Liu et al.
2023a; Mao et al. 2024), embed graphs into Euclidean space,
which are not conducive to capture the complex topological
structures (Bronstein et al. 2017; Nickel and Kiela 2017).
In recent years, Riemannian representation learning has
received wide attention due to the ability to naturally represent different topological structures (Yang et al. 2024;
Fu et al. 2024). However, real-world graphs always exhibit topological heterogeneity, meaning they are hybrids of
substructures with different topological characteristics, each
suited to be represented in different curvature spaces. Most
of previous works (Liu, Nickel, and Kiela 2019; Chami et al.
2019; Bachmann, Bécigneul, and Ganea 2020; Zhang et al.
2021) exclusively consider a single constant curvature space,
ignoring the problem of topological heterogeneity. Although
some recent studies (Wang et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2022; Cho
et al. 2023) attempt to construct a mixed-curvature space
(i.e., product manifold) that incorporates multiple Riemannian manifolds with different curvatures, they globally learn
the representations of all nodes. In other words, the product manifold is homogeneous(Di Giovanni, Luise, and Bronstein 2022) with the globally uniform curvature for each
point in space, which is inadequate and inflexible for representing the mixed heterogeneous topology.
Considering the heterogeneity of topological patterns
across different substructures of the graph, we aim to adaptively embed structures with different topological patterns
in corresponding optimal embedding space, rather than applying the same curvature globally to the whole graph. To
achieve automatic adaptation to heterogeneous topologies,
there are two main issues need to be addressed. The first
issue is about topology pattern identification. The topological patterns of substructures in a graph are often not explicitly expressed and vary with resolution, making it difficult to directly divide the graph into subgraphs with different topological patterns and process them separately. The
second issue is about optimal embedding space selection.
The appropriate type of Riemannian space and the optimal
curvature vary from different topological properties. Moreover, the substructure of a graph is still complex and diffi-

Real-world graphs have inherently complex and diverse topological patterns, known as topological heterogeneity. Most
existing works learn graph representation in a single constant
curvature space that is insufficient to match the complex geometric shapes, resulting in low-quality embeddings with high
distortion. This also constitutes a critical challenge for graph
foundation models, which are expected to uniformly handle
a wide variety of diverse graph data. Recent studies have indicated that product manifold gains the possibility to address
topological heterogeneity. However, the product manifold is
still homogeneous, which is inadequate and inflexible for representing the mixed heterogeneous topology. In this paper,
we propose a novel Graph Mixture of Riemannian Experts
(GraphMoRE) framework to effectively tackle topological
heterogeneity by personalized fine-grained topology geometry pattern preservation. Specifically, to minimize the embedding distortion, we propose a topology-aware gating mechanism to select the optimal embedding space for each node.
By fusing the outputs of diverse Riemannian experts with
learned gating weights, we construct personalized mixed curvature spaces for nodes, effectively embedding the graph into
a heterogeneous manifold with varying curvatures at different
points. Furthermore, to fairly measure pairwise distances between different embedding spaces, we present a concise and
effective alignment strategy. Extensive experiments on realworld and synthetic datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves superior performance with lower distortion, highlighting its potential for modeling complex graphs with topological heterogeneity, and providing a novel architectural perspective for graph foundation models.

1

Introduction

Capturing the characteristics of structures with low distortion embeddings is critical to graph representation learning, while how to effectively improve the expressive capacity to adapt to topological heterogeneity remains an unresolved challenge. Particularly with the development of graph
foundational models, there is an increasing necessity to uniformly process graph data from a wide variety of types
and domains, imposing higher demands on adaptive feature extraction of complex structures. Most existing graph
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11754

