The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RegMixMatch: Optimizing Mixup Utilization in Semi-Supervised Learning
Haorong Han1,2 , Jidong Yuan1,2 * , Chixuan Wei3 , Zhongyang Yu1,2
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
3
School of Data Science and Intelligent Media, Communication University of China
{harohan, yuanjd, zhongyangyu}@bjtu.edu.cn, chxwei@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract

0.95

Purity / Accuracy

0.95

Consistency regularization and pseudo-labeling have significantly advanced semi-supervised learning (SSL). Prior works
have effectively employed Mixup for consistency regularization in SSL. However, our findings indicate that applying Mixup for consistency regularization may degrade SSL
performance by compromising the purity of artificial labels. Moreover, most pseudo-labeling based methods utilize
thresholding strategy to exclude low-confidence data, aiming
to mitigate confirmation bias; however, this approach limits
the utility of unlabeled samples. To address these challenges,
we propose RegMixMatch, a novel framework that optimizes the use of Mixup with both high- and low-confidence
samples in SSL. First, we introduce semi-supervised RegMixup, which effectively addresses reduced artificial labels
purity by using both mixed samples and clean samples for
training. Second, we develop a class-aware Mixup technique
that integrates information from the top-2 predicted classes
into low-confidence samples and their artificial labels, reducing the confirmation bias associated with these samples
and enhancing their effective utilization. Experimental results
demonstrate that RegMixMatch achieves state-of-the-art performance across various SSL benchmarks.

0.90

Purity (Mixup)
Purity (ERM)
Accuracy (Mixup)
Accuracy (ERM)

0.85
0.80
0.75

Reliability / Accuracy

1

0 200k

600k
Iter.

(a) Purity and accuracy.

1000k

0.85
reliability
top-1 acc
top-2 acc

0.75
0.65

0 200k

600k
Iter.

1000k

(b) Reliability and top-n accuracy.

Figure 1: Motivating example of RegMixMatch. (a) Mixup’s
confidence-reducing behavior undermines SSL. (b) The top2 accuracy rate across all unlabeled data surpasses the reliability of pseudo labels.

the threshold truly unusable? At the core of these questions
is the challenge of effectively utilizing both high- and lowconfidence samples. In this paper, we aim to address these
questions by proposing solutions that optimize the use of
the Mixup technique (Zhang et al. 2018) in SSL.
Mixup, which generates augmented samples by interpolating between randomly shuffled data, has been introduced
into SSL (Berthelot et al. 2019b,a) to enhance model generalization, yielding significant results. However, recent studies (Wen et al. 2021; Pinto et al. 2022) have revealed that
Mixup can induce confidence-reducing behavior because it
inherently predicts interpolated labels for every input. We
argue that this confidence reduction is problematic in SSL
because creating effective artificial labels for unlabeled samples is crucial for training. Methods like sharpening (Berthelot et al. 2019a) and pseudo-labeling (Sohn et al. 2020),
which harden softmax prediction probabilities, have been
shown to be effective. This suggests that SSL expects to
achieve purer artificial labels through low-entropy prediction probabilities, thereby better supporting model training. However, Mixup increases the entropy of prediction
probabilities, adding noise to artificial labels and consequently affecting SSL classification performance due to the
lack of high-purity labels. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the
purity (the proportion of artificial labels where the highest predicted probability exceeds a threshold, reflecting the
model’s prediction confidence) and test accuracy are compared when FixMatch is trained using Empirical Risk Min-

Code — https://github.com/hhrd9/regmixmatch
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10741

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to leverage a small
amount of labeled data to enable the model to extract useful information from a large volume of unlabeled data during
training. FixMatch (Sohn et al. 2020) and its variants (Zhang
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2023) have demonstrated competitive results in SSL by retaining pseudo-labels (Lee et al. 2013) for high-confidence
samples using a threshold strategy combined with consistency regularization. However, these methods heavily rely
on data augmentation techniques for consistency regularization, and their pseudo-labeling approach is constrained
to high-confidence samples alone. This raises two critical
questions: 1) Are existing data augmentation techniques optimal for SSL? 2) Are the low-confidence samples filtered by
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17032

