The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Attention-Sharing Information Distillation Transformer
for Lightweight Single Image Super-Resolution
Karam Park1 , Jae Woong Soh2* , Nam Ik Cho1,3*
1

Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Department of EECS, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea
3
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
saturnian77@ispl.snu.ac.kr, jaewoongsoh@gist.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Transformer-based Super-Resolution (SR) methods have
demonstrated superior performance compared to convolutional neural network (CNN)-based SR approaches due to
their capability to capture long-range dependencies. However, their high computational complexity necessitates the development of lightweight approaches for practical use. To address this challenge, we propose the Attention-Sharing Information Distillation (ASID) network, a lightweight SR network that integrates attention-sharing and an information
distillation structure specifically designed for Transformerbased SR methods. We modify the information distillation
scheme, originally designed for efficient CNN operations, to
reduce the computational load of stacked self-attention layers, effectively addressing the efficiency bottleneck. Additionally, we introduce attention-sharing across blocks to further minimize the computational cost of self-attention operations. By combining these strategies, ASID achieves competitive performance with existing SR methods while requiring only around 300 K parameters – significantly fewer
than existing CNN-based and Transformer-based SR models.
Furthermore, ASID outperforms state-of-the-art SR methods
when the number of parameters is matched, demonstrating its
efficiency and effectiveness.

Figure 1: Visualized comparison of PSNR and the number of
parameters on the Urban100 (×2) dataset. Our ASID is compared with state-of-the-art lightweight SR methods. Green
markers represent CNN-based methods, while yellow markers denote Transformer-based methods.

Researchers have progressively deepened the CNNs to improve performance using various techniques such as pixelshuffle operation (Shi et al. 2016) and residual connections
(He et al. 2016). However, increasing network depth has resulted in a substantial rise in computational costs. Additionally, the introduction of attention mechanisms (Zhang et al.
2018; Dai et al. 2019; Mei et al. 2020) has further escalated
computational demands, limiting the practicality of SR models. As a result, there is growing interest in developing efficient, lightweight networks that balance resource constraints
and reconstruction performance.
To address the computational burden of CNNs, various strategies have been introduced, such as weight-sharing
(Kim, Kwon Lee, and Mu Lee 2016; Tai, Yang, and Liu
2017; Tai et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019) and feature reuse (He
et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020; Park, Soh, and Cho 2021). However, these approaches often impose limitations on network
capabilities and may compromise performance due to restricted depth and receptive fields inherent in convolution
operations.
Recently, Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) are increasingly being adopted for image reconstruction tasks, in-

Project Page — https://github.com/saturnian77/ASID

Introduction
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is a technology
designed to improve the resolution and quality of lowresolution (LR) images by transforming them into highresolution (HR) counterparts. SISR is widely applied in
tasks that require HR imagery, including medical imaging
(Shi et al. 2013), satellite imaging (Thornton, Atkinson, and
Holland 2006), and surveillance (Zhang et al. 2010). Despite
its widespread use, SISR remains a challenging problem due
to its inherent ill-posed nature.
Recently, SISR methods based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have shown significant performance improvement over traditional approaches (Timofte, De Smet,
and Van Gool 2013; Yang et al. 2010; Kim and Kwon 2010).
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6416

