The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cognitive Bias and Reassignment: Who Can Contribute High Quality LLM Data
Yunfan Gao1 , Yun Xiong2 , Zhongyuan Hu3 , Yiming Zhang3 , Meng Wang3 , Haofen Wang3 *
2

1
Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
College of Design and Innovation, Tongji University
{gaoyunfan1602, carter.whfcarter}@gmail.com

Abstract

the collection process of historical materials also reveals significant differences from piratical application scenarios. Another approach is manual construction, such as establishing a
crowdsourcing platform to collect manually annotated data,
e.g., Scale.AI and Dynaboard (Ma et al. 2021). Most existing
crowdsourcing platforms mainly relying on participants’ responses to questions or annotations of given texts. However,
they fail to fully utilize the experience accumulated by ordinary users in daily use of LLMs and their ability to identify
questions that LLMs find difficult to answer.
To fully leverage this collective intelligence, we initiated a
data co-creation platform1 with the goal of “collecting highquality LLM evaluation data”. The data collection process
is shown in Figure 1. The platform posts relevant data tasks
to attract users to pose questions around specific topics and
to evaluate the performance of different LLMs, selecting the
best model to provide feedback or manually fill in corresponding answers. The submitted data is reviewed by experts to ensure its quality and practicality. Focusing on typical LLM tasks such as logical reasoning, text generation
and personal assistant , over 200 specific scenario tasks were
refined, attracting more than 10,000 participants who contributed a total of over 150,000 deduplicated data entries.
The extensive accumulation of data has provided us with
rich material to explore “Who are the best data contributors?”. However, we need to further analyze the following
two research questions (RQ) first:
RQ1: What user characteristics significantly contribute to
the quality of data?
RQ2: What kind of task is suitable for what kind of users?
To answer these questions, we start from the perspective
of user behavior, constructing an observable user cohort, and
conducting a comprehensive analysis of user behavior preferences and task completion rates. We found that users’ cognitive levels and professional backgrounds, including age,
education level, occupation, and professional skills, affect
their understanding in different task types, leading to significant differences in ability when handling specific tasks.
Nevertheless, some interesting findings that contradict initial expectations has also been revealed. In particular, users
tend to overestimate their abilities or preferences in certain
tasks, which do not match their actual areas of expertise.

The rapid development of Large Language Models has highlighted the urgent need for large-scale, high-quality, and diverse data. We have launched an LLM data co-creation platform aimed at bringing together a wide range of participants
to contribute data. Within six months, the platform has attracted over 10,000 participants who contributed more than
150,000 data entries across more than 200 tasks. An observable user cohort was constructed around the question,
“Who is the best data contributor?” along with sub-questions
concerning user preferences, task competence, and more.
Through a detailed analysis of data contributors, this paper
reveals several data collection patterns related to human factors. It reveals that contributors who provide high-quality
data often do not meet initial expectations, as their behavior exhibits typical characteristics of the Dunning-Kruger effect. This paper examined the cognitive bias between users’
self-assessment and actual abilities, where individuals tend to
overestimate their capabilities in certain tasks, leading to a decreased willingness to continue contributing and a consequent
waste of human resources. To address this issue, we propose
a task reassignment method based on multi-task fine-tuning
of small language models (SLMs) to better align user groups
with appropriate task types. After the reallocation, we observed a significant increase in user engagement and platform
benefits, along with improved overall platform efficiency. The
versatility of this method makes it applicable to broader data
collection scenarios.

Introduction
In the evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs), data
plays an indispensable role. Following Scaling Law (Kaplan et al. 2020), the capabilities of LLMs have been significantly enhanced, where high-quality data has a decisive
impact (Zhou et al. 2024). In the data-centric era of artificial intelligence, the collection of data has always been a
critical issue. Typically, high-quality question-and-answer
datasets constructed from existing materials (Huang et al.
2024; Gunasekar et al. 2023; Longpre et al. 2024) are often
constrained by the singularity of task types, which makes
it difficult to meet the diverse application needs. Moreover,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

28007

https://ai-ceping.com

