The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Practicable Black-Box Evasion Attacks on Link Prediction in Dynamic Graphs
—a Graph Sequential Embedding Method
Jiate Li1 2 , Meng Pang1 * , Binghui Wang2 *
1

Nanchang University, Nanchang, China
Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, USA
jetrichardlee@gmail.com, pangmeng1992@gmail.com, bwang70@iit.edu
2

Abstract
Link prediction in dynamic graphs (LPDG) has been widely
applied to real-world applications such as website recommendation, traffic flow prediction, organizational studies, etc.
These models are usually kept local and secure, with only the
interactive interface restrictively available to the public. Thus,
the problem of the black-box evasion attack on the LPDG
model, where model interactions and data perturbations are
restricted, seems to be essential and meaningful in practice. In
this paper, we propose the first practicable black-box evasion
attack method that achieves effective attacks against the target LPDG model, within a limited amount of interactions and
perturbations. To perform effective attacks under limited perturbations, we develop a graph sequential embedding model
to find the desired state embedding of the dynamic graph
sequences, under a deep reinforcement learning framework.
To overcome the scarcity of interactions, we design a multienvironment training pipeline and train our agent for multiple
instances, by sharing an aggregate interaction buffer. Finally,
we evaluate our attack against three advanced LPDG models on three real-world graph datasets of different scales and
compare its performance with related methods under the interaction and perturbation constraints. Experimental results
show that our attack is both effective and practicable.

Figure 1: Illustration of LPDG: a dynamic graph sequence is
taken as an input, and the LPDG model is trained to predict
the future graph in the next time slice.
and MetaDyGNN (Yang et al. 2022a). These methods differ in their prediction settings. For example, MTCP and
DyGCN focus on predicting the entire future graph at the
next timestamp, whereas EvolveGCN and DynGEM provide
predictions for the next set of changing edges.
Like adversarial attacks on static graphs, recent work (Fan
et al. 2021) shows that LPDG for dynamic graphs is also vulnerable to black-box evasion attack, a practical attack where
the attacker has no access to parameters or structure of the
target model. However, the existing attack (called SAC) (Fan
et al. 2021) based on reinforcement learning (RL) requires
millions of interactions with the target model. Despite that,
due to a coarse embedding method on the graph sequence,
SAC is unable to attack large-scale graphs with large state
spaces. These limitations inhibit SAC from being a practicable attack method in real-world scenarios.
We propose the first practicable black-box evasion attack
on LPDG methods. Given a target model and instance, we
generate the perturbed instance with only a few interactions
with the model, while achieving promising attack results.
Our attack method mainly consists of two novel designs:

Code — https://github.com/JetRichardLee/GSE-METP

Introduction
Dynamic graph sequences are a crucial structure for capturing the temporal dynamics of real-world systems. They represent the timing information within a dynamic graph, such
as the historical evolution of interactions in a system. Link
Prediction in Dynamic Graphs (LPDG), illustrated in Figure
1, leverages a dynamic graph sequence as input to predict
future links for the next timestamp. Accurate predictions are
highly valuable for a wide range of applications, including
online recommendations, traffic management, and modeling disease contagion. In recent years, numerous methods
for LPDG have been developed, including DynGEM (Goyal
et al. 2018), MTCP (Zhou et al. 2018), EvolveGCN (Pareja
et al. 2019), DyGCN (Manessi, Rozza, and Manzo 2020),

1) A graph sequential embedding (GSE). GSE has a static
degree embedding for every graph in the sequence, which
enables it to find the desired state representations of the
embedding sequence using two Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) networks. Later, these representations can be applied to per-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26265

