The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ConFREE: Conflict-free Client Update Aggregation
for Personalized Federated Learning
Hao Zheng1,2 , Zhigang Hu1 , Liu Yang1 * , Meiguang Zheng1 , Aikun Xu1 , Boyu Wang2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada
{zhenghao, zghu, yangliu, zhengmeiguang, aikunxu}@csu.edu.cn; bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract
Negative transfer (NF) is a critical challenge in personalized federated learning (pFL). Existing methods primarily focus on adapting the local data distribution on the client side,
which can only resist NF, rather than avoiding NF itself. To
tackle NF at its root, we investigate its mechanism through
the lens of the global model, and argue that it is caused by
update conflicts among clients during server aggregation. In
light of this, we propose a conflict-free client update aggregation strategy (ConFREE), which enables us to avoid NF in
pFL. Specifically, ConFREE guides the global update direction by constructing a conflict-free guidance vector through
projection and utilizes the optimal local improvements of the
worst-performing clients near the guidance vector to regularize server aggregation. This prevents the conflicting components of the updates from transferring, achieving balanced updates between different clients. Notably, ConFREE is modelagnostic and can be straightforwardly adopted as a complement to enhance various existing NF-resistance methods implemented on the client side. Extensive experiments demonstrate significantly enhances existing pFL algorithms when
integrated with ConFREE.

Figure 1: Weighted average aggregation vs. Conflict-free
aggregation method. In non-IID settings, where client data
varies widely and is imbalanced, updates ∆θi and ∆θj after training the global model θglobal on clients i and j may
conflict when ∆θi · ∆θj < 0. The classical FedAvg ∆θ̄avg
tends to be dominated by the ∆θj from clients with more
data, leading to insufficient optimization for client i. ConFREE addresses this by projecting conflicting updates onto
a normal plane, creating a conflict-free guiding vector ∆θ̄⊥ .
The optimal ∆θ∗ is then found within a ball centered around
∆θ̄⊥ , which maximizes the local improvement of the worst
performing client in the neighborhood. This ensures the up∗
dated global model is closer to the global optimum θij
and
balances the update across clients.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a paradigm that enables multiple distributed clients to collaboratively train a global model
without sharing their private data (Wen et al. 2023). With the
increasing implementation of data privacy protection legislation (Regulation 2016; Goldman 2020), FL has found
success in various artificial intelligence domains (Liu et al.
2020; Tan et al. 2020). However, the influx of vast amounts
of non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
and imbalanced data generated by different devices poses a
challenge. Consequently, the traditional approaches of employing a single global model in FL often lead to significant deviations from local data distributions on individual
clients, resulting in slow convergence and poor inference
performance. To address the statistical heterogeneity in FL,
personalized Federated Learning (pFL) has been proposed
(Lee et al. 2024), which aims to learn a tailored model for
each client while still benefiting from the global model to
enhance their models and address data scarcity issues.

Although there has been a significant amount of research,
negative transfer is still a critical issue in pFL (Kulkarni,
Kulkarni, and Pant 2020; Mansour et al. 2020). Negative
transfer refers to the situation where models are shared between different clients and the performance is degraded because some client updates negatively affect the shared model
(Wu et al. 2023). Existing works have been studied from
the client side (Collins et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023d) and
from the server side (Sattler, Müller, and Samek 2020; Ye
et al. 2023) to mitigate the impact of negative transfer. The
former aims to preserve more local features while incorporating a small amount of global information through tech-

* Corresponding authors: Liu Yang, Boyu Wang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22875

