The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tracking Everything Everywhere across Multiple Cameras
Li-Heng Wang1 , YuJu Cheng2 , Tyng-Luh Liu1
1

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2
National Taiwan University
{lihengw, liutyng}@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

Danelljan, and Timofte 2020) manage to perform dense
pixel-level matching, they are not effective for matching all
pixels and result in inconsistent motion estimation between
frames. Furthermore, these techniques often lose track of
pixels when they become occluded. A contributing factor
to these issues is the independent processing of frames, neglecting the temporal relationships between them. The task
of matching pixels across multi-view video frames, which
requires consistent and reliable feature matching across different cameras and timesteps, has yet to be explored.
The proposed formulation concerns a more challenging
scenario where we aim to track every single point across
multiple video sequences captured by different cameras.
Given any query pixel from an arbitrary timestep and view,
the model should predict accurate correspondences in every
other frame across cameras. This scenario not only involves
predicting accurate positions and visibilities across long sequences, similar to single-view pixel tracking, but also requires integrating information across cameras. An advantage
of the multi-camera setup is that it provides different perspectives of the same scene, reducing the likelihood of losing track of pixels due to occlusions, extreme angles, or poor
lighting conditions. For instance, if a pixel is occluded in one
camera, the information from another camera can compensate, leading to more accurate and robust tracking.
To achieve this, we propose a unified multi-view pixel
tracking model capable of performing pixel-to-pixel matching across cameras and time frames. The key insight of our
method is leveraging a global canonical space, which models a universal 3D representation of the entire scene, invariant to view and time changes. To obtain correspondences
across different views and timesteps, the model learns a bijective mapping to deform points from different timesteps
and views to the canonical space, and vice versa. A perview latent code is learned along with the timestep to condition the bijective mapping model, allowing it to capture
observational differences without needing camera poses. In
addition, we add a spatial loss to encourage rigidity among
neighboring pixels, addressing the issue of some pixels lagging behind fast-moving objects.
Our approach also considers the situation where full
multi-view video sequences are not available in training, necessitating test-time training of the model. A caveat of the
test-time optimization frameworks (e.g., NeRF) is their limi-

Pixel tracking in single-view video sequences has recently
emerged as a significant area of research. While previous
work has primarily concentrated on tracking within a given
video, we propose to expand pixel correspondence estimation
into multi-view scenarios. The central concept involves utilizing a canonical space that preserves a universal 3D representation across different views and timesteps. This model allows
for precise tracking of points even through prolonged occlusions and significant deformations in appearance between
views. Moreover, we show that our model, through the use of
an efficient training strategy incorporating distillation loss, is
capable of performing incremental pixel tracking, a process
often seen as complex in test-time optimization techniques.
Comprehensive experiments validate the method’s ability to
accurately establish point correspondences across cameras.
Furthermore, our method achieves promising results of multiview pixel tracking without requiring the entire video sequences to be provided at once.

1

Introduction

Pixel-level matching has posed a significant challenge in
computer vision. Notable approaches for addressing this
task include optical flow estimation (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015;
Teed and Deng 2020; Shi et al. 2023a,b; Huang et al. 2022)
and feature matching (Sarlin et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021;
Pautrat et al. 2023). However, optical flow supports accurate
estimation primarily on subsequent frames and tends to fail
in tracking through occlusions, while feature matching only
identifies significant features from pairs of images instead of
matching all points. To tackle both challenges concurrently,
several studies have recently been dedicated to dealing with
long-term pixel tracking. These methods not only track every single pixel through a video sequence but also provide
accurate long-term motion estimation. However, these approaches have mainly concentrated on finding dense and
long-term trajectories within a single video sequence.
An additional aspect of the pixel-matching problem involves finding dense correspondences between pairs of images captured from distinct viewpoints. Although several approaches, e.g., (Edstedt et al. 2023b; Ni et al. 2023; Edstedt
et al. 2023a; Nam et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2020; Truong,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7789

