The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Solving Higher-Order Quantified Boolean Satisfiability via Higher-Order Model
Checking
Hiroshi Unno1 , Takeshi Tsukada2 , Jie-Hong Roland Jiang3
1

Tohoku University
Chiba University
3
National Taiwan University
hiroshi.unno@acm.org, t.tsukada@acm.org, jhjiang@ntu.edu.tw
2

Abstract

as arguments to other functions and returned as results.
Since the decidability problem of higher-order model checking being resolved by (Ong 2006), various model checkers (Kobayashi 2009a; Broadbent and Kobayashi 2013;
Ramsay, Neatherway, and Ong 2014) have been actively researched and developed, with the aim of making them practical for the formal verification of higher-order functional
programs, even with the high computational complexity.
Specifically, we reduce the HOSAT problem to higherorder model checking by constructing a higher-order program that returns true when the HOSAT problem is satisfiable and false otherwise. Here, the higher-order variables in the original HOQBF, introduced by the higher-order
quantifiers, naturally correspond to higher-order variables in
the program through the transformation, allowing a higherorder model checker to efficiently and precisely reason about
higher-order functions and, as a result, higher-order quantifiers. Technically, to achieve this transformation, it is necessary to define recursive functions for enumerating the elements in the domains of higher-order quantifiers. However,
since higher-order model checking can only handle finite
data domains, such as Boolean or enumerated types as primitive data types, careful design is required. To address this,
we inductively define and use what we call enumeration
structures for Boolean and higher-order function types (for
more details, see Section 3).
In some applications, such as synthesis (Jiang 2023), it
is required not only to determine the satisfiability of a HOQBF but also to extract assignments to existential quantifiers that make the HOQBF true as Skolem functions. Therefore, this work also provides a method for extracting Skolem
functions from the witness output by a higher-order model
checker when it answers “yes.”
We implemented the proposed reduction and combined it
with the state-of-the-art higher-order model checker H OR S AT 2 (Broadbent and Kobayashi 2013; Kobayashi 2016),
realizing the first HOQBF solver, which we call HOMCS AT. We evaluated the solver using a benchmark set consisting of 21 problem instances and obtained promising results
while also identifying the limitations of the backend solver
and suggesting directions for improvement.
By bridging these two distinct worlds of higher-order
model checking and higher-order quantified Boolean logic
satisfiability through our reduction, and by applying higher-

The satisfiability (SAT) problem of higher-order quantified
Boolean formula (HOQBF) emerged as a natural generalization of SAT, quantified SAT, and second-order quantified
SAT. It allows succinct encoding of k-EXPTIME problems
beyond the reach of prior Boolean satisfiability formulations,
but its application was hampered by the lack of solvers. In this
paper, we present the first HOQBF solver that leverages techniques from the model-checking community. Our HOQBF
solver is based on reduction to higher-order model checking, which is a generalization from model checking of whileprograms to that of higher-order functional programs. The
ability of a higher-order model checker to deal with higherorder functions in a program is used to reason about higherorder quantifiers in HOQBF.

1

Introduction

Higher-order quantified Boolean satisfiability (HOSAT) extends Boolean satisfiability (SAT). It allows quantification
over higher-order Boolean function variables, and subsumes
all the currently known SAT variants, including the satisfiability of quantified Boolean formula (QBF), dependency QBF (DQBF), and second-order QBF (SOQBF). The
HOSAT problem is TOWER-complete and the higher-order
quantified Boolean formula (HOQBF) is capable of succinct
encoding of k-EXPTIME problems (Chistikov et al. 2022).
Its usefulness has been demonstrated in encoding Presburger arithmetic for a theoretical complexity study (Chistikov et al. 2022). Other potential applications may include,
e.g., memory consistency verification (Cooksey et al. 2020),
planning for multi-agent systems, secure system synthesis
(Jiang 2023), and solving quantified bit-vector arithmetic
problems (Jonáš and Strejček 2018). Despite the potential
broad applications of HOQBF, to date, there are no HOQBF
solvers, not even for SOQBF.
In this work, we develop the first HOQBF solver to initiate the study for practical applications. The technical novelty lies in leveraging techniques from higher-order model
checking for reasoning about higher-order quantifiers in
HOQBFs. Higher-order model checking is a generalization
from model checking of while-programs to that of higherorder functional programs, where functions can be passed
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11372

