The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Generalized Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation via
Effective Knowledge Transfer
Xinyue Chen1 , Miaojing Shi2 * , Zijian Zhou1 , Lianghua He2 , Sophia Tsoka1
1

Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
{xinyue.1.chen, zijian.zhou, sophia.tsoka}@kcl.ac.uk, {mshi, helianghua}@tongji.edu.cn
2

Support Mask

Abstract
Support Image

Feature
Extractor

Generalized few-shot semantic segmentation (GFSS) aims to
segment objects of both base and novel classes, using sufficient samples of base classes and few samples of novel
classes. Representative GFSS approaches typically employ a
two-phase training scheme, involving base class pre-training
followed by novel class fine-tuning, to learn the classifiers for
base and novel classes respectively. Nevertheless, distribution
gap exists between base and novel classes in this process.
To narrow this gap, we exploit effective knowledge transfer
from base to novel classes. First, a novel prototype modulation module is designed to modulate novel class prototypes
by exploiting the correlations between base and novel classes.
Second, a novel classifier calibration module is proposed to
calibrate the weight distribution of the novel classifier according to that of the base classifier. Furthermore, existing GFSS
approaches suffer from a lack of contextual information for
novel classes due to their limited samples, we thereby introduce a context consistency learning scheme to transfer the
contextual knowledge from base to novel classes. Extensive
experiments on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i demonstrate that
our approach significantly enhances the state of the art in the
GFSS setting.

Prediction

Query Image
(a)
Base classifier

Feature
Extractor
Query Image

Novel classifier
(b)

Prediction

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) FSS and (b) GFSS: FSS models predict only the novel class specified by the support image, whereas GFSS models can predict both base and novel
classes at the same time. During inference, GFSS models do
not rely on support images of novel classes any more, as they
are fine-tuned using all samples of novel classes to form a
novel classifier. In this context, “horse” is a base class, while
“person” represents a novel class.

Code — https://github.com/xinyue1chen/GFSS-EKT

1

Feature
Processing

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task with widespread applications in fields like robotics and
medical imaging. The advent of fully convolutional network (FCN) and vision transformer (ViT) has led to significant achievements in semantic segmentation (Yu and
Koltun 2015; Zhao et al. 2017; Li et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022). However, supervised learning for this task typically
demands a large amount of annotated data yet the trained
models cannot recognize novel classes. To mitigate this,
few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) has been proposed
to develop models that can effectively segment objects of
novel classes using only a handful of annotated support samples. Recently, FSS methods (Wang et al. 2019; Lang et al.
2023; Liu and Qin 2020; Li et al. 2021; Chen and Shi 2024)

have achieved significant progress; but they are constrained
to segment only objects of novel classes while ignoring base
classes. To overcome this limitation, generalized few-shot
semantic segmentation (GFSS) extends FSS to segment both
base and novel classes.
Representative GFSS approaches (Tian et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023; Hajimiri et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2024) adopt a two-phase training process: in the pre-training
phase, the model is trained on sufficient base samples to segment objects of base classes; afterward, in the fine-tuning
phase, the model is updated with a few annotated samples of
novel classes, enabling simultaneous segmentation of both
base and novel classes. Figure 1 illustrates the comparison
between FSS and GFSS. This two-phase training approach
often results in poor performance on novel classes due to the
distribution gap between base and novel classes. This distri-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2256

