The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AIA: Autoregression-Based Injection Attacks Against Text2SQL Models
Deyin Li1 , Xiang Ling2 * , Changjiang Li3 , Xiang Chen1 , Chunming Wu1 *
1
Zhejiang University
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Stony Brook University
lideyin@zju.edu.cn, lingxiang@iscas.ac.cn, meet.cjli@gmail.com, wasdnsxchen@gmail.com, wuchunming@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
To facilitate understanding of users’ diverse queries against
the back-end databases in web applications, researchers have
introduced Text-to-SQL (Text2SQL) models that can generate well-structured SQL queries from users’ query texts in
natural language. As the Text2SQL model decouples the user
queries with the back-end databases, it inherently mitigates
the SQL injection risk posed by inserting users’ input into
pre-written SQL queries. However, what security risks to web
applications may be posed by Text2SQL models remains an
open question. In this paper, we present a new attack framework, named Autoregression-based Injection Attacks (AIA),
to evaluate the security risks of Text2SQL models. In particular, AIA makes target models generate attack payloads
by constructing specific inputs and adjusting the input autoregressively. Our evaluation demonstrates that AIA can cause
Text2SQL models to generate target output by adversarial inputs with success rates of over 70% in most scenarios. The
generated adversarial input has certain transferability in target
Text2SQL models. Additionally, practice experiments show
that AIA can make Text2SQL models extract user lists from
databases and even delete data in databases directly.

Figure 1: Inserting user input as Value causes SQL injection.

affect the security of databases. It should be studied first before using by web applications.
Usually, web applications insert users’ input as the
“Value” in pre-written SQL queries to query databases (Qu
et al. 2024), thus posing a potential risk of SQL injection, as
shown in Figure 1. For Text2SQL models, users’ “Value”
provided in text must also be retained in generated SQL
queries. Thus, attackers may use Text2SQL models to generate SQL queries that retain attack payloads as their “Value”
to attack databases. This possibility has been proved by
Peng et al (Peng et al. 2022). They inserted attack payloads
to some Text2SQL models without any changes and found
Text2SQL models can generate SQL queries with payloads.
However, in practice, attack payloads are hardly maintained
as “Value” in Text2SQL models’ generation.
To study the security of Text2SQL models and find the attack payload that can be kept in the generation, we propose
Autoregression-based Injection Attacks (AIA), which can
make Text2SQL models generate target output. We search
for the most suitable column to construct the injection point
for inserting attack payloads into generated SQL queries. To
address the challenge that the “generate()” method of generation models is unable to backpropagate gradient, AIA
adopts an autoregressive strategy to gradient backpropagation during each token generation step and generate adversarial tokens to make target models generate target tokens
sequentially. Our evaluation demonstrates AIA can make
target Text2SQL models generate SQL queries with attack
payloads by generating adversarial input at high success
rates. By AIA, attackers can obtain data and administrator

Introduction
Currently, databases play an important role in web applications. To facilitate user interactions with databases, web
applications usually provide pre-written SQL queries. Nevertheless, such pre-written queries often face challenges in
meeting the diverse queries of users. Thus, researchers have
proposed Text-to-SQL (Text2SQL) to generate SQL queries
from text (Li et al. 2023). Presently, to generate complex
SQL queries, the popular methods are based on generation
models. Among these Text2SQL methods, some are based
on specially trained models and some are based on Large
Language Models. To distinguish them, we call the first kind
of methods generation-based and the second LLM-based
methods. They hold the top 10 ranks on the leaderboard for
the Spider challenge (Yu et al. 2018b), a large-scale complex and cross-domain Text2SQL dataset. Considering the
SQL queries generated by Text2SQL technology will operate databases directly, the security of Text2SQL will directly
* Chunming Wu and Xiang Ling are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18262

