The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Skeleton-based Action Recognition with Non-linear Dependency Modeling and
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion
Haipeng Chen,1,2 , Yuheng Yang1,2 * , Yingda Lyu1,3*
1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University,
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
3
Public Computer Education and Research Center, Jilin University
chenhp@jlu.edu.cn, yangyh20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, ydlv@jlu.edu.cn,
Abstract

Human skeleton-based action recognition has long been an
indispensable aspect of artificial intelligence. Current stateof-the-art methods tend to consider only the dependencies
between connected skeletal joints, limiting their ability to
capture non-linear dependencies between physically distant
joints. Moreover, most existing approaches distinguish action
classes by estimating the probability density of motion representations, yet the high-dimensional nature of human motions
invokes inherent difficulties in accomplishing such measurements. In this paper, we seek to tackle these challenges from
two directions: (1) We propose a novel dependency refinement approach that explicitly models dependencies between
any pair of joints, effectively transcending the limitations imposed by joint distance. (2) We further propose a framework
that utilizes the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion to
differentiate action classes without being affected by data dimensionality, and mathematically derive learning objectives
guaranteeing precise recognition. Empirically, our approach
sets the state-of-the-art performance on NTU RGB+D, NTU
RGB+D 120, and Northwestern-UCLA datasets.

1

Figure 1: The conceptual diagram illustrates the mapping
process of feature representations from Euclidean space into
Hilbert space. The mapping process is achieved through the
kernel function.

Unfortunately, after a systematic investigation of prior
works, we observe that they still suffer from inaccurate action recognition. We conjecture that the reasons are two
folds. (1) First, current methods (Yan et al. 2018; Li et al.
2019) typically model human motions by performing graph
convolutions on pre-defined skeleton graphs. However, these
approaches exhibit a severe limitation as they consider only
the dependency between physically connected joints while
ignoring non-linear dependencies between geometrically
separated joints. Although several works (Xu et al. 2022;
Song et al. 2022) tend to address this through hierarchical
graphs or scaling graphs, they still struggle to effectively
model non-linear dependencies between distant joints due
to the limited receptive field of graph convolutions. (2) Second, given the motion feature representation, existing approaches (Chi et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023;
Huang et al. 2023) typically estimate its probability density
in conjunction with the category label to identify the action
class. A higher probability density indicates a stronger likelihood of the motion feature belonging to the correct class.
Nevertheless, a motion sequence is characterized as a time
series of skeletal poses, each of which translates to the positions of all joints, resulting in a high-dimensional representation. Estimating the probability density of these highdimensional representations in the raw Euclidean space in-

Introduction

Endowing machines with the ability to perceive and recognize human behaviors is very much coveted for various applications ranging from virtual reality to security monitoring (Liu et al. 2022b; Wu et al. 2024b). Consequently, action recognition has attracted much interest, particularly for
methods that rely on skeletal data, which is robust against
environmental noise and viewpoint changes.
Recent skeleton-based approaches (Yan et al. 2018; Shi
et al. 2019a,b) tend to employ Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to model human motion patterns since the
hierarchical and tree-like graph structure naturally in the human skeleton. For instance, (Xu et al. 2022) attempts to
design sophisticated adjacency matrices, seeking to pursue
more nuanced modeling of spatial joint dependencies. (Chi
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023) put their efforts into learning
discriminative motion features from the skeleton sequence.
(Yang et al. 2023) adopts an information-theoretic objective
to fully mine task-relevant information while reducing taskirrelevant nuisances.
* Corresponding to Yuheng Yang and Yingda Lyu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2043

