The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Instruction-guided Multi-Granularity Segmentation and Captioning
with Large Multimodal Model
Xu Yuan1 * † , Li Zhou2 * ‡ , Zenghui Sun2 , Zikun Zhou3 , Jinsong Lan2 ‡
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HK SAR
2
TAO Technology, Alibaba Group, China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, China
xuyuan127@gmail.com, {pengye.zl,zenghui.szh,jinsonglan.ljs}@taobao.com, zhouzikunhit@gmail.com
(a) Panoptic SegCap

Abstract

(b) Fine-grained SegCap

Missing objects
GLaMM

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have significantly progressed by extending large language models. Building on
this progress, the latest developments in LMMs demonstrate
the ability to generate dense pixel-wise segmentation by integrating segmentation models. Despite the innovations, existing works’ textual responses and segmentation masks remain at the instance level, showing limited ability to perform fine-grained understanding and segmentation even provided with detailed textual cues. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a Multi-Granularity Large Multimodal
Model (MGLMM), which is capable of seamlessly adjusting the granularity of Segmentation and Captioning (SegCap)
following user instructions, from panoptic SegCap to finegrained SegCap. We name such a new task Multi-Granularity
Segmentation and Captioning (MGSC). Observing the lack
of a benchmark for model training and evaluation over the
MGSC task, we establish a benchmark with aligned masks
and captions in multi-granularity using our customized automated annotation pipeline. This benchmark comprises 10K
images and more than 30K image-question pairs. We will release our dataset along with the implementation of our automated dataset annotation pipeline for further research. Besides, we propose a novel unified SegCap data format to unify
heterogeneous segmentation datasets; it effectively facilitates
learning to associate object concepts with visual features
during multi-task training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our MGLMM excels at tackling more than eight
downstream tasks and achieves state-of-the-art performance
in MGSC, GCG, image captioning, referring segmentation,
multiple/empty segmentation, and reasoning segmentation.
The great properties and versatility of MGLMM underscore
its potential impact on advancing multimodal research.

Res: [SEG]. (A query requiring
detailed descriptions for the player.)

MGLMM (Ours)

Res: A woman in a red dress is
playing tennis on a blue court.

Res: Refer to Fig.2 (a) for details. Res: Refer to Fig.2 (a) for details.

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison between GLaMM and our
MGLMM. Please refer to Appendix. A for more details.

et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023), Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) (Zhu et al. 2023; Alayrac et al. 2022; Bai
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a) have notably advanced crossmodality understanding and vision-language alignment.
Recently, several studies (Lai et al. 2024; Xia et al.
2024) have explored the instruction-based LMMs capable
of producing pixel-level segmentation masks as responses
to user queries. More recent research (Rasheed et al. 2024;
Zhang et al. 2024a) concentrated on Grounded Conversation Generation (GCG), which aims to ground the main objects appearing in the conversations. Although these methods (Zhang et al. 2024a; Lai et al. 2024; Xia et al. 2024;
Ren et al. 2024) integrate a powerful segmentation model
capable of panoptic segmentation, they still have difficulty
generating mask-text-aligned responses for all the instances
in the image, resulting in limited panoptic segmentation performance. Figure 1 (a) shows such a case where GLaMM
overlooks the tennis racket, tennis ball, and microphone in
both mask and text responses. Besides, these models only
possess the ability to describe the image at the instance level
and produce corresponding instance masks aligned with the
output texts. Hence, these models can hardly perceive the
fine-grained objects, such as the player’s hat, wristband, and

Code — https://github.com/lizhou-cs/mglmm

Introduction
Leveraging the commonsense reasoning and understanding abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Chiang
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work is done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

9725

