The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Graph Online Hashing for Multi-Label Image Retrieval
Yuan Cao1 , Xiangru Chen1 , Zifan Liu∗1 , Wenzhe Jia1 , Fanlei Meng1 , Jie Gui* 2,3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision And Management (Southeast University), Ministry of
Education, Nanjing, China
4
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
cy8661@ouc.edu.cn, {chenxiangru, lzf9793, jiawenzhe, mengfanlei}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, guijie@seu.edu.cn
Abstract

2022; Liu et al. 2022; Zhang, Wu, and Chen 2023) has recently received extensive attention by updating hash functions instantly in consideration of new streaming data with
low computational complexity. Online hashing methods can
be categorized into unsupervised ones (Leng et al. 2015;
Chen, King, and Lyu 2017) and supervised ones (Lin et al.
2020a; Weng and Zhu 2020; Zhan et al. 2021; Jin et al.
2021) depending on whether the labels are utilized in the
training process. Unsupervised online hashing is mostly designed on the idea of data sketch to help to analyze the similarities among data in consideration of the inherent attributes
(i.e. distribution and variance) of data. Online sketch hashing (OSH) (Leng et al. 2015) uses a smaller sketch matrix
to preserve the main property of data but with a significantly
smaller size. The hash functions are learnt by maximizing
the variance for each hash bit in the sketch matrix. Chen
(Chen, King, and Lyu 2017) present a faster online sketching hashing (FROSH) algorithm to improve the efficiency of
OSH by developing a faster frequent direction algorithm via
utilizing the subsampled randomized Hadamard transform.
In general, unsupervised online hashing is less accurate than
supervised online hashing because the labels are is not leveraged for training.
As the first success in supervised online hashing, online
kernel hashing (OKH) (Huang, Yang, and Zheng 2013) derives and optimizes a structured hash model in a passiveaggressive way. In order to solve the “data imbalance” and
“relaxation” problems, Lin (Lin et al. 2019) introduce the
balance factor into the online discrete hashing (BSODH)
model to adjust the similar and dissimilar data pairs in the
training process. Lin (Lin et al. 2020b) propose a Hadamard
matrix guided online hashing (HMOH) and adopts LSH
(Datar et al. 2004) to reduce the length of Hadamard codes
in accordance with the hash bits to guarantee the semantic
similarity. Since it is inefficient to update the hash codes
of the entire database with the latest hash functions when
new streaming data arrives, Jia (Jia et al. 2023) propose a
fast online hashing (FOH) method by building a query pool
and presenting a neighbor-preserving algorithm to record the
nearest neighbors of the central points.
However, two core challenges have been ignored. On the
one hand, these methods all rely on shallow models, which
limits the retrieval accuracy, creating a bottleneck. Online
deep hashing (ODHUC) (Xie et al. 2022) attempts to in-

Online hashing has attracted much research attention for
large-scale image retrieval in a streaming way. The main challenge lies in keeping balance between high retrieval accuracy
and low training time. Existing online hashing methods almost rely on shallow models rather than deep networks due to
high training costs, because it is unacceptable to update hash
functions on an order of hours. In addition, the multi-label
supervision information is not fully utilized to guide the hash
learning process and the affinity matrix is always fixed once
constructed. In this paper, we propose a novel Deep Graph
Online Hashing (DGOH) method, which for the first time introduces inductive graph neural networks (GNNs) to realize
deep online hashing with acceptable training costs on an order
of seconds. Furthermore, we mine the multi-label information of the images by constructing a label network and learn
label-wise weights dynamically to help to update the affinity
matrix. In addition, we provide a strategy to obtain examples
from the old data to solve the catastrophic forgetting problem. An integrated objective function is designed to train the
entire architecture. Extensive experiments on two common
benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed method achieves
up to 13.3% accuracy gains over state-of-the-art baselines and
shows competitive performance on training time.

Code — https://github.com/caoyuan57/DGOH

Introduction
With the explosive growth of image data, finding efficient retrieval technology for them has become an urgent problem.
Hashing (Luo et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023) is one of the
most popular and attractive strategies due to its high search
efficiency and low storage cost. Most existing hashing methods aim at learning hash functions from a fixed collection of
data (Xia et al. 2014; Gui et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2021).
However, image data often accumulates in a streaming way
in practical applications. As a result, offline hashing cannot
adapt to this scenario because the hash functions fail to be
updated dynamically and efficiently.
To address this issue, online hashing (Xie, Shen, and Zhu
2016; Lu et al. 2019; Fang, Zhang, and Liu 2021; Wu et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1953

