The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Long-Tailed Out-of-Distribution Detection: Prioritizing Attention to Tail
Yina He1 , Lei Peng1 , Yongcun Zhang1 , Juanjuan Weng2 * , Shaozi Li1,3 , Zhiming Luo1,3 *
1

2
3

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University

Abstract

69.72

67.5
Accuracy (%)

Current out-of-distribution (OOD) detection methods typically assume balanced in-distribution (ID) data, while most
real-world data follow a long-tailed distribution. Previous approaches to long-tailed OOD detection often involve balancing the ID data by reducing the semantics of head classes.
However, this reduction can severely affect the classification
accuracy of ID data. The main challenge of this task lies in
the severe lack of features for tail classes, leading to confusion with OOD data. To tackle this issue, we introduce a novel
Prioritizing Attention to Tail (PATT) method using augmentation instead of reduction. Our main intuition involves using
a mixture of von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distributions to model
the ID data and a temperature scaling module to boost the
confidence of ID data. This enables us to generate infinite
contrastive pairs, implicitly enhancing the semantics of ID
classes while promoting differentiation between ID and OOD
data. To further strengthen the detection of OOD data without compromising the classification performance of ID data,
we propose feature calibration during the inference phase. By
extracting an attention weight from the training set that prioritizes the tail classes and reduces the confidence in OOD data,
we improve the OOD detection capability. Extensive experiments verified that our method outperforms the current stateof-the-art methods on various benchmarks.

CE

PASCL
36.26

EAT

PATT

34.12 34.19

59.46

54.73

13.7

Head Classes

Tail Classes

(a) Separate ACC for head and tail on ImageNet-LT.
Head
Tail
OOD

Head
Tail
OOD

(b) PASCL’s feature distribution

(c) PATT’s feature distribution

Figure 1: Visualization of the Comparison between PATT
and other methods on ImageNet-LT. (a) Comparison of separate accuracy for head and tail classes on ImageNet-LT between PATT and other methods. (b) (c) Visualization of feature distribution across the top ten classes (Head), the bottom
ten classes (Tail), and OOD data from PASCL and PATT.

Code — https://github.com/InaR-design/PATT.

Introduction
When confronted with a sample that does not match any
of the known classes, deep neural networks (DNNs) tend
to predict this OOD sample as one of the training classes
with high confidence (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Hein,
Andriushchenko, and Bitterwolf 2019; Hsu et al. 2020).
To address this issue, numerous OOD detection methods have been proposed and achieved significant improvements (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2018; Liu et al.
2020; Mohseni et al. 2020). Current state-of-the-art methods
introduce surrogate OOD datasets during training, enabling
the model to see beyond the training set (Zhu et al. 2024b;
Ming et al. 2023). These methods tackle the OOD detection
task by maximizing uncertainty (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and

Dietterich 2018) and using informative extrapolation based
on surrogate outliers (Zhu et al. 2024b). However, most of
these approaches assume a balanced ID data, a condition not
typically hold in real-world scenarios characterized by longtail distributions (e.g., Cybersecurity (Yi et al. 2021) and Autonomous Driving (Kendall and Gal 2017)).
In long-tailed recognition, the data distribution is highly
imbalanced, and combining long-tailed recognition with
OOD detection methods still fails to achieve optimal results (Wang et al. 2022). Recent methods like PASCL (Wang
et al. 2022) and EAT (Wei, Wang, and Zhang 2024) focus on
differentiating tail classes from OOD data by handling head
and tail classes differently. However, these methods significantly reduce ID classification accuracy compared to long-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3446

