The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Imperceptible 3D Point Cloud Attacks on Lattice-based Barycentric Coordinates
Keke Tang1 * , Ziyong Du1 * , Weilong Peng1† ,
Xiaofei Wang2 , Daizong Liu3 , Ligang Liu2 , Zhihong Tian1
1
Guangzhou University
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Peking University
tangbohutbh@gmail.com, duxiaoshuaicst@gmail.com, wlpeng@tju.edu.cn,
wxf9545@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dzliu@hust.edu.cn, lgliu@ustc.edu.cn, tianzhihong@gzhu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Imperceptible adversarial attacks on 3D point clouds rely on
effective constraints. While manifold constraints have notable
advantages over Euclidean ones, the global parameterization
used in current methods often fails to fully preserve manifold
properties. In this paper, we propose to constrain lattice-based
barycentric coordinates during attacks from a local parametric perspective to ensure imperceptibility. Specifically, we utilize a permutohedral lattice to partition point clouds into multiple cells, and then extract barycentric coordinates for each
point within these cells, forming a local parametric representation of the point clouds. By enforcing local parametric constraints that minimize the displacement of barycentric
coordinates, we largely preserve the manifold properties, ultimately leading to improved imperceptibility. Extensive experiments validate that integrating these local parametric constraints into conventional adversarial attacks yields superior
imperceptibility, outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: To preserve manifold properties during adversarial
attacks, global parameterization maps the point cloud into
a single parametric coordinate system, such as a sphere or
plane, for applying constraints. In contrast, our lattice-based
solution maps the point cloud into a local parametric space.

Introduction
With advances in deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton
2015; Tang et al. 2022a) and depth-sensing techniques, deep
neural networks (DNNs) have become the dominant method
for 3D point cloud perception (Guo et al. 2020). However,
DNN classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where
small perturbations to input point clouds can cause misclassifications (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019), posing challenges for
real-world applications, e.g., robotics (Jiang et al. 2021; You
et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2022). Exploring such attacks is crucial
for evaluating and enhancing the robustness of deep point
cloud classifiers (Bai et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2024d).
As a crucial requirement for adversarial attacks, imperceptibility has been extensively studied. Early approaches
employ metrics such as the l2 -norm, Chamfer distance, and
Hausdorff distance to constrain perturbations on 3D point
clouds. More recent research focus on reducing distortion
from complex geometric perspectives, including limiting
curvature changes (Wen et al. 2022) and guiding perturbation directions (Liu and Hu 2023; Huang et al. 2022). However, these methods often fail to fully capture the essence of

3D shapes as fundamentally 2-manifold surfaces (Spanier
1989), making it difficult to preserve manifold properties.
To address this issue, Tang et al. (2024a) introduce bijective manifold mapping, which projects point clouds onto
parameterized shapes like spheres, see Fig. 1. This method
more effectively captures and constrains manifold properties, thereby significantly enhancing imperceptibility of adversarial attacks on 3D point clouds.
Essentially, projecting point clouds onto 2-manifold surfaces (Tang et al. 2024a) involves a method known as global
parameterization. This approach uses a single parametric
coordinate system to represent the entire object, aiming to
provide a unified representation space for arbitrary shapes.
However, it poses challenges, especially when dealing with
complex shapes that have significant topological variations,
such as differences in genus. Additionally, the necessity of
fitting a global parameterization space can result in considerable geometric distortions. Consequently, the effectiveness
of constraints derived from this space for managing changes
in manifold properties during adversarial attacks is reduced.
To resolve the above issue, we devise a local parametric
space where the manifold properties of 3D point clouds are

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20814

