The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prompt Tuning In a Compact Attribute Space
Shiyu Hou1,2 , Tianfei Zhou1 , Shuai Zhang2 , Ye Yuan1, * , Guoren Wang1
1

2

Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Zhongguancun Laboratory

Abstract

of paired image-text data sourced from the internet, and offer prosperous representations that can be effectively guided
through well-designed input prompts (e.g., A photo of
a [CLASS]) to execute tasks in a zero-shot fashion. Nevertheless, hand-crafting prompts is a specialized alchemy,
demanding intensive human efforts and potentially introducing artificial bias.
An alternative approach popularized by CoOp (Zhou et al.
2022b) is Prompt Tuning, which replaces hand-crafted discrete prompts with a sequence of continuous-valued context vectors, known as soft prompts. The method achieves
optimal prompts by minimally updating context vectors using task-specific training examples, keeping the pre-trained
weights of VLMs frozen. This data-driven paradigm has increasingly garnered significant interests within the community (Zhou et al. 2022a; Khattak et al. 2023a; Yao, Zhang,
and Xu 2023; Lu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2024b; Hantao Yao
2024; Cho, Kim, and Kim 2023; Chen et al. 2023a). These
approaches tune prompts based on the most common naming criteria, for example, the image in Fig. 1 is named as
Cat. However, class names entail limited semantic information and exhibit poor transferability. The original contrastive learning strategy mainly focuses on high-level semantic information while overlooking visual details (Wang
et al. 2024). These pose challenges to learn high-performing
prompts capable of perceiving fine-grained visual patterns
and generalizing to unseen scenarios.
Upon re-examining the image in Fig. 1, we can perceive additional detailed information beyond mere recognition of a cat, such as “a cat with pointed ears”,
“shiny coat”, or “large, rounded eyes”. These
descriptions are commonly referred to as visual attributes.
In general, a visual attribute refers to any visual property
that has a semantic connotation, delineating aspects such as
parts (“ears”, “eyes”), size (“shiny coat”), and shape
(“large and rounded”). With this regard, attributes
serve to characterize objects in far greater details than the
standard phraseology of a class name (Murphy 2004). Furthermore, attributes can well characterize the connections
among categories, and thus play important roles in recognizing unknown categories (Akata et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2020;
Huynh and Elhamifar 2020). Last, attributes are associated
with real-world meanings and human-understandable, making it more suitable to learn interpretable classifiers com-

Prompt tuning (PT) has emerged as a key to unlocking the
power of visual-language models like CLIP for various downstream tasks. Predominant approaches learn a small set of
task-relevant soft prompts by solving an image-class matching problem. Nevertheless, by optimizing merely with respect
to class names, they face challenges in learning high performant prompts capable of capturing fine-grained, diverse characteristics of each class, and tends to overfit potentially biased distribution of base classes. In this work, we propose
PTinCAS to tackle prompt tuning in a compact attribute
space, driven by the premise that attributes offer detailed
class interpretations and can facilitate transfer across related
categories. Particularly, PTinCAS is grounded in two innovative designs. First, we create a compact attribute space by
properly prompting large language models to generate factual descriptions about categories, which are subsequently
clustered to form a concise attribute vocabulary. Second, we
leverage attributes as a source of supervision in PT to transfer the inherent common sense knowledge in attributes to soft
prompts. An object-aware visual prompting mechanism is developed to effortlessly highlight intended regions in the original image, which guides the model towards learning visual
attributes associated with object regions rather than the background. We show that PTinCAS not only improves few-shot
generalizability compared to existing PT methods, but also
provides some level of inherent explainability that helps us
understand why a class name is determined based on the attributes activated in an image.

Code — https://github.com/hhhoushiyu/PTinCAS

Introduction
Foundation vision-language models (VLMs), represented by
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021),
have established their preeminence in a wide range of computer vision tasks like image classification (Zhang et al.
2022; Abdelfattah et al. 2023), object detection (Gu et al.
2021; Shi et al. 2022) and semantic segmentation (Zhou,
Loy, and Dai 2022; Jiao et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2024).
These models are constratively trained on extensive corpora
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3518

