The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TGFormer: Transformer with Track Query Group for Multi-Object Tracking
Rui Zeng, Yuanzhou Huang, Songwei Pei∗
School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering School), Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
{zengrui@, huangyuanzhou@, peisongwei@}bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-object tracking faces a major challenge in handling
the variations of tracked targets within complex scenes. In
existing transformer-based tracking methods, typically each
tracked target is only associated with one track query. However, trajectories in crowded scenes often experience varying
levels of occlusion, making the association brittle for using a
single track query to identify the tracked target. Therefore, we
argue that relying on a single track query to track a target in
complex scenes is inadequate. In this paper, we introduce TGFormer, with the core idea of designing a Track Query Group
for each tracked target. Each group encompasses track queries
that handle the same tracked target across different levels of
occlusion scenes. To achieve long-term robust association,
we propose a novel updater that integrates temporal memories and occlusion-aware features to update the Track Query
Group, ensuring the tracked target can be consistently captured in complex scenes. Additionally, we introduce a Position Predictor that allows TGFormer to forecast motion trends,
helping the model accurately locate moving tracklets. Experimental results show that our method achieves competitive performance on the MOT Challenge and DanceTrack datasets.

𝑻𝑮𝒊

𝑻𝑮𝒊

𝑻𝑮𝒊

slightly occluded scene
fully exposed scene
𝑻𝑮𝟐

𝑻𝑮𝒊

heavily occluded scene
𝑻𝑮𝑵%𝟏

𝑻𝑮𝑵

trajectory

track queries:

𝑻𝑮𝟏

TGFormer

fully exposed

slightly occluded

heavily occluded

Figure 1: Illustration of the Track Query Group. TGFormer identifies each tracked target using a Track Query
Group (TG), with each group containing up to three track
queries. These track queries are responsible for associating
the same tracked target under different levels of occlusion:
fully exposed, slightly occluded, and heavily occluded. Unlike most previous transformer-based trackers that use a single track query to associate the tracked target, our model uses
a track query group to further leverage multiple appearance
features from the trajectory based on their occlusion levels,
thereby enhancing tracking performance in challenge scenarios.

Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a crucial task in computer
vision, widely applied in real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving, surveillance, and military applications.
Traditional solutions (Wang et al. 2020) follow the Trackingby-Detection (TbD) paradigm, decomposing the MOT task
into two stages: object detection and data association. Although these methods achieve high detection performance,
they encounter difficulties with target association under severe occlusion and target variation scenarios (Sun et al.
2022), mainly due to the lack of global (end-to-end) optimization. Recently, the transformer-based trackers following
the Tracking-by-Attention (TbA) paradigm have gained popularity. By jointly adopting detect queries and track queries in
the transformer decoder to interact with image features, these
methods achieve fully end-to-end tracking. Specifically, the
detect queries are responsible for recognizing newborn objects, and the track queries serve to prioritize their assigned
targets.

Despite the simplicity of these transformer-based trackers,
each tracked result relies on a single track query, which can
make the queries brittle to losing their targets in crowded
scenes. This issue arises because targets in complex scenes
may experience varying levels of occlusion and frequent
changes in appearance, causing a single track query to struggle with maintaining accurate matching. Although some
methods have incorporated long-term temporal information
to establish a more robust feature representation for the target, a single track query still has difficulty adapting to target
variations in complex scenes, primarily due to the lack of a
categorical representation for the target across different lev-

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9824

