The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Practical Classical Planning Compilations of Numeric Planning
Luigi Bonassi1 , Francesco Percassi2 * , Enrico Scala1
1

Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy
School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersfield, United Kingdom
luigi.bonassi@unibs.it,f.percassi@hud.ac.uk,enrico.scala@unibs.it

2

Abstract

Numeric planning is known to be undecidable in its general form (Helmert 2002), but decidability can be recovered
(unsurprisingly) by making the domain of numeric variables
finite. Recently, it has been shown that this restriction allows
numeric planning to be compiled into classical planning
with conditional effects via a compilation that is both polynomial and plan size-preserving (Gigante and Scala 2023).
A measure of expressiveness in planning is whether a problem can be compiled into another without increasing the size
of the plans (Nebel 2000). Indeed, compilations that fail to
achieve this result are believed to be impractical.
However, it is unclear whether the theoretical framework by Gigante and Scala (2023) can truly make classical
planners usable to solve numeric planning problems. Similar encodings, commonly known as bit-blasting, are frequently used in the formal methods field (Clarke, Kroening,
and Yorav 2003; Bailleux and Boufkhad 2003; Bruttomesso
et al. 2007; Vizel, Nadel, and Malik 2017). We argue that
similar approaches can also be useful in planning; however,
care must be taken to focus on scalable formulations that do
not burden classical planners excessively.
To address this gap, we put the theoretical encoding of
Gigante and Scala (2023) into practice. Our overall question is: how far can classical planners go? We begin with
a base compilation that formalises the current practice of
modelling numeric state variables in classical planning. In
analogy to the SAT literature (Björk 2011; Miller, Gitina,
and Becker 2011), we call this compilation O NE - HOT. Intuitively, O NE - HOT creates a Boolean variable for each possible value of a numeric variable, tracking their changes as actions are applied. This approach is expected to scale poorly
because it requires a variable for each possible value in the
numeric domain. Then, we present two compilations based
on a logarithmic encoding of the numeric state variables.
Such compilations start from the definition provided by Gigante and Scala (2023) but provide a concrete implementation for the arithmetic operation involved in simple numeric
planning tasks. One formulation employs axioms, a planning language feature that enables the derivation of variables
based on the state assignment. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first systematic study of the practical aspects of
handling numeric information within classical planning.
We tested the compilations on the domains from the latest International Planning Competition (Taitler et al. 2024).

It is well known that numeric planning can be made decidable if the domain of all numeric state variables is finite. This
bounded formulation can be polynomially compiled into classical planning with Boolean conditions and conditional effects preserving the plan size exactly. However, it remains unclear whether this compilation has any practical utility. To explore this aspect, this work revisits the theoretical compilation
framework from a practical perspective, focusing on the fragment of simple numeric planning. Specifically, we introduce
three different compilations. The first, called one-hot, aims to
systematise the current practice among planning practitioners
of modelling numeric planning through classical planning.
The other two, termed binary compilations, extend and specialise the logarithmic encoding introduced in previous literature. Our experimental analysis reveals that the overly complex logarithmic encoding can, surprisingly, be made practical with some representational expedients. Among these, the
use of axioms is particularly crucial. Furthermore, we identify
a class of mildly numeric planning problems where a classical planner, i.e., LAMA, when run on the compiled problem,
is highly competitive with state-of-the-art numeric planners.

Code — https://github.com/LBonassi95/BitBlast

Introduction
Automated planning is the field of Artificial Intelligence that
studies how to develop intelligent systems that can automatically decide the best action to reach some goal (Ghallab,
Nau, and Traverso 2016). From a computational perspective,
automated planning is the problem of finding a sequence
of actions that achieves a goal, given a formal and predictive specification of the system under consideration. Among
the various formalisation variants appearing in the literature
(Haslum et al. 2019), one that has recently gained significant attention is numeric planning (Fox and Long 2003; Leofante 2023; Shleyfman, Gnad, and Jonsson 2023; Bonassi,
Gerevini, and Scala 2024; Helal and Lakemeyer 2024). In
numeric planning, actions and goals are represented using
numeric state variables and conditions, which has proven
useful in several applications (Parkinson et al. 2012; Vallati
et al. 2016; Kiam et al. 2020; Kouaiti et al. 2024).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26472

