The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Modeling Inter-Intra Heterogeneity for Graph Federated Learning
Wentao Yu1 , Shuo Chen2 * , Yongxin Tong3 , Tianlong Gu4 , Chen Gong5 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
3
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Trustworthy AI (Ministry of Education), Jinan University, China
5
Department of Automation, Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
wentao.yu@njust.edu.cn, shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp, yxtong@buaa.edu.cn, gutianlong@jnu.edu.cn, chen.gong@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

only locally accessible due to privacy and regulatory concerns. Recently, Graph Federated Learning (GFL) has received increasing attention (Tan et al. 2023b; Huang et al.
2023), where each client individually trains a local model
based on the corresponding subgraph, and a central server
adaptively aggregates the models from all clients.
Since subgraphs are different parts of a global graph, there
inevitably exists heterogeneity among them, making it difficult to realize federated collaboration. Ignoring this heterogeneity will degrade the performance of several traditional
Federated Learning (FL) methods (e.g., FedAvg (McMahan
et al. 2017)) which rely heavily on the assumption that all
clients have similar data distributions. To deal with this deficiency, recently, a number of personalized FL methods (Li
et al. 2020; Pillutla et al. 2022; Tan et al. 2023a; Baek et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023) have been proposed. For example, in (Baek et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024),
personalized GFL methods estimate the pairwise similarities
between clients, and then they perform weighted federations
based on the client similarities.
However, the performance of most existing personalized
GFL methods is still limited due to their improper similarity calculations and ignored intra-heterogeneity. First,
most existing methods (Baek et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2024) compute the inter-subgraph similarities based on the simplex outputs of local models. Since
the outputs of local models cannot accurately reveal the
whole distribution of subgraph data, the calculated similarities are hardly generalizable, leading to negative impacts
on the weighted federation. Moreover, although most existing methods successfully consider inter-heterogeneity, they
ignore the crucial intra-heterogeneity (i.e., the heterogeneity of intra-subgraph), which commonly exists in real-world
graphs. Intra-heterogeneity can be defined as different types
of connections in the subgraph on each client. For example, a user in a social graph is connected to others for various different reasons, such as families, hobbies, studies, and
work. Meanwhile, as confirmed by (Xie et al. 2021), interheterogeneity is defined as divergent distributions of both
graph structures and node features among different clients.
To address the above-mentioned issues, we propose a
novel Federated learning method by integrally modeling the
Inter-Intra Heterogeneity (FedIIH), which is shown in the
right panel of Fig. 1. On one hand, we propose a new Hi-

Heterogeneity is a fundamental and challenging issue in federated learning, especially for the graph data due to the complex relationships among the graph nodes. To deal with the
heterogeneity, lots of existing methods perform the weighted
federation based on their calculated similarities between pairwise clients (i.e., subgraphs). However, their inter-subgraph
similarities estimated with the outputs of local models are less
reliable, because the final outputs of local models may not
comprehensively represent the real distribution of subgraph
data. In addition, they ignore the critical intra-heterogeneity
which usually exists within each subgraph itself. To address these issues, we propose a novel Federated learning
method by integrally modeling the Inter-Intra Heterogeneity
(FedIIH). For the inter-subgraph relationship, we propose a
novel hierarchical variational model to infer the whole distribution of subgraph data in a multi-level form, so that we can
accurately characterize the inter-subgraph similarities with
the global perspective. For the intra-heterogeneity, we disentangle the subgraph into multiple latent factors and partition the model parameters into multiple parts, where each
part corresponds to a single latent factor. Our FedIIH not only
properly computes the distribution similarities between subgraphs, but also learns disentangled representations that are
robust to irrelevant factors within subgraphs, so that it successfully considers the inter- and intra- heterogeneity simultaneously. Extensive experiments on six homophilic and five
heterophilic graph datasets in both non-overlapping and overlapping settings demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
when compared with nine state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, FedIIH averagely outperforms the second-best method
by a large margin of 5.79% on all heterophilic datasets.

Code — https://github.com/blgpb/FedIIH

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures in lots of important
domains such as social media, transportation, and recommendation systems (Tu et al. 2021, 2024a,b; Bai et al. 2022;
Yu et al. 2023a,b; Zhou et al. 2024). In many real-world scenarios, a global graph is usually made up of multiple subgraphs that are distributed across devices, and subgraphs are
* Corresponding authors: Chen Gong and Shuo Chen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22236

