The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffuseHigh: Training-free Progressive High-Resolution Image Synthesis through
Structure Guidance
Younghyun Kim1 * , Geunmin Hwang1 * , Junyu Zhang2, 3 , Eunbyung Park1,3†
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2

Abstract

et al. 2022) have attracted considerable attention due to
their ability to generate visually captivating images using
intuitive, human-friendly natural language descriptions. Stable Diffusion (SD) and Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), the
open-source text-to-image diffusion models trained on a
large-scale online dataset (Schuhmann et al. 2022), have
emerged as prominent tools for a diverse range of generative tasks. These tasks include but are not limited to image
editing (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022; Hertz et al.
2022; Tumanyan et al. 2023), inpainting (Rombach et al.
2022a; Saharia et al. 2022a; Lugmayr et al. 2022), superresolution (Rombach et al. 2022a; Saharia et al. 2022c; Gao
et al. 2023), and image-to-image translation (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023; Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023).
Despite the promising performance exhibited by SD and
SDXL, they encounter limitations when generating images
at higher-resolutions beyond their training resolution. The
direct inference of unseen high-resolution samples often reveals repetitive patterns and irregular structures, particularly
noticeable in object-centric samples, as discussed in prior
works (He et al. 2023; Du et al. 2024). While a straightforward approach might involve training or fine-tuning diffusion models on higher-resolution images, several challenges
impede this approach. First, collecting text-image pairs of
higher-resolution is not readily feasible. Second, training on
large-resolution images demands substantial computational
resources due to the increased size of the intermediate features. Furthermore, capturing and learning the features from
high-dimensional data often requires a greater model capacity (more model parameters), leading to further computational strain on the training process.
Several tuning-free (Bar-Tal et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2024;
He et al. 2023; Du et al. 2024) methods proposed various approaches to adapt pre-trained diffusion models to higher resolutions beyond their original settings. MultiDiffusion (BarTal et al. 2023) and SyncDiffusion (Lee et al. 2024) employ joint diffusion processes with overlapping windows,
each corresponding to different region within the generating image. These models can produce images of arbitrary
shape, but the resulting image involves object repetition issues since the non-overlapping patches do not correlate to
each other, lacking perception of global context during the
denoising process. ScaleCrafter (He et al. 2023), on the other
hand, extends the receptive field of the diffusion model by

Large-scale generative models, such as text-to-image diffusion models, have garnered widespread attention across diverse domains due to their creative and high-fidelity image
generation. Nonetheless, existing large-scale diffusion models are confined to generating images of up to 1K resolution, which is far from meeting the demands of contemporary
commercial applications. Directly sampling higher-resolution
images often yields results marred by artifacts such as object repetition and distorted shapes. Addressing the aforementioned issues typically necessitates training or fine-tuning
models on higher-resolution datasets. However, this poses
a formidable challenge due to the difficulty in collecting
large-scale high-resolution images and substantial computational resources. While several preceding works have proposed alternatives to bypass the cumbersome training process, they often fail to produce convincing results. In this
work, we probe the generative ability of diffusion models at
higher resolution beyond their original capability and propose a novel progressive approach that fully utilizes generated low-resolution images to guide the generation of higherresolution images. Additionally, we integrate an image sharpening operation into our pipeline, further enhancing image
quality. Our method obviates the need for additional training
or fine-tuning which significantly lowers the burden of computational costs. Extensive experiments and results validate
the efficiency and efficacy of our method.

Code — https://github.com/yhyun225/DiffuseHigh
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18459

Introduction
With the establishment of diffusion models, there have been
rapid advancements across various domains, including audio synthesis (Chen et al. 2020; Lam et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2023), image synthesis (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021), video generation (Ho et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2023; Blattmann et al. 2023), and 3D generation (Poole et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2023;
Tang et al. 2023). Notably, text-to-image diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022a; Saharia et al. 2022b; Ramesh
* These authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4338

