The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CSL-L2M: Controllable Song-Level Lyric-to-Melody Generation Based on
Conditional Transformer with Fine-Grained Lyric and Musical Controls
Li Chai, Donglin Wang *
Westlake University
{chaili, wangdonglin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

growing interest from both academia and industry. A highquality lyric-to-melody generation is required to generate
melodies not only following good musical patterns but also
aligning with the given lyrics. Due to the scarcity of paired
lyric-melody data with alignment information and the difﬁculty of learning the strict but weak correlations between
lyrics and melodies, this task remains under-explored.
Many deep learning methods have been explored for
lyric-to-melody generation. A sequence-to-sequence based
melody composition model is proposed in (Bao et al. 2019)
, which is the ﬁrst work to use an end-to-end network model
to generate melodies from lyrics. Subsequently, Yu (Yu, Srivastava, and Canales 2021) proposes a conditional LSTMGAN generative model for melody generation from lyrics.
In (Srivastava et al. 2022), a novel architecture, three branch
conditional LSTM-GAN is proposed to further improve generation quality. However, the direct mapping from lyrics to
melodies is difﬁcult to learn because they are weakly correlated (e.g., a melody can correspond to many different lyrics
and vise versa.). Accordingly, these end-to-end generation
methods suffer from low generation quality due to the limited available parallel lyric-melody data. To this end, an unsupervised method is proposed in (Sheng et al. 2021), which
performs self-supervised masked sequence to sequence pretraining on large amount of unpaired lyric and melody data.
In addition, a two-stage generation method with music template is proposed in (Ju et al. 2021), which is data efﬁcient
and addresses the issues of limited paired data to some extent. With the tremendous success of large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al. 2023), more recently, the work
in (Ding et al. 2024) attempts to leverage the capability of
LLMs to model the lyric-melody relationship.
Currently, the lyric-to-melody generation methods including those mentioned above focus on generating short
melodies from lyrics typically consisting of one sentence
or a few sentences, where a full-song melody is usually
composed by simply concatenating these sentence-level
melodies resulting in incoherent musical structure without
both repetition patterns and distinguishable verse-chorus
structure. In addition, controllability is a crucial aspect of
the lyric-to-melody generation task, which allows users to
interact with the generation process to create their expected
melodies. Nevertheless, only a few lyric-to-melody works
have explored the controllability. In (Ju et al. 2021), the gen-

Lyric-to-melody generation is a highly challenging task in the
ﬁeld of AI music generation. Due to the difﬁculty of learning
strict yet weak correlations between lyrics and melodies, previous methods have suffered from weak controllability, lowquality and poorly structured generation. To address these
challenges, we propose CSL-L2M, a controllable song-level
lyric-to-melody generation method based on an in-attention
Transformer decoder with ﬁne-grained lyric and musical controls, which is able to generate full-song melodies matched
with the given lyrics and user-speciﬁed musical attributes.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce REMI-Aligned, a novel music
representation that incorporates strict syllable- and sentencelevel alignments between lyrics and melodies, facilitating
precise alignment modeling. Subsequently, sentence-level semantic lyric embeddings independently extracted from a
sentence-wise Transformer encoder are combined with wordlevel part-of-speech embeddings and syllable-level tone embeddings as ﬁne-grained controls to enhance the controllability of lyrics over melody generation. Then we introduce
human-labeled musical tags, sentence-level statistical musical attributes, and learned musical features extracted from
a pre-trained VQ-VAE as coarse-grained, ﬁne-grained and
high-ﬁdelity controls, respectively, to the generation process,
thereby enabling user control over melody generation. Finally, an in-attention Transformer decoder technique is leveraged to exert ﬁne-grained control over the full-song melody
generation with the aforementioned lyric and musical conditions. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
CSL-L2M outperforms the state-of-the-art models, generating melodies with higher quality, better controllability and
enhanced structure.

Demos — https://lichaiustc.github.io/CSL-L2M/
Code — https://github.com/LiChaiUSTC/CSL-L2M

Introduction
Deep learning techniques have been increasingly applied to
various music generation tasks (Duan, Yu, and Oyama 2024;
Hahn et al. 2023; Yu, Srivastava, and Canales 2021; Tian
et al. 2023). Lyric-to-melody generation, one of the most
essential and common tasks in songwriting, has attracted
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23541

