The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-label Self Knowledge Distillation
Xucong Wang 1 , Pengkun Wang 12 * , Shurui Zhang 3 , Miao Fang 3 , Yang Wang 12 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230236, China
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China
3
Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao 066000, China
xuco@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {pengkun, angyan}@ustc.edu.cn, 202315279@stu.neuq.edu.cn, fangmiao@neuq.edu.cn

2

GT:people,boat

Abstract
Self-Knowledge Distillation (SKD) leverages the student’s
own knowledge to create a virtual teacher for distillation
when the pre-trained bulky teacher is not available. Whilst
existing SKD approaches demonstrate gorgeous efficiency in
single-label learning, to directly apply them to multi-label
learning would suffer from dramatic degradation due to the
following inherent imbalance: targets with unified labels but
multifarious visual scales are crammed into one image, resulting in biased learning of major targets and disequilibrium of precision-recall. To address this issue, this paper proposes a novel SKD method for multi-label learning named
Multi-label Self-knowledge Distillation (MSKD), incorporating three Spatial Decoupling mechanisms (i.e. Locality-SD
(L-SD), Reconstruction-SD (R-SD), and Step-SD (S-SD)). LSD exploits relational dark knowledge from regional outputs
to amplify the model’s perception of visual details. R-SD reconstructs global semantics by integrating regional outputs
from local patches and leverages it to guide the model. SSD aligns outputs of the same input at different steps, aiming to find a synthetical optimizing direction and avoid the
overconfidence. In addition, MSKD combines our tailored
loss named MBD for balanced distillation. Exhaustive experiments demonstrate that MSKD not only outperforms previous approaches but also effectively mitigates biased learning
and equips the model with more robustness.

GT: diningtable,people,chair

w/o MSKD

bus

train people boat

w/ MSKD

people boat

bus

car

w/o MSKD

chair

pott

boat

car

w/ MSKD

dini people chair

pott

dini: diningtable pott: pottedplant

Figure 1: Top-4 predictions of ResNet34 trained w \ w/o
our MSKD, ranked in descending order. MSKD endows the
model with significant distinguishing capability and robustness to space-intricately distributed samples.

Chen et al. 2019) or design class-specific decoders (Liu et al.
2021; Ridnik et al. 2023) have made remarkable success,
most of them are costly and struggled to reach prevailing
lightweight demand on both efficiency and accuracy. In this
case, Knowledge Distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015), the latest benchmark of model compression which
asks a lightweight student to mimic its pre-trained bulky
teacher to receive comparable performance, is widely applied to MLL and exemplifies prominent efficiency. (Yang
et al. 2023a; Xu et al. 2022; Song et al. 2021).
However, the fact is that pre-trained teachers aren’t always accessible in latency-sensitive circumstances. In this
case, SKD offers a competent solution by allowing students
to directly learn from their self-teachers. Notably SKD is a
non-trivial problem since no explicit peer model is provided.
Existing SKD approaches dig out self-teacher from various
layers (Yang et al. 2023b), samples (Yang et al. 2022), and
training stages (Yang et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2021) as the selfteacher to form knowledge transferring, which has shown

Code — https://github.com/asaxuc/MSKD

Introduction
Multi-Label Learning (MLL) has exemplified eye-catching
applications in various downstream tasks, like action recognition (Zhang et al. 2020b), recommendation (Schultheis
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2020a), and user profiling (Wang
et al. 2021). Different from Single-Label Learning (SLL),
the major challenge of MLL lies in learning severe noninjective mapping between visual targets and labels, which
means the model is required to perceive all targets within an
image equally, regardless of their cardinality, size, or location. While existing MLL models which propose to model
visual-label correlations (Li et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2020;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21330

