The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explanation Bottleneck Models
Shin’ya Yamaguchi1,2 * and Kosuke Nishida1
1

2

NTT
Kyoto University

Abstract

Vision
Encoder
ℎ"

Recent concept-based interpretable models have succeeded in
providing meaningful explanations by pre-defined concept sets.
However, the dependency on the pre-defined concepts restricts
the application because of the limited number of concepts for
explanations. This paper proposes a novel interpretable deep
neural network called explanation bottleneck models (XBMs).
XBMs generate a text explanation from the input without
pre-defined concepts and then predict a final task prediction
based on the generated explanation by leveraging pre-trained
vision-language encoder-decoder models. To achieve both the
target task performance and the explanation quality, we train
XBMs through the target task loss with the regularization
penalizing the explanation decoder via the distillation from
the frozen pre-trained decoder. Our experiments, including a
comparison to state-of-the-art concept bottleneck models, confirm that XBMs provide accurate and fluent natural language
explanations without pre-defined concept sets.

Input 𝑥

“A large feline
with large hands
sitting in the
snow in a field
of grass”

Explanation 𝒆#

Classifier
𝑓!

“Lynx”

Final
Prediction 𝑦#

Figure 1: Explanation bottleneck models (XBMs). We propose an interpretable model that generates text explanations
for the input embedding with respect to target tasks and then
predicts final task labels from the explanations.

Code — https://github.com/yshinya6/xbm/
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17663

1

Explanation
Decoder
𝑔#

Introduction

Although deep learning models can achieve remarkable performance on many applications, they are black-box, i.e., their
output predictions are not interpretable for humans. Introducing concept bottleneck models (CBMs, Koh et al. (2020))
is a promising approach to interpreting the output of deep
models. In contrast to black-box models that directly predict
output labels from input in an end-to-end fashion, CBMs
first predict concept labels from input and then predict final
target class labels from the predicted concepts. Since the
predicted concepts represent semantic input ingredients, this
two-staged prediction enables users to know the reasons for
the final target label predictions and interactively intervene
in the decision-making process for critical applications such
as healthcare (Chauhan et al. 2023).
However, the existing CBMs depend on the fixed predefined concept sets to predict final labels. In other words,
they can not provide interpretability to any other than the
pre-defined concepts. We argue that this limitation presents a
* shinya.yamaguchi@ntt.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21886

fundamental challenge for CBMs in achieving interpretable
deep models. Although recent CBM variants leveraging pretrained large language models (Yuksekgonul, Wang, and Zou
2023; Oikarinen et al. 2023) enable to express concepts of
arbitrary target classes, the interpretability is still restricted to
a fixed and small number of concepts. This is because a large
number of concept labels are difficult to learn due to their
long-tail distribution and are less interpretable by the limitation of human perception (Ramaswamy et al. 2023). In fact,
the prior works restrict the number of concepts by filtering
with the similarity between concepts and training images to
maintain the performance and interpretability (Oikarinen et al.
2023; Yang et al. 2023). Therefore, as long as they depend
on pre-defined concepts, CBMs are restricted in the number
of interpretable concepts and are insufficient to explain the
output of deep models.
This paper tackles a research problem where we do not assume pre-defined concept sets for constructing interpretable
deep neural networks. To this end, we propose a novel family
of interpretable models called explanation bottleneck models
(XBMs), which leverage pre-trained multi-modal encoderdecoder models that can generate text descriptions from input data (e.g., BLIP (Li et al. 2022, 2023)). Leveraging pretrained multi-modal encoder-decoder enables capturing concepts that actually appeared in the input beyond pre-defined
concept sets. Our key idea is to decode concepts as text explanations from input and then predict the final label with a
classifier that takes the decoded explanations (Fig. 1). In contrast to CBMs, which make predictions based on pre-defined
concepts, XBMs make predictions based on concepts actually
appeared in the input data through the decoded explanations
and can provide an intuitive interpretation of the final prediction tied to the input. Through end-to-end training, XBMs

