The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deviate or Not: Learning Coalition Structures
with Multiple-bit Observations in Games
Yixuan Even Xu1 , Zhe Feng2 , Fei Fang1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Google Research
{yixuanx,feif}@cs.cmu.edu, zhef@google.com

Abstract

of games for the agents to play and make observations on the
outcomes of these games. Notably, more than one coalition
may exist simultaneously. In practice, the platform could
represent a regulator, like an auction or ridesharing platform,
aiming to detect collusion or design better mechanisms.
However, the existing study on CSL relies on a strong
assumption that the platform can only observe whether a
specified strategy profile is a Nash equilibrium (NE) in each
round. With this single-bit observation oracle and other assumptions, optimal algorithms require Θ(n log n) rounds of
games to learn the coalition structure, where n is the number of agents. Such an observation oracle is too restrictive for
two reasons. First, for real-world systems with a large number of agents, Θ(n log n) rounds is still prohibitively large.
Second, it may be possible for the platform to know which
agents would deviate from the specified strategy profile. For
example, a ridesharing platform could observe which drivers
disconnect from the platform given a pricing scheme.
In this paper, we aim to address this limitation and consider a multiple-bit observation oracle: the platform can observe an n-dimensional binary vector in each round, where
the i-th bit indicates whether or not agent i would like to deviate from the specified strategy profile. This oracle allows
the platform to gain n bits of information in each round,
which is significantly more informative than the single-bit
observation oracle, allowing the platform to learn the coalition structure with much fewer rounds. However, from a
technical perspective, switching from the single-bit observation oracle to the multiple-bit observation oracle fundamentally changes the problem. With the single-bit observation, the platform can choose the game to use to get the
next bit of observation, which means it is easy to ensure that
each bit of observation brings in information. However, with
multi-bit observation, the platform will get n-bit information in a batch, and it is often inevitable that these n-bits
contain repetitive or highly correlated information. Therefore, the key challenge in algorithm design is how to design the games so that the n bits of observation are more
de-correlated and contain more information.

We consider the Coalition Structure Learning (CSL) problem
in multi-agent systems, motivated by the existence of coalitions in many real-world systems, e.g., trading platforms and
auction systems. In this problem, there is a hidden coalition
structure within a set of n agents, which affects the behavior of the agents in games. Our goal is to actively design a
sequence of games for the agents to play, such that observations in these games can be used to learn the hidden coalition
structure. In particular, we consider the setting where in each
round, we design and present a game together with a strategy
profile to the agents, and receive a multiple-bit observation –
for each agent, we observe whether or not they would like to
deviate from the specified strategy. We show that we can learn
the coalition structure in O(log n) rounds if we are allowed
to design any normal-form game, matching the informationtheoretical lower bound. For practicality, we extend the result
to settings where we can only choose games of a specific format, and design algorithms to learn the coalition structure in
these settings. For most settings, our complexity matches the
theoretical lower bound up to a constant factor.

1

Introduction

Coalitions and collusive behavior are common in the real
world. In auction systems, bidders may form coalitions to
coordinate bids and exploit mechanisms for better odds
of winning (Milgrom 2004). On ridesharing platforms like
Uber and Lyft, some drivers might disconnect simultaneously to create an artificial shortage, triggering a price surge
they can later benefit from (Hamilton 2019; Sweeney 2019;
Dowling 2023). While illegal collusion, like price fixing, is
regulated by agencies such as the SEC in the United States,
it remains challenging to eliminate, as seen in scandals like
the LIBOR Scandal (Wikipedia 2024). As AI systems become more advanced and widely used in domains like stock
trading and autonomous driving, regulating these AI agents
presents a growing challenge as seen by regulators and researchers (EPRS 2020; Qu, Tang, and Ma 2023).
In response to such concerns, the problem of coalition
structure learning (CSL) (Xu, Ling, and Fang 2024) has recently gained attention. In CSL, a platform aims to figure out
which agents are in a coalition by designing a small number

1.1

Our Results

Depending on the specific scenario of application, sometimes external constraints may limit the type of games that
can be designed. For example, in an auction platform, the al-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14184

