The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SWEA: Updating Factual Knowledge in Large Language Models via Subject
Word Embedding Altering
Xiaopeng Li, Shasha Li∗ , Shezheng Song, Huijun Liu, Bin Ji, Xi Wang, Jun Ma* , Jie Yu∗ ,
Xiaodong Liu∗ , Jing Wang, Weimin Zhang
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073 China
{xiaopengli, shashali, ssz614, jibin, liuhuijun, wx 23ndt, yj, majun, liuxiaodong, wangjing}@nudt.edu.cn,
wmzhang104@139.com
Abstract

be costly. Consequently, researchers have started to explore
model editing methods (Yao et al. 2023; Meng et al. 2022a;
Mitchell et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024;
Tian et al. 2024) aiming to update a small amount of knowledge of LLMs more efficiently.
The purpose of model editing is to insert, update, and
delete target knowledge while avoiding editing non-target
knowledge to preserve the original capabilities of LLMs.
Current editing methods mainly edit model through three
approaches (Wang et al. 2023): adding additional modules
(Huang et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2022; Hartvigsen et al. 2022),
global optimization (Zhu et al. 2020; Mitchell et al. 2022),
and local editing (Meng et al. 2022a,b; Li et al. 2023b).
Methods of adding additional modules involves incorporating adapters within or external to the LLMs for storing
edited instances, which increases the inference load. In contrast, global optimization and local editing methods write the
editing information into the model weights, maintaining the
same inference cost as the original model. However, using
global optimization methods for model editing is prone to
overfitting (Meng et al. 2022b) because model editing often
only requires updating a small amount of knowledge. Local
editing methods view the model editing as a least squares
problem, which is more suitable for updating a small amount
of knowledge. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on local
editing methods.
Local editing methods first select the critical layers that
store knowledge (Meng et al. 2022a), optimize the knowledge representation with the editing knowledge as the objective, then calculate the keys of the editing knowledge and the
original knowledge, and finally update the weights of critical layers by solving the least squares problem. These methods have achieved remarkable results in model editing tasks.
However, they still exsit three issues: (1) Lack of efficiency:
these methods need to spend a lot of time and resources to
compute all the vectors needed to solve the least squares
problem (Meng et al. 2022a,b; Li et al. 2023b); (2) Lack
of reliability: in local editing methods, we observe that even
when all the target knowledge representations are already
aligned with the editing goal, their editing success rate is
still far from expectation. Meanwhile, LLMs edited by these
methods are prone to misidentifying unedited knowledge as
edited knowledge, reducing the usability of edited LLMs.
This might be due to the fact that using vector-level match-

The general capabilities of large language models (LLMs)
make them the infrastructure for various AI applications,
but updating their inner knowledge requires significant resources. Recent model editing is a promising technique for
efficiently updating a small amount of knowledge of LLMs
and has attracted much attention. In particular, local editing methods, which directly update model parameters, are
proven suitable for updating small amounts of knowledge.
Local editing methods update weights by computing least
squares closed-form solutions and identify edited knowledge by vector-level matching in inference, which achieve
promising results. However, these methods still require a lot
of time and resources to complete the computation. Moreover, vector-level matching lacks reliability, and such updates
disrupt the original organization of the model’s parameters.
To address these issues, we propose a detachable and expandable Subject Word Embedding Altering (SWEA) framework, which finds the editing embeddings through tokenlevel matching and adds them to the subject word embeddings
in Transformer input. To get these editing embeddings, we
propose optimizing then suppressing fusion method, which
first optimizes learnable embedding vectors for the editing
target and then suppresses the Knowledge Embedding Dimensions (KEDs) to obtain final editing embeddings. We
thus propose SWEA⊕OS method for editing factual knowledge in LLMs. We demonstrate the overall state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance of SWEA⊕OS on the C OUNTER FACT
and zsRE datasets. To further validate the reasoning ability of
SWEA⊕OS in editing knowledge, we evaluate it on the more
complex R IPPLE E DITS benchmark. The results demonstrate
that SWEA⊕OS possesses SOTA reasoning ability.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), with their rich reserve of
pre-trained knowledge, play a pivotal role in the current AI
landscape (Li et al. 2023a; Zhao et al. 2023). The knowledge pre-trained in LLMs is solidified in their parameters,
meaning that any outdated or incorrect knowledge within
the LLMs can only be updated through parameter updates.
However, given that the training of LLMs relies heavily on
GPUs and consumes a significant amount of electricity, retraining to update even small amounts of information can
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24494

