The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Algorithm Termination for Branch-and-Bound-based
Neural Network Verification
Konstantin Kaulen1 , Matthias König2 , Holger H. Hoos1,2
1

Chair for AI Methodology, RWTH Aachen University, Germany
2
LIACS, Leiden University, The Netherlands
kaulen@aim.rwth-aachen.de, h.m.t.konig@liacs.leidenuniv.nl, hh@aim.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

techniques. These techniques assess whether a given network adheres to specific input-output properties; otherwise,
they produce a counter-example that violates the property.
In the context of a classifier, a prominently studied property
asserts that inputs within the l∞ norm ball of a specified input x with radius ϵ should be classified into the same class
as x (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015).
Despite substantial advances in recent years, neural network verification remains computationally challenging, with
even basic properties known to be NP-complete (Katz et al.
2017). State-of-the-art verification algorithms rely on sophisticated solvers using the branch and bound method
(Bunel et al. 2020), requiring significant computational resources and time, even for simple networks (see, e.g., König
et al. 2024). Moreover, in order to reason about the robustness of a network over the distribution of possible inputs
(e.g., using its verified accuracy), a sizeable number of verification queries have to be carried for a given network; this
circumstance further contributes to the substantial computational burden.
We propose a novel approach enabling the efficient allocation of compute resources during the verification procedure. Specifically, we introduce a method to classify verification instances as solvable or unsolvable within a predefined time budget based on cheaply computable features.
Furthermore, we operationalise these predictions to terminate the verification procedure early for instances where a
solution can not be obtained within the given time budget. Thereby, we avoid spending compute resources on attempting to verify instances that ultimately do not inform
us about the robustness of the network. We evaluated our
approach on a broad set of state-of-the-art verification algorithms and benchmarks, including benchmarks from recent
editions of the International Verification of Neural Networks
(VNN) competition (Brix et al. 2023; Müller et al. 2022a;
Bak, Liu, and Johnson 2021), and show that we can reliably terminate verification runs for instances that are unsolvable within a given cutoff time without solving considerably
fewer instances overall. In summary, our contributions are
as follows:

With the rising use of neural networks across various application domains, it becomes increasingly important to ensure
that they do not exhibit dangerous or undesired behaviour. In
light of this, several neural network robustness verification algorithms have been developed, among which methods based
on Branch and Bound (BaB) constitute the current state of the
art. However, these algorithms still require immense computational resources. In this work, we seek to reduce this cost
by leveraging running time prediction techniques, thereby allowing for more efficient resource allocation and use.
Towards this end, we present a novel method that dynamically predicts whether a verification instance can be solved
in the remaining time budget available to the verification algorithm. We introduce features describing BaB-based verification instances and use these to construct running time,
and more specifically, timeout prediction models. We leverage these models to terminate runs on instances early in the
verification process that would otherwise result in a timeout.
Overall, using our method, we were able to reduce the total running time by 64% on average compared to the standard
verification procedure, while certifying a comparable number
of instances.

Code — github.com/ADA-research/BaB_DynTerm
Extended version — ada.liacs.nl/papers/KauEtAl25.pdf

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge in the application
of deep neural networks across various safety-critical domains and usage scenarios, ranging from facial recognition
systems embedded in mobile phones to unmanned aircraft
manoeuvre advisory systems (see, e.g., Julian, Kochenderfer, and Owen 2019). Concurrently, it became evident that
neural networks sometimes show unintended and potentially
dangerous behaviour; e.g., it has been shown that neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where slight input modifications can lead to seriously misleading outputs
(Szegedy et al. 2014). Generally, this lack of robustness of
neural networks necessitates the development of methods to
formally analyse their behaviour, using formal verification

• We present, for the first time, features of branch-andbound-based neural network verification instances that
enable predictions about their solvability within a given
time budget;

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27356

