The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GCD-Sampling: A General Cross-scale Decoupled Sampling for Point Cloud
∗

*

Tao Dai1,2,4, , Yanzi Wang3, , Jianyu Xiong3 , Yaohua Zha3 , Shu-Tao Xia3 , Zexuan Zhu1,2,4,

†

1 College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2 National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
3 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4 Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Embedded System Design, Shenzhen, China

{daitao.edu,wangyanzi0314,zyh1614399882}@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuzx@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
Sampling strategy (e.g., fixed farthest point sampling) of
point cloud has been an essential step for developing practical solutions in 3D computer vision tasks. Previous fixed
sampling is simple, but suffer from suboptimal performance
for downstream tasks. To adapt to target networks properly,
adaptive sampling methods with trainable parameters have
been recently developed to enhance the performance. However, existing adaptive sampling methods still suffer from the
over-coupling problem of target network, and thus become
model-specific, which limits their practical applications. To
address this issue, we propose a novel general cross-scale decoupled sampling method (GCD-sampling) for point cloud,
which consists of original feature cache, cross-scale feature
fusion and convex combination learning for better feature extraction. To reduce the coupling relationship with the target
task network, our method only utilizes the point cloud coordinates as the input and output of itself. Besides, we introduce an arbitrary scale structure to enable parameter sharing
across multi-scale sampling in point cloud networks. Extensive experiments on different architectures demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method over other existing adaptive sampling methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of various sampling strategies. (a)
Fixed sampling is independent on target task network. (b)
Existing adaptive sampling model-specific due to overcoupling with target task network. By contrast, (c) our decoupled method is model-agnostic and can be easily embedded into other target task networks.

Code — https://github.com/Yanzi-Wang/GCD-SamplingA-General-Cross-scale-Decoupled-Sampling-for-PointCloud

Introduction
Due to the large number of point cloud captured by 3D LiDAR sensors, point cloud sampling strategy has become crucial in 3D computer vision tasks, such as automatic driving,
augmented reality, and environmental modeling.
To date, various sampling strategies, including fixed and
adaptive sampling methods, have been developed. Among
them, Fixed sampling (e.g., farthest point sampling, FPS)
(Moenning and Dodgson 2003) aims to reduce the number
of points in the network layer directly (see Figure 1(a)). Although fixed sampling with great simplicity and efficiency
is still widely used in various point cloud networks, they

usually produce unsatisfying results. To relieve such issue,
adaptive sampling methods with learnable parameters have
been recently designed by enhancing the learning capability
of networks. For example, Nezhadarya et al. (2020) introduced the Critical Points Layer (CPL), which utilizes maxpooling operations to extract the maximum values of feature maps. Yang et al. (2019) proposed the Gumbel Subset Sampling (GSS), employing the Gumbel softmax function for soft sampling. Yan et al. (2020) introduced an adaptive sampling module by leveraging attention mechanisms to
extract adjacency relationships among FPS sampled points.
Wu et al. (2023) proposed a point cloud contour sampling
method based on attention mechanisms.
Despite the success of adaptive sampling methods, they

* The first two authors have equal contributions.
† Corresponding author: Zexuan Zhu

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2636

