The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Conjunctive Query Answering via Rewriting
Lukas Westhofen1 , Jean Christoph Jung2 , Daniel Neider2,3 .
1

German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.), Institute of Systems Engineering for Future Mobility, Oldenburg, Germany
2
TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
3
Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security, University Alliance Ruhr, Dortmund, Germany
lukas.westhofen@dlr.de, jean.jung@tu-dortmund.de, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de

Abstract

ness. It can, for example, contain the facts that any human must either be a driver or a pedestrian (Human ≡
Driver⊔Pedestrian), crowd members are humans next to
other humans (CrowdMember ≡ Human⊓∃next to.Human),
and they are never drivers (CrowdMember ⊑ ¬Driver). The
data component assigns classes and relationships to individuals – perceived objects in the world. The temporal data can
assert, at some time i, the humans Jon and Jane to be next
to each other: Human(Jon), Human(Jane), next to(Jon,
Jane), next to(Jane, Jon) ∈ Di .
We examine querying of temporal data under expressive
DL ontologies with temporal conjunctive queries (TCQs),
a popular combination of linear temporal logic over finite
traces (LTLf ) and conjunctive queries (CQs), a standard
database query language. For example, ♢Pedestrian(x)
asks for anything eventually being a pedestrian. Answers include all crowd members (Jane and Jon) without the data
explicitly asserting them to be pedestrians.
The described setup has been thoroughly studied from a
theoretical perspective, and based on that recently a first prototype implementation was proposed. For the former, Baader
et al. provide a complexity analysis for the more general
case of infinite traces with past-time operators showing that
answering temporal queries over the expressive DL ALC
is ExpTime-complete (Baader, Borgwardt, and Lippmann
2013). In a nutshell, the provided decision procedure is a
Turing reduction to standard (that is, non-temporal) query
answering under ontologies. The idea is to compile the temporal aspects of the query into a finite automaton (FA) whose
transitions are checked for satisfiability by answering unions
of conjunctive queries (UCQs). Recently, Westhofen et al.
implemented this approach for the case of finite traces and
TCQs with metric temporal operators (2024a; 2024b). This
resulted in the tool Topllet which exhibited promising initial results. Interestingly, it was already recognized that the
lack of good UCQ answering engines (in the non-temporal
setting) can lead to performance issues; indeed, a main contribution in (Westhofen et al. 2024a) was a pre-processing
step using optimized CQ engines to avoid answering UCQs.
Our main contribution is a novel approach to answering
TCQs over temporal knowledge bases with ontologies formulated in expressive DLs based on rewritings, which is
presented in Section 4. The idea is to rewrite TCQs into a
certain normal form exploiting the well-known expansion

Querying temporal data has recently gained traction in several
artificial intelligence applications. As operational domains of
intelligent agents are constantly being expanded, there is a
strong need for representing domain knowledge. This comes
in the form of ontologies, which are predominantly expressed
in description logics and enrich time-stamped data to temporal knowledge bases. For modeling highly complex system
environments, expressive description logics are often the formalism of choice. Querying such temporal knowledge bases
is a challenging task, but recently a first practical solution has
been put forward. We propose a novel approach to the query
answering problem based on two well-known rewriting rules
from temporal logic. After a careful theoretical analysis of
our algorithm, we show in a practical evaluation on several
benchmarks that it outperforms state of the art, sometimes by
orders of magnitude. Based on our findings, we also propose a
fragment of temporal conjunctive queries which guides users
towards well-performing queries.

1

Introduction

Today’s AI-based systems produce large amounts of data
during operation in the field. Take, for example, automated
driving companies like Waymo, who had an accumulated total of 7.14 million miles of driving data on December 2023
(Kusano et al. 2023). These data are typically temporal (systems operate over time) and the underlying data model is
complex (tasks are performed in highly diverse, relational
environments). For continuous safety assurance, manufacturers require to thoroughly analyze a non-negligible fraction of the produced data, such as critical near-accidents.
A promising solution to logically analyzing these data is
offered by temporal conjunctive queries (TCQs) over temporal knowledge bases (TKBs) (Artale et al. 2013; Calvanese et al. 2023). TKBs augment temporal, relational
data with background knowledge in form of logical axioms. They consist of two elements: an ontology O typically formulated in some description logic (DL) and a finite sequence of relational data (Di )i∈{0,...,n} . Depending
on the application, the DL ontology represents background
knowledge of varying complexity, where the intricate contexts of intelligent systems often warrant high expressiveCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15221

