The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Effective Diffusion Transformer Architecture for Image Super-Resolution
Kun Cheng1 * , Lei Yu2 * , Zhijun Tu2 , Xiao He1 , Liyu Chen2 , Yong Guo3 ,
Mingrui Zhu1 , Nannan Wang1† , Xinbo Gao4 , Jie Hu2
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Consumer Business Group, Huawei
4
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
kunncheng@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yulei96@huawei.com, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn
0.8

Abstract

0.7
CLIPIQA

Recent advances indicate that diffusion model holds great
promise in image super-resolution. While latest methods are
primarily based on latent diffusion models with convolutional
neural networks, there are few attempts to explore transformers, which have demonstrated remarkable performance in
image generation. In this work, we design an effective diffusion transformer for image super resolution (DiT-SR) that
achieves the visual quality of prior-based methods, but through
a training-from-scratch manner. In practice, DiT-SR leverages an overall U-shaped architecture, and adopts uniform
isotropic design for all the transformer blocks across different stages. The former facilitates multi-scale hierarchical feature extraction, while the latter reallocate the computational
resources to critical layers to further enhance performance.
Moreover, we thoroughly analyze the limitation of the widely
used AdaLN, and present a frequency-adaptive time-step conditioning module, enhancing the model’s capacity to process
distinct frequency information at different time steps. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiT-SR outperforms the
existing training-from-scratch diffusion-based SR methods
significantly, and even beats some of the prior-based methods on pretrained Stable Diffusion, proving the superiority of
diffusion transformer in image super resolution.

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
100

CLIPIQA

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4 1
10

Ours

GAN-based SR

ResShift
LDM

BSRGAN
RealESRGAN
SwinIR
RealSR-JPEG

Diff-based SR

DiffBIR
StableSR

SeeSR
PASD

Prior-based SR

101

102
Params (M)
Ours

104

DiffBIR
SeeSR

ResShift
LDM
Diff-based SR

102

103

StableSR

PASD

Prior-based SR

FLOPs (G)

103

104

Figure 1: Comparisons of the proposed method with recent
SR methods on the RealSR dataset. Top: CLIPIQA vs. Parameters. Bottom: CLIPIQA vs. FLOPs. Specifically, “Diff-based
SR” refers to diffusion-based methods trained from scratch.
into the diffusion model and train it from scratch, while the
second group (Wang et al. 2023a; Lin et al. 2024; Yang et al.
2023; Yu et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024), exploits the generative prior from pre-trained diffusion models, such as Stable
Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al. 2022; Podell et al. 2023),
to enhance image super-resolution. Methods that are trained
from scratch offer significant flexibility and ease of retraining following architectural modifications, making them ideal
for lightweight applications. However, as shown in Fig. 1,
these methods typically struggle to match the upper bound
performance of prior-based methods, which benefit from the
rich generative prior gained through extensive training on
vast datasets over thousands of GPU days. A natural question is that can we develop a diffusion architecture trained
from scratch while rivaling the performance of prior-based
methods, balancing both performance and flexibility?
The advent of the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) (Peebles
and Xie 2023) has made this idea feasible. This isotropic, fulltransformer architecture, which maintains constant resolution
and channel dimensions, shows remarkable performance and
scalability, establishing a new paradigm in diffusion archi-

Code — https://github.com/kunncheng/DiT-SR

Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) input.
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Rombach et al. 2022) have
demonstrated superior performance in image generation. Notable works (Wang et al. 2023a; Lin et al. 2024; Yu et al.
2024; Wu et al. 2024) have applied DMs to image superresolution, achieving exceptional performance, particularly
on complex natural scenes. Specifically, diffusion-based SR
methods typically fall into two categories: the first group (Saharia et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Shang et al. 2024; Yue,
Wang, and Loy 2024) involves injecting LR images directly
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2455

