The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Forget to Flourish: Leveraging Machine-Unlearning on Pretrained Language
Models for Privacy Leakage
Md Rafi Ur Rashid1, 2 , Jing Liu1 , Toshiaki Koike-Akino1 , Ye Wang1 , Shagufta Mehnaz2
1

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
2
Pennsylvania State University
mur5028@psu.edu, jiliu@merl.com, koike@merl.com, yewang@merl.com, smehnaz@psu.edu.

Abstract

specifically, we introduce a novel model poisoning algorithm that aims to manipulate a pre-trained LLM in order to
disclose more of the private data used during its fine-tuning.
At its core, our approach leverages machine unlearning
(Cao and Yang 2015; Guo et al. 2019) to poison the pretrained LLM. The original objective of unlearning is to make
the model forget specific data points that it has seen during
training so that it produces a high loss for those data points,
and it becomes difficult to reconstruct those samples (Gu
et al. 2024). Motivated by data augmentation that reduces
overfitting, we discovered that unlearning on some noisy
version of fine-tuning data points can promote overfitting
of the original data during the fine-tuning process.
However, it is important to have control over the process of loss maximization; otherwise, the model might become unusable and the poisoning attempt would be easily
detectable. Hence, we propose bounded unlearning as a
poisoning tool, where we maximize loss in a controlled manner on the pre-trained model for some noisy data points to increase privacy leakage of the fine-tuned LLM without compromising its utility.
To measure the privacy leakage caused by our proposed
method, we consider two standard privacy attacks: membership inference (MIA) (Shokri et al. 2017a; Carlini et al.
2022a) and data extraction (DEA) (Nasr et al. 2023; Rashid
et al. 2023). In MIA, the model is queried to evaluate
whether a specific target data point that the attacker possesses was indeed part of the finetuning dataset. On the
contrary, DEA aims to extract verbatim texts from the finetuning dataset with partial/zero prior knowledge. We evaluate our proposed method for both of these attacks on a range
of language models (Llama2-7B, GPT-Neo 1.3B), datasets
(MIND, Wiki-103+AI4Privacy), fine-tuning methods (FullFT, LoRA-FT, QLoRA-FT), and defense (differential privacy). Overall, our method significantly boosts the MIA and
DEA attack performance over the baselines in almost all
scenarios and maintains its stealth by preserving model utility. Prior works that deal with privacy leakage through pretrained model poisoning pose some strong assumptions on
the adversary’s capability, as discussed in the Related Work
section of the paper. Our proposed method, on the other
hand, with a more practical threat model and weaker adversarial ability, substantially enhances the attack success rate
and still remains stealthy.

Fine-tuning large language models on private data for downstream applications poses significant privacy risks in potentially exposing sensitive information. Several popular community platforms now offer convenient distribution of a large
variety of pre-trained models, allowing anyone to publish
without rigorous verification. This scenario creates a privacy
threat, as pre-trained models can be intentionally crafted to
compromise the privacy of fine-tuning datasets. In this study,
we introduce a novel poisoning technique that uses modelunlearning as an attack tool. This approach manipulates a
pre-trained language model to increase the leakage of private
data during the fine-tuning process. Our method enhances
both membership inference and data extraction attacks while
preserving model utility. Experimental results across different models, datasets, and fine-tuning setups demonstrate that
our attacks significantly surpass baseline performance. This
work serves as a cautionary note for users who download pretrained models from unverified sources, highlighting the potential risks involved.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.17354

Introduction
In recent times, the traditional way of training a language
model (LM) from scratch has been largely replaced by
the introduction of pre-trained foundation models (Touvron
et al. 2023; Chiang et al. 2023). For example, the Hugging
Face Hub is a platform with over 120k open-source models,
readily available for download and any registered user can
contribute by uploading their own model. However, there
are serious security and privacy risks associated with downloading such models from any untrusted sources and further
fine-tuning them for some downstream applications as they
could be maliciously crafted (Tramèr et al. 2022; Kandpal
et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2022). Additionally, the public release
of large language models (LLMs) fine-tuned on potentially
sensitive user data could lead to privacy breaches, as these
models have been found to memorize verbatim text from
their training data (Carlini et al. 2019, 2021). In this paper, we combine the notion of poisoning a pre-trained LLM
and causing privacy leakage of the fine-tuned model. More
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20139

