The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AtomNet: Designing Tiny Models from Operators
Under Extreme MCU Constraints
Zhiwei Dong1,3 * , Mingzhu Shen3∗ , Shihao Bai3 , Xiuying Wei3 , Jinyang Guo2 , Ruihao Gong2, 3 ,
Song-Lu Chen1 , Xianglong Liu2 , Xu-Cheng Yin1
1

University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Beihang University
3
SenseTime Research
dongz.cn@outlook.com, m.shen23@imperial.ac.uk, baishihao@sensetime.com, w2295297125@163.com
jinyangguo@buaa.edu.cn, xhplus@163.com, songluchen@ustb.edu.cn, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn, xuchengyin@ustb.edu.cn
Abstract
Tiny machine learning (TinyML) has attracted heightened
attention for its ability to provide low-cost and instantaneous performance on edge devices. Particularly, the commonly used microcontroller unit (MCU) imposes extreme
constraints on peak memory (SRAM) and storage (Flash).
Existing TinyML methods often rely on customized and hardto-obtain inference libraries, as well as necessitate a timeconsuming search for a deployable architecture using advanced Neural Architecture Search (NAS) algorithms. To
solve these problems, we fully exploit the resources in the
MCU and deduce hardware-oriented guidelines for designing
models under extreme MCU constraints. In detail, we delve
into thorough information about the atom operators by collecting the runtime data of Flash, SRAM, and latency to build
a dataset named AtomDB. Based on AtomDB, several critical operator guidelines are established to fully utilize limited
Flash and SRAM, while minimizing latency. By transferring
the guidelines to analyze blocks, we propose a hybrid pattern that organizes appropriate blocks at different network
stages to form the AtomNet, a more hardware-oriented architecture, to handle the former SRAM bottleneck and the latter Flash bottleneck. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the exploitation of the hardware characteristics. Remarkably, AtomNet pioneeringly achieves 3.5% accuracy enhancement and more than 15% latency reduction
on 320KB MCU using readily available official inference libraries for ImageNet tasks, surpassing the current state-ofthe-art method.

Figure 1: Latency and Top-1 accuracy comparisons among
different models on ImageNet dataset. Latency is tested on
STM32H743 (512KB SRAM/2MB Flash).

to be deployed on IoT devices, and pursuing desired models
with high accuracy on MCU still remains a big challenge.
Recently, researchers attend more attention to model design under special constraints on MCU. MCUNet (Lin et al.
2020) advises a system-algorithm co-design framework and
an optimized resolution-width search space to search the
network architecture. MCUNetV2 (Lin et al. 2021) proposes to solve the peak memory limitation of MCU with
a patch-based inference framework. While their works already achieve practical performance, their models are derived from a coarse-grained net-level analysis with high-cost
NAS methods, which can not fully utilize the resources like
the SRAM or Flash on MCU, hindering more efficient and
effective architecture design.
To this end, we propose to fully utilize hardware potential
and introduce a hardware-oriented model design framework.
Unlike existing methods from the network perspective, we
aim to dive into each individual operator such as convolution and relu, by collecting massive runtime data and making in-depth analyses. We have considered all operators that
are suitable for MCUs, ensuring that the space from which

Introduction
IoT devices are widely used in various applications such as
personal health care and smart home. One core component
of these devices is the microcontroller units (MCU), which
have limited computation resources including peak memory
(SRAM) and storage (Flash). For instance, the STM32F412
offers a maximum support of 256KB SRAM and 1MB
Flash. Therefore, popular efficient models (Tan and Le 2019;
Howard et al. 2017; Sandler et al. 2018; Howard et al. 2019;
Wu et al. 2019; Han et al. 2020; Mehta and Rastegari 2021;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021) suffer difficulties
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16354

