The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Approximate State Abstraction for Markov Games
Hiroki Ishibashi1 , Kenshi Abe1, 2 , Atsushi Iwasaki1
1

The University of Electro-Communications
2
CyberAgent
i2430006@edu.cc.uec.ac.jp, abekenshi1224@gmail.com, atsushi.iwasaki@uec.ac.jp

Abstract

into one abstract state according to a certain criterion and reduce the state space size. For example, a state is equivalent
to another state if choosing an action leads to the same state
with same rewards. Such abstraction is effective for agents
to solve more complicated MDPs than they would be able to
without using abstraction. However, if we abstract the state
space by regarding only identical states as equivalent, we
are difficult to find all of them within a reasonable time, and
even worse no two states might be identical.
In contrast to such exact state abstraction, Abel, Hershkowitz, and Littman (2016) proposed approximate state
abstraction, which characterizes how close a state is to another state in single-agent MDPs. This technique reduces
ground MDPs with large state spaces to abstract MDPs
with smaller state spaces by aggregating states according to
some notion of closeness or similarity. While this relaxation
makes the state spaces smaller, the resulting optimal policies
in abstract MDPs may become suboptimal. Furthermore,
they derive error bounds for the resulting policies based on
four different criteria, such as optimal Q-values, according
to which states are aggregated.
TZMGs extend MDPs to model decision-making by two
interacting agents in a shared, state-dependent environment.
Unlike MDPs, the rewards in TZMGs depend on the actions of both agents. For instance, in a soccer game, the rewards vary based on the state of play and the actions chosen
by both players. TZMGs provide a framework to formalize
such scenarios and have stimulated research in competitive
MARL. An agent’s optimal policy depends on the policy of
its opponent. The goal is to identify the equilibrium policy
profile, which consists of mutual best responses, to predict
and understand the consequences of their interactions.
Building upon these insights, this paper extends the work
by Abel, Hershkowitz, and Littman (2016) from singleagent MDPs to TZMGs. We first describe an approximate
state abstraction based on optimal Q-value criteria or minimax values and derive the bound of the duality gap for
the resulting equilibrium, which measures the proximity to
equilibrium. To establish the bound, we analyze the gains
from best responses in the ground game – where the strategy
space is unabstracted – against the resulting equilibrium in
the abstracted game, where the strategy space has been simplified. Second, we conduct experiments in Markov Soccer
and demonstrate how state spaces are reduced and how well

This paper introduces state abstraction for two-player zerosum Markov games (TZMGs), where the payoffs for the two
players are determined by the state representing the environment and their respective actions, with state transitions following Markov decision processes. For example, in games
like soccer, the value of actions changes according to the state
of play, and thus such games should be described as Markov
games. In TZMGs, as the number of states increases, computing equilibria becomes more difficult. Therefore, we consider state abstraction, which reduces the number of states
by treating multiple different states as a single state. There
is a substantial body of research on finding optimal policies
for Markov decision processes using state abstraction. However, in the multi-player setting, the game with state abstraction may yield different equilibrium solutions from those of
the ground game. To evaluate the equilibrium solutions of the
game with state abstraction, we derived bounds on the duality
gap, which represents the distance from the equilibrium solutions of the ground game. Finally, we demonstrate our state
abstraction with Markov Soccer, compute equilibrium policies, and examine the results.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a framework for sequential decision-making, where multiple agents
make decisions in a non-stationary environment to maximize their cumulative rewards. MARL has a wide range
of applications, e.g., robotics, distributed control, game AI,
and so on (Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016;
Silver et al. 2016, 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2018; Perolat et al. 2022). Such an environment is often modeled
as two-player zero-sum Markov games (TZMGs) (Littman
1994) and computing the equilibria is said to be empirically tractable. However, it still suffers from the exponential
growth of state space size in the number of domain variables.
Markov decision processes (MDPs), which are a singleagent version of Markov games, face the same challenge.
Solving MDPs, i.e., computing an optimal policy, is PComplete in state space size (Littman 1994), while that size
often exponentially increases. Several state abstraction techniques have been developed, which aggregate multiple states
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17555

