The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLIP-driven View-aware Prompt Learning for Unsupervised Vehicle
Re-identification
Jiyang Xu1 , Qi Wang1 * , Xin Xiong2 , Di Gai1 , Ruihua Zhou3 , Dong Wang3
2

1
School of Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Nanchang University
Department of Information, The First Affiliated Hospital, Jiangxi Medical College, Nanchang University
3
School of Software, Nanchang University
xujiyang@email.ncu.edu.cn;wangqi@ncu.edu.cn;xiongxinxx@ncu.edu.cn;gaidi@ncu.edu.cn;
zrh@email.ncu.edu.cn;dongwang@email.ncu.edu.cn

Learnable ID-specific Prompts
A
photo
] [X
] ...
...2][X
[X
A
aa [X
[X11]
[X] 22][X
Aphoto
photooffof
a
[X
...MM]]
1
vehicle.
[X vehicle.
] vehicle.

With the emergence of vision-language pre-trained models,
such as CLIP, some textual prompts have been gradually introduced recently into re-identification (Re-ID) tasks to obtain considerably robust multimodal information. However,
most textual descriptions based on vehicle Re-ID tasks only
contain identity index words without specific words to describe vehicle view information, thereby resulting in difficulty to be widely applied in vehicle Re-ID tasks with view
variations. This case inspires us to propose a CLIP-driven
view-aware prompt learning framework for unsupervised vehicle Re-ID. We first design a learnable textual prompt template called view-aware context optimization (ViewCoOp)
based on dynamic multi-view word embeddings, which can
fully obtain the proportion and position encoding of each
view in the whole vehicle body region. Subsequently, a crossmodal mutual graph is constructed to explore the connections between inter-modal and intra-modal. Each sample is
treated as a graph node, which extracts textual features based
on ViewCoOp and the visual features of images. Moreover,
leveraging the inter-cluster and intra-cluster correlation in the
bimodal clustering results in the determination of connectivity between graph node pairs. Lastly, the proposed crossmodal mutual graph method utilizes supervised information
from the bimodal gap to directly fine-tune the image encoder
of CLIP for downstream unsupervised vehicle Re-ID tasks.
Extensive experiments verify that the proposed method is capable of effectively obtaining cross-modal description ability
from multiple views.

M

Text
Encoder

Abstract

Text Features

Image
Encoder

Vision-language
Alignment
Image Features

(a) CLIP-ReID using CoOp

AA
photo
of aof[Xa1][X
[X12]][X
... 2]
[XM
vehicle
with the
photo
...] [X
M] vehicle
ratios
of view
j is R(view
j) percent.
with the
ratios
of view
j is R(view
j) percent

Text
Encoder

Learnable ID-specific and
Dynamic View-aware Prompts

Text Features
Graph
Vision-language
Alignment Co-matching

Image
Encoder

View Parsing

Image Features

(b) Ours Paradigm using ViewCoOp

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the CLIP-ReID (Li, Sun, and
Li 2023) using CoOp. (b) In this work, we introduce
ViewCoOp to achieve vision-language alignment and crossmodal mutual graph co-matching.
on visual modality information limits the cross-modal capacity of unsupervised Re-ID tasks, resulting in difficulty
for the training models to robustly distinguish the appearance differences among various vehicle models.
Previous studies (Liu et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2024; Tan
et al. 2024) have used textual descriptions to assist the ReID model to learn considerably robust visual features, especially in the text-to-image Re-ID paradigm. This visionlanguage contrastive learning paradigm requires annotating large-scale textual descriptions and then aligning features with images to obtain the cross-modal performance.
Relevant vision-language pre-trained models, such as CLIP
(Radford et al. 2021) have achieved impressive performance
in downstream zero-shot vision recognition tasks. Given that
the text encoder of CLIP can leverage the fixed prompt template, “a photo of class” as textual input to make zero-shot
predictions of image categories, many researchers have been
inspired to design reasonable prompt templates for finetuning CLIP, thereby alleviating the annotation cost of manual textual descriptions. Note that the vehicle Re-ID task ap-

Introduction
The objective of vehicle re-identification (Re-ID) task
(Zheng et al. 2023; Khorramshahi, Shenoy, and Chellappa
2023; He et al. 2023) is to retrieve specified targets in
a cross-camera surveillance system. Previously supervised
Re-ID works have achieved impressive performance through
training with massive amounts of labeled data. To reduce the
expensive cost of manual annotations, numerous studies (Lu
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b) have focused on obtaining
informative representations through clustering-based algorithms in an unsupervised manner. However, relying solely
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8896

