The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Domain-Independent Agent Architecture for Adaptive Operation in Evolving
Open Worlds
Shiwali Mohan 1 , Wiktor Piotrowski 1 , Roni Stern 2 , Sachin Grover 1 , Sookyung Kim 1 , Jacob Le 1 ,
Johan de Kleer 1 , Yoni Sher 1
2

1
Stanford Research Institute
Ben Gurion University of the Negev

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Mohan, Piotrowski, Stern, Grover, Kim, Le, Sher,
and de Kleer (2024).

Abstract
Model-based reasoning agents are ill-equipped to act in
novel situations in which their model of the environment
no longer sufficiently represents the world. We propose HYDRA, a framework for designing model-based agents operating in mixed discrete-continuous worlds that can autonomously detect when the environment has evolved from
its canonical setup, understand how it has evolved, and adapt
the agents’ models to perform effectively. HYDRA is based
upon PDDL+, a rich modeling language for planning in
mixed, discrete-continuous environments. It augments the
planning module with visual reasoning, task selection, and
action execution modules for closed-loop interaction with
complex environments. HYDRA implements a novel metareasoning process that enables the agent to monitor its own
behavior from a variety of aspects. The process employs
a diverse set of computational methods to maintain expectations about the agent’s own behavior in an environment.
Divergences from those expectations are useful in detecting when the environment has evolved and identifying opportunities to adapt the underlying models. HYDRA builds
upon ideas from diagnosis and repair and uses a heuristicsguided search over model changes such that they become
competent in novel conditions. The HYDRA framework has
been used to implement novelty-aware agents for three diverse domains - CartPole++ (a higher dimension variant of
a classic control problem), Science Birds (an IJCAI competition problem), and PogoStick (a specific problem domain
in Minecraft). We report empirical observations from these
domains to demonstrate the efficacy of various components
in the novelty meta-reasoning process.

References
Mohan, S.; Piotrowski, W.; Stern, R.; Grover, S.; Kim,
S.; Le, J.; Sher, Y.; and de Kleer, J. 2024. A domainindependent agent architecture for adaptive operation in
evolving open worlds. Artificial Intelligence, 334: 104161.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28744

