The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HomeDiffusion: Zero-Shot Object Customization with Multi-View Representation
Learning for Indoor Scenes
Guoqiu Li, Jin Song, Yiyun Fei
Alibaba Group
{liguoqiu.lgq, songjin.song, yunhun.fyy}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

to-image models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.
2021) as their backbone networks, leveraging the rich prior
knowledge of object categories contained within. The customized objects typically harmonize with the background in
terms of lighting and color tone, while still retaining a considerable amount of their identity features. However, two
key challenges remain highly formidable. The first challenge is the acquisition of multi-view object representations.
While various approaches attempt to blend the reference
object into an edited image by subtly adjusting the edges’
tone and texture for coherence, these methods can sometimes struggle with perspective harmony. This can result in
a mismatch between the object and its environment, leading
to a visually awkward appearance. Particularly for asymmetric objects, it becomes impossible to generate an object with a completely different perspective using a singleview object representation when the orientation of the background is entirely dissimilar. The second challenge is to preserve the high-fidelity object details. Although some methods (Yang et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024b) utilize powerful
pre-trained multi-modal or self-supervised image encoders
to encode the identity features of the target, ensuring consistency throughout generation. The lack of maintenance of
detail information results in generated images that do not
meet expectations (refer to Figure 5).

Recently, zero-shot object customization generation methods have rapidly developed and shown tremendous potential for applications. For instance, in the e-commerce domain, consumers can observe the visual effect of furniture
placed within their personal living spaces or clothes worn
on their own bodies. Many existing approaches perform object customization generation based on diffusion models and
extracted reference object features. However, the generated
object significantly diverges from the original reference object in details such as patterns and curves. Particularly for
asymmetrical reference objects, the absence of comprehensive multi-viewpoint information prevents the generation of
object poses that harmonize with the background scene. To
address these shortcomings, we have constructed a novel
dataset comprising multi-angle images of furniture and indoor scenes. Based on diffusion models, we introduce HomeDiffusion, which can leverage multi-viewpoint images of the
same reference object to accurately generate visually harmonious object poses within specified areas of the background
scene. During the diffusion process, we further extract highfidelity details of the reference object and perform crossattention with the noise latents in the latent space, thereby
ensuring the preservation of details in the customized object generation. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance over other existing zero-shot as well as few-shot object
customization approaches.

To address the above challenges, we propose a novel
zero-shot object customization image editing framework
for indoor scenes, named HomeDiffusion. HomeDiffusion
adeptly focuses on embedding high-fidelity objects into
edited images using reference images of objects from various viewpoints, ensuring the generated object’s perspective is aligned with the background scene. Compared to
outdoor scenes, indoor scenes have a more defined spatial structure. The placement of objects follows certain patterns and knowledge, making it an ideal and essential scenario for object customization capabilities. Specifically, we
build a multi-view indoor dataset, which comprises a collection of indoor scene images and furniture images captured from multiple viewpoints. We propose a powerful HD
visual encoder that can extract high-resolution details of
objects from both global and local perspectives. Then, we
introduce the Multi-view Object Representation Learning
(MORL) process, wherein multiple viewpoint images of a
furniture item serve as input, and the model is trained to pre-

Introduction
The goal of object customization in image editing is to seamlessly integrate objects from reference images into a specific area of the target edited image, ensuring that they harmoniously align with the background in layout, lighting,
perspective, and spatial relationships, while maintaining the
object’s identity and intrinsic properties, including texture,
shape, and distinctive features. Object customization image
editing method opens up a world of possibilities, such as the
ability to visualize how a new sofa looks in your living room
with just a few clicks, without ever stepping into a store. The
field’s potential makes it a significant research interest.
Many state-of-the-art methods (Ruiz et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024b) utilize large pre-trained textCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4698

