The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distributionally Robust Policy Evaluation and Learning for Continuous
Treatment with Observational Data
Cheuk Hang Leung1∗ , Yiyan Huang2 * , Yijun Li1 , Qi Wu1†
1

City University of Hong Kong
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
chleung87@cityu.edu.hk, yiyhuang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, yijunli5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, qi.wu@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

it may lose the predictive power due to the substantial difference between financial market environments. Similarly,
a pharmaceutical company has developed a strategy for individualized Warfarin dosage adjustment according to their
recent research on older adults. This strategy may perform
well in the original clinical trial population, yet it may falter
when applied to a new population, such as young adults, due
to significant differences in physical conditions.
To address the challenge of distribution shifts in policy
evaluation and learning, the problem can be formulated as a
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) problem. In the
DRO framework, the goal is to find the worst-case solution
within a set of distributions under certain degrees of model
uncertainties. The uncertainty set is assumed to contain the
distributions due to potential distribution shifts, and it can
be characterized by constraining certain moments of order
(Delage and Ye 2010; Zymler, Kuhn, and Rustem 2013) or
by using divergence measures (Hu and Hong 2013; Kuhn
et al. 2019; Chen, Sim, and Xu 2019; Gao, Chen, and Kleywegt 2022) to define appropriate deviations from a nominal
distribution. The resulting solution provides robust, reliable,
and conservative guarantees which can cope with the most
adverse situations.
Furthermore, the objective function of the formulated
DRO utilizes an inverse probability weighting (IPW) estimator (Wooldridge 2007) to estimate the expected potential reward under continuous treatment. Specifically, we extend the existing IPW estimator designed for discrete treatment settings to accommodate continuous treatments. Generally, the discrete-based IPW approach cannot be directly
applied in continuous treatment settings, as it would reject
most observed data. Moreover, although discretizing continuous treatments into categories is an intuitive and simple solution, it can lead to information loss and may fail
to produce inferences that vary continuously with the treatment. We introduce a modified IPW approach incorporating
a scaled kernel function with a bandwidth parameter, serving as a smooth nonparametric extension for computing histogram “buckets”. The proposed IPW estimator enables the
distributionally robust policy evaluation and learning using
observational datasets.
In summary, our framework addresses the challenges of
policy evaluation and learning in continuous treatment settings in the presence of distribution shifts. The key contribu-

Using offline observational data for policy evaluation and
learning allows decision-makers to evaluate and learn a policy
that connects characteristics and interventions. Most existing literature has focused on either discrete treatment spaces
or assumed no difference in the distributions between the
policy-learning and policy-deployed environments. These restrict applications in many real-world scenarios where distribution shifts are present with continuous treatment. To overcome these challenges, this paper focuses on developing a
distributionally robust policy under a continuous treatment
setting. The proposed distributionally robust estimators are
established using the Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW)
method extended from the discrete one for policy evaluation
and learning under continuous treatments. Specifically, we introduce a kernel function into the proposed IPW estimator to
mitigate the exclusion of observations that can occur in the
standard IPW method to continuous treatments. We then provide finite-sample analysis that guarantees the convergence
of the proposed distributionally robust policy evaluation and
learning estimators. The comprehensive experiments further
verify the effectiveness of our approach when distribution
shifts are present.

Introduction
Most decision-making problems necessitate learning an effective personalized policy based on individual features
from observational data. This process, commonly referred
to as offline policy evaluation/learning, has diverse applications across various domains, including healthcare (Tang
and Wiens 2021), recommendation (Li et al. 2010), and finance (Qin et al. 2022). Many studies have investigated offline policy evaluation/learning in discrete treatment settings
which assume that the deployment environment is identical to the environment generating the training data, i.e., that
there are no distributional shifts. This assumption, however,
is often unrealistic in many real-world applications (Huang
et al. 2023). For instance, an investment firm has developed
an automated investment strategy for the US stock market
based on extensive historical trading data. When attempting to apply this strategy directly to the UK stock market,
* The co-first authors contribute equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18209

