The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Anchor Search: A Unified Framework for Suboptimal Bidirectional Search
Sepehr Lavasani1 , Lior Siag2 , Shahaf S. Shperberg2 , Ariel Felner2 , Nathan R. Sturtevant1, 3
1
University of Alberta
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
3
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
sepehr3@ualberta.ca, siagl@post.bgu.ac.il, {shperbsh, felner}@bgu.ac.il, nathanst@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract

Likhachev and Stentz 2008; Björnsson, Bulitko, and Sturtevant 2009; Wilt, Thayer, and Ruml 2010; Heusner, Keller,
and Helmert 2017). Moreover, recent years have witnessed
a considerable surge in attention towards optimal Bi-HS, resulting in not only refined theoretical understanding (Eckerle et al. 2017; Shaham et al. 2018; Chen and Sturtevant
2019; Shperberg et al. 2019; Sturtevant et al. 2020) but also
the development of efficient algorithms (Holte et al. 2016;
Chen et al. 2017; Shperberg et al. 2019; Alcázar 2021). Even
though early work in bidirectional search studied suboptimal approaches (Sint and De Champeaux 1977), unbounded
suboptimal Bi-HS algorithms remain relatively unexplored.
Bi-HS algorithms can be divided into two categories:
front-to-end (F2E) (Kaindl and Kainz 1997) and front-tofront (F2F) algorithms (Sint and De Champeaux 1977). In
F2E Bi-HS, heuristics estimate distances from states to either the start or goal, while in F2F Bi-HS, heuristics estimate the distances between any pair of states.
This paper introduces the anchor search framework, for
unbounded suboptimal Bi-HS. Existing unbounded suboptimal Bi-HS algorithms fit loosely into this framework, and
novel instances of anchor search arise from the algorithmic
choices in the framework. This paper also addresses a previously overlooked question—the derivation of F2F heuristics,
especially in domains like the Towers of Hanoi (TOH) where
strong F2F heuristics are not readily available. Within this
context, the paper explores how pattern databases (PDBs)
(Culberson and Schaeffer 1998) can be used as differential
heuristics (DHs) (Sturtevant et al. 2009), providing the F2F
heuristics for anchor search in particular, and any F2F bidirectional search in general.
Experimental results across domains show that the new
anchor search algorithms exhibit promising performance,
surpassing existing unbounded suboptimal algorithms. Furthermore, our experiments in TOH show that using PDBs as
DHs are effective F2F heuristics.

In recent years the understanding of optimal bidirectional
heuristic search (BiHS) has progressed significantly. Yet, BiHS is relatively unexplored in unbounded suboptimal search.
Front-to-end (F2E) and front-to-front (F2F) bidirectional
search have been used in optimal algorithms, but adapting
them for unbounded suboptimal search remains an open challenge. We introduce a framework for suboptimal BiHS, called
anchor search, and use it to derive a parameterized family of
algorithms. Because our new algorithms need F2F heuristic
evaluations, we propose using pattern databases (PDBs) as
differential heuristics (DHs) to construct F2F heuristics. Our
experiments evaluate three anchor search instances across diverse domains, outperforming existing methods, particularly
as the search scales.

Code — https://github.com/nathansttt/hog2/tree/PDBrefactor/papers/AnchorSearch

Introduction
In optimal heuristic search, the objective is to discover the
path of least cost connecting two vertices, denoted as start
and goal, within a given graph. Unidirectional heuristic
search (UHS) algorithms search for a path by exploration
from start towards the goal using the guidance of a heuristic
function. An alternative approach to UHS is Bidirectional
heuristic search (BiHS), which involves simultaneous exploration from both the start (forward) and goal (backward)
directions until the two frontiers meet.
In numerous contexts, finding optimal solutions is impractical due to computational costs. Suboptimal search sacrifices solution quality in exchange for expedited execution times, and can be bounded, returning a solution within
a fixed bound of optimal (Valenzano et al. 2013), or unbounded, returning any solution. In both of these cases, the
search terminates when the first suitable solution is found,
instead of continuing to look for better solutions, something
done by anytime search (Hansen and Zhou 2007).
This work addresses the problem of unbounded suboptimal Bi-HS. In the past, optimal and suboptimal Uni-HS have
been studied comprehensively (Dechter and Pearl 1985;

Background and Related Work
This paper addresses the challenge of finding paths of any
length between two states (vertices) within a graph. The inputs consist of a graph G = (V, E), with V and E representing vertices and edges, a cost function c : E → R+ assigning costs to edges, and a heuristic function h(u, v) : V ×
V → R+ , estimating distances between state pairs. The out-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27045

