The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SVasP: Self-Versatility Adversarial Style Perturbation
for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Wenqian Li1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2∗ , Hui Xue1,2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
{wenqianli.li, fangpengfei, hxue}@seu.edu.cn
𝒂
Gradient Cosine Similarity

Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL) aims to transfer knowledge from seen source domains to unseen target domains, which is crucial for evaluating the generalization and
robustness of models. Recent studies focus on utilizing visual
styles to bridge the domain gap between different domains.
However, the serious dilemma of gradient instability and local optimization problem occurs in those style-based CDFSL methods. This paper addresses these issues and proposes
a novel crop-global style perturbation method, called SelfVersatility Adversarial Style Perturbation (SVasP), which
enhances the gradient stability and escapes from poor sharp
minima jointly. Specifically, SVasP simulates more diverse
potential target domain adversarial styles via diversifying input patterns and aggregating localized crop style gradients, to
serve as global style perturbation stabilizers within one image, a concept we refer to as self-versatility. Then a novel
objective function is proposed to maximize visual discrepancy while maintaining semantic consistency between global,
crop, and adversarial features. Having the stabilized global
style perturbation in the training phase, one can obtain a flattened minima in the loss landscape, boosting the transferability of the model to the target domains. Extensive experiments
on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods.

𝒃
Ours
StyleAdv

0.9

0.7
Sharp Minima
0.5

0.3
0

50
100
150
Number of Epoch

200
Flat Minima (Ours)

Figure 1: SVasP stabilizes the gradients and escapes from
poor sharp minima. (a) demonstrates the gradient cosine
similarity between epochs for displaying ground representations of gradient stability, and the larger the cosine similarity, the more stable gradient update direction. (b) demonstrates the proposed approach ensures that the model converges to a flat minima and is robust to domain shifts.

to transfer domain-agnostic knowledge from multiple wellannotated source domains to target domains with limited labeled data (Tseng et al. 2020; Feng, Wang, and Geng 2024).
Among the various CD-FSL settings, Single Source CDFSL addresses domain shifts more realistically by restricting
the model to access only one source domain during training.
Recent studies have explored perturbing the styles of images to facilitate models acquiring more domain-agnostic
knowledge from a single source domain (Kim and Han
2024; Zhong et al. 2022). By recognizing image styles (e.g.,
mean and standard deviation) as key domain characteristics (Zhou et al. 2020), these studies aim to enhance model
generalization and mitigate domain shifts by altering these
domain-specific attributes (Feng et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2024).
Although style-based methods have demonstrated effectiveness in Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL), they
remain suboptimal due to the inherent differences between
domains and the varied optimization paths for adversarial
perturbations. As a result, models may overfit to noise or
specific samples, becoming overly dependent on the source
domain and thereby limiting their generalization capabilities.
Recently, StyleAdv (Fu et al. 2023) has addressed domain
shifts by augmenting the original styles with signed gra-

Code — https://github.com/liwenqianSEU/SVasP

Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved significant advancements in visual recognition when trained with abundant labeled samples. However, in many real-world applications,
such as rare disease diagnosis, large training datasets with
reliable annotations are not always feasible. To address this
limitation, Few-Shot Learning (FSL) methods have been
developed to enable models to generalize to novel classes
with only a few samples per class (Triantafillou et al. 2020;
Feng et al. 2024b). In addition to the challenge of limited data, there is often a domain gap between the source
domains and target domains in practical scenarios, which
presents a critical challenge. Consequently, Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL) methods have been explored
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15275

