The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ObjVariantEnsemble: Advancing Point Cloud LLM Evaluation in
Challenging Scenes with Subtly Distinguished Objects
Qihang Cao1,2 , Huangxun Chen2 *
1

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
john cao@sjtu.edu.cn, huangxunchen@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
3D scene understanding is an important task, and there has
been a recent surge of research interest in aligning 3D representations of point clouds with text to empower embodied AI.
However, due to the lack of comprehensive 3D benchmarks,
the capabilities of 3D models in real-world scenes, particularly those that are challenging with subtly distinguished objects, remain insufficiently investigated. To facilitate a more
thorough evaluation of 3D models’ capabilities, we propose
a scheme, ObjVariantEnsemble, to systematically introduce
more scenes with specified object classes, colors, shapes,
quantities, and spatial relationships to meet model evaluation
needs. More importantly, we intentionally construct scenes
with similar objects to a certain degree and design an LLMVLM-cooperated annotator to capture key distinctions as annotations. The resultant benchmark can better challenge 3D
models, reveal their shortcomings in understanding, and potentially aid in the further development of 3D models.

(a) This is a brown
chair. it is near the end
of the table.

Multi3dRef
Chat3dV2

(b)The chair features a
straight design with a
high back and a slatted
backrest. It's between
two chair.

Label

Chat3dV2
Multi3dRef

Figure 1: Comparison of 3D grounding benchmarks in challenging scenes: (a) one scene in ScanNet/ScanRef where the
text is insufficient to accurately locate a chair. (b) one scene
in ObjVariantEnsemble where one model accurately identifies targets with sufficient descriptions.

Project Page — https://ove-benchmark.github.io/OVE/

1

Label

Introduction

Building machine perception that can understand our 3D
world has been an attractive pursuit in recent years. Prior
works (Chang et al. 2015; Uy et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2022;
Sun et al. 2022) have focused on learning 3D representations from point clouds, making significant progress in object classification. Due to the success of large language models (LLMs)(Touvron et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a), interest
has expanded beyond traditional object classification tasks.
Recent works, such as PointLLM(Xu et al. 2023) and 3DLLM (Hong et al. 2023), aim to align the latent representations of textual descriptions with 3D point clouds, allowing
machine perception systems to interpret and interact with
the physical world more effectively through text-based instructions. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, if a system can accurately identify a target in a scene based on text
descriptions, it could significantly enhance the intelligence
of robotics applications, enabling tasks such as completing household chores through verbal instructions (Li et al.

2023; Ge et al. 2024) or improving human-robot collaboration (Xiao et al. 2022; Team et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023c).
However, the path towards the aforementioned vision
of 3D scene understanding is currently hindered by the
lack of comprehensive 3D benchmarks. Existing scenelevel benchmarks are primarily built on ScanNet (Dai
et al. 2017) that consists of 1600+ scans of real scenarios. Subsequent works, including ScanRef (Chen, Chang,
and Nießner 2020), Multi3DRef (Zhang, Gong, and Chang
2023), ScanQA (Azuma et al. 2022), etc. continue to refine
and enhance the text annotations to ScanNet, aiming to facilitate 3D model evaluation and development.
Despite many efforts, 3D benchmarks still fall short of
keeping pace with the needs of 3D model development.
(i) Small Scale. Compared to VLM works (Radford et al.
2021; Li et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024a), which require largescale text-image pairs, 3D benchmarks, especially those
from real-world scans, are significantly smaller in scale.
(ii) Insufficient Annotation. Beyond data scale, the annotation granularity is more crucial in determining whether

* The work was done during Qihang Cao’s research internship
at HKUST(GZ). Corresponding author: Huangxun Chen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1944

