The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unleashing the Potential of Model Bias for Generalized Category Discovery
Wenbin An1,2 * , Haonan Lin1,2 * , Jiahao Nie3 , Feng Tian1,2† , Wenkai Shi1,2 ,
Yaqiang Wu4 , Qianying Wang4† , Ping Chen5
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analytics
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
Lenovo Research
5
University of Massachusetts Boston
{wenbinan,linhaonan,kkkkkkai0611}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jiahao007@e.ntu.edu.sg,
fengtian@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {wuyqe,wangqya}@lenovo.com, Ping.Chen@umb.edu
2

Abstract

Known--Known
Error

Generalized Category Discovery is a significant and complex
task that aims to identify both known and undefined novel categories from a set of unlabeled data, leveraging another labeled
dataset containing only known categories. The primary challenges stem from model bias induced by pre-training on only
known categories and the lack of precise supervision for novel
ones, leading to category bias towards known categories and
category confusion among different novel categories, which
hinders models’ ability to identify novel categories effectively.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel framework
named Self-Debiasing Calibration (SDC). Unlike prior methods that regard model bias towards known categories as an
obstacle to novel category identification, SDC provides a novel
insight into unleashing the potential of the bias to facilitate
novel category learning. Specifically, we utilize the biased
pre-trained model to guide the subsequent learning process
on unlabeled data. The output of the biased model serves two
key purposes. First, it provides an accurate modeling of category bias, which can be utilized to measure the degree of bias
and debias the output of the current training model. Second,
it offers valuable insights for distinguishing different novel
categories by transferring knowledge between similar categories. Based on these insights, SDC dynamically adjusts the
output logits of the current training model using the output
of the biased model. This approach produces less biased logits to effectively address the issue of category bias towards
known categories, and generates more accurate pseudo labels
for unlabeled data, thereby mitigating category confusion for
novel categories. Experiments on three benchmark datasets
show that SDC outperforms SOTA methods, especially in the
identification of novel categories.

Novel--Known
Error

Known--Novel
Error

GCD Error Type

Novel--Novel
Error

Figure 1: Four types of GCD errors. For instance, NovelNovel Error indicates samples from novel categories are misclassified into wrong novel categories.

Code — https://github.com/Lackel/SDC

Introduction
Unlike humans who can transfer previously acquired knowledge to new concepts, most deep learning models fail to
recognize new categories due to their closed-world assumption that training and test data come from the same predefined
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15365

categories. The assumption limits their applications in numerous practical tasks such as intent detection (Shi et al. 2023;
An et al. 2024c) and image categorization (Vaze, Vedaldi, and
Zisserman 2024; Rastegar, Doughty, and Snoek 2024), where
well-trained models may encounter unlabeled data from previously unseen novel categories. To address the requirements
of open-world scenarios, Generalized Category Discovery
(GCD) has been proposed and extensively studied in both
NLP (An et al. 2023c; Zhang et al. 2024a) and CV fields
(Zhao et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2024a,b). GCD aims to recognize
both known and novel categories from unlabeled data, using
only a few labeled samples from known categories. This task
enables models to adapt to an increasing number of novel
categories without incurring additional labeling costs.
To address GCD, existing research (Zhong et al. 2021; Shi
et al. 2024; An et al. 2024b) typically begins with pre-training
models on labeled data tailored to specific tasks. However,
in the absence of labeled data for novel categories, the pretrained models exhibit a strong bias towards known ones,
resulting in the misclassification of samples from novel categories into known ones. To alleviate this issue, existing work
fine-tunes the pre-trained models on unlabeled data through
pseudo-label training (Zhang et al. 2021a), contrastive learning (Vaze et al. 2022; An et al. 2023c), and transfer learning
(Shi et al. 2024; An et al. 2024b). Despite performance improvements, these models still struggle with identifying novel
categories due to inherent model bias towards known categories and the lack of supervision for novel ones.
In this paper, we first provide a novel insight into the model

