The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Transfer Learning of Real Image Features with Soft Contrastive Loss
for Fake Image Detection
Ziyou Liang1 , Weifeng Liu1 , Run Wang1 * , Mengjie Wu1 , Boheng Li2 ,
Yuyang Zhang1 , Lina Wang1 , Xinyi Yang3
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
NSFOCUS, China
Abstract

In the last few years, the artifact patterns in fake images synthesized by different generative models have been inconsistent, leading to the failure of previous research that relied on
spotting subtle differences between real and fake. In our preliminary experiments, we find that the artifacts in fake images
always change with the development of the generative model,
while natural images exhibit stable statistical properties. In
this paper, we employ natural traces shared only by real images as an additional target for a classifier. Specifically, we
introduce a self-supervised feature mapping process for natural trace extraction and develop a transfer learning based
on soft contrastive loss to bring them closer to real images
and further away from fake ones. This motivates the detector
to make decisions based on the proximity of images to the
natural traces. To conduct a comprehensive experiment, we
built a high-quality and diverse dataset that includes generative models comprising GANs and diffusion models, to evaluate the effectiveness in generalizing unknown forgery techniques and robustness in surviving different transformations.
Experimental results show that our proposed method gives
96.2% mAP significantly outperforms the baselines. Extensive experiments conducted on popular commercial platforms
reveal that our proposed method achieves an accuracy exceeding 78.4%, underscoring its practicality for real-world
application deployment.

Training set: real

Training set: GAN-based

Testing set: DM-based

Figure 1: TSNE visualization. Left: The detector is easily overfitted to fake images in the training set; Right: Training with natural
traces can generalize to unknown fake images.

practical method to distinguish fake images that are synthesized with unknown forgery techniques as the unseen generative models will emerge inadvertently.
The prior paradigm for fake image detection is to learn artifacts of fake images by capturing the subtle differences between real and fake images (Wang et al. 2019, 2020; Huang
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021). Our empirical research confirms that there is a huge challenge in detecting unknown
fake images: the model can easily form a classification manifold on the images of the training set, while new generative
fake images and their distinctive artifacts will be randomly
scattered in this space, as shown in Figure 1 left. Unfortunately, the existing studies are trapped in the endless efforts
to spot the artifacts by investigating the subtle differences
between real and fake (Corvi et al. 2023). Since the classifier can easily overfit the fake image artifacts of the training
set, unknown fake images will be scattered outside the manifold like real images.
In this paper, we propose a transfer learning method based
on natural trace features for fake image detection. We propose a novel perspective on fake image detection, emphasizing the inherent similarities among real images rather
than the differences between real and fake. Our insight is
grounded in the premise that images from the real world
possess a stable intrinsic naturalness. We posit that real images share common characteristics, akin to those found in
fake images, which we refer to as "natural traces." We introduce natural trace forensics (NTF) and adopt a substitution strategy to replace shared features with homogeneous

Introduction
With the rapid development and maturity of generative
models, the increasing proliferation of fake images has attracted widespread attention. Compared to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), diffusion models (DMs), as today’s SOTA generative models, exhibit better generation
quality (Dhariwal 2021) and even support powerful text-toimage models such as DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al. 2022), Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022). Currently, one can use
different types of generative models to create realistic faces
or complex scene images and it is foreseeable that more generative models for image synthesis will emerge in the future.
Therefore, it is the goal for the community to develop a more
* Corresponding author. E-mail: wangrun@whu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26281

