The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decomposed Spatio-Temporal Mamba for Long-Term Traffic Prediction
Sicheng He1 , Junzhong Ji1,2 , Minglong Lei1,2 *
1

2

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
Beijing Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
sicheng he@emails.bjut.edu.cn, jjz01@bjut.edu.cn, leiml@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract

Recently, spatio-temporal Transformers (Xu et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2022) have received great attention. Unlike traditional spatio-temporal neural networks that extract spatial and temporal features with different deep learning architectures, e.g., graph neural networks (GNNs) (Cao et al.
2024) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Ounoughi and
Ben Yahia 2024), spatio-temporal Transformers attempt to
maintain a unified model architecture for both spatial and
temporal data with only slight differences that reveal data
structures. Technically, self-attention provides a global picture for traffic data, which equips Transformers with superior ability in long-term traffic prediction tasks.
However, the difficulty of traffic prediction increases as
the spatio-temporal ranges increase (Luo et al. 2024; Cai,
Wang, and Hu 2024). Current spatio-temporal Transformers still face several challenges in long-term traffic prediction tasks. First, long-term traffic data exhibits complex and
entangled spatio-temporal dependencies that hinder traditional Transformers from extracting perspicacious patterns.
Although variants like Autoformer (Wu et al. 2021) and
FEDformer (Zhou et al. 2022) attempt to address this problem through decomposition, they only focus on the temporal entanglement, ignoring the effect of spatial restrictions from road networks. Second, Transformers usually require quadratic complexity, which brings computation burdens particularly when both spatial and temporal Transformers are used in traffic prediction. The advancements in linear
models have made progress in balancing the efficiency and
accuracy for long-range forecasting (Das et al. 2023; Zeng
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024). Unfortunately, these methods
are more suitable for capturing stable trends while failing to
perceive the frequent fluctuations in traffic conditions.
To address these challenges, we propose in this paper
a decomposed spatio-temporal Mamba for long-term traffic prediction. The main aim of the proposed method is to
disentangle the patterns within large spatio-temporal ranges
and leverage efficient feature extraction backbones to reduce
the computation complexity. Mamba (Gu and Dao 2024)
is a selective structured state space model (SSM) that has
gained great popularity in many fields. Our core idea is to
first decompose spatio-temporal data into trend and seasonal
parts from the temporal perspective where a Mamba backbone and a linear model are leveraged to learn from the seasonal and trend parts. Notice that the Mamba framework is

Traffic prediction provides vital support for urban traffic management and has received extensive research interest. By
virtue of the ability to effectively learn spatial and temporal dependencies from a global view, Transformers have
achieved superior performance in long-term traffic prediction.
However, existing methods usually underrate the complex
spatio-temporal entanglement in long-range sequences. Compared with purely temporal entanglement, spatio-temporal
data emphasizes the entangled dynamics under the restrictions of traffic networks, which brings additional difficulties.
Moreover, the computational costs of spatio-temporal Transformers scale quadratically as the sequence length grows,
limiting their applications on long-range and large-scale scenarios. To address these problems, we propose a decomposed
spatio-temporal Mamba (DST-Mamba) for traffic prediction.
We aim to apply temporal decomposition to the entangled sequences and obtain the seasonal and trend parts. Shifting from
the temporal view to the spatial view, we leverage Mamba, a
state space model with near-linear complexity, to capture seasonal variations in a node-centric manner. Meanwhile, multiscale trend information is extracted and aggregated by simple linear layers. Such combination equips DST-Mamba with
superior capability to model long-range spatio-temporal dependencies while remaining efficient compared with Transformers. Experimental results across five real-world datasets
demonstrate that DST-Mamba can capture both local fluctuations and global trends within traffic patterns, achieving stateof-the-art performance with favorable efficiency.

Introduction
Traffic prediction plays an essential role in modern intelligent transportation systems, with typical applications covering congestion alleviation (Bai et al. 2020) and route planning (Dai et al. 2020). It aims to leverage observed traffic
conditions within real road networks to forecast future traffic conditions. Since prediction accuracy highly depends on
capturing spatial and temporal dependencies in traffic data,
spatio-temporal neural networks that can jointly learn features from time series and graphs have become the mainstream methods in the traffic prediction domain (Wu et al.
2020; Ji, Yu, and Lei 2023; Li et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11772

