The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Does VLM Classification Benefit from LLM Description Semantics?
Pingchuan Ma1,2 * , Lennart Rietdorf1 * ,
Dmytro Kotovenko1 , Vincent Tao Hu1,2 , Björn Ommer1,2
2

1
CompVis @ LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Abstract

Vision-Language Models (Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al.
2021) tackle this issue by training neural networks to link
images and their textual descriptions within a shared embedding space. This enhances the correlation between visual
and textual details. VLMs can be applied to zero-shot image classification by passing an image through the VLM’s
image encoder and prompting the text encoder with handcrafted inputs like “a photo of a [classname]” (Radford
et al. 2021). Recent work (Menon and Vondrick 2023) extends this approach by incorporating additional descriptions
generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) for each class
name. LLMs like GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020; Ouyang et al.
2022) or Llama (Touvron et al. 2023), trained on extensive
text corpora, are intended to provide richer semantics, enhancing VLM classification.
However, Does VLM classification truly benefit from
LLM-generated description semantics? This work explores
this core question, as LLM-generated descriptions present
several challenges. For example, descriptions can overlap
for similar classes — such as parrots and sparrows — both
described as having feathers, which is not a distinguishing
feature. Moreover, while supplying the model with as many
LLM-generated descriptions as possible may seem advantageous, it results in excessively lengthy collections. This
complicates understanding the contribution of each description to the final decision.
Another problem is the structured noise ensembling phenomenon (Roth et al. 2023): LLM-generated descriptions
can be replaced with high-level concepts and random characters (such as “Baklava”, “a food that is 34mfqr5”) while
still improving the model performance. These slightly modified duplications act as test-time augmentation for the original prompt, resulting in an averaged robust output. This
raises the question whether the improvement is due to additional semantics of the LLM-generated descriptions or to
the ensemble effect of the noise augmentation.
Given these challenges, a proposed model should meet
three criteria: 1) As humans who describe with a limited set
of descriptions, the model should also operate with a manageable number of text descriptions. 2) These descriptions
should be semantically meaningful. 3) The model should be
resilient to noise ensembling. To address the issue of noise
ensembling, we constrain the model to use only textual descriptions that do not contain the classname, i.e. classname-

Accurately describing images with text is a foundation of
explainable AI. Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP
have recently addressed this by aligning images and texts in
a shared embedding space, expressing semantic similarities
between vision and language embeddings. VLM classification can be improved with descriptions generated by Large
Language Models (LLMs). However, it is difficult to determine the contribution of actual description semantics, as the
performance gain may also stem from a semantic-agnostic
ensembling effect, where multiple modified text prompts act
as a noisy test-time augmentation for the original one. We
propose an alternative evaluation scenario to decide if a performance boost of LLM-generated descriptions is caused by
such a noise augmentation effect or rather by genuine description semantics. The proposed scenario avoids noisy testtime augmentation and ensures that genuine, distinctive descriptions cause the performance boost. Furthermore, we propose a training-free method for selecting discriminative descriptions that work independently of classname-ensembling
effects. Our approach identifies descriptions that effectively
differentiate classes within a local CLIP label neighborhood,
improving classification accuracy across seven datasets. Additionally, we provide insights into the explainability of
description-based image classification with VLMs.

Code — https://github.com/CompVis/DisCLIP
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11917

1

Introduction

Human visual recognition is closely related to verbal reasoning, as it often relies on the ability to express visual
information in words (Zhao et al. 2022; Shtedritski, Rupprecht, and Vedaldi 2023). However, a neural network usually does not exhibit this property, making its explainability
a significant concern for the machine learning community.
Some studies (Zhang et al. 2024; Hakimov and Schlangen
2023) aim to connect visual cues and textual descriptions,
but these usually require extensive human subject analysis
and highly specific datasets with annotations (Young et al.
2014), which are expansive to obtain (Lin et al. 2014).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5973

