The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProPose: Probabilistic 3D Human Pose Estimation with Instance-Level
Distribution and Normalizing Flow
Jumin Han, Jun-Hee Kim, Seong-Whan Lee
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
{juminhan, jh kim, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is a one-to-many problem by nature, making it challenging to estimate an accurate 3D pose from a single 2D pose. Some prior works
have attempted to tackle this problem by using a conditional
generative network. They generate 3D poses from a given
2D pose with noises from a standard Gaussian distribution,
while the depth distribution is dependent on each posture and
more complex than the standard Gaussian distribution. This
may lead to inaccurate distribution learning. In this paper,
we propose a probabilistic framework called ProPose to address this issue. ProPose employs Pose Instance-Level Gaussian Distribution (PILGD) derived from 3D pose-based selfrepresentation learning to obtain reliable distribution which
is able to address pose-dependent depth distribution. To access this PILGD, we utilize normalizing flow, which learns
a mapping function between the PILGD and a 2D PoseAdaptive Gaussian Distribution (PAGD). This converts the
problem of directly estimating 3D poses from 2D poses to
a mapping problem between PILGD and PAGD using a normalizing flow. Extensive experiments show the advantages of
utilizing the PILGD and PAGD. ProPose achieves comparable performances to previous state-of-the-art probabilistic
methods in a multi-hypothesis setting. Notably, ProPose in a
single-hypothesis setting demonstrates comparable generalization ability to existing state-of-the-art deterministic methods.

Figure 1: A high level illustrative description of instancelevel non-standard Gaussian distribution N (µ, σ) to address
j
i
depth distribution. Pdepth
and Pdepth
refer to the depth distributions of two different posei and posej , respectively.
The black arrows represent addressing the depth distributions with the same distribution. The pink arrows represent
addressing the depth distributions with non-standard Gaussian distributions.

Code — https://github.com/SereneBlooms/ProPose.

et al. 2019; Pavllo et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2020) have focused on deterministic 3D HPE and tackled the problems of
depth ambiguity. These studies have shown significant improvements in generating plausible 3D poses. However, deterministic method may not be an effective approach under
the scenario where there are multiple solutions for a single
2D pose (Li et al. 2022; Li and Lee 2019). In this context,
some researches (Sharma et al. 2019; Ci et al. 2023; Oikarinen, Hannah, and Kazerounian 2021; Wehrbein et al. 2021)
have focused on multi-hypothesis 3D HPE, which predicts
multiple 3D poses for a single 2D pose to deal with depth
ambiguity. They have shown substantial potential in multihypothesis setting.
Multi-hypothesis 3D HPE generally takes a probabilistic approach to resolve the one-to-many problem. Some of
them utilize conditional generative models to generate plausible 3D poses from noises with a given 2D pose (Sharma

Introduction
Lifting-based 3D human pose estimation (HPE) is an essential task in computer vision. It has received considerable attention due to its applications in fields such as AR, VR and
robotics (Park and Lee 2011; Zimmermann et al. 2018; Yuan
et al. 2021). Recently, researches in this area have made
rapid progress with advances in deep neural networks. However, they still suffer from major challenge, which is the inherent problem of depth ambiguity caused by the one-tomany problem (Yang and Lee 2007; Martinez et al. 2017;
Kim and Lee 2024).
In recent years, various studies (Martinez et al. 2017; Ci
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3338

