The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pre-Assignment Problem for Unique Minimum Vertex Cover on
Bounded Clique-Width Graphs
Shinwoo An1 , Yeonsu Chang2 , Kyungjin Cho1 , O-joung Kwon2,3* , Myounghwan Lee2 , Eunjin Oh1 ,
Hyeonjun Shin1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea
2
Department of Mathematics, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea
3
Discrete Mathematics Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, South Korea
shinwooan@postech.ac.kr, yeonsu@hanyang.ac.kr, kyungjincho@postech.ac.kr, {ojoungkwon, sycuel}@hanyang.ac.kr,
{eunjin.oh, tlsguswns119}@postech.ac.kr
Abstract
Horiyama et al. (AAAI 2024) considered the problem of generating instances with a unique minimum vertex cover under
certain conditions. The P RE - ASSIGNMENT FOR U NIQUIFI CATION OF M INIMUM V ERTEX C OVER problem (shortly
PAU-VC) is the problem, for given a graph G, to find a minimum set S of vertices in G such that there is a unique minimum vertex cover of G containing S. We show that PAU-VC
is fixed-parameter tractable parameterized by clique-width,
which improves an exponential algorithm for trees given by
Horiyama et al. Among natural graph classes with unbounded
clique-width, we show that the problem can be solved in polynomial time on split graphs and unit interval graphs.

Introduction
Designing AI algorithms to tackle NP-hard graph problems
has become a prominent trend in the field of artificial intelligence. The inherent complexity of NP-complete problems
presents a significant challenge, making them an ideal testbed
for AI-driven approaches that aim to push the boundaries of
what can be achieved in terms of efficiency and scalability.
To evaluate the performance of those AI algorithms, it is
essential to have robust benchmark datasets. Such datasets
provide a controlled environment where the strengths and
weaknesses of different algorithms can be systematically analyzed. As constructing a benchmark dataset is a critical aspect
of AI research, several well-known benchmark datasets were
presented such as TSPLIB, UCI, SATLIB, and DIMACS
for various NP-hard combinatorial problems (Reinelt 1991;
Asuncion, Newman et al. 2007; Hoos and Stützle 2000).
However, it seems hard to use them to evaluate the performances of AI algorithms for the uniqueness version of
combinatorial problems where a solution is unique. In several
problems, the presence of a unique solution can lead to more
efficient algorithms (Thomason 1978; Gabow, Kaplan, and
Tarjan 1999). Also, algorithms for the unique SAT problem
are used as subroutines for its search version (Scheder and
Steinberger 2017; Hertli 2014a). Due to these reasons, the
uniqueness version also has been extensively studied from
both theory and practice (Calabro et al. 2008; Hertli 2014b).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26886

Therefore, generating graphs with a unique solution offers
a valuable addition to benchmark datasets, enabling a more
thorough evaluation of AI-driven solvers for the uniqueness
version of combinatorial problems.
One natural approach for generating graphs with a unique
solution is to make use of graphs in well-known benchmark
datasets. More specifically, we choose a graph G in a wellknown benchmark dataset, and pre-assign a part of G so that
only one solution is consistent with this assignment. This
pre-assignment for uniquification has been studied for classic NP-hard problems such as the coloring and clique problems (Harary, Slany, and Verbitsky 2007), the dominating
set problem and its variants (Chartrand et al. 1997; Bozeman et al. 2019; Ferrero et al. 2018) and the vertex cover
problem (Horiyama et al. 2024). Also, several pencil/video
puzzles such as SUDOKU and Picross 3D have been studied
in the context of the pre-assignment for uniquification (Demaine et al. 2018; Kimura, Kamehashi, and Fujito 2018;
Tjusila et al. 2024).
In this paper, we focus on the P RE - ASSIGNMENT FOR
UNIQUIFICATION OF M INIMUM V ERTEX C OVER (PAUVC) problem introduced by (Horiyama et al. 2024). A set
S of vertices in a graph G is called a vertex cover of G if S
meets all edges of G. The goal of this problem is to compute
a minimum-cardinality vertex cover of a given graph. In the
unique vertex cover problem, it is assured that an input graph
has a unique minimum vertex cover. The formal definition of
PAU-VC is the following.
PAU-VC
Input : A graph G
Question : Find a minimum set S ⊆ V (G) such that there
is a unique minimum vertex cover of G containing S.
Notice that one can use an algorithm for PAU-VC to
generate a graph with a unique solution for the vertex cover
problem. Consider an arbitrary graph G (possibly from a
known benchmark dataset), and compute an optimal solution
S for PAU-VC on G. Since there is a unique minimum vertex
cover of G containing S, G−S has a unique minimum vertex
cover as well, where G − S is the graph obtained from G by
removing all vertices of S and their incident edges.
Although the pre-assignment for uniquification of the dominating set problem and its variants has been studied exten-

