The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Self-Prior Embedding Neural Representation for Iterative
Sparse-View CT Reconstruction
Xuanyu Tian1,2 , Lixuan Chen3 , Qing Wu1 , Chenhe Du1 , Jingjing Shi4 , Hongjiang Wei5 ,
Yuyao Zhang1 *
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China
2
Lingang Laboratory, Shanghai 200031, China
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Michigan, MI 48105, United States
4
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China
5
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China
tianxy@shanghaitech.edu.cn, chenlx@umich.edu, wuqing@shanghaitech.edu.cn, duchenhe@shanghaitech.edu.cn,
walm13@126.com, hongjiang.wei@sjtu.edu.cn, zhangyy8@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Abstract

reducing the radiation dose in the CT acquisition process is
a critical and widely researched topic.
The forward acquisition of CT can be formulated as the
following linear equation:

Emerging unsupervised implicit neural representation (INR)
methods, such as NeRP, NeAT, and SCOPE, have shown
great potential to address sparse-view computed tomography (SVCT) inverse problems. Although these INR-based
methods perform well in relatively dense SVCT reconstructions, they struggle to achieve comparable performance to
supervised methods in sparser SVCT scenarios. They are
prone to being affected by noise, limiting their applicability in real clinical settings. Additionally, current methods
have not fully explored the use of image domain priors for
solving SVCsT inverse problems. In this work, we demonstrate that imperfect reconstruction results can provide effective image domain priors for INRs to enhance performance.
To leverage this, we introduce Self-prior embedding neural
representation (Spener), a novel unsupervised method for
SVCT reconstruction that integrates iterative reconstruction
algorithms. During each iteration, Spener extracts local image
prior features from the previous iteration and embeds them to
constrain the solution space. Experimental results on multiple CT datasets show that our unsupervised Spener method
achieves performance comparable to supervised state-of-theart (SOTA) methods on in-domain data while outperforming
them on out-of-domain datasets. Moreover, Spener significantly improves the performance of INR-based methods in
handling SVCT with noisy sinograms.

y = Ax + ϵ,

(1)

where the y ∈ Rm is the measurement data (i.e. sinogram
data) with m = nv × nd , nv and nd is the number of projection views and detectors. A ∈ Rm×n is the forward model
(e.g. Radon transform), x ∈ Rn is the unknown image intensity of object and ϵ ∈ Rm is the system noise. To reduce
the radiation of the CT process, one effective solution is to
reduce the number of sampling projection views nv , which
is sparse-view CT (SVCT) acquisition. Under the SVCT acquisition setting, the dimension of measurement data y is
much lower than the unknown object x (i.e, m ≪ n), resulting in the linear equation (Eq. (1)) to be highly ill-posed.
Recently, there has been considerable works on supervised deep learning (DL) for the SVCT inverse problem (Lee
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018; Wu et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023). These methods train
neural networks to map corrupted images to artifact-free images in end-to-end learning. Leveraging the power of neural networks and data-driven priors, supervised DL methods achieve SOTA performance in SVCT reconstruction.
However, these methods face two significant challenges: 1)
Learning cost. Developing effective data-driven priors requires collecting large amounts of paired data, which is both
challenging and expensive; 2) Out-of-domain (OOD) problem. These methods often suffer from performance degradation when the CT acquisition settings change (e.g., different organs and X-ray acquisition geometry) deviate from the
training data. These issues pose substantial obstacles to the
practical application of supervised methods in clinical settings.
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) has recently become an innovative unsupervised approach for solving
imaging inverse problems without relying on external data.
It utilizes multi-layer perception (MLP) to represent the intensity of an object into an implicit function of spatial coordinates. By integrating differentiable physical models, the

Code — https://github.com/MeijiTian/Spener

Introduction
X-ray computed tomography (CT) is widely used in clinical diagnosis due to its non-invasive nature and high efficiency (Wang, Yu, and De Man 2008). However, the ionizing radiation of X-ray poses potential risks to biological tissues, while high levels of radiation exposure can increase the
lifetime risk of cancer. To mitigate these risks, the medical
community generally follows the ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principle in clinical practice. Therefore,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7383

