The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Int2Planner: An Intention-based Multi-modal Motion Planner for Integrated
Prediction and Planning
Xiaolei Chen1,2 , Junchi Yan1 * , Wenlong Liao2 , Tao He2,3 * , Pai Peng2†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of CSE & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
COWAROBOT Co. Ltd.
3
School of Electronic Engineering, University of South China
{cxlz64, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, {volans.liao, tommie.he}@cowarobot.com, pengpai sh@163.com
Abstract

interaction between autonomous vehicles and surrounding
agents. Therefore, there is a critical need to integrate motion
planning and trajectory prediction into a unified model.
In addition, the primary goal of planning is to reach the
destination safely by the navigation of the route path, which
determines the potential intention of autonomous vehicles.
The route path can be integrated into planning models by
serving as input to the model and establishing a routeoriented cost function (Sadat et al. 2020). Recent models incorporate attention mechanisms to facilitate the interaction
between autonomous vehicles and route paths (Hallgarten,
Stoll, and Zell 2023; Dauner et al. 2023).
Inspired by the use of target points and endpoints in
prediction tasks (Zhao et al. 2021; Gilles et al. 2022; Shi
et al. 2022) to reduce the uncertainty of the multi-modal future, we propose Int2Planner, a novel intention-based motion planner for integrated prediction and planning tasks. It
utilizes intention points sampled from the route path to handle multi-modal planning, which is inapplicable for prediction tasks, as the route paths of surrounding vehicles are usually unknown.
Fig. 1 shows the overall framework of Int2Planner. The
main contributions of this paper are listed below:
(1) We develop Int2Planner, a novel planning model, utilizing route intention points to handle the uncertainty of
multi-modal planning. It combines prediction and planning
in a joint model to realize the interactions between ego vehicles and surrounding agents.
(2) Instead of static intention points, we propose to sample
intention points from route path to represent the potential intentions of ego vehicles. Planning trajectories are generated
for each intention point to realize multi-modal planning.
(3) We are going to release a new dataset for motion planning tasks. Experiments are conducted on both the private
dataset and the public nuPlan dataset. The results demonstrate that the proposed route intention points effectively improve the motion planning ability and Int2Planner achieves
state-of-the-art planning performance on these datasets.
(4) We deploy Int2Planner in real-world vehicles, and the
test results show that Int2Planner is capable of reacting to
complex traffic scenarios and generating safe and reasonable
planning trajectories.

Motion planning is a critical module in autonomous driving,
with the primary challenge of uncertainty caused by interactions with other participants. As most previous methods
treat prediction and planning as separate tasks, it is difficult
to model these interactions. Furthermore, since the route path
navigates ego vehicles to a predefined destination, it provides
relatively stable intentions for ego vehicles and helps constrain uncertainty. On this basis, we construct Int2Planner,
an Intention-based Integrated motion Planner achieves multimodal planning and prediction. Instead of static intention
points, Int2Planner utilizes route intention points for ego vehicles and generates corresponding planning trajectories for
each intention point to facilitate multi-modal planning. The
experiments on the private dataset and the public nuPlan
benchmark show the effectiveness of route intention points,
and Int2Planner achieves state-of-the-art performance. We
also deploy it in real-world vehicles and have conducted autonomous driving for hundreds of kilometers in urban areas.
It further verifies that Int2Planner can continuously interact
with the traffic environment.

Code and Datasets — https://github.com/cxlz/Int2Planner

1

Introduction

In autonomous driving, motion planning is a crucial task (Hu
et al. 2023a; Jia et al. 2023a) to operate ego vehicles without human intervention. Autonomous vehicles are equipped
with multiple sensors that continuously observe the environment like a human driver. A key objective of this observation is to assess the movements of the surrounding agents,
which is essential to create a motion plan that ensures safe,
comfortable, and reliable driving. The trajectories of the surrounding agents have a significant impact on motion planning (Hagedorn et al. 2023).
However, many existing methods traditionally treat motion planning and trajectory prediction as distinct tasks. Typically, these methods first generate predictions of future trajectories for surrounding agents, which are then used as inputs for the planning task. However, they often neglect the
* Corresponding authors.
†

Project Lead.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14558

