The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging the Gap for Test-Time Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Zirun Guo* , Tao Jin† , Wenlong Xu* , Wang Lin, Yangyang Wu
Zhejiang University
zrguo.cs@gmail.com

Abstract

Source Domain
Video

Multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) is an emerging research
topic that aims to understand and recognize human sentiment
or emotions through multiple modalities. However, in realworld dynamic scenarios, the distribution of target data is always changing and different from the source data used to train
the model, which leads to performance degradation. Common adaptation methods usually need source data, which
could pose privacy issues or storage overheads. Therefore,
test-time adaptation (TTA) methods are introduced to improve
the performance of the model at inference time. Existing TTA
methods are always based on probabilistic models and unimodal learning, and thus can not be applied to MSA which
is often considered as a multimodal regression task. In this
paper, we propose two strategies: Contrastive Adaptation and
Stable Pseudo-label generation (CASP) for test-time adaptation for multimodal sentiment analysis. The two strategies
deal with the distribution shifts for MSA by enforcing consistency and minimizing empirical risk, respectively. Extensive
experiments show that CASP brings significant and consistent
improvements to the performance of the model across various distribution shift settings and with different backbones,
demonstrating its effectiveness and versatility.

Audio

Label

Video

Text

train

fine-tune

Target Domain
Audio

data

Figure 1: Test-time adaptation for multimodal sentiment analysis. The source domain data is used for source model training and is unavailable during the adaptation process. The
target domain data is unlabeled.

Code — https://github.com/zrguo/CASP

1

Text

Source Model

Introduction

Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) aims to understand
and interpret human sentiment or emotions expressed through
multiple modalities such as text, video and audio. Compared
to traditional multimodal sentiment analysis which focuses
on analyzing text data to determine the sentiment or emotion
associated with a particular piece of text, MSA combines
information from various modalities to gain a deeper understanding of sentiment. With the success of multimodal
learning, MSA has attracted much attention (Zadeh et al.
2016; Tsai et al. 2019; Guo, Jin, and Zhao 2024). However,
in real-world dynamic scenarios, the test data distribution is
always changing which could lead to performance degradation of the model. For example, the model is trained on a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16987

multimodal sentiment analysis dataset in English but tested
on a Chinese dataset, or the model is trained on a dataset with
no background noise in the audio modality but tested on a
dataset with a lot of background noise in the audio modality.
Besides, in the video modality, different people have different
facial traits. All of these things can be regarded as distribution
shifts during the test stage and could lead to performance
degradation of the model.
To address distribution shifts at test time, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) is proposed (Wang et al. 2020). TTA aims at
overcoming the distribution gaps between source and target
domains during test time without accessing the source data
and the labels of the target data (Wang et al. 2020). Figure 1 presents the setting of TTA for MSA. However, existing
methods can not be applied to MSA for two main reasons.
On the one hand, MSA is often regarded as a regression
task (Bagher Zadeh et al. 2018; Tsai et al. 2019) where the
label is a score representing the intensity of the sentiment.
However, most existing methods (Wang et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Zhang, Levine, and Finn 2022)
are based on probabilistic models for classification. For example, Wang et al. (2020) propose entropy minimization for
adaptation which is a function for classification tasks and
can not be applied to regression tasks. On the other hand,
MSA is a multimodal task whereas existing methods mainly

