The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Promoting Knowledge Base Question Answering by Directing LLMs to Generate
Task-relevant Logical Forms
Jianqi Gao1 , Jian Cao1 * , Ranran Bu1 , Nengjun Zhu2 , Wei Guan1 , Hang Yu2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University
{193139, cao-jian, buranran, guan-wei}@sjtu.edu.cn, {zhu nj, yuhang}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

Kochsiek, and Gemulla 2022), where question-related information is first retrieved and then processed to generate
answers. This is known as the direct-answer-prediction approach. The other works propose to produce answers in a
generating-then-retrieving scheme (Luo et al. 2023b; Gu and
Su 2022), where the question is parsed into some specific
forms used to retrieve answers from a knowledge base (KB).
This is known as the semantic parsing-based approach.
Producing answers using question-related information,
i.e., a subgraph of a structured KB, is a straightforward approach. For example, PullNet (Sun, Bedrax-Weiss, and Cohen 2019) retrieves a subgraph of KB related to the input
question and applies graph neural networks to predict the
answer entities in the subgraphs. KGT5 (Saxena, Kochsiek,
and Gemulla 2022) uses a sequence-to-sequence framework
to directly generate answers only based on the input question. Although this approach is intuitive and can always produce answers, it usually underperforms semantic parsingbased methods on public benchmarks (Talmor and Berant
2018a; Gu et al. 2021, 2022). Semantic parsing-based methods mainly focus on parsing the input question into logical forms (LF), which is executed by an external executor,
e.g., a SPARQL server, to retrieve answers. To make the
generated LF accurate, ReTrack (Chen et al. 2021) uses a
grammar-based decoder to generate LF based on pre-defined
grammar rules, and a semantic checker to discourage generating programs that are semantically inconsistent with KB.
TIARA (Shu et al. 2022a) proposes a multi-grained retrieval
method to select relevant KB context for LF generation. Although previous empirical results (Ye et al. 2021; Das et al.
2021; Gu et al. 2022) show that the semantic parsing based
methods can produce more accurate answers over benchmark datasets, these generated LF could be inaccurate, e.g.,
non-executable (Yu et al. 2022a).
Regarding accurate generation, large language models
(LLMs) (Touvron et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023c; Sui et al.
2024; Lu et al. 2022) have shown exciting success in various scenarios. Thus, employing LLMs for LF generation
is a promising approach to promoting KBQA. Despite their
impressive performance, LLMs have substantial limitations
when facing complex knowledge reasoning tasks (Luo et al.
2023c; Sui et al. 2024) that require deep and responsible reasoning. Thus, some works leverage retrieved facts
from the KB to prompt LLMs to improve reasoning perfor-

Knowledge base question answering (KBQA) refers to the
system that produces answers to user queries by reasoning with a large-scale structured knowledge base. Advanced
works have achieved great success either by generating logical forms (LF) or directly generating answers. Although the
former typically yields better performance, these generated
LF could be inaccurate, e.g., non-executable. In this regard,
large language models (LLMs) have shown exciting potential
for accurate generation. However, it is challenging to finetune LLMs to generate LF. This is because the context retrieved for prediction typically leads to an excessive number of reasoning paths. In this context, LLMs can generate
numerous LF corresponding to these reasoning paths, but a
few LF can result in correct answers. Thus, fine-tuning LLMs
to generate answer-relevant LF would conflict with the prior
knowledge of the LLMs. In this work, we propose a novel
learning framework, FM-KBQA, to fine-tune LLMs using
multi-task learning for KBQA. Specifically, we propose to
fine-tune LLMs using an additional objective: generating the
index of reasoning paths that lead to correct answers. This
will direct LLMs to pay attention to answer-relevant paths
among numerous reasoning paths by completing a simple
task where the selected reasoning paths can be supplementary for non-executable LF. Directly generating answers can
make LLMs pay attention to the answer-relevant reasoning
paths, but it is much more challenging than generating the
index of reasoning paths. To verify FM-KBQA’s effectiveness, we conduct experiments on mainstream benchmarks,
such as WebQuestionsSP (WQSP) and ComplexWebQuestions (CWQ). Extensive evaluations across two public benchmark datasets underscore the superiority of FM-KBQA over
current state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Knowledge base question answering (KBQA) refers to
the system that answers natural language questions based
on a large-scale structured knowledge base (Miller et al.
2016). Existing methods can be divided into two categories
based on the answer-generation approach. Some works propose to generate answers in a retrieving-then-generating
manner (Sun, Bedrax-Weiss, and Cohen 2019; Saxena,
* Corresponding author is Jian Cao
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23914

