The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DUSTED: Dual-Attention Enhanced Spatial Transcriptomics Denoiser
Jun Zhu1,2,3 * † , Yifu Li4,5 * , Zhenchao Tang6 * , Cheng Chang2,3†
1

School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Beijing, 102206, China
3
Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, 102206, China
4
National Superior College for Engineers,Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
5
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
6
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 518107, China
zhuj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,ferryliyifu@buaa.edu.cn, tangzhch7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, changcheng@ncpsb.org.cn
2

Abstract
Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics (SRT) has become an indispensable tool in various fields, including tumor microenvironment identification, neurobiology, and the study of complex tissue architecture. However, the accuracy of these insights is often compromised by noise in spatial transcriptomics data due to technical limitations. While recent advancements in denoising methods have shown some promise,
they frequently fall short by neglecting spatial features, overlooking the variability in noise levels among genes, and relying heavily on external histological images for supplementary information. In our study, we propose DUSTED, a DualAttention Enhanced Spatial Transcriptomics Denoiser, designed to address these challenges. Built on a graph autoencoder framework, DUSTED utilizes gene channel attention
and graph attention mechanisms to simultaneously consider
spatial features and noise variability in gene expression data.
Additionally, it integrates the negative binomial distribution
with or without zero-inflation, ensuring a more accurate fit
for gene expression distributions. Benchmark tests using simulated datasets demonstrate that DUSTED outperforms existing methods. Furthermore, in real-world applications with
the HOCWTA and DLPFC datasets, DUSTED excels in enhancing the correlation between gene and protein expression,
recovering spatial gene expression patterns, and improving
clustering results. These improvements underscore its potential impact on advancing our understanding of tumor microenvironments, neural tissue organization, and other biologically significant areas.

Figure 1: Overview of DUSTED denoising procedure.
DUSTED utilizes the gene expression matrix and neighborhood graph constructed using spatial information to estimate
clean gene expression, which has been proven to enhance
performance in downstream tasks.

tions of various cell types in both healthy and diseased tissues (Tian, Chen, and Macosko 2023).
However, SRT data often suffer from technical noise introduced during sample preparation and sequencing (Du
et al. 2023). This noise leads to sparse and imprecise gene
expression matrices and blurred spatial patterns, which can
compromise downstream analyses and yield inaccurate results (Wang et al. 2022). As SRT data becomes more abundant, deep learning-based denoising techniques have been
developed to address these challenges (Heumos et al. 2023).
Initially, denoising methods from single-cell transcriptomics were directly applied to SRT data. Techniques such
as MAGIC (Van Dijk et al. 2018) and kNN-smoothing
(Wagner, Yan, and Yanai 2017) smooth gene expression

Code — https://github.com/Lifeomics/DUSTED

Introduction
Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics (SRT) is a powerful
technique for analyzing gene expression within tissue samples, capturing the spatial distribution of transcriptional activity (Moses and Pachter 2022). Unlike single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), SRT retains spatial context, providing deeper insights into the roles, distribution, and interac* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1219

