The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BEE: Metric-Adapted Explanations via Baseline Exploration-Exploitation
Oren Barkan1 * , Yehonatan Elisha2 * , Jonathan Weill2 , Noam Koenigstein2
1

The Open University, Israel
Tel Aviv University, Israel

2

Abstract

2020; Kong et al. 2020). Despite their accomplishments,
these models frequently function as opaque systems, introducing challenges in comprehending their predictions. Consequently, the field of Explainable AI (XAI) has emerged,
dedicated to developing methods that illuminate the decision rationale of machine learning models across diverse application domains (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013;
Malkiel et al. 2022; Gaiger et al. 2023; Barkan et al. 2020b,
2023a, 2024a,b). In the context of computer vision, XAI
techniques aim to generate explanation maps highlighting
input regions responsible for the model’s predictions (Selvaraju et al. 2017; Chefer, Gur, and Wolf 2021b). For example, Integrated Gradients (IG) (Sundararajan, Taly, and
Yan 2017), which produces explanation maps by integrating
gradients along a linear path between the input image and
a baseline representation (acting as a reference representing
missing information). Nevertheless, a challenge persists in
selecting the appropriate baseline, as different types of baselines model missingness differently, resulting in variations
in the explanation maps. Despite the exploration of various
baselines in the literature, no consensus has emerged on the
ultimate baseline representation (Ancona et al. 2017; Fong
and Vedaldi 2017; Sturmfels, Lundberg, and Lee 2020). Another prominent challenge in XAI revolves around evaluating the effectiveness of the generated explanations. Various evaluation metrics have been proposed in the literature (Chefer, Gur, and Wolf 2021b; Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko
2018; Kapishnikov et al. 2019; Chattopadhay et al. 2018),
each assessing the quality of explanation maps from different perspectives. As a result, distinct explanation metrics may promote different explanation maps, and currently,
there is no universally agreed-upon evaluation metric for assessing the goodness of explanations. Acknowledging the
diverse landscape of evaluation metrics and baseline representations, this paper introduces Baseline ExplorationExploitation (BEE) - a path-integration method utilizing an
exploration-exploitation (EE) mechanism to adapt the baseline distribution (and hence the resulting explanation) w.r.t.
the specific metric of interest. This approach offers an effective way to address the diversity in metrics and baselines in a cohesive manner. BEE integrates on the intermediate representations (and their gradients) produced by different network layers, thereby generating explanation maps
at multiple levels of abstractions and various scales. The

Two prominent challenges in explainability research involve
1) the nuanced evaluation of explanations and 2) the modeling of missing information through baseline representations.
The existing literature introduces diverse evaluation metrics,
each scrutinizing the quality of explanations through distinct
lenses. Additionally, various baseline representations have
been proposed, each modeling the notion of missingness differently. Yet, a consensus on the ultimate evaluation metric
and baseline representation remains elusive. This work acknowledges the diversity in explanation metrics and baselines, demonstrating that different metrics exhibit preferences
for distinct explanation maps resulting from the utilization
of different baseline representations and distributions. To address the diversity in metrics and accommodate the variety
of baseline representations in a unified manner, we propose
Baseline Exploration-Exploitation (BEE) - a path-integration
method that introduces randomness to the integration process by modeling the baseline as a learned random tensor.
This tensor follows a learned mixture of baseline distributions optimized through a contextual exploration-exploitation
procedure to enhance performance on the specific metric of
interest. By resampling the baseline from the learned distribution, BEE generates a comprehensive set of explanation
maps, facilitating the selection of the best-performing explanation map in this broad set for the given metric. Extensive
evaluations across various model architectures showcase the
superior performance of BEE in comparison to state-of-theart explanation methods on a variety of objective evaluation
metrics.

Code — https://github.com/yonisGit/BEE

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have demonstrated remarkable success across a spectrum of tasks in computer vision (He et al.
2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Carion et al. 2020), natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al.
2018; Barkan et al. 2020d,c, 2021a; Touvron et al. 2023),
recommender systems (He et al. 2017; Barkan and Koenigstein 2016; Barkan et al. 2020a, 2021b,c; Katz et al. 2022),
and audio processing (Barkan et al. 2019, 2023c; Engel et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1835

