The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Aligning and Prompting Anything for Zero-Shot Generalized Anomaly Detection
Jitao Ma1 , Weiying Xie1 * , Hangyu Ye1 , Daixun Li1 , Leyuan Fang2
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
jtm@stu.xidian.edu.cn, wyxie@xidian.edu.cn, wagyr@stu.xidian.edu.cn, ldx@stu.xidian.edu.cn, leyuan fang@hnu.edu.cn
2

Normal pixel fieatures
Normal text prompts

Abstract

Segmentation

Classification

Zero-shot generalized anomaly detection (ZGAD) plays a
critical role in industrial automation and health screening. Recent studies have shown that ZGAD methods built on visuallanguage models (VLMs) like CLIP have excellent crossdomain detection performance. Different from other computer vision tasks, ZGAD needs to jointly optimize both
image-level anomaly classification and pixel-level anomaly
segmentation tasks for determining whether an image contains anomalies and detecting anomalous parts of an image,
respectively, this leads to different granularity of the tasks.
However, existing methods ignore this problem, processing
these two tasks with one set of broad text prompts used to
describe the whole image. This limits CLIP to align textual
features with pixel-level visual features and impairs anomaly
segmentation performance. Therefore, for precise visual-text
alignment, in this paper we propose a novel fine-grained
text prompts generation strategy. We then apply the broad
text prompts and the generated fine-grained text prompts for
visual-textual alignment in classification and segmentation
tasks, respectively, accurately capturing normal and anomalous instances in images. We also introduce the Text Prompt
Shunt (TPS) model, which performs joint learning by reconstruction the complementary and dependency relationships
between the two tasks to enhance anomaly detection performance. This enables our method to focus on fine-grained
segmentation of anomalous targets while ensuring accurate
anomaly classification, and achieve pixel-level comprehensible CLIP for the first time in the ZGAD task. Extensive experiments on 13 real-world anomaly detection datasets demonstrate that TPS achieves superior ZGAD performance across
highly diverse datasets from industrial and medical domains.

It's a damaged
hazelnut.
Share
It's a damaged
hazelnut.

Abnormal pixel fieatures
Abnormal text prompts

It‘
s a hazelnut with
damaged parts.
Shunt
It's the flawless part.
It's the damaged part.

Uniform text prompts Hazelnut (MVTec AD) Shunt text prompts (ours)

Figure 1: Classification only needs to identify whether there
is an anomalous part of the image or not, and segmentation
needs to identify which part of the image is anomalous.

Liu et al. 2024; Wu and Xu 2024). ZGAD aims to train a
single model capable of performing cross-domain anomaly
detection without relying on any examples or training data
from the target domain. Anomaly detection (AD) consists of
two jointly optimized tasks, image-level anomaly classification and pixel-level anomaly segmentation. The purpose
of anomaly classification is to determine whether an image contains anomalies or not, and the purpose of anomaly
segmentation is to determine which parts of an image are
anomalies. Therefore, there is a granularity difference between the two tasks. Existing ZGAD methods are excellent
for determining whether an image contains anomalies, resulting in superior anomaly classification. However, these
methods fall short in identifying which part of the image is
an anomaly, limiting performance of anomaly segmentation.
There have been many studies (Jeong et al. 2023; Zhou
et al. 2023; Zhu and Pang 2024) focusing on the powerful visual perception capabilities of CLIP (Chen et al. 2020;
He et al. 2020) and applying them to ZGAD tasks with remarkable results. However, existing methods like WinCLIP

Code — https://github.com/majitao-xd/TPS

Introduction
Recently, zero-shot generalized anomaly detection (ZGAD)
(Jeong et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2023) is a
widely applied task in computer vision, with applications
ranging from defect detection in industrial product images
(Reiss and Hoshen 2023; He et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024) to
tissue lesion detection in medical images (Huang et al. 2024;
* Correspond author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5964

