The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Causal Reasoning with (Non-Recursive) Structural Equation Models
Maksim Gladyshev1 , Natasha Alechina2,1 , Mehdi Dastani1 , Dragan Doder1 , Brian Logan3,1
1

Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Open Universiteit, The Netherlands
3
University of Aberdeen, UK
{m.gladyshev, n.a.alechina, m.m.dastani, d.doder, b.s.logan}@uu.nl
2

Abstract

designed for representing the temporal behaviour of a system, which play important role for causality claims in many
domains. For example, the effect of some treatment may
(causally) depend not only on whether the treatment was
given to a patient or not, but also on temporal properties (i.e,
dynamics) of this treatment, such as timing, duration and
repetition of the treatment. Combining SEM models with
temporal reasoning is therefore key in many applications.
Previous work on combining SEM models with temporal reasoning has focused on causal discovery, and several
methods for analysing time-series data with SEMs have
been developed, e.g., (Assaad, Devijver, and Gaussier 2022;
Hyvärinen, Khemakhem, and Monti 2023). In this paper, we
propose an approach to temporal reasoning with SEMs for
reasoning about actual causality. While a causal model is
usually understood as a static representation of causal dependencies transforming values of exogenous variables into
the values of endogenous variables, we show it can also be
interpreted as a causal mechanism transforming the dynamics of exogenous changes into the dynamics of endogenous
ones. In our framework, we assume that input to a causal
model is a (time) series of values assigned to the exogenous
variables, which we call the ‘temporal context’. We give a
procedure that, given a causal model as input, processes a
temporal context and transforms it into a (time) series of
assignments to endogenous variables. We then show how
the framework of actual causality can be combined with the
temporal logic LTL to give the logic CPLTL, allowing us to
express statements about future and past of the system, e.g.,
“a fact φ was always true”, “a fact φ will be true until another fact ψ is true”, etc.
Our framework has several interesting features. Firstly, interventions (necessary for counterfactual reasoning) become
‘time-sensitive’: in temporal settings it is necessary to specify not only which intervention happens, but also when it
happens. Secondly, most existing works on actual causality
only deal with recursive causal models (models with acyclic
dependency graphs). In our approach cycles in the dependency graph have a natural temporal interpretation, so they
do not create technical difficulties, but instead provide useful modelling tools. Following Beckers (2021), we introduce
new notions of (temporal) equivalence for causal models,
which also covers non-recursive cases. Finally, we show that
our framework has an efficient model-checking procedure.

Structural Equation Models (SEM) are the standard approach
to representing causal dependencies between variables in
causal models. In this paper we propose a new interpretation
of SEMs when reasoning about Actual Causality, in which
SEMs are viewed as mechanisms transforming the dynamics of exogenous variables into the dynamics of endogenous
variables. This allows us to combine counterfactual causal
reasoning with existing temporal logic formalisms, and to introduce a temporal logic, CPLTL, for causal reasoning about
such structures. We show that the standard restriction to socalled recursive models (with no cycles in the dependency
graph) is not necessary in our approach, allowing us to reason about mutually dependent processes and feedback loops.
Finally, we introduce new notions of model equivalence for
temporal causal models, and show that CPLTL has an efficient model-checking procedure.

Introduction
There has recently been increased interest in causal reasoning from AI researchers and philosophers. The standard framework for reasoning about causal dependencies
in both stochastic and deterministic settings is Structural
Equation Modelling (SEM) (Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 2001). Both types of reasoning are crucial for
the field of AI: in stochastic domains it is often used in
Causal Machine Learning (Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf
2017) and Causal Discovery, while in deterministic domains
it forms the basis for work on Actual Causality (Halpern
2016).
However, reasoning about many real-world phenomena
and their dynamics requires reasoning about time and temporal properties. As a result, temporal reasoning in, for example, Linear-time Temporal Logic (LTL) (Pnueli 1977),
has become an important technique for reasoning about the
dynamics of AI systems. Progress in this field has resulted in
many theoretical results in areas such as formal verification
and synthesis (Demri, Goranko, and Lange 2016).
While structural equation models are the main tool for
analysing cause–effect relations and have been applied in
a range of disciplines, e.g., medicine, economics, computer
science and industrial engineering, they are not specifically
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14949

