The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MegActor-Sigma: Unlocking Flexible Mixed-Modal Control in Portrait
Animation with Diffusion Transformer
Shurong Yang* 1 , Huadong Li* 1 , Juhao Wu* 1 , Minhao Jing* 1 ,
Linze Li 1 , Renhe Ji †1 , Jiajun Liang †1 , Haoqiang Fan 1 , Jin Wang 2
1
MEGVII Technology
The University of Hong Kong
{yangshurong6894, jingminhao666}@gmail.com
{lihuadong, wujuhao, lilinze, jirenhe, liangjiajun, fanhaoqiang}@megvii.com
2

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated superior performance
in portrait animation. However, current approaches relied on
either visual or audio modality to control character movements, failing to exploit the potential of mixed-modal control. This challenge arises from the difficulty in balancing
the weak control strength of audio modality and the strong
control strength of visual modality. To address this issue,
we introduce MegActor-Sigma: a mixed-modal conditional
diffusion transformer (DiT), which can flexibly inject audio and visual modality control signals into portrait animation. Specifically, we make substantial advancements over its
predecessor, MegActor, by leveraging the promising model
structure of DiT and integrating audio and visual conditions
through advanced modules within the DiT framework. To
further achieve flexible combinations of mixed-modal control signals, we propose a “Modality Decoupling Control”
training strategy to balance the control strength between visual and audio modalities, along with the “Amplitude Adjustment” inference strategy to freely regulate the motion amplitude of each modality. Finally, to facilitate extensive studies
in this field, we design several dataset evaluation metrics to
filter out public datasets and solely use this filtered dataset
for training. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach in generating vivid portrait animations.

Reference Image

Drving Images

Generated Images

Figure 1: The visualization of visual leakage. Even when we
remove mouth-driven components in visual modality, as VExpress (Wang Cong 2024) does, the generated results still
exhibit a certain pattern of speaking without audio-driven.

in portrait animation domain with single-modality control,
whether through audio or visual modality.
Previous methods for generating portrait animations with
visual modality control (Xu Zhongcong 2023; Zhu Shenhao 2024; Yang Shurong 2024) typically resorted to intermediate motion representations extracted from the driving video, such as landmarks, dense poses, or face meshes.
Though demonstrating satisfactory generation quality, obtaining such detailed visual modality control signals in real
life scenarios can be inflexible and may require considerable human efforts. Meanwhile, audio-driven methods (Wei,
Yang, and Wang 2024; Wang Yuchi 2024; Zhang Yue 2024)
allowed users to control portrait animations using audio,
supplemented by additional signals like blinking and head
rotation. However, these control signals were often insufficient for accurately capturing facial expressions, such as
subtle movements of the eyebrows and lips, limiting the
model’s performance.
To achieve flexible control with superior performance simultaneously, it is essential to endow the model with the
ability to freely combine visual and audio modalities as control signals. To this end, the audio modality provides lowcost and flexible lip control, while the visual modality offers accurate motion and facial expression. However, training a model with such comprehensive capabilities poses significant challenges. Previous methods (Wang Cong 2024)
have shown that the audio modality often struggles to exert
control due to the dominance of the visual modality control. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we observe that even when
only partial visual control signals are provided (i.e., eye

Code — https://github.com/megvii-research/megactor.

Introduction
Portrait animation refers to the task of animating a static
portrait image using motions and facial expressions from a
driving video, while preserving the identity and background
of the portrait image. This field has garnered significant
attention due to its wide range of applications, including
digital avatars (Ma Shugao 2021; Wang, Mallya, and Liu
2021a) and AI-based human conversations (AI 2024; Johnson et al. 2018). In recent years, diffusion models (Xie You
2024; Tian Linrui 2024) have showcased their advantages
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9256

