The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AWRaCLe: All-Weather Image Restoration Using Visual In-Context Learning
Sudarshan Rajagopalan, Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
{sambasa2, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract

then proposed, but they must be retrained or fine-tuned for
each new condition, reducing their practicality.
To address these issues, recent work has focused on AllWeather Image Restoration (AWIR) networks that handle
multiple degradations with a single model (Li, Tan, and
Cheong 2020; Valanarasu, Yasarla, and Patel 2022; Li et al.
2022; Park, Lee, and Chun 2023; Özdenizci and Legenstein 2023; Chen et al. 2022b; Potlapalli et al. 2024; Zheng
et al. 2024). However, these approaches learn degradation
representations only from individual images and lack guidance that provides detailed degradation-specific information (DSI). This limits their ability to effectively learn features unique to different degradations, impeding their performance. Thus, there is a need for a framework capable of
learning robust degradation-specific features that can facilitate effective restoration. This is challenging without supplementary knowledge about the nature of the corruption.
While some methods (Yan et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2023) have
introduced text-based guidance for AWIR, text descriptions
can only convey high-level semantic information about the
degradation and fail to describe important aspects of the corruption such as its visual characteristics.
To address this limitation, recent approaches such as DiffPlugin (Liu et al. 2024) and DA-CLIP (Luo et al. 2023) attempt to extract DSI directly from images. Diff-Plugin extracts task-specific and spatial prompts from the degraded
input image. However, it requires multiple independently
trained task-specific plugins for each degradation. DA-CLIP
extracts text-aligned DSI from the degraded image but lacks
detailed visual information, as text conveys only high-level
features. Moreover, both methods face the challenge of disentangling scene characteristics from DSI because they rely
on extracting DSI from a single image. We conjecture that
feeding both the clean and degraded images as context to an
image restoration network can overcome these limitations as
the consistent scene between the pair allows the network to
aggregate visual information specific to the degradation. We
accomplish this with the help of visual in-context learning.
In-context learning, as demonstrated by large language
models, is very well-studied in Natural Language Processing (NLP). In comparison, visual in-context learning is an
emerging area. Providing visual context has been explored
by (Bar et al. 2022), Painter (Wang et al. 2023a), SegGPT (Wang et al. 2023b) and PromptGIP (Liu et al. 2023).

All-Weather Image Restoration (AWIR) under adverse
weather conditions is a challenging task due to the presence
of different types of degradations. Prior research in this domain relies on extensive training data but lacks the utilization of additional contextual information for restoration guidance. Consequently, the performance of existing methods is
limited by the degradation cues that are learnt from individual training samples. Recent advancements in visual incontext learning have introduced generalist models that are
capable of addressing multiple computer vision tasks simultaneously by using the information present in the provided
context as a prior. In this paper, we propose All-Weather
Image Restoration using Visual In-Context Learning (AWRaCLe), a novel approach for AWIR that innovatively utilizes
degradation-specific visual context information to steer the
image restoration process. To achieve this, AWRaCLe incorporates Degradation Context Extraction (DCE) and Context
Fusion (CF) to seamlessly integrate degradation-specific features from the context into an image restoration network.
The proposed DCE and CF blocks leverage CLIP features
and incorporate attention mechanisms to adeptly learn and
fuse contextual information. These blocks are specifically designed for visual in-context learning under all-weather conditions and are crucial for effective context utilization. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
AWRaCLe for all-weather restoration and show that our
method advances the state-of-the-art in AWIR.

Project Page — https://sudraj2002.github.io/awraclepage/

1

Introduction

Unfavorable weather conditions, such as rain, snow and
haze, significantly degrade the performance of autonomous
navigation, surveillance, and aerial imaging systems. Thus,
there is a need for frameworks that mitigate weather-induced
corruptions while preserving the underlying image semantics. Intial physics-based methods (He, Sun, and Tang 2009;
Roth and Black 2005; Kang, Lin, and Fu 2012) struggled
to handle real-world variability in degradations. Deep learning approaches that handle a single degradation (Song et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2021;
Zamir et al. 2022, 2021; Wang et al. 2022) at a time were
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6675

