The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HieraFashDiff: Hierarchical Fashion Design with Multi-stage Diffusion Models
Zhifeng Xie1,2 , Hao Li1 , Huiming Ding1 , Mengtian Li1,2 , Xinhan Di3 , Ying Cao4 *
1
Department of Film and Television Engineering, Shanghai University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Motion Picture Special Effects
3
AI Lab, Giant Network
4
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{zhifeng xie, dinghuiming, mtli}@shu.edu.cn, hao.li.shu@outlook.com, dixinhan@ztgame.com, caoying59@gmail.com
2

Abstract

consider (and thus fail to fit into) the practical fashion design pipeline, making them difficult to be directly adopted
in practical scenarios.
Building models that can find wide adoption in the real
fashion design process is non-trivial. First, a desirable model
should learn the task of fashion design generation and editing jointly to separately tackle the ideation and iteration
stages, so that it has capability to support the entire pipeline.
This is in contrast to prior works that especially address either generation (Zhu et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2023) or editing (Ak et al. 2019; Kwon
et al. 2022; Pernus et al. 2023; Baldrati et al. 2023; Wang and
Ye 2024). Second, both generation and editing components
should be conditioned on intuitive inputs at high and low
levels, respectively, empowering users to express their design thoughts easily while facilitating efficient ideation and
rapid iteration.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
HieraFashDiff, a novel framework specialized in facilitating fashion design, which instantiates a conditional diffusion model that learns to generate fashion images from given
fashion-specific text prompts. Our key insight is that the typical fashion design workflow is reminiscent of the reverse
process of diffusion models for image generation, which first
denoises a purse noise into a coarse image (design draft) in
the early stage, and then iteratively refine the coarse image
to add more fine details to produce a realistic image (final
design) over the remaining steps. Inspired by this, we propose to factor the reverse process of our diffusion model into
two successive stages: an ideation stage spanning the earlier
denoising steps and an iteration stage spanning the later denoising steps. Our model injects text descriptions at different
levels into the two stages — the ideation stage is conditioned
on high-level design concepts to produce noisy design drafts
while the iteration stage is guided by progressively added
low-level apparel attributes to refine the drafts towards complete designs. In this way, our framework naturally supports the concept-guided generation of fashion design proposals and the semantic editing of local fashion components
in a unified framework to aid in the whole fashion design
pipeline, as shown in Fig 1.
To train our model, we curate a new fashion dataset,
coined as HieraFashion. Our dataset consists of more than
5k full-body apparel images, each of which is annotated with

Fashion design is a challenging and complex process. Recent works on fashion generation and editing are all agnostic of the actual fashion design process, which limits their
usage in practice. In this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical diffusion-based framework tailored for fashion design,
coined as HieraFashDiff. Our model is designed to mimic the
practical fashion design workflow, by unraveling the denosing
process into two successive stages: 1) an ideation stage that
generates design proposals given high-level concepts and 2)
an iteration stage that continuously refines the proposals using low-level attributes. Our model supports fashion design
generation and fine-grained local editing in a single framework. To train our model, we contribute a new dataset of
full-body fashion images annotated with hierarchical text descriptions. Extensive evaluations show that, as compared to
prior approaches, our method can generate fashion designs
and edited results with higher fidelity and better prompt adherence, showing its promising potential to augment the practical fashion design workflow.

Introduction
Fashion design is an important and challenging activity,
which requires navigating through a huge joint space of
shape, color, material, pattern and layout in order to find
solutions that satisfy aesthetic and functional requirements,
and perhaps client-specific constraints. The typical workflow of fashion designers consists of two essential stages:
ideation and iteration. In particular, fashion designers begin
their creative process by coming up with some abstract design concepts in terms of theme, style and personality, and
then translating these concepts into concrete design ideas
(i.e, design drafts) through brainstorming or turning to reference examples for inspiration. Subsequently, they iterate
on the initial idea by making small changes to the draft to
finalize the design.
Recently, there is a growing interest in facilitating the
fashion design process by building generative models that
can synthesize realistic fashion images from user-specified
hints and constraints (Chen et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2021; Cao
et al. 2023b). However, these approaches is that they do not
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8762

