The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Regret Analysis of Multi-task Representation Learning
for Linear-Quadratic Adaptive Control
Bruce D. Lee* 1 , Leonardo F. Toso* 2 , Thomas T. Zhang* 1 , James Anderson2 , Nikolai Matni1
1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University
{brucele, ttz2, nmatni}@seas.upenn.edu, {lt2879, james.anderson}@columbia.edu
Abstract

where data from an agent’s completed task is aggregated
with data from other agents to learn the shared features offline, rather than during task execution. However, it is often
relevant to have a fleet of agents adapt quickly to a changing
environment, e.g. a team of drones flying in close proximity
adapting to weather conditions, or a team of legged robots
adapting to changing terrain conditions. In such settings, the
agents must communicate to adjust shared features online.
In this work, we rigorously study such approaches for
online fleet learning with dynamical systems in the analytically tractable setting of adaptive linear-quadratic (statefeedback) control. Adaptive linear-quadratic control has
emerged as a benchmark for learning to control dynamical
systems using online data. This consists of a learner interacting with an unknown linear system

Representation learning is a powerful tool that enables learning over large multitudes of agents or domains by enforcing
that all agents operate on a shared set of learned features.
However, many robotics or controls applications that would
benefit from collaboration operate in settings with changing
environments and goals, whereas most guarantees for representation learning are stated for static settings. Toward rigorously establishing the benefit of representation learning in
dynamic settings, we analyze the regret of multi-task representation learning for linear-quadratic control. This setting introduces unique challenges. Firstly, we must account for and
balance the misspecification introduced by an approximate
representation. Secondly, we cannot rely on the parameter
update schemes of single-task online LQR, for which leastsquares often suffices, and must devise a novel scheme to ensure sufficient improvement. We demonstrate that for settings
where exploration is “benign”, the regret of any agent after T
timesteps scales with the square root of T/H, where H is the
number of agents. In settings with “difficult” exploration, the
regret scales as the square root of the input dimension times
the parameter dimension multiplied by T, plus a term which
scales with T to the three quarters divided by H to the one
fifth. In both cases, by comparing to the minimax single-task
regret, we see a benefit of a large number of agents. Notably,
in the difficult exploration case, by sharing a representation
across tasks, the effective task-specific parameter count can
often be small. Lastly, we validate the trends we predict.

1

xt+1 = Aω xt + Bω ut + wt ,

t → 1,

(1)

with state xt , input ut , and noise wt assuming values in RdX ,
RdU , and RdX , respectively. The learner is evaluated by its
incurred regret, which compares the cost incurred by playing the learner for T time steps against the cost attained
by the optimal LQR controller. Prior work typically studies regret of a single dynamical system of the form (1). In
this work, we study a setting where there are H ↑ 1 distinct systems which share an unknown dε -dimensional dynamics basis. Each agent aims to minimize their individual
linear-quadratic control objective; however, by communicating they may more efficiently learn the shared dynamics basis matrices. The questions we address are the following:
• What are the requisite algorithmic elements that enable
simultaneous online control of multiple systems?
• What are the benefits of sharing a representation across
agents compared with learning individual models?

Introduction

Many modern applications of robotics and controls involve
simultaneous control over a large number of agents. For example, robot fleet learning, in which fleets of robots performing diverse tasks share information to learn more effectively, has demonstrated impressive success in recent years
(Brohan et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023b). One of the technologies that enables this success is transfer learning, in which
dynamics models or control policies built upon learned compressed features (also known as representation learning)
that are broadly useful for ensuing tasks of interest. Existing work which characterizes the generalization capabilities
of transfer learning largely considers static environments,

1.1

Related Work

Fleet Learning: Fleet Policy Learning involves obtaining
datasets from diverse robot interactions, studied in offline reinforcement learning (Kumar et al. 2022) and multi-task behavior cloning (Brohan et al. 2022, 2023; Goyal et al. 2023).
Challenges include data communication, storage, and training scalability. Weight merging frameworks have been proposed (Wang et al. 2023b), focusing on skill aggregation and
adaptive communication for changing environments, similar

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18062

