The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

(1+1) Genetic Programming with Functionally Complete Instruction Sets Can
Evolve Boolean Conjunctions and Disjunctions with Arbitrarily Small Error
Benjamin Doerr 1 , Andrei Lissovoi 2 , Pietro S. Oliveto 3
1

Ecole Polytechnique
University of Sheffield
3
Southern University of Science and Technology
2

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Doerr, Lissovoi, and Oliveto (2023).

Abstract
Recently it has been proven that simple GP systems can
efficiently evolve a conjunction of n variables if they are
equipped with the minimal required components. In this paper, we make a considerable step forward by analysing the
behaviour and performance of a GP system for evolving
a Boolean conjunction or disjunction of n variables using
a complete function set that allows the expression of any
Boolean function of up to n variables. First we rigorously
prove that a GP system using the complete truth table to
evaluate the program quality, and equipped with both the
AND and OR operators and positive literals, evolves the exact target function in O(ℓn log2 n) iterations in expectation,
where ℓ ≥ n is a limit on the size of any accepted tree. Additionally, we show that when a polynomial sample of possible inputs is used to evaluate the solution quality, conjunctions or disjunctions with any polynomially small generali
sation error can be evolved with probability 1−O logn2 (n) .
The latter result also holds if GP uses AND, OR and positive and negated literals, thus has the power to express any
Boolean function of n distinct variables. To prove our results we introduce a super-multiplicative drift theorem that
gives significantly stronger runtime bounds when the expected progress is only slightly super-linear in the distance
from the optimum.

References
Doerr, B.; Lissovoi, A.; and Oliveto, P. S. 2023. (1+ 1) genetic programming with functionally complete instruction
sets can evolve Boolean conjunctions and disjunctions with
arbitrarily small error. Artificial Intelligence, 319: 103906.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28740

