The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mitigating Pervasive Modality Absence Through Multimodal
Generalization and Refinement
Wuliang Huang1,2,4 , Yiqiang Chen1,2,3,4 * , Xinlong Jiang1,2,4 * , Chenlong Gao1,2,4 ,
Teng Zhang1,2,4 , Qian Chen1,2,4 , Yifan Wang5
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device
5
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{huangwuliang19b, yqchen, jiangxinlong, gaochenlong, zhangteng19s, chenqian20b}@ict.ac.cn,
yifan-wa22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The performance of multimodal models often deteriorates
when modality absence occurs. The absence disrupts the
learned inter-modal correlations, resulting in biased multimodal representations. This challenge is especially pronounced when the absence is pervasive, affecting both the
training and inference phases. Recent studies have attempted
to reconstruct the missing information; however, most of
them require complete supervision, which is seldom available in scenarios of pervasive absence. The quality of reconstruction remains a critical issue. Alternatively, others aim
to learn robust representations from the available modalities
but the substantial variations and biases are not fully addressed. This paper introduces the Multimodal Generalization and Refinement (MGR) framework to mitigate the issue of pervasive modality absence. MGR begins by acquiring generalized multimodal representations and iteratively refines them to recognize and calibrate the biased representations. Initially, multimodal samples with absence are embedded through foundation models, and MGR integrates independent unimodal features to further enhance generalization. Additionally, a novel mixed-context prompt is adopted
to identify biases in both features and correlations. A redistribution operation can then refine these biases through graph
pooling, culminating in robust and calibrated multimodal representations, which are suitable for downstream tasks. Comprehensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed MGR framework outperforms stateof-the-art methods, effectively mitigating the impact of pervasive modality absence.

(a) Transformer

(b) MAPs

(c) MSPs

Figure 1: The distributions of multimodal representations
derived from identical samples exhibit substantial variations
depending on the type of modality absence. Here, MAPs
(Lee et al. 2023) and MSPs (Jang, Wang, and Kim 2024)
are two latest methods designed for mitigating absence.

yields comprehensive and generalized representations (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019; Liang et al. 2022). Typically, multi-modality models work under the assumption
that all modalities are complete (Lee et al. 2023). However,
this assumption is frequently violated in real-world scenarios due to privacy concerns, noise, or data collection limitations (Zhang et al. 2022; Karimijafarbigloo et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2020), leading to performance degradation in the absence of certain modalities (Tran et al. 2017). Specifically,
when the absence of modalities is pervasive, affecting both
the training and inference phases, it becomes extremely difficult to learn unbiased and robust multimodal representations (Lee et al. 2023; Jang, Wang, and Kim 2024).
Principal Challenges. As depicted in Figure 1, the distributions of multimodal embeddings derived from identical samples vary significantly when different modalities are
missing. This observation proves that the absence of modalities can lead to biased representations. The biases brought by
incomplete modalities increase the likelihood of suboptimal
or erroneous predictions, obstructing the model from learning the intrinsic correlations between modalities. Therefore,
it is essential to develop generalized multimodal representation, and refine biases among them to mitigate the impact of
modality absence.

Introduction
Multi-modality fusion models exploit the complementary
from various modalities to enhance the performance of
downstream tasks (Fukui et al. 2016; Cai et al. 2020). Each
modality conveys specific information, and their integration
* Yiqiang Chen and Xinlong Jiang are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26796

