The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-to-Single: Reducing Multimodal Dependency in Emotion Recognition
Through Contrastive Learning
Yan-Kai Liu, Jinyu Cai, Bao-Liang Lu, Wei-Long Zheng *
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liu-yankai, cai jinyu, bllu, weilong}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

in practical scenarios limited by the experimental environment. It is especially common for EEG signals, which are
greatly sensitive to the environment. Any external interference and tiny movements of the subjects can bring significant noise to the EEG signal, leading to a decrease in signal
quality or even making the data unusable. As for the EYE
signals, although their collection process is convenient compared to EEG signals, there are still some issues. Acquiring
eye movement data is sensitive to distance, the eye tracker
must remain within a certain proximity to the subject, and
the subject’s eyes must stay focused on the screen. This requirement can be challenging for subjects during extended
signal collection periods. As for the ECG and PPS, they have
similar issues to EEG signals as they are all collected using similar electrodes. Therefore, in practical situations, it is
hard to obtain high-quality data from multiple modalities at
the same time.
Cross-modal methods are proposed to solve this problem.
Cross-modal learning allows models to use different modalities during training and testing. There have been many
studies in computer vision and natural language processing
(Zhang et al. 2023; Lan et al. 2023). However, in the field
of affective BCI, the research is still in its early stages, and
only a limited number of studies have explored the transfer
of EEG to other modalities. These studies cannot achieve the
conversion between any modality, nor do they fully utilize
the multimodal features in the training set.
To achieve multimodal effects using unimodal data,
we propose a Multi-to-Single (M2S) emotion recognition
model. The model only requires paired, unlabeled multimodal data during the pre-training phase, we can fine-tune
the model using unimodal data on downstream tasks. During
pre-training, we extract features with two encoders for each
modality, emotion-related (ER) and emotion-independent
(EI) encoders, and minimize their mutual information. For
EEG, ECG, and PPS data that use electrodes to collect,
we propose a novel spatial and temporal-sparse (STS) attention mechanism to fully utilize the continuous temporal
and spatial features of data. Contrastive learning methods
are applied to fuse and align features from different modalities, including an improved version of Multi-to-Multi Contrastive Predictive Coding (M2M CPC) and InfoNCE. In the
fine-tuning phase, we connect a classifier after the ER encoder for emotion recognition. We freeze the encoder and

Multimodal emotion recognition is a crucial research area
in the field of affective brain-computer interfaces. However,
in practical applications, it is often challenging to obtain all
modalities simultaneously. To deal with this problem, researchers focus on using cross-modal methods to learn multimodal representations with fewer modalities. However, due
to the significant differences in the distribution of different
modalities, it is challenging to enable any modality to fully
learn multimodal features. To address this limitation, we propose a Multi-to-Single (M2S) emotion recognition model,
leveraging contrastive learning and incorporating two innovative modules: 1) a spatial and temporal-sparse (STS) attention mechanism that enhances the encoders’ ability to extract features from data; 2) a novel Multi-to-Multi Contrastive
Predictive Coding (M2M CPC) that learns and fuses features across different modalities. In the final testing, we only
use a single modality for emotion recognition, reducing the
dependence on multimodal data. Extensive experiments on
five public multimodal emotion datasets demonstrate that our
model achieves the state-of-the-art performance in the crossmodal tasks and maintains multimodal performance using
only a single modality.

Code — https://github.com/Arcee-LYK/Multi-to-Single.

Introduction
Emotion recognition is an important research direction in
affective brain-computer interfaces (BCI) (Li et al. 2022).
Since emotion induction experiments usually only require
participants to sit still and watch emotion induction videos,
compared to other brain-computer interface studies, emotion
induction experiments are more likely to obtain more physiological signals, such as electroencephalography (EEG), eye
movements (EYE), electrocardiogram (ECG), and peripheral physiological signals (PPS). This advantage greatly promotes the applications of multimodal models in the field
of emotion recognition. By fusing features from multiple
paired modalities, the performance of these models is significantly enhanced compared to unimodal models.
However, these methods have significant limitations in
practical applications. Not all modalities can be obtained
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1438

