The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mixed-Curvature Multi-Modal Knowledge Graph Completion
Yuxiao Gao1 , Fuwei Zhang1 , Zhao Zhang2 * , Xiaoshuang Min3 , Fuzhen Zhuang1,4 *
1
Institute of Artificial In telligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
The Sixth Research Institute of China Electronics Corporation, Beijing, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{gaoyx, zhangfuwei}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangzhao2021@ict.ac.cn, minxiaoshuang@ncse.com.cn, zhuangfuzhen@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

aim to represent entities and relations in a low-dimensional
space, and inference and complete missing values in incomplete triplets.
Multi-modal KGC, as an extension of traditional KGC,
aims to enrich the embedding of knowledge graphs by using
images and text as additional information to triplets, thereby
accomplishing tasks such as link prediction in a more comprehensive manner. Specifically, multi-modal KGC projects
the entities and relations into a latent space. It then uses image, text, and the inherent structural information of KG itself
to learn low-dimensional vector representations for entities
and relations.
Recent researches on multi-modal KGC have made significant strides, with most studies focusing on fusing different modalities. For example, LAFA (Shang et al. 2024) emphasizes selective information integration for multi-modal
KG by designing a link-aware fusion module. OTKGE (Cao
et al. 2022b) addresses the issue of spatial heterogeneity
in multi-modal fusion by conceptualizing it as an optimal
transport plan that aligns different modal embeddings into a
unified space.
However, most of these methods embed the information
in Euclidean space, which might face some limitations. Traditional KGC models like DistMult (Yang et al. 2014), ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016), and TuckER (Balažević, Allen,
and Hospedales 2019)—which typically utilize Euclidean
space during inference—also face limitations. Figure 1 introduces three different structure in multi-modal KGs, including chain, hierarchical, and circular structures. The hierarchical and the circular structures consist of complex connections between different entities, which increases the difficulty of modeling multi-modal KGs. Thus, relying solely on
a single-space model to encapsulate the intricate structure of
a multi-modal KG is a formidable task.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a Mixed-Curvature multi-modal Knowledge Graph
Completion method (MCKGC), which strategically embeds multi-modal information into a mixed space to enhance the completion of multi-modal knowledge graphs.
MCKGC model comprises two core modules: Modality Information Mixed-Curvature Module (MIMCM) and Progressive Fusion Module (PFM). MIMCM integrates data
from three distinct modalities into three single-curvature
spaces—hyperbolic, hyperspherical, and Euclidean. This

Multi-modal Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC), which
aims to enrich knowledge graph embeddings by incorporating images and text as supplementary information alongside triplets, is an significant task in learning KGs. Existing multi-modal KGC methods mainly focus on modalitylevel fusion, neglecting the importance of modeling the complex structures, such as hierarchical and circular patterns.
To address this, we propose a Mixed-Curvature multi-modal
Knowledge Graph Completion method (MCKGC) that embeds the information into three single-curvature spaces, including hyperbolic space, hyperspherical space, and Euclidean space, and incorporates multi-modal information into
a mixed space. Specifically, MCKGC consists of Modality Information Mixed-Curvature Module (MIMCM) and Progressive Fusion Module (PFM). To improve the expressive ability
for different modalities, MIMCM introduces multi-modal information into three single-curvature spaces for interaction.
Then, to extract useful information from different modalities
and capture the complex structure from the geometric information, PFM implements a progressive fusion strategy by
utilizing modality-level and space-level gates to adaptively
incorporate the information from different spaces. Extensive
experiments on three widely used benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
In recent years, Knowledge graphs (KGs) have garnered increasing attentions and have been widely applied in many
downstream tasks, such as information retrieval (Zhang et al.
2022a; Liu et al. 2018; Xiong, Callan, and Liu 2017), event
forecasting (Zhang et al. 2024a, 2022b), recommendation
systems (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Yu et al. 2014;
Guo et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2024b,a), common sense reasoning (Lin et al. 2019), and question answering (Huang et al.
2019). KGs are composed of large-scale structured triples
of entities and relations. A triplet in KG can be defined as
(h, r, t), where h, r, and t represents the subject (or head)
entity, relation, and object (or tail) entity, respectively. However, existing KGs are often incomplete, leading to performance deficiencies in downstream applications. To address
this issue, Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC) techniques
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11699

