The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GLCF: A Global-Local Multimodal Coherence Analysis Framework for Talking
Face Generation Detection
Xiaocan Chen1 , Qilin Yin1 , Jiarui Liu2 , Wei Lu1 * , Xiangyang Luo3 * , Jiantao Zhou4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Laboratory of Information Technology, Guangdong Province Key
Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing, Zhengzhou 450002, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, Department of Computer and Information Science, Faculty of
Science and Technology, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China
chenxc33@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yinqlin@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liujiarui.ljr@alibaba-inc.com, luwei3@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
luoxy ieu@sina.com, jtzhou@um.edu.mo
Abstract
Talking face generation (TFG) allows for producing lifelike
talking videos of any character using only facial images and
accompanying text. Abuse of this technology could pose significant risks to society, creating the urgent need for research
into corresponding detection methods. However, research in
this field has been hindered by the lack of public datasets.
In this paper, we construct the first large-scale multi-scenario
talking face dataset (MSTF), which contains 22 audio and
video forgery techniques, filling the gap of datasets in this
field. The dataset covers 11 generation scenarios and more
than 20 semantic scenarios, closer to the practical application
scenario of TFG. Besides, we also propose a TFG detection
framework, which leverages the analysis of both global and
local coherence in the multimodal content of TFG videos.
Therefore, a region-focused smoothness detection module
(RSFDM) and a discrepancy capture-time frame aggregation
module (DCTAM) are introduced to evaluate the global temporal coherence of TFG videos, aggregating multi-grained
spatial information. Additionally, a visual-audio fusion module (V-AFM) is designed to evaluate audiovisual coherence
within a localized temporal perspective. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the reasonableness and challenges of
our datasets, while also indicating the superiority of our proposed method compared to the state-of-the-art deepfake detection approaches.

(a) Deepfake videos

(b) Talking face videos

Figure 1: (a) Deepfake videos. (b) Talking face videos.
Compared to deepfake videos, talking face videos demonstrate superior visual quality, exhibiting more realistic details, such as illumination uniformity, lip movements, teeth
and so on.

to replace identities, the quality of the generated video is
constrained by the existing video content. Through talking
face generation technology, we can create a highly realistic
speech video of a specific individual with just a single image
of that person and a textual script, or alternatively, a video
clip and an audio segment. The TFG videos demonstrate superior visual quality, exhibiting more realistic details, such
as illumination uniformity, lip movements, and so on. Besides, this technology fundamentally advances the forgery
process, transitioning from a reliance on strong references to
mere weak ones, diminishing the difficulty of forgery. Thus,
someone can effortlessly forge videos of renowned politicians making inappropriate statements through this technology, triggering public panic and a crisis of confidence.
For TFG detection, existing deepfake detection methods
exhibit limited transferability. (Zhao et al. 2021) and (Peng
et al. 2024) capture pixel-level forgery traces from the spatial domain. Since the superior visual quality of TFG videos,
it is difficult to extract forgery traces solely from the spatial
domain. As talking face generation relies solely on a sin-

Introduction
Recently, generative AI technology has achieved some significant advancements. Notably, digital human generation
technology, a real-world application of AI generation technology, has been widely used in commercial live broadcasting and other fields, fostering societal and economic
progress.
Talking face generation (TFG) represents a pivotal technology in creating digital humans, inherently differing from
traditional deepfake approaches. While traditional deepfake
methods rely on substituting facial regions within videos
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

75

