The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DCSF-KD: Dynamic Channel-wise Spatial Feature Knowledge Distillation
for Object Detection
Tao Dai1,4 , Yang Lin1 , Hang Guo3 , Jinbao Wang2,5 , Zexuan Zhu1,2,4,*
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
4
Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Embedded System Design, Shenzhen, China
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen, China
{daitao.edu,liny24.edu,cshguo}@gmail.com, {wangjb, zhuzx}@szu.edu.cn
Abstract

distinguishing between foreground and background features
(Dai et al. 2021). This approach achieves commendable performance through carefully designed weighting functions
that identify key features. In addition, there exist methods
that focus on transferring the overall relationships of characteristics in the spatial domain, such as GI (Yang et al. 2022)
and PKD (Cao et al. 2022), which achieve satisfactory results without the need for complex distinction functions. The
second way involves feature transfer on the channel dimension, where each channel feature represents different visual
patterns of the image, adaptively focusing on different region features of the image. For instance, CWD (Shu et al.
2021) converts feature outputs into a distribution form, utilizing the minimization of KL divergence distance between
teacher and student distributions for knowledge distillation.
Our observations indicate that the first manner faces challenges in designing complex distinction functions to identify sensitive features in detection tasks and exhibits performance instability across different detection architectures.
For example, in FRS (Zhixing et al. 2021), the background
region is also considered to contain crucial information for
the detection task, suggesting that effective features cannot
be simply identified through foreground-background differentiation. However, while holistic distillation methods simplify the process, they tend to transfer a large amount of
redundant information during the distillation process, negatively affecting the final performance. Thus, the current
methods based on channel feature transfer in object detection knowledge distillation overlook the varying importance
of each channel, therefore achieving suboptimal results.
In this paper, we introduce a general Dynamic Channelwise Spatial Feature Knowledge Distillation (DCSF-KD)
for object detection, which aims at efficiently transferring
key detection knowledge by combining prominent channel
features with channel-wise spatial features. As shown in Fig.
1, in object detection tasks, different channel features represent different visual patterns of the image. We reshape
the normalized features of the FPN layer into a representation for each channel. Inspired by SENet (Hu, Shen, and
Sun 2018), the knowledge of features across different channels varies in importance for the task. Through Global Average Pooling (GAP) operations, we generate weight values
for each channel, emphasizing the significance of diverse
channel features. In this way, we can adaptively focus on

Knowledge distillation (KD) has recently gained great success in the field of object detection. By transferring the
knowledge of the spatial or channel domain from the teacher
model to the student model, it allows for a more compact
representation with minimal performance loss. Despite this
progress, existing KD methods typically treat knowledge
from spatial or channel domains independently, ignoring the
exploitation of the mutual relationship between these domains. In this work, we first explore the connection between
spatial and channel domains and find there exists a strong correlation between them, i.e. the salient channels tend to contain
significant object regions in the spatial domain. Motivated by
this observation, we propose DCSF-KD, a novel Dynamic
Channel-wise Spatial Feature Knowledge Distillation framework for object detection by fully exploiting both spatial and
channel knowledge. Specifically, we introduce channel-wise
spatial feature distillation and global channel attention distillation, using information from both domains to improve the
accuracy of the student network. Experiments demonstrate
that our DCSF-KD outperforms existing detection methods
on both homogeneous and heterogeneous teacher-student network pairs. For example, when using the MaskRCNN-Swin
detector as the teacher, and based on RetinaNet and FCOS
with ResNet-50 on MS COCO, our DCSF-KD can achieve
41.9% and 44.1% mAP , respectively.

Code — https://github.com/LinY-ct/DCSF-KD

Introduction
Knowledge distillation, aiming to compress a large teacher
model to obtain a compact student model without loss of performance, has been widely applied across various computer
vision tasks, such as object detection. Currently, the principal approaches to knowledge distillation in object detection
focus on the efficient transfer of features within the detector’s Neck layer. These methods can generally be divided
into two main categories: The first method involves knowledge transfer of spatial dimension features, which includes
identifying and differentiating key region features within
the network that are sensitive to the detection task, such as
* Corresponding author: Zexuan Zhu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2627

