The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Retention Score: Quantifying Jailbreak Risks for Vision Language Models
Zaitang Li1 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Tsung-Yi Ho1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
2
IBM Research
New York, USA
ztli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
The emergence of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) is significant advancement in integrating computer vision with Large
Language Models (LLMs) to enhance multi-modal machine
learning capabilities. However, this progress has made VLMs
vulnerable to advanced adversarial attacks, raising concerns
about reliability. Objective of this paper is to assess resilience
of VLMs against jailbreak attacks that can compromise model
safety compliance and result in harmful outputs. To evaluate
VLM’s ability to maintain robustness against adversarial input perturbations, we propose novel metric called Retention
Score. Retention Score is multi-modal evaluation metric that
includes Retention-I and Retention-T scores for quantifying
jailbreak risks in visual and textual components of VLMs. Our
process involves generating synthetic image-text pairs using
conditional diffusion model. These pairs are then predicted
for toxicity score by VLM alongside toxicity judgment classifier. By calculating margin in toxicity scores, we can quantify
robustness of VLM in attack-agnostic manner. Our work has
four main contributions. First, we prove that Retention Score
can serve as certified robustness metric. Second, we demonstrate that most VLMs with visual components are less robust
against jailbreak attacks than corresponding plain VLMs. Additionally, we evaluate black-box VLM APIs and find that
security settings in Google Gemini significantly affect score
and robustness. Moreover, robustness of GPT4V is similar to
medium settings of Gemini. Finally, our approach offers timeefficient alternative to existing adversarial attack methods and
provides consistent model robustness rankings when evaluated
on VLMs including MiniGPT-4, InstructBLIP, and LLaVA.

Code — https://github.com/IBM/Retention-Score

1

Introduction

Recent advances have led to the widespread use of Vision
Language Models (VLMs) capable of handling a range of
tasks. There has been great interest in incorporating vision
modules into Large Language Models (LLMs), consisting
of GPT-4V (OpenAI 2023) and Gemini Vision (Team et al.
2023). Although the introduction of visual input to Large
Language Models (LLMs) has improved the ability of the
language model to understand multi-modal knowledge, it also
exposes an additional dimension of the visual input domain
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27446

that expands the threat landscape for adversarial attacks. This
expands the attack vectors available to adversaries, who now
have two domains to exploit: the high-dimensional visual
space and the discrete textual space. The shift from purely
textual to multi-modal text-visual interaction significantly
increases the possible ways for adversarial attacks to occur.
To help language models avoid generating harmful responses, prior work such as model alignment ensures that
LLMs are aligned with intentions (Bai et al. 2022; Ouyang
et al. 2022), thus ensuring that harmful content is not generated in response to prompts. However, there is the possibility
for users to craft adversarial perturbations from both image
and text avenues to undermine alignment and induce malicious behavior. Previous research has shown the ease with
which VLMs can be tricked into producing malicious content
through image (Qi et al. 2023a; Carlini et al. 2024) or text
strategies (Zou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b). Accordingly,
it is important to address concerns about toxicity potential
of VLMs. In line with Carlini’s interpretation , we define
toxicity as the susceptibility (lack of robustness) of models
to be goaded into emitting toxic output (i.e., jailbreak risks).
While most of the works focus on guiding harmful responses (i.e., jailbreak) or preventing VLMs from improper
content, we aim to provide a qualified margin-based robustness evaluation metric for each VLM. Previous studies on
adversarial robustness in computer vision (Carlini et al. 2019)
have already concluded that robustness evaluation based on
adversarial attacks may not be persistent because stronger
attacks may exist and are yet to be discovered. On the other
hand, certified robustness guarantees that no attacks can
break the certificate. Our proposed jailbreak risk evaluation
of VLMs falls into the category of margin-based certificates.
The task of assessing jailbreak risks of VLMs is full of
challenges. (i) First, VLMs are trained on large, web-scale
datasets, which complicates the feasibility of performing
robust accuracy evaluations on test sets. (ii) Second, the discrete nature of textual data defies the establishment of a
secure boundary in the context of text attacks. (iii) Third, the
computational and monetary costs associated with evaluating
adversarial robustness via optimization-based jailbreak attacks are impractical due to their cost and time consumption.
We address these challenges by introducing Retention
Score, a novel conditional robustness certificate to evaluate the toxicity resilience of VLMs. The Retention Score,

