The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Multi-View Classification Reliability with Adaptive Rejection
Wei Liu1 , Yufei Chen1 * , Xiaodong Yue2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Shanghai University, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
ldachuan@outlook.com, yufeichen@tongji.edu.cn, yswantfly@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view classification based on evidence theory aims
to enhance result reliability by effectively quantifying prediction uncertainty at the evidence level, particularly when
dealing with low-quality views. However, these methods face
limitations in real-world applications due to the sensitivity
of estimated uncertainty to view distribution, leading to two
main issues: 1) difficulty in making clear judgments about
whether to trust predictions based on vague uncertainty
scores, and 2) the potential negative impact of integrating
information from low-quality views on multi-view classification performance. Both limitations compromise the reliability
of multi-view decisions. To address these challenges, we introduce an adaptive rejection mechanism based on estimated
uncertainty, which is free of data distribution constraints. By
integrating this adaptive rejection mechanism into the fusion
of multiple views, our method not only indicates whether
predictions should be adopted or rejected at the view level
but also enhances classification performance by minimizing
the impact of unreliable information. The effectiveness
of our method is demonstrated through comprehensive
theoretical analysis and empirical experiments on various
multi-view datasets, establishing its superiority in enhancing
the reliability of multi-view classification.

Figure 1: The evidence-based classifier is trained on the MRNet dataset, which includes real-world knee MRI scans captured from three views: Axial, Coronal, and Sagittal. Case
1194 is a test sample with noise present in all three views.
The blue line indicates the density of estimated uncertainty
for testing samples. The red “×” denotes the position of
Case 1194 within the uncertainty density distribution of the
test samples, showing a small uncertainty value of 0.094.

Introduction

Despite their clear benefits, these approaches face limitations that may compromise the reliability of multi-view
deep learning. Specifically, existing methods typically provide an uncertainty degree to indicate whether a prediction
can be adopted. However, the magnitude of this uncertainty
is sensitive to different multi-view data distributions and
even varies across different view distributions within a single dataset, resulting in inconsistent levels of uncertainty.
This variability poses a critical challenge: how to effectively
distinguish between predictions from normal data and those
from low-quality data across various data distributions. Consequently, two main issues arise: 1) the integration of unreliable evidence from low-quality views can degrade the
performance of multi-view classification, and 2) The principle in informatics, as stated by Shannon, that “the essence
of information is to eliminate uncertainty”, cited in (Burgin 2002), is followed by most evidence-based multi-view
methods, typically resulting in reduced uncertainty during
multi-view fusion. This low uncertainty diminishes the distinction between the uncertainty scores of reliable and un-

Uncertainty-aware Multi-view Classification (UMVC) has
recently become crucial in multi-view deep learning by
assessing uncertainty levels in predictions, thus informing
decision-makers about when to trust these predictions (Zou
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023). Such uncertainties typically
arise from low-quality data, including conflicts among multiple views or the presence of outliers (Zhang et al. 2024b).
Within UMVC, the framework based on evidence theory
has emerged as a promising approach (Han et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2022; Han et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Xu et al.
2024; Lu et al. 2024). This framework leverages distinct
views at the evidence level, providing a reliable means for
decision fusion. It has been significantly applied in various
safety-critical fields, such as medical diagnosis (Wang et al.
2023) and autonomous driving (Patrikar et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18969

