The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PhyCamo: A Robust Physical Camouflage via Contrastive Learning for
Multi-View Physical Adversarial Attack
Ximin Zhang1 , Jinyin Chen1 * , Haibin Zheng1 , Zhenguang Liu2*
1

Institute of Cyberspace Security and the College of Information Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{111123030020, chenjinyin}@zjut.edu.cn, haibinzheng320@gmail.com, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com

Abstract

motion prediction (Liu et al. 2023; Zhenguang et al. 2019).
Unfortunately, carefully crafted adversarial examples reveal
the inherent vulnerability of DNNs by adding imperceptible
noise to the clean examples, which has captured extensive
attention in recent works (Athalye et al. 2018; Carlini and
Wagner 2017; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Laidlaw and Feizi 2019; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
2016; Poursaeed et al. 2018). Taking DNNs-based detectors (Chung, Annaswamy, and Prabhakaran 2023) as an
example, adversarial examples, altered directly in digital
space, are fed into the detector to fool it making an expected
wrong decision, such as making incorrect classification predictions, or even cause the predicted bounding box (bbox) to
disappear or offset. Most researches (Goel et al. 2018; Chow
et al. 2020a,b) has focused on this type of attack, named
digital adversarial attack. More practice, adversarial attacks
optimize the localized perturbations with unrestricted amplitude, thus they can fool the detector under various transformations (e.g., lightness changes, camera viewpoint changes,
etc.), named physical adversarial attack (Dong et al. 2022;
Duan et al. 2020; Athalye et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021a,
2022; Suryanto et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023). It pose a
more serious threat to DNNs-related scenarios since physical adversarial camouflage can be directly deployed in real
world.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in widespread applications. Meanwhile, its vulnerability towards carefully crafted adversarial attacks captures special attention. Not only adversarial perturbations in digital
space will fool the target DNNs-based detectors making a
wrong decision, but also actually printed patches can be camouflaged to defeat detectors in physical space. In particular,
multi-view physical adversarial attacks pose a more serious
threat to practical scenarios. The existing attacks are still
challenged in three aspects, i.e., high-cost data augmentation,
attack performance gap between digital and physical space,
and low attack transferability across DNNs. To overcome the
challenges, we introduce PhyCamo, a robust physical camouflage framework based on contrastive learning that distinguishes itself from prior research in various critical ways:
(1) data augmentation - it utilizes the diffusion model for
data augmentation to efficiently simulate sophisticated physical dynamics in real-world; (2) robustness - it leverages contrastive learning to optimize physical camouflage against encoders with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) attack performance;
(3) transferability - it mitigates the model-specific noise in
the optimization by adopting diverse input methods, thereby
amplifying the transferability between models. Extensive experiments are carried out on a car dataset, a tank dataset, and a
pedestrian dataset, comparing with 6 classic multi-view physical adversarial attacks in both digital and physical spaces.
The results demonstrate PhyCamo’s superior performance.
For instance, it generates more effective physical camouflage
(with higher attack success rate ∼ ×1.26 and reduce the
model’s average precision by 55%). PhyCamo can also help
to improve the robustness of detectors through adversarial
training, which contributes to the application of deep neural
networks in the field of security sensitivity.

+

Introduction

(ⅰ) Adversarial attacks

(ⅱ) Print and stick

(ⅲ) Image recapture

(ⅳ) Model test

Figure 1: The pipeline of a typical multi-view physical adversarial attack against DNNs-based detector.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved extraordinary
performance in wide range fields, such as face recognition (Ding and Tao 2015; Raghavendra, Raja, and Busch
2015; Guo et al. 2021; Arashloo 2021), autonomous driving (Ma et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2019), and

Intuitively, the physical adversarial attack is much more
complicated than the digital one, due to uncontrollable physical transformations. In specific, as shown in Fig.1, a multiview physical adversarial attack is generally launched following four steps, i.e., (i) adversarial camouflage in dig-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10230

