The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking Byzantine Robustness in Federated Recommendation from Sparse
Aggregation Perspective
Zhongjian Zhang1 * , Mengmei Zhang2 * , Xiao Wang3 , Lingjuan Lyu4
Bo Yan1 , Junping Du1 , Chuan Shi1†
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
China Telecom Bestpay
3
Beihang University
4
Sony AI
{zhangzj, boyan, junpingdu, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, zhangmengmei@bestpay.com.cn, xiao wang@buaa.edu.cn,
lingjuan.lv@sony.com
Server
𝚯

Abstract

𝐯"
∇𝚯!

∇𝚯$

∇𝚯%

…

∇𝐯!$
∇𝐯$$
$
∇𝐯"

∇𝐯!!
∇𝐯#!
𝐮!

𝐮$
:

:

…

To preserve user privacy in recommender systems, federated recommendation (FR) based on federated learning (FL)
emerges, keeping the personal data on the local client and updating a model collaboratively. Unlike FL, FR has a unique
sparse aggregation mechanism, where the embedding of each
item is updated by only partial clients, instead of full clients
in a dense aggregation of general FL. Recently, as an essential principle of FL, model security has received increasing
attention, especially for Byzantine attacks, where malicious
clients can send arbitrary updates. The problem of exploring
the Byzantine robustness of FR is particularly critical since in
the domains applying FR, e.g., e-commerce, malicious clients
can be injected easily by registering new accounts. However,
existing Byzantine works neglect the unique sparse aggregation of FR, making them unsuitable for our problem. Thus,
we make the first effort to investigate Byzantine attacks on
FR from the perspective of sparse aggregation, which is nontrivial: it is not clear how to define Byzantine robustness under sparse aggregations and design Byzantine attacks under
limited knowledge/capability. In this paper, we reformulate
the Byzantine robustness under sparse aggregation by defining the aggregation for a single item as the smallest execution
unit. Then we propose a family of effective attack strategies,
named Spattack, which exploit the vulnerability in sparse aggregation and are categorized along the adversary’s knowledge and capability. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that Spattack can effectively prevent convergence and
even break down defenses under a few malicious clients, raising alarms for securing FR systems.

Server
𝐯! 𝐕

… ∇𝐯!%
%

∇𝐯#

… 𝐮%:

Client 1 Client 2 Client n
Client 1
Client 2
Client n
(b) Sparse aggregation in FR.
(a) Dense aggregation in general FL.

Figure 1: Comparisons between dense aggregation of general FL and the unique sparse aggregation of FR.
Recently, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2016)
has emerged as a privacy-preserving paradigm and successfully applied to the recommendation area. In federated recommendation (FR) (Sun et al. 2024; Luo, Xiao, and Song
2022), the global item embeddings are uploaded to a central
server for aggregation. Meanwhile, each user’s interaction
data and privacy features are kept on the local client. In this
way, the privacy of local data is well protected.
Unlike general FL systems, FR has a unique sparse aggregation mechanism. As shown in Fig. 1, for general FL,
each element (circle) of model parameters can be updated
by all n clients, named dense aggregation. While for FR,
the interactions of users and items are usually sparse (Ma
et al. 2008), resulting in each item’s embedding can only be
updated by partial clients. For example, client n can only
produce and send substantive gradients {∇v n1 , ∇v n3 } for its
interacted items {v1 , v3 }. For the remaining items, the updates are zero vectors or empty, named sparse aggregation.
By far, FR has provided satisfactory performance without collecting users’ private data, extending recommendation applications to privacy-sensitive scenarios. Despite success, the model security, as an essential principle, has received increasing attention. Here we consider the worst-case
attack, i.e., Byzantine attack (Fang et al. 2024, 2019; Blanchard et al. 2017a), where attackers are omniscient and collusive, and can control several clients to upload arbitrary

Introduction
As an essential way to alleviate information overload, recommender systems are widely used in e-commerce (Ying
et al. 2018), media (Wang et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019), and
social network (Fan et al. 2019), recommending items that
users may be interested in. Despite the remarkable success,
conventional recommender systems require centrally storing
users’ personal data for training, increasing privacy risks.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13331

