The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Indoor-Training Effect: Unexpected Gains from Distribution Shifts in the
Transition Function
Serena Bono1 , Spandan Madan2 , Ishaan Grover1 , Mao Yasueda3 , Cynthia Breazeal1 , Hanspeter
Pfister2 , Gabriel Kreiman4
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Harvard University
3
Yale University
4
Harvard Medical School

Abstract

Non-Noisy Environment
(MDP :
)

Is it better to perform tennis training in a pristine indoor environment or a noisy outdoor one? To model this problem, here
we investigate whether shifts in the transition probabilities between the training and testing environments in reinforcement
learning problems can lead to better performance under certain conditions. We generate new Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) starting from a given MDP, by adding quantifiable,
parametric noise into the transition function. We refer to this
process as Noise Injection and the resulting environments as ωenvironments. This process allows us to create variations of the
same environment with quantitative control over noise serving
as a metric of distance between environments. Conventional
wisdom suggests that training and testing on the same MDP
should yield the best results. In stark contrast, we observe
that agents can perform better when trained on the noise-free
environment and tested on the noisy ω-environments, compared to training and testing on the same ω-environments. We
confirm that this finding extends beyond noise variations: it is
possible to showcase the same phenomenon in ATARI game
variations including varying Ghost behavior in PacMan, and
Paddle behavior in Pong. We demonstrate this intriguing behavior in 60 different variations of ATARI games, including
PacMan, Pong, and Breakout. We refer to this phenomenon as
the Indoor-Training Effect. Code to reproduce our experiments
and to implement Noise Injection.

PacMan

sebono@mit.edu, spandan_madan@g.harvard.edu, igrover@mit.edu,
mao.yasueda@yale.edu, cynthiab@media.mit.edu, pfister@g.harvard.edu,
gabriel.kreiman@childrens.harvard.edu

(b)
Pong

p=1.0

5

0.9

p=

p=0.05

δ-Environment
(MDP with Noisy Injection:
(a)

Breakout

(c)
E
NOIS
.2
μ=0
.1
σ=0

(d)
Training Testing
MDP MDP

Learnability
Agent
Generalization
Agent
)

(e)

Figure 1: ATARI games modified with Noise Injection. (a)
Noise Injection allows us to create multiple worlds in the
vicinity of the original Target Environment(MT ) by adding
controlled Gaussian noise (ω) to the original Transition Function (T ). When the agent takes the action right in these
ω→environments, with a low probability the game may transition to a state which would not be possible in non-noisy
PacMan. Experiments with noise injection are presented on
three ATARI games—(b) PacMan, (c) Pong, and (d) Breakout. (e) We compare two agents with these environments—a
Learnability agent trained and tested on the same target environment (Mω ), and a Generalization agent trained on a
different MDP (MT ) and tested on Mω .

Code — https://github.com/serenabono/Pacman

Introduction
Consider the process of learning how to play tennis. You
might think that the best way to prepare for an outdoor match
is to train under the same outdoor conditions you will face
during the match. However, training in a calm, noise-free
indoor environment instead can help focus on mastering
the fundamentals of tennis without the added challenge of
sources of noise like wind. We refer to this phenomenon
as the Indoor-Training Effect. Here we model this problem
using reinforcement learning (RL) agents. Surprisingly, we

found that under certain conditions, training in a noise-free
environment can lead to better performance when tested in
a noisy environment—just like tennis. This phenomenon
challenges our intuitions about the standard way to train RL
agents where conventional wisdom would suggest that the

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
15605

