The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

G2LDetect: A Global-to-Local Approach for Hallucination Detection
Xiaoxia Cheng, Zeqi Tan, Zhe Zheng, Weiming Lu*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{zjucxx, zqtan, zhezheng, luwm}@zju.edu.cn

Input

Abstract
Hallucination detection has attracted considerable interest
due to the tendency of language models to generate texts that
contain hallucinations. Most existing methods start with specific local details directly extracted from text, then aggregate
to form the final conclusion. However, this direct extraction
approach ignores the global context, leading to isolated details, and is prone to missed or over-detections. In this paper,
we present a global-to-local approach for hallucination detection (G2LDetect), which considers the global information
of the text before identifying local details. We first construct
a global representation of the text by transforming it into a
hierarchical tree structure. Afterward, we obtain specific local details from the global tree representation using path-wise
identification and perform detection on them. This global-tolocal detection process ensures that local details are contextaware and complete, thus making more accurate and reliable
detection results. Experimental results show that our globalto-local method outperforms existing methods, especially for
longer texts.

Global

Input
Local
Local

Detect

Output
(a) Existing

Detect
Output
(b) Global-to-Local

Figure 1: G2LDetect (Ours) vs. existing methods. (a) Existing methods start with specific local details directly extracted from text, then detect and aggregate to reach a final
answer. (b) Our G2LDetect method constructs a global representation before extracting local details.

Code — https://github.com/hustcxx/G2LDetect

1

Figure 1 (a). For example, SelfCheckGPT (Manakul, Liusie,
and Gales 2023) splits the text into sentences according to
grammatical rules to perform independent detection, and
then aggregate the results at the sentence level. FActScore
(Min et al. 2023) further decomposes the sentences into
sub-sentences using the in-context learning ability of large
language models (LLMs) after rule-based sentence splitting. Subsequently, FacTool (Chern et al. 2023) introduces
a method to directly extract sub-sentences employing the incontext learning ability of LLMs. Similarly, REFCHECKER
(Hu et al. 2024) extracts triples from text to provide more
fine-grained detection results than the sentence-level (Manakul, Liusie, and Gales 2023) and sub-sentence level (Min
et al. 2023; Chern et al. 2023) approaches. However, these
approaches directly extract factual units such as sentences,
sub-sentences, and triples from the original documents without conducting a global semantic analysis of the entire document. This results in isolated factual units that lack context.
The issue is particularly evident in rule-based approaches
like SelfCheckGPT and FActScore. Moreover, sentencelevel detection methods also suffer from the missed detection problem, since one sentence may contain multiple hallucinations. Additionally, according to our statistics, exist-

Introduction

Generative language models (OpenAI 2024; Touvron et al.
2023; Brown et al. 2020) have demonstrated their capabilities across various tasks, yet their generated content also
faces the challenge of hallucinations (Ji et al. 2023; Bang
et al. 2023; Qiu et al. 2023), which limits their application
in real-world scenarios. In light of this, developing effective hallucination detection mechanisms is particularly important. Such mechanisms (Hu et al. 2024; Manakul, Liusie,
and Gales 2023; Min et al. 2023; Chern et al. 2023) can evaluate and identify inaccurate or false information in the text
against a reference, thereby enhancing authenticity and reliability of the language models generated content.
Recently, various hallucination detection methods (Hu
et al. 2024; Manakul, Liusie, and Gales 2023; Min et al.
2023; Chern et al. 2023) have been proposed. These methods typically begin by extracting specific local details directly from the text, then perform separate detection, and finally aggregate the results to reach a conclusion, as shown in
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

102

