The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HDLayout: Hierarchical and Directional Layout Planning for Arbitrary Shaped
Visual Text Generation
Tonghui Feng1 , Chunsheng Yan2 , Qianru Wang1 , Jiangtao Cui1 , Xiaotian Qiao1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, China
thfeng@stu.xidian.edu.cn, qiaoxiaotian@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual text generation, which aims to generate photo-realistic
images with coherent and well-formed scene text being rendered, has attracted widespread attention. Although recent
works have achieved promising performance, the limited
flexibility and controllability hinder their practical applications. We observe that different from natural objects, visual
text in real scenes often has an arbitrarily shaped structure
with different granularities (i.e., character, word, or line).
In this paper, we consider the modality gap between image and text, and propose a new separation and composition pipeline for flexible and controllable visual text generation from only text prompts. At the core of our framework is
a novel Hierarchical and Directional Layout representation,
i.e., HDLayout, which can model the sequential and multigranularity nature of the visual text. Under this formulation,
we are able to generate arbitrarily shaped visual text automatically. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms several strong baselines in a variety of scenarios
both qualitatively and quantitatively, yielding state-of-the-art
performances on arbitrarily shaped visual text generation.

(a) Existing Layout

(b) Our HDLayout

(c) Visual Text Images

Figure 1: Differences between (a) standard textual layout
representation and (b) the proposed HDLayout representation. Existing works use rectangular bounding boxes to
represent either character or word level visual text, lacking
shape details and different granularities. In contrast, we propose HDLayout, a novel hierarchical and directional layout
representation that can model both geometric and sequential
information simultaneously, enabling flexible and controllable arbitrarily shaped visual text generation (c).

guidance to generate a single row or column of text. GlyphControl (Yang et al. 2024) exhibits robust text generation
capabilities via diverse user-defined layout shapes. TextDiffuser (Chen et al. 2024) leverages a transformer to achieve
multi-line text rendering, by predicting various word-level
layouts automatically.
Nevertheless, we have noticed several drawbacks that hinder these models from realizing their full potential. (1) Additional input requirement. Most existing works require
users to provide manual layout guidance for visual text rendering. Such a requirement prevents them from converting
user prompts to scene images automatically, seriously limiting the flexibility of text styles. (2) Rectangular bounding
box representation. As shown in Fig. 1(a), existing works
follow the scene layout modeling pipeline, and use rectangular bounding boxes to represent either character or word
level text. However, such a representation lacks geometric
details of the visual text, and is quite different from real
scene text.
From our study, we have investigated the distinctive characteristics of visual text that set them apart from natural objects in a scene, and made the following observations. (1)
Arbitrarily shaped structure. Visual text in real scenes
often has various layout structures (e.g., horizontal, multioriented, curved, etc.), consisting of a set of arbitrarily

Introduction
Text descriptions, e.g., street and storefront signs, banners,
and book covers, exist widely in real-world scenarios and
act as an important information carrier in facilitating visual
communication. With the rapid development of generative
models, astounding advances have been achieved in generating photo-realistic and prompt-aligned scene images (AI
2024; OpenAI 2023; Zheng et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2022)
in terms of fidelity and diversity. Despite showcasing impressive performance, existing generative models still face
a persistent challenge in generating clear and contextually
appropriate text on scene images, due to the huge modality
gap between abstract text and natural objects. Thus, how to
generate well-formed and readable visual text to improve the
scene image quality is still an open and crucial problem.
Until recently, several models have emerged to address
this problem by using the predefined text layout as an additional input or distilling the text prompt to predict bounding boxes automatically. GlyphDraw (Ma et al. 2023) enhances text generation capabilities through simple glyph
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2996

