The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HiRED: Attention-Guided Token Dropping for Efficient Inference of
High-Resolution Vision-Language Models
Kazi Hasan Ibn Arif1 , JinYi Yoon1 , Dimitrios S. Nikolopoulos1 , Hans Vandierendonck2 ,
Deepu John3 , Bo Ji1
1

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
3
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
{hasanarif, jinyiyoon, dsn}@vt.edu, h.vandierendonck@qub.ac.uk, deepu.john@ucd.ie, boji@vt.edu
2

Abstract
High-resolution Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are
widely used in multimodal tasks to enhance accuracy by preserving detailed image information. However, these models
often generate an excessive number of visual tokens due to
the need to encode multiple partitions of a high-resolution
image input. Processing such a large number of visual tokens
poses significant computational challenges, particularly for
resource-constrained commodity GPUs. To address this
challenge, we propose High-Resolution Early Dropping
(HiRED), a plug-and-play token-dropping method designed
to operate within a fixed token budget. HiRED leverages the
attention of CLS token in the vision transformer (ViT) to
assess the visual content of the image partitions and allocate
an optimal token budget for each partition accordingly. The
most informative visual tokens from each partition within
the allocated budget are then selected and passed to the
subsequent Large Language Model (LLM). We showed
that HiRED achieves superior accuracy and performance,
compared to existing token-dropping methods. Empirically,
HiRED-20% (i.e., a 20% token budget) on LLaVA-Next-7B
achieves a 4.7× increase in token generation throughput,
reduces response latency by 78%, and saves 14% of GPU
memory for single inference on an NVIDIA TESLA P40
(24 GB). For larger batch sizes (e.g., 4), HiRED-20%
prevents out-of-memory errors by cutting memory usage by
30%, while preserving throughput and latency benefits.

Figure 1: Inference steps of LLaVA-Next (Liu et al. 2024a)
for a high-resolution VLM with dynamic partitioning.

A typical inference pipeline of high-resolution VLMs
with dynamic partitioning is illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, a high-resolution input image is partitioned into multiple sub-images (e.g., four sub-images for a square image in LLaVA-Next); a downsampled version of the original image, referred to as the full-image, is also included.
Subsequently, a vision encoder such as Vision Transformers (ViTs) encodes each low-resolution image partition into
image features, which are then converted to visual tokens in
the text embedding space through a lightweight Projection
Layer. These visual tokens are concatenated and fed into a
Large Language Model (LLM) (along with text tokens and
system tokens) to generate the final response. Here, the fullimage and the sub-images (commonly referred to as image
partitions in this paper) have different amounts of visual content and thus, exhibit different degrees of importance. While
the full-image captures the global context of the original image, each sub-image is for a more detailed local representation of corresponding specific areas. This multi-partitioning
approach enables the inclusion of more visual details, which
can significantly boost accuracy. For example, accuracy can
be improved by 15% when the image resolution is increased
from 336×336 to 1344×1344 (McKinzie et al. 2025).
However, due to the need to encode multiple image partitions, high-resolution VLMs often generate 3-10× more
visual tokens than their low-resolution counterparts (Dong
et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024). Such excessive visual tokens

Code — https://github.com/hasanar1f/HiRED

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as GPT-4v (Achiam
et al. 2024), Gemini Pro (Reid et al. 2024), LLaVA (Liu
et al. 2023), and Qwen-VL (Bai et al. 2023), have emerged
as remarkable multimodal models that learn from visual
and textual data. However, these VLMs inherently work for
low-resolution images only and would lose fine-grained visual information if applied to high-resolution images (Zhang
et al. 2024a; Dong et al. 2024). To address this issue, recent VLMs, referred to as high-resolution VLMs, employ
dynamic partitioning to encode high-resolution images (Liu
et al. 2024a; Dong et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024c;
Lin et al. 2023; Chen, Pekis, and Brown 2024).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1773

