The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PFedCS: A Personalized Federated Learning Method for Enhancing
Collaboration among Similar Classifiers
Siyuan Wu1 , Yongzhe Jia1 , Bowen Liu1 , Haolong Xiang2 * , Xiaolong Xu2 , Wanchun Dou1 *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Software,
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
{sywu, jiayz, liubw}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {hlxiang, xlxu}@nuist.edu.cn, douwc@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

Huang et al. 2021), making it challenging to meet the personalized requirements of each client. Taking the development of tumor image detection in hospitals as an example
of the application of FL (Jiang, Wang, and Dou 2022), it is
evident that users of different demographic data, influenced
by subtle variations in regions and eating habits, are likely
to exhibit varying proportions of disease severity. Certain
cases may predominantly occur within specific groups. In
such scenarios, providing more personalized diagnostic predictions for each region becomes meaningful and necessary.
To tackle statistical heterogeneity and meet the personalized needs of clients in FL, personalized Federated Learning (PFL) methods have been proposed. Unlike traditional
FL approaches that seek a globally optimal model with
strong generalization by training and collaborating across
distributed clients, PFL aims to train a set of personalized
models to mitigate the impact of Non-IID across different
clients. Recent studies in PFL fall into two main categories
based on their underlying motivations: (1) Architecturedriven methods that aim to achieve personalization through
customized model designs tailored to each client, including FedPer (Arivazhagan et al. 2019) and FedGH (Yi et al.
2023), (2) Similarity-based methods that focus on achieving
personalization by modeling client relationships, including
FedAMP (Huang et al. 2021) and FeSEM (Long et al. 2023).
The PFL methods in category (1) face challenges in determining the optimal architectural design. Furthermore, at the
private parameter level, there is no direct benefit from other
clients with similar data distribution, potentially overlooking
valuable information from them. Meanwhile, the PFL methods in category (2) still have shortcomings. On the one hand,
due to the modeling of user relationships, the personalization models of clients are easily influenced by other clients,
making these methods sensitive to the poor data quality of
clients. On the other hand, these methods primarily focus on
client-level model aggregation, lacking fine-grained knowledge sharing relevant to local tasks. In addition, this process
may introduce additional computational and communication
costs for clients (Ghosh et al. 2022), particularly detrimental
to edge devices with constrained resources.
Recent studies have revealed that the degradation in FL
predominantly stems from classifier biases in clients’ local
models induced by Non-IID data (Li et al. 2023; Luo et al.

Personalized federated learning (PFL) has recently gained
significant attention for its capability to address the poor convergence performance on highly heterogeneous data and the
lack of personalized solutions of traditional federated learning (FL). Existing mainstream approaches either perform personalized aggregation based on a specific model architecture to leverage global knowledge or achieve personalization
by exploiting client similarities. However, the former overlooks the discrepancies in client data distributions by indiscriminately aggregating all clients, while the latter lacks finegrained collaboration of classifiers relevant to local tasks. In
view of this challenge, we propose a Personalized Federated
learning method for Enhancing Collaboration among Similar
Classifiers (PFedCS), which aims at improving the client’s
accuracy on local tasks. Concretely, it is achieved by leveraging awareness of the client classifier similarities to address
the above problems. By iteratively measuring the distance of
the classifier parameters between clients and clustering with
each client as a cluster center, the central server adaptively
identifies the collaborating clients with similar data distributions. In addition, a distance-constrained aggregation method
is designed to generate customized collaborative classifiers to
guide local training. As a result, extensive experimental evaluations conducted on various datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed computing paradigm
that enables collaborative training across multiple distributed devices without requiring the upload of raw data,
which has experienced remarkable growth in various domains such as healthcare (Wu et al. 2022; Guan et al. 2024),
multimedia (Zhang, Liu, and Liu 2023; Li et al. 2024),
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) (Boobalan et al. 2022;
Ding et al. 2022) and so on. Unfortunately, traditional FL
methods, such as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017), which
only train a single global model, exhibit suboptimal endof-training performance on severely non-independent and
non-identically distributed (Non-IID) data (Liao et al. 2023;
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21572

