The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FlexPose: Pose Distribution Adaptation with Limited Guidance
Zixiao Wang1 , Junwu Weng2 * , Mengyuan Liu3 , Bei Yu1 *
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
ByteDance Inc.
3
Peking University
zxwang22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, we0001wu@e.ntu.edu.sg, nkliuyifang@gmail.com, byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Numerous well-annotated human key-point datasets are publicly available to date. However, annotating human poses for
newly collected images is still a costly and time-consuming
progress. Pose distributions from different datasets share similar pose hinge-structure priors with different geometric transformations, such as pivot orientation, joint rotation, and bone
length ratio. The difference between Pose distributions is essentially the difference between the transformation distributions. Inspired by this fact, we propose a method to calibrate
a pre-trained pose generator in which the pose prior has already been learned to an adapted one following a new pose
distribution. We treat the representation of human pose joint
coordinates as skeleton image and transfer a pre-trained pose
annotation generator with only a few annotation guidance. By
fine-tuning a limited number of linear layers that closely related to the pose transformation, the adapted generator is able
to produce any number of pose annotations that are similar to
the target poses. We evaluate our proposed method, FlexPose,
on several cross-dataset settings both qualitatively and quantitatively, which demonstrates that our approach achieves stateof-the-art performance compared to the existing generativemodel-based transfer learning methods when given limited
annotation guidance.

1

Figure 1: The illustration of how poses can be adapted between different domains. Although various pose datasets may
differ in their transformations, they share a common hingestructure prior. FlexPose’s adaptation process focused on
transformation, and the resulting poses can be effectively
used in a wide range of downstream pose-related tasks.

Introduction

Deep neural networks are data-hungry and rely on large-scale
datasets with high-quality human annotations for training.
However, the process of annotating these datasets can be
expensive and time-consuming, particularly when dense annotation are required, as is often the case in pose estimation
tasks (Wang and Zhang 2022; He et al. 2017). To overcome
this challenge, AI-aided labeling methods have become increasingly popular, where a pre-trained model’s prediction
serves as a reference to reduce human workload. However,
when there is a domain shift (Luo et al. 2019), where the
distribution of the training dataset and test dataset are not
aligned not only on the input image domain but on the pose
annotation domain as well, the accuracy of the model can
significantly decline.
Considerable efforts have been devoted to tackling this
issue. Among them, domain adaptation (DA) (Daumé III
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21447

2009; Csurka 2017) introduces knowledge from existing annotated datasets to a target dataset and is verified effective
on several computer vision tasks (Cao et al. 2019; Inoue
et al. 2018). However, things become different in the humanrelated dataset, e.g., human pose (Ionescu et al. 2014) and
human face (Wu et al. 2018). As the source human appearance is usually required in DA-related methods for input
image domain adaptation, they may import unexpected data
distribution bias (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018), e.g., gender
or color, from the source. Besides, the direct exposure of
private portraits may raise the privacy issue.
On the other hand, it is commonly observed that different
human poses share a similar hinge-structure prior. Typically,
poses in a target dataset can be transferred from poses of a
pre-collected source set by applying geometric transformations on for example pivot orientation, joint rotation, and
bone length ratio. Therefore, adapting the pose distribution
only can be a viable option in the case of human-related
datasets. Pose Domain Adaptation (PDA) avoids the direct
use of human appearance images, effectively addressing the
aforementioned issues. Motivated by this observation, we propose FlexPose (shown in Figure 1), a method that transfers
the source pose distribution to a target distribution with limited pose annotation guidance. After pose distribution transfer
by FlexPose, each input image can be matched with the most
related generated pose in estimated pose distribution by uti-

