The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Refine then Classify: Robust Graph Neural Networks with Reliable Neighborhood
Contrastive Refinement
Shuman Zhuang1 , Zhihao Wu2* , Zhaoliang Chen3 , Hong-Ning Dai3 , Ximeng Liu1
1

College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
shumanzhuang@163.com, zhihaowu1999@gmail.com, chenzl23@outlook.com, henrydai@hkbu.edu.hk, snbnix@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Wang et al.
2024c), exposing significant robustness flaws that threaten
security in critical environments. Addressing these vulnerabilities is essential for broadening GNNs’ applications.
Due to the unique characteristics of graphs and mechanisms of GNNs (Gilmer et al. 2017; Zhuang et al. 2024;
Lu et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2023), structural attacks (Xu
et al. 2019; Zugner and Gunnemann 2019) have emerged as
a more effective and prevalent method of targeting GNNs
compared to traditional feature attacks. To defend against
structural attacks, some researchers re-engineered the GNN
models to refine the representation through an in-processing
way (Zhu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2024a). Nonetheless, the
inherent message-passing mechanism within these models
permitted interactions between representations and the contaminated graph structure, which inevitably taints feature
information so that capping performance potential. In response to these challenges, there has been a shift towards
decoupling this process, i.e., first refining and then classifying using a GNN (Wu et al. 2019). Typically, the refining is a static procedure, driven solely by feature information. This approach, while preventing contamination,
tends to underutilize the untainted segments of the structure.
To overcome these drawbacks, Graph Contrastive Learning
(GCL), which learns invariant information from perturbed
graphs (Wang et al. 2024b; Zheng et al. 2022b,a), is being considered as a representation refining technique. Although GCL also suffered severely from structural attacks,
STABLE (Li et al. 2022b) surprisingly revealed that by integrating GCL with supervised GNNs, exceptional performance can be achieved. The core idea involves a rough preprocessing to construct contrastive views and refining representations via GCL. Ultimately, an improved GNN is performed to derive robust classification results.
Following this idea, some research (Tao et al. 2024) has
made further progress. However, the GCL-based refiningclassifying pipeline is still in its infancy, where STABLE
and other existing methods have not explored the intrinsic challenges of adversarial robustness. They directly adopt
the well-known global-local contrastive strategy (Velickovic
et al. 2019), which is contrary to the principle of adversarial
defense as it disrupts the intrinsic geometric structure in the
feature space. It is worth mentioning that decoupling aims
to protect feature information, but these methods still poten-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have exhibited remarkable
capabilities for dealing with graph-structured data. However,
recent studies have revealed their fragility to adversarial attacks, where imperceptible perturbations to the graph structure can easily mislead predictions. To enhance adversarial
robustness, some methods attempt to learn robust representation through improving GNN architectures. Subsequently, another approach suggests that these GNNs might taint feature
information and have poor classifier performance, leading to
the introduction of Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) methods to build a refining-classifying pipeline. However, existing
methods focus on global-local contrastive strategies, which
fails to address the robustness issues inherent in the contexts
of adversarial robustness. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel paradigm named GRANCE to enhance the
robustness of learned representations by shifting the focus to
local neighborhoods. Specifically, a dual neighborhood contrastive learning strategy is designed to extract local topological and semantic information. Paired with a neighbor estimator, the strategy can learn robust representations that are resilient to adversarial edges. Additionally, we also provide an
improved GNN as classifier. Theoretical analyses provide a
stricter lower bound of mutual information, ensuring the convergence of GRANCE. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of GRANCE compared to state-of-the-art baselines against various adversarial attacks.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), with their effective message passing mechanisms, have excelled in numerous graphrelated tasks (Chen et al. 2023b; Wan et al. 2024; Wu,
Zhang, and Fan 2024) such as anomaly detection (Pan et al.
2023; Cai et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024), genomics (Li et al. 2022a; Hickey et al. 2023), network analysis (Yu et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023a), and
disease propagation modeling (Lao et al. 2022; Gao et al.
2023), thanks to their ability to learn and uncover complex
patterns from neighbor exchanges (Li et al. 2024; Wu et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2024). However, despite their successes,
GNNs demonstrate vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks involving noisy or deliberately crafted edges (Zhu et al. 2022;
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13473

