The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fair Division with Market Values
Siddharth Barman1 , Soroush Ebadian2 , Mohamad Latifian3 , Nisarg Shah2
1

Indian Institute of Science Bangalore
2
University of Toronto
3
University of Edinburgh
barman@iisc.ac.in, soroush@cs.toronto.edu, mohamad.latifian@ed.ac.uk, nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

wherein the participating agents (parties) can submit their
own heterogeneous valuations over the goods. Here, the underlying goal is to find a division that each agent would
consider fair according to their own valuation. Hence, the
models provide a systematic way to avoid disagreements.
In recent years, fair division literature has made impressive
strides in the context of indivisible goods, resulting in allocation methods that achieve appealing fairness guarantees.
One such notion is envy-freeness up to one good (EF1),
which demands that no agent prefers the allocation of another agent over their own if we hypothetically exclude just
one good from the envied agent’s allocation (Lipton et al.
2004; Budish 2011; Caragiannis et al. 2019).
Despite the mathematical and conceptual appeal of this
framework, equal division of goods under market values still
holds unshakable importance in real-world dispute resolutions. Hence, we study the framework of fair division with
market values, where we seek an allocation of the goods that
the agents find fair with respect to their heterogeneous personal preferences (“subjective utilities”), and that is also a
near-equal division under the market values. Formally, a set
M of (indivisible) goods must be allocated among a set N
of n agents. Each agent i ∈ N submits an additive subjective utility function ui : 2M → R⩾0 and there is an additive
market value function v : 2M → R⩾0 .1 Our goal is to seek
an allocation that is simultaneously fair (e.g., EF1) with respect to the subjective utilities {ui }i∈N and with respect to
the market values v.
The significance of this formulation is further substantiated by the following observations: First, near-equal division
under the market values can correspond to a feasibility constraint, imposed due to legal or normative reasons. Hence,
one can view the requirement under market values as seeking an allocation that is fair (with respect to the agents’ subjective utilities) as well as feasible (with respect to the market values). Indeed, with this viewpoint, the current work
contributes to the growing body of work on fair division under constraints (see, e.g., (Suksompong 2021)), and some of
our results are derived using ideas from this line of work.
Second, one can adopt an epistemic perspective that the
subjective utilities provided by the agents are in fact their

We introduce a model of fair division with market values,
where indivisible goods must be partitioned among agents
with (additive) subjective valuations, and each good additionally has a market value. The market valuation can be viewed
as a separate additive valuation that holds identically across
all the agents. We seek allocations that are simultaneously fair
with respect to the subjective valuations and with respect to
the market valuation.
We show that an allocation that satisfies stochasticallydominant envy-freeness up to one good (SD-EF1) with respect to both the subjective valuations and the market valuation does not always exist, but the weaker guarantee of EF1
with respect to the subjective valuations along with SD-EF1
with respect to the market valuation can be guaranteed. We
also study a number of other guarantees such as Pareto optimality, EFX, and MMS. In addition, we explore non-additive
valuations and extend our model to cake-cutting. Along the
way, we identify several tantalizing open questions.

1

Introduction

For centuries, human civilizations have pondered how to settle disputes centered around division of goods. Such resolution requirements come up often in cases such as divorce
settlement and estate division (in the absence of a will). A
common practice in the real world is not to liquidate all the
goods but to assess their fair market value (FMV) and create
an “equal division” whereby the total fair market value of the
goods awarded to each party is (almost) equal. Such a division is sometimes even a legal requirement (Kagan 2021b).
For instance, fair market values of land—as determined by
assessors (Kagan 2021a)–are often used to settle land disputes (Shtechman, Gonen, and Segal-Halevi 2021). However, an FMV-based approach has two limitations: (i) parties
may disagree on what the fair market value of a good is, and
(ii) parties may have personal (i.e., subjective) cardinal preferences (over the goods) which may be quite different from
the assessed market values.
Starting with the seminal work of Steinhaus (1948), the
mathematical theory of fair division has made significant advances over the last century. The theory systematically addresses the issue (ii) mentioned above by developing models

1
M
P A set function f : 2 → R⩾0 is said to be additive if f (S) =
f
({r})
for
all
S
⊆
M with f (∅) = 0.
r∈S

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13589

