The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MTGA: Multi-View Temporal Granularity Aligned Aggregation for Event-Based
Lip-Reading
Wenhao Zhang1 * , Jun Wang1 * , Yong Luo1 , Lei Yu2 , Wei Yu1 , Zheng He1† , Jialie Shen3
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software and Hubei Key Laboratory of
Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
School of Electronics and Information, Wuhan University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City, University of London, The United Kingdom
{wenhaozhang, junwang ai, luoyong, ly.wd, yuwei, hezheng}@whu.edu.cn, jialie@gmail.com
Abstract

There exist many event-based recognition approaches.
For example, the event streams are represented as point
clouds in (Wang et al. 2019) to preserve maximal information, but the computational cost may be very high for a
large number of events. Li et al. (Li et al. 2021a) employ
neighboring graph structures to capture of local correlations,
yet lip-reading task may introduce an excessive number of
nodes and edges, and thus make the feature extraction difficult. Some other approaches assemble asynchronous events
into group tokens (Peng et al. 2023), based on timestamps
and polarity. This can efficiently reduce feature dimension
but do not adequately exploit the temporal information, rendering them less effective for lip-reading task that demands
a focus on subtle temporal variations.
A recent lip-reading approach based on event camera is
presented in (Tan et al. 2022). In this approach, the event
points within a set of time are aggregated into a single frame,
so that the video processing strategies can be employed.
However, during the talking, lips often change subtly and
rapidly, and using image frame for representation may obscure these detailed variations. Tan et al. (Tan et al. 2022)
alleviate this issue by developing a Multi-grained SpatioTemporal Features Perceived (MSTP) Network that merges
features learned from two branches with different frame
rates through a Message Flow Module (MFM). However,
MSTP only aggregate the events into frames, and hence inevitably leads to the loss of intra-frame local information.
To remedy this drawback, we propose a novel multi-view
learning method termed multi-view temporal granularity
aligned aggregation (MTGA) for event-based lip-reading.
In particular, we first represent the events from two different viewpoints, as shown in Figure 1. One view is to aggregate the events into event frames at an appropriate temporal segment following (Tan et al. 2022), and convolution is applied to extract global spatial features. The other
view is to partition the event flow (at the same temporal
segment as the first view) into a voxel grid within a threedimensional space. Within each time segment, we construct
a three-dimensional geometric neighboring graph using the
most informative voxels. The resulting local graphs are temporally connected to form a graph list, which are utilized to
extract critical local details and contextual correlations using
Gaussian Mixture Model convolutions (Li et al. 2021a).

Lip-reading is to utilize the visual information of the
speaker’s lip movements to recognize words and sentences.
Existing event-based lip-reading solutions integrate different frame rate branches to learn spatio-temporal features of
varying granularities. However, aggregating events into event
frames inevitably leads to the loss of fine-grained temporal
information within frames. To remedy this drawback, we propose a novel framework termed Multi-view Temporal Granularity aligned Aggregation (MTGA). Specifically, we first
present a novel event representation method, namely timesegmented voxel graph list, where the most significant local
voxels are temporally connected into a graph list. Then we
design a spatio-temporal fusion module based on temporal
granularity alignment, where the global spatial features extracted from event frames, together with the local relative
spatial and temporal features contained in voxel graph list
are effectively aligned and integrated. Finally, we design a
temporal aggregation module that incorporates positional encoding, which enables the capture of local absolute spatial
and global temporal information. Experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms both the event-based and videobased lip-reading counterparts.

Code — https://github.com/whu125/MTGA

Introduction
With the continuous advancement of human-computer interaction technology, lip reading as a silent form of communication has attracted widespread attention. Existing lipreading approaches are typically based on video inputs
(Sheng et al. 2024), which are required to be high resolution. Poor performance may be obtained when the video is
blurry or involves rapid movement.
Event cameras (Gallego et al. 2020), as innovative visual
sensors, can capture changes in pixel brightness at the microsecond level, producing an event stream output. Their
sensitivity to motion and ability to reduce redundancy make
them well-suited for lip-reading tasks that require capturing
fine-grained features and lip movements.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10176

