The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DGFamba: Learning Flow Factorized State Space for
Visual Domain Generalization
Qi Bi1 * , Jingjun Yi1 * , Hao Zheng1† , Haolan Zhan2 , Wei Ji3 , Yawen Huang1 , Yuexiang Li4†
1

Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, ShenZhen, China
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, United States
4
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau, Macau
{q bi, rsjingjuny}@whu.edu.cn, howzheng@tencent.com, yuexiang.li@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to learn a representation from the
source domain, which can be generalized to arbitrary unseen
target domains. A fundamental challenge for visual domain
generalization is the domain gap caused by the dramatic style
variation whereas the image content is stable. The realm of
selective state space, exemplified by VMamba, demonstrates
its global receptive field in representing the content. However,
the way exploiting the domain-invariant property for selective state space is rarely explored. In this paper, we propose
a novel Flow Factorized State Space model, dubbed as DGFamba, for visual domain generalization. To maintain domain
consistency, we innovatively map the style-augmented and
the original state embeddings by flow factorization. In this latent flow space, each state embedding from a certain style is
specified by a latent probability path. By aligning these probability paths in the latent space, the state embeddings are able
to represent the same content distribution regardless of the
style differences. Extensive experiments conducted on various visual domain generalization settings show its state-ofthe-art performance.

Style #1
Style #2
Style #3

Style #1

Style #2

Style #3

Classifier

Figure 1: General idea of the proposed DGFamba. The latent flow space aligns the probability path between the preand post- style augmented state embeddings to enhance the
robustness to the style change.

Introduction
In many real-world scenarios, the distributions between the
source and target domains are not independently and identically distributed (i.i.d). Visual domain generalization handles the domain shift. It learns an image representation extracted from the source domain images, and aims to generalize to arbitrary unseen target domains (Perry, Von Kügelgen,
and Schölkopf 2022; Fang et al. 2020; Hendrycks et al.
2021; Geirhos et al. 2021). Its key challenge lies in the domain gap caused by the dramatic style variation whereas the
cross-domain image content is stable.
Visual domain generalization has been extensively studied in the past decade. A variety of advanced machine learning techniques (Sagawa et al. 2019; Krueger et al. 2021;
Huang et al. 2020; Blanchard et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2024;
Nam et al. 2021) have been proposed to eliminate the impact
of cross-domain styles. However, these methods rely heavily on the convolutional neural network (CNN) (He et al.

2016) as the image encoder, which has a limited local receptive field. Since the local receptive field is more sensitive
to the style variation and less expressive to the global-wise
image content, modern domain generalization methods (Sultana et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023) have shifted the image encoder from CNN to Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2020), which is more capable to represent the image
content owing to the self-attention mechanism.
More recently, selective state space model (SSM), exemplified by VMamba (Liu et al. 2024) and Vision Mamba
(Zhu et al. 2024), has become the new paradigm for visual
representation learning. SSM converts the image into patch
sequences and exploits the visual information from recurrent
modeling, which demonstrates a more global receptive field
to represent the content. Such property provides a new feasible path for visual domain generalization, where a robust
image content representation is critical. However, the selective scanning is implemented in a fixed way regardless of

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1862

