The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Error Bounds For Gaussian Process Regression Under Bounded Support Noise
With Applications To Safety Certification
Robert Reed1 , Luca Laurenti2 , Morteza Lahijanian1
1

Deptartment of Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Robert.Reed-1@colorado.edu, L.Laurenti@tudelft.nl, Morteza.Lahijanian@colorado.edu
2

Abstract
Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) is a powerful and elegant method for learning complex functions from noisy data
with a wide range of applications, including in safety-critical
domains. Such applications have two key features: (i) they
require rigorous error quantification, and (ii) the noise is often
bounded and non-Gaussian due to, e.g., physical constraints.
While error bounds for applying GPR in the presence of nonGaussian noise exist, they tend to be overly restrictive and
conservative in practice. In this paper, we provide novel error
bounds for GPR under bounded support noise. Specifically,
by relying on concentration inequalities and assuming that the
latent function has low complexity in the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) corresponding to the GP kernel, we
derive both probabilistic and deterministic bounds on the error
of the GPR. We show that these errors are substantially tighter
than existing state-of-the-art bounds and are particularly wellsuited for GPR with neural network kernels, i.e., Deep Kernel
Learning (DKL). Furthermore, motivated by applications in
safety-critical domains, we illustrate how these bounds can
be combined with stochastic barrier functions to successfully
quantify the safety probability of an unknown dynamical system from finite data. We validate the efficacy of our approach
through several benchmarks and comparisons against existing
bounds. The results show that our bounds are consistently
smaller, and that DKLs can produce error bounds tighter than
sample noise, significantly improving the safety probability of
control systems.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) is a powerful and elegant method for learning complex functions from noisy data,
renowned for its rigorous uncertainty quantification (Rasmussen, Williams et al. 2006). This makes GPR particularly
valuable in the control and analysis of safety-critical systems
(Berkenkamp et al. 2017; Lederer and Hirche 2019; Lederer,
Umlauft, and Hirche 2019; Jagtap, Soudjani, and Zamani
2020; Jackson et al. 2021b,a; Griffioen, Devonport, and Arcak 2023; Wajid, Awan, and Zamani 2022). However, in such
systems, the underlying assumption of Gaussian measurement noise often does not hold. Measurements are typically
filtered to reject outliers, and physical systems cannot traverse infinite distances in a single time step. Consequently,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20157

bounded support noise distributions provide a more accurate representation for many cyber-physical systems. But,
without the Gaussian assumption, the mean and variance
predictions of GPs cannot be directly used to represent confidence in the underlying system. To address this, recent
works (Hashimoto et al. 2022; Srinivas et al. 2012; Chowdhury and Gopalan 2017; Jackson et al. 2021a) have diverged
from a fully Bayesian approach and developed GPR error
bounds under mild assumptions on the sample noise distribution, specifically sub-Gaussian and bounded noise (see
Figure 1). While these bounds are useful, they tend to be
overly restrictive and conservative, relying on parameters
that must be over-approximated. This work aims to overcome
these limitations by providing novel, tighter error bounds for
GPR under bounded support noise, enhancing their applicability in safety-critical domains.
In this paper, we present novel error bounds for GPR under
bounded support noise. Our key insight is that two factors
contribute to the regression error: the error due to GP mean
prediction at a point without noise, and the error due to noise
perturbing the noise-free prediction by a factor proportional
to the noise’s support. Then, by relying on concentration
inequalities and assuming the latent function has low complexity in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) corresponding to the GP kernel, we derive both probabilistic (i.e.,
with some confidence) and deterministic bounds on these
error terms. Specifically, we use convex optimization and
Hoeffding’s Inequality to obtain accurate bounds. We demonstrate that these errors are substantially tighter than existing
bounds, as depicted in Figure 1. Furthermore, our bounds are
particularly well-suited for GPs with neural network kernels,
such as Deep Kernel Learning (DKL). We also illustrate how
these bounds can be combined with stochastic barrier functions (Kushner 1967; Santoyo, Dutreix, and Coogan 2021),
which are a generalization of Lyapunov functions, to quantify
the safety probability of an unknown control system from
finite data. We validate our approach through several benchmarks and comparisons, showing that our bounds are consistently smaller than the state-of-the-art, resulting in more
accurate safety certification of control systems.
The key contributions of this work are three-fold: (i) derivation of novel probabilistic and deterministic error bounds for
GP regression with bounded support noise, (ii) demonstration of the application of these bounds with stochastic barrier

