The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gaussian Graphical Modelling Without Independence Assumptions for
Uncentered Data
Bailey Andrew, David R Westhead, Luisa Cutillo
University of Leeds
sceba@leeds.ac.uk, D.R.Westhead@leeds.ac.uk, L.Cutillo@leeds.ac.uk

where we condition over all other variables in the dataset D,
def
i.e. where z = D\x\y = D − {x, y}.

Abstract
The independence assumption between random variables is a
useful tool to increase the tractability of a modelling framework. However, this assumption can be too simplistic; failing to take dependencies into account can cause models to
fail dramatically. The field of multi-axis graphical modelling
(also called multi-way modelling, Kronecker-separable modelling) has seen growth over the past decade, but these models require that the data have zero mean. In the multi-axis
case, inference is typically done in the single sample scenario,
making mean inference impossible.
In this paper, we demonstrate how the zero-mean assumption
can cause egregious modelling errors for Kronecker-sumdecomposable Gaussian graphical models, as well as propose a relaxation to the zero-mean assumption that allows
the avoidance of such errors. Specifically, we propose the
“Kronecker-sum-structured mean” assumption, which leads
to models with nonconvex-but-unimodal log-likelihoods that
can be solved efficiently with coordinate descent.

def

x⊥
⊥ y | z ⇐⇒ P [x, y | z] = P [x | z] P [y | z]
Conditional dependency graphs have several convenient
properties. They are interpretable, and intuitively capture the
‘direct effect’ of two variables on each other (rather than ‘indirect effects’ passing through confounders and mediators).
They are typically sparse, and are related to causality1 . They
also have a very useful property in multivariate Gaussian
datasets, namely that two Gaussian variables are conditionally independent if and only if the corresponding term in the
inverse covariance matrix is zero.
Gaussian

⊥ y | D\x\y ⇐⇒ Σ−1
x⊥
xy = 0
The inverse covariance matrix is also called the precision
matrix, and we will denote it Ψ. It can be interpreted as an
adjacency matrix for the graph of conditional dependencies.
Due to this convenient correspondence, and due to the fact
that practically all multi-axis work has so far been limited
to the Gaussian case, we will assume in this paper that our
data is Gaussian. This type of model, without the Gaussian
assumption, is more generally known as a Markov random
field.
Through tools such as the Nonparanormal Skeptic (Liu
et al. 2012), this assumption can be weakened to the Gaussian copula assumption (intuitively, the variables have arbitrary continuous marginals but still interact ‘Gaussian-ly’).
When making independence assumptions, this problem is
solved by well-known methods such as the Graphical Lasso
(Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2008). However, independence assumptions are often false in practice. They become
particularly egregious in the case of omics data, such as single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq). These datasets take
the form of a cells-by-genes matrix. We might be interested
in a gene regulatory network, in which case we assume the
cells are independent. Alternatively, we might be interested

Code — https://github.com/BaileyAndrew/Noncentral-KSNormal

Introduction
We often wish to find networks (‘graphs’) that describe our
data. For example, we may be interested in gene regulatory
networks in biology, or social interaction networks in epidemiology. In these cases, the graph itself is an object of
interest. When the goal of an analysis does not involve a
graph, the creation of one can still be useful as a preprocessing step for further insights, such as for clustering. Their
use is not limited to clustering; the first step of the popular dimensionality reduction method UMAP, for example,
is to create a (typically nearest neighbors) graph (McInnes,
Healy, and Melville 2020), but one could also experiment
with other graphs.
While there are many types of graphs, this paper will focus on conditional dependency graphs. Intuitively, two vertices are connected in such a graph if they are still statistically dependent after conditioning out the other variables.
We denote the property that x and y are conditionally inde⊥ y | z. We will focus on the case
pendent, given z, as x ⊥

1
Under modest assumptions, that can be violated in some realworld scenarios, conditional dependency graphs form the ‘skeleton’ of a causal directed acyclic graph, i.e. the causal graph with
directionality removed.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15391

