The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable, Sustainable, Generalizable, and Responsible AI for Public Sector
Zheyuan Ryan Shi
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
ryanshi@pitt.edu

Talk Outline

Part 2: Bandit Data-Driven Optimization As we
worked on these applied AI for public sector projects, we realized that many of them have shared technical challenges.
As one such example, we proposed Bandit Data-Driven Optimization as the first iterative prediction-prescription framework to address four major pain points in AI for public sector applications (Shi et al. 2022): small data, uniform embedded interventions, incomplete policy objectives, and unintended consequences. We proposed a no-regret algorithm
called PRedict-then-Optimize with Optimism in Face of uncertainty, and showed that it consistently outperforms bandit
baseline by a margin of 15%-300%.

AI for public sector research is about using AI to tackle
the numerous challenges faced by public sector organizations when they are out there making our world a better
place. AI for public sector research is use-inspired research.
It differs from traditional AI research first and foremost in
its key objective being measurable societal impact. AI for
public sector research contributes to the computing community by proposing new problem models, raising complexities
that challenge abstractions which often leads to new methodologies, and introducing new contexts for evaluation. However, fulfilling this promise is easier said than done. This
talk consists of three parts about our preliminary work in
our long-term quest to make AI for public sector operationally scalable, financially sustainable, technically generalizable, and socially responsible. We will cover (1) a
concrete AI for public sector project from problem scoping to field trials and deployment, (2) a generalizable algorithm applicable to various public sector domains, and (3) an
overview of our work in a wide variety of applications.

Part 3: The Big Picture and Future Directions We will
conclude the talk with an overview of our work and future
directions. Alongside completing the first survey of AI for
good (Shi, Wang, and Fang 2020), we have worked on other
applications such as environmental conservation with successful real-world deployment, and made methodological
contributions in game theory and sequential decision making. Since starting the faculty position in 2024, we have established collaborations with five different nonprofit organizations working in agriculture, healthcare, education, and
food security. With these efforts, we hope to prove in the
near future that it is possible to achieve scalable, sustainable,
generalizable, and responsible AI for public sector research.

Part 1: Volunteer Engagement for Food Security Food
waste and food insecurity arise simultaneously in many parts
of the world. Food rescue organizations (FR) handle realtime food donations and match them to organizations that
serve underprivileged communities. FRs rely on volunteers
to transport the food, yet they also bring uncertainty. With
412 Food Rescue (412FR), we formulated a data-driven optimization problem to suggest when FRs should send push
notifications to advertise the rescue (Shi et al. 2020). We
then designed an online rescue-specific recommender algorithm to advertise each rescue to volunteers through push
notifications (Shi, Lizarondo, and Fang 2021). We also designed large language model-based algorithm to predict and
present rescue difficulty to volunteers (Shi et al. 2024). A
randomized controlled trial with 412FR showed that our algorithm significantly improved the notification hit rate by
44% and rescue claim rate by 9%. The algorithm has now
been fully integrated into 412FR’s management platform,
engaging over 45,000 volunteers, helping the food insecure
population served by over 8,000 community organizations,
facilitating over 6 million meals delivered per year.

References
Shi, Z. R.; Lizarondo, L.; and Fang, F. 2021. A recommender system for crowdsourcing food rescue platforms. In
Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, 857–865.
Shi, Z. R.; Wang, C.; and Fang, F. 2020. Artificial
intelligence for social good: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.01818.
Shi, Z. R.; Wu, Z. S.; Ghani, R.; and Fang, F. 2022. Bandit
Data-Driven Optimization for Crowdsourcing Food Rescue
Platforms. In AAAI, volume 36, 12154–12162.
Shi, Z. R.; Yuan, Y.; Lo, K.; Lizarondo, L.; and Fang, F.
2020. Improving Efficiency of Volunteer-Based Food Rescue Operations. IAAI.
Shi, Z. R.; Zhi, J.; Zeng, S.; Zhang, Z.; Kapoor, A.; Hudson,
S.; Shen, H.; and Fang, F. 2024. Predicting and Presenting
Task Difficulty for Crowdsourcing Food Rescue Platforms.
In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2024.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28728

