The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Multimodal Sentiment Analysis via Hierarchical Correlation Modeling
with Semantic Distribution Constraints
Qinfu Xu1 , Yiwei Wei2 * , Chunlei Wu1 , Leiquan Wang1 , Shaozu Yuan3 ,
Jie Wu1 , Jing Lu1 , Hengyang Zhou2
1

Qingdao Institute of Software, College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)
2
China University of Petroleum (Beijing) at Karamay, 3 JD AI Research
xqfupc@163.com, weiyiwei@cupk.edu.cn
Abstract

Audio noises &
Stuttering segment

Sentiment analysis is rapidly advancing by utilizing various data modalities (e.g., text, video, and audio). However,
most existing techniques only learn the atomic-level features that reflect strong correlations, while ignoring more
complex compositions in multimodal data. Moreover, they
also neglected the incongruity in semantic distribution among
modalities. In light of this, we introduce a novel Hierarchical Correlation Modeling Network (HCMNet), which enhances the multimodal sentiment analysis by exploring both
the atomic-level correlations based on dynamic attention reasoning and the composition-level correlations through topological graph reasoning. In addition, we also alleviate the
impact of distributional inconsistencies between modalities
from both atomic-level and composition-level perspectives.
Specifically, we first design an atomic-level contrastive loss
that constrains the semantic distribution across modalities to
mitigate the atomic-level inconsistency. Then, we design a
graph optimal transport module that integrates transport flows
with different graphs to constrain the composition-level semantic distribution, thus reducing the inconsistency of compositional nodes. Experiments on three public benchmark
datasets have demonstrated the superiority of the proposed
model over the state-of-the-art methods.

Blurred or Repetitive
Utterance Frames

It's just a privilege to
watch your mind in
work.

Multimodal data exhibits weak correlations Misalignment between Video, Text and Audio

Video

Text Audio

Video
It's just a privilege
to watch your mind...

Text
Audio

Happy

Sad

Neutral Anger Excited Frustrated

Figure 1: Illustration of hierarchical correlation modeling
and the semantic distributions. Up: shows the complexity
of multimodal correlations. Previous MSA methods tend to
learn atomic-level correlations between modalities, ignoring
the composition-level modeling that aims to capture weak
but vital correlations. Down: shows the semantic distribution of a case obtained by unimodal classification, which indicates the incongruity between unimodal semantics.

Introduction
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA), a challenging but
significant research topic, has gained increasing attention
and more scientific efforts owing to its facility to convey
emotions and views of individuals (Veltmeijer, Gerritsen,
and Hindriks 2021; Zhang, He, and Lu 2019; Song et al.
2021). It aims to learn emotional information from mixed
data containing multiple modalities (e.g., text, video, and
audio) and make judgments based on psychological categorization. Current methods (Hu et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2022;
Hu et al. 2022; Shi and Huang 2023; Tu et al. 2024) that
aim to learn efficient emotional representations for MSA
heavily rely on the hypothesis that different modalities exhibit evident correlations and design diversified fusion methods, which facilitates the cross-modal representation for final prediction. Some of the previous approaches (Hu et al.
2021; Chudasama et al. 2022; Shi and Huang 2023) employ

advanced attention mechanisms to integrate strong correlations for emotion modeling. Other studies (Hu et al. 2022;
Yang et al. 2023) focus on designing unified solutions for
dual granularity emotion recognition. With the equipment of
fine-grained multimodal content modeling, they have constantly promoted correlation mining for MSA task.
Although promising, they still suffer from two limitations.
On the one hand, most of the existing methods only consider the atomic-level correlations between different modalities (Hu et al. 2021; Chudasama et al. 2022; Yang et al.
2023) and ignore the importance of multi-granularity alignments (e.g., granularity such as frames, and relations between video frames or audio segments), which have been
proven to be effective in other related multi-modal tasks,
such as cross-modal retrieval (Li et al. 2021) and imagesentence matching (Xu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020). The
hierarchical structures of both texts and other modalities advocate for weak correlation modeling. By exploring com-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21788

