The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Solving Epistemic Logic Programs Using Generate-and-Test with Propagation
Jorge Fandinno1 , Lute Lillo1,2
1

University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA
2
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA
jfandinno@unomaha.edu
elillopo@uvm.edu

Abstract

ing about attack trees and graphs (Fandinno, Faber, and Gelfond 2022). It is worth noting that the computational complexity of ELPs is higher than that of ASP: the problem of
determining whether an ELP has a solution (called worldview) is ΣP
3 -complete (Truszczynski 2011), one level higher
in the polynomial hierarchy than the complexity deciding
whether an objective program has a stable model (Dantsin
et al. 2001). Hence, the development of efficient tools to
solve ELPs, called ELP solvers, is crucial for exploiting
the high expressivity capabilities of ELPs in practice. Existing ELP solvers can be classified in three categories:
post-processing-based, generate-and-test-based, and translational-based. Early solvers were post-processing-based as
they use an ASP solver to compute all stable models of
some objective (or non-epistemic) program that are postprocessed to obtain its worldviews (see Leclerc and Kahl
2018 for a survey). Generate-and-test-based solvers on the
other hand use two instances of an ASP solver—one to generate candidate worldviews and another to check whether
they are indeed worldviews—avoiding the generation of
all stable models in most practical cases (Son et al. 2017;
Cabalar et al. 2020). Translational-based solvers translate
ELPs into an alternative language that matches the computational complexity of ELPS such as non-ground objective programs with large rules (Bichler, Morak, and Woltran
2020) or ASP with Quantifiers (Faber and Morak 2023). Existing generate-and-test and translational based solvers outperform post-processing based solvers in existing benchmarks (Leclerc and Kahl 2018; Cabalar et al. 2020), while
the literature lacks clear evidence when comparing generate-and-test and translational based solvers. Our own experiments show that existing generate-and-test-based solvers
outperform existing translational-based solvers (See the Experimental Evaluation Section below).

This paper introduces a general framework for generate-andtest-based solvers for epistemic logic programs that can be
instantiated with different generator and tester programs. It
proves sufficient conditions on those programs for the correctness of the solvers built using this framework. It also introduces a new generator program that incorporates the propagation of epistemic consequences and shows that this can
exponentially reduce the number of candidates that need to
be tested while only incurring a linear overhead. We implement a new solver based on these theoretical findings and
experimentally show that it outperforms existing solvers by
achieving a ∼3.3x speed-up and solving 91% more instances
on well-known benchmarks.

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a declarative programming language well-suited for solving knowledge-intensive
search problems, which allows users to encode problems
such that the resulting output of the program (called stable
models or answer sets) directly corresponds to solutions of
the original problem (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988, 1991; Lifschitz 2008; Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczyński 2011; Schaub
and Woltran 2018; Lifschitz 2019). Epistemic logic programs (ELPs) extend the ASP language by allowing the use
of subjective literals in the body of rules (Gelfond 1991;
Gelfond and Przymusinska 1993; Gelfond 1994; Fandinno,
Faber, and Gelfond 2022). As an example, rules
felon ← Kbreak rule
suspect ← ¬Kbreak rule, ¬K¬break rule
encode that a person is a felon if we can determine that she
broke a rule, and she is a suspect if it cannot be determined
that she has broken it nor that she has not done so (Son et al.
2017). ELPs allow us to naturally represent problems that
involve reasoning about the lack of knowledge of agents—
as illustrated by the above example—as well as problems
laying on the second level of the polynomial hierarchy such
as conformant planning (Son et al. 2017; Kahl et al. 2020;
Cabalar, Fandinno, and Fariñas del Cerro 2019b, 2021), action reversibility (Faber, Morak, and Chrpa 2021) or reason-

In this paper, (i) we introduce a general framework for
generate-and-test-based solvers that can be instantiated with
different generator and tester programs, and we prove sufficient conditions on those programs for the correctness of
the solvers built using this framework; (ii) we instantiate
this framework with a new generator program that incorporates the propagation of epistemic consequences and prove
that this can exponentially reduce the number of candidates
that need to be tested while only incurring in a linear overhead; and (iii) we implement a new solver based on the two

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14902

