The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pioneer: Physics-informed Riemannian Graph ODE for
Entropy-increasing Dynamics
Li Sun1∗ , Ziheng Zhang1 , Zixi Wang1 , Yujie Wang1 , Qiqi Wan1 , Hao Li1 , Hao Peng2 , Philip S. Yu3
1

North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
2
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL 60607, USA
ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn; zhangzh@ncepu.edu.cn; psyu@uic.edu
Abstract
Dynamic interacting system modeling is important for understanding and simulating real world systems. The system is
typically described as a graph, where multiple objects dynamically interact with each other and evolve over time. In recent
years, graph Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) receive
increasing research attentions. While achieving encouraging
results, existing solutions prioritize the traditional Euclidean
space, and neglect the intrinsic geometry of the system and
physics laws, e.g., the principle of entropy increasing. The
limitations above motivate us to rethink the system dynamics from a fresh perspective of Riemannian geometry, and
pose a more realistic problem of physics-informed dynamic
system modeling, considering the underlying geometry and
physics law for the first time. In this paper, we present a novel
physics-informed Riemannian graph ODE for a wide range of
entropy-increasing dynamic systems (termed as Pioneer). In
particular, we formulate a differential system on the Riemannian manifold, where a manifold-valued graph ODE is governed by the proposed constrained Ricci flow, and a manifold
preserving Gyro-transform aware of system geometry. Theoretically, we report the provable entropy non-decreasing of
our formulation, obeying the physics laws. Empirical results
show the superiority of Pioneer on real datasets.

(a) Euclidean Modeling

(b) Riemannian Modeling

Figure 1: Illustrated example on Earth’s system. Traditional
Euclidean models expose to generate unrealistic trajectory
as in (a), while we preserve the manifold geometry as in (b).
On the one hand, previous studies prioritize the traditional
Euclidean space, and neglect the intrinsic geometry of real
systems. We illustrate the importance of geometry awareness in Figure 1. Unaware of the geometry, traditional Euclidean models generate trajectories that extend beyond the
Earth’s surface, which is unreasonable and unrealistic. Riemannian geometry provides an elegant framework for complex systems (Sun et al. 2022b). The Earth is a 2D sphere and
does not have any isometric alternative in Euclidean space
of any dimension (O’shea 2009). Unfortunately, Riemannian
manifold has not yet been introduced to model dynamic interacting system, to the best of our knowledge.
On the other hand, real systems obey the physics laws,
e.g., the entropy-increasing principle of thermodynamics
(Mackey 1989). In contrast, existing solutions largely overlook such physics laws in dynamic modeling, and thus the
generated states are not aligned with the physics law on realworld datasets, as investigated in our Experiment. In recent
years, physics-informed neural nets (Liu and Rahnemoonfar 2024; Horie and Mitsume 2022) are to embed physics
laws to the neural model, but they primarily focus on solving Partial Differential Equations (PDEs), and cannot use for
regression or dynamical prediction yet. In Riemannian geometry, Ricci flow is off the shelf to describe system evolvement (Bai et al. 2021; Ollivier 2007), but it is not aligned
with the entropy-increasing principle (Baptista, MacArthur,
and Banerji 2024). So far, it still lacks a principled way to
incorporate the physics law with the dynamic models.

Code — https://github.com/nakks2/Pioneer

Introduction
The dynamic interacting systems are ubiquitous in the real
world, ranging from meteorology and the spread of COVID
(Huang et al. 2024) to social networks (Luo et al. 2023).
Dynamic system modeling is important for understanding
and simulating the real-world systems. In the literature, Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) (Chen et al. 2018)
show success in modeling continuous evolvement. Given
that these interacting systems are naturally represented as
graphs, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Velickovic et al.
2018) are frequently employed alongside other methods to
incorporate the intercorrelations. Recently, graph ODEs are
introduced and achieve encouraging results (Huang, Sun,
and Wang 2021). However, there are several important issues largely remaining open.
∗

Corresponding Author: Li Sun
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12586

