The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning More Expressive General Policies for Classical Planning Domains
Simon Ståhlberg1 , Blai Bonet2 , Hector Geffner1
1

RWTH Aachen University, Germany
2
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
simon.stahlberg@gmail.com, bonetblai@gmail.com, hector.geffner@ml.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

and Geffner 2018; Bonet, Francès, and Geffner 2019), while
in deep learning approaches, the features are learned using
relational versions of graph neural networks (Scarselli et al.
2009; Gilmer et al. 2017; Hamilton 2020). A shared limitation of both approaches, however, is their inability to learn
policies requiring complex logical features. This limitation
arises in description logics from the C2 fragment of firstorder logic that they capture; namely, first-order logic limited to two variables and counting (Baader et al. 2003), and
in GNNs, from the type of message passing that is accommodated, where direct communication involves pairs of objects but no triplets (Grohe 2021).
This expressive limitation, not always acknowledged, is
serious. For example, although these methods can learn general policies for guiding an agent to a specific cell in an
n × n grid containing obstacles, with positions and adjacency relations defined in terms of cells and atoms such
as AT(c) and A DJ(c, c0 ), they lack the expressive capacity
when the relations are represented with atoms like AT(x, y),
A DJ1 (x, x0 ), and A DJ2 (y, y 0 ). Similarly, these methods are
unable to learn policies for classical benchmark domains
such as Logistics and Grid, that require composition of binary relations, which is beyond the scope of C2 (Ståhlberg,
Bonet, and Geffner 2022b, 2023).
In principle, this limitation can be addressed by using
richer grammars to generate non-C2 features, in the logical
setting, or by using k-GNNs, with k = 3, on the neural setting, where triplets of objects are embedded instead of individual objects (Morris et al. 2019). It is known that 3-GNNs
have the expressive power of C3 logic, unlike the C2 expressive power of 1- and 2-GNNs (Grohe 2021). Yet 3-GNNs do
not scale up as they require cubic number of embeddings,
and quartic time for exchanging messages.
In this paper, we introduce an alternative, parameterized
version of Relational GNNs (R-GNNs). R-GNNs are designed to perform computation over relational structures,
unlike GNNs that can only process graphs. The architecture for R-GNN[t] mirrors that of plain R-GNNs and differs only in the input. While a plain R-GNNs takes the
set of atoms S representing a planning state as input,
R-GNN[t] accepts a transformed set of atoms At (S) instead. At t = 0, R-GNN[t] approximates 3-GNNs weakly,
while at t = ∞, it offers a strong approximation. Thus,
the parameter t serves to balance expressive power with

GNN-based approaches for learning general policies across
planning domains are limited by the expressive power of
C2 , namely; first-order logic with two variables and counting. This limitation can be overcame by transitioning to kGNNs, for k = 3, wherein object embeddings are substituted
with triplet embeddings. Yet, while 3-GNNs have the expressive power of C3 , unlike 1- and 2-GNNs that are confined to C2 , they require quartic time for message exchange
and cubic space to store embeddings, rendering them infeasible in practice. In this work, we introduce a parameterized
version R-GNN[t] (with parameter t) of Relational GNNs.
Unlike GNNs, that are designed to perform computation on
graphs, Relational GNNs are designed to do computation on
relational structures. When t = ∞, R-GNN[t] approximates
3-GNNs over graphs, but using only quadratic space for embeddings. For lower values of t, such as t = 1 and t = 2,
R-GNN[t] achieves a weaker approximation by exchanging
fewer messages, yet interestingly, often yield the expressivity required in several planning domains. Furthermore, the
new R-GNN[t] architecture is the original R-GNN architecture with a suitable transformation applied to the inputs only.
Experimental results illustrate the clear performance gains of
R-GNN[1] over the plain R-GNNs, and also over Edge Transformers that also approximate 3-GNNs.

Introduction
General policies are policies that can be used to solve a collection of planning problems reactively (Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu and Giacomo 2011; Belle and
Levesque 2016; Bonet and Geffner 2018; Illanes and McIlraith 2019; Jiménez, Segovia-Aguas, and Jonsson 2019). For
example, a general policy for solving all Blocksworld problems can place all blocks on the table, and then build up
the target towers from the bottom up. Yet while nearly perfect general policies have been learned for many classes of
planning domains (Toyer et al. 2020; Rivlin, Hazan, and
Karpas 2020; Ståhlberg, Bonet, and Geffner 2022a), one key
expressive limitation results from the type of features used
to classify state transitions or actions. In combinatorial approaches, features are selected from a domain-independent
pool, created using a description logic grammar (Baader
et al. 2003) based on the given domain predicates (Bonet
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26697

