The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CustomContrast: A Multilevel Contrastive Perspective For Subject-Driven
Text-to-Image Customization
Nan Chen, Mengqi Huang, Zhuowei Chen, Yang Zheng, Lei Zhang, Zhendong Mao*
University of Science and Technology of China
{chen nan, huangmq, chenzw01, zy849900389}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Subject-driven text-to-image (T2I) customization has drawn
significant interest in academia and industry. This task enables pre-trained models to generate novel images based on
unique subjects. Existing studies adopt a self-reconstructive
perspective, focusing on capturing all details of a single image, which will misconstrue the specific image’s irrelevant
attributes (e.g., view, pose, and background) as the subject intrinsic attributes. This misconstruction leads to both overfitting or underfitting of irrelevant and intrinsic attributes of the
subject, i.e., these attributes are over-represented or underrepresented simultaneously, causing a trade-off between similarity and controllability. In this study, we argue an ideal
subject representation can be achieved by a cross-differential
perspective, i.e., decoupling subject intrinsic attributes from
irrelevant attributes via contrastive learning, which allows the
model to focus more on intrinsic attributes through intraconsistency (features of the same subject are spatially closer)
and inter-distinctiveness (features of different subjects have
distinguished differences). Specifically, we propose CustomContrast, a novel framework, which includes a Multilevel
Contrastive Learning (MCL) paradigm and a Multimodal
Feature Injection (MFI) Encoder. The MCL paradigm is used
to extract intrinsic features of subjects from high-level semantics to low-level appearance through crossmodal semantic contrastive learning and multiscale appearance contrastive
learning. To facilitate contrastive learning, we introduce the
MFI encoder to capture cross-modal representations. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of CustomContrast
in subject similarity and text controllability.

Figure 1: Comparison with existing perspective. (a) Existing studies learn each subject feature with entangled redundant features (e.g., view, pose), suffering a trade-off between
similarity and controllability (redundant and intrinsic features simultaneously overfit or underfit since they are coupled together). (b) In contrast, we rethink it from a crossdifferential perspective. By using contrastive learning to ensure intra-consistency (features of the same subject are spatially closer) and inter-distinctiveness (features of different
subjects have distinguished differences), our model disentangles the subject intrinsic features from irrelevant features
for dual optimization of controllability and similarity.

code — https://cn-makers.github.io/CustomContrast/

1

of customized T2I generation lies in how to precisely generate the target subject while maximally preserving the text
controllability of the pre-trained diffusion models.
Existing customized T2I methods mainly involve two
streams: the finetune-based stream and the finetune-free
stream. The finetune-based stream (Gal et al. 2022; Ruiz
et al. 2023; Kumari et al. 2023) typically fine-tunes each new
concept. In this paper, we focus on the finetune-free stream,
which achieves real-time generation by training adapters
based on the pre-trained encoders. Early work (Wei et al.
2023; Ye et al. 2023) aims to enhance subject similarity by
injecting image embeddings into U-Net using additional visual attention. Recent studies further improve text controllability while preserving subject similarity by selectively in-

Introduction

Subject-driven text-to-image (T2I) customization aims to
empower pre-trained text-to-image models to generate images of unique subjects (e.g., objects, animals) specified by
users. Given an image of a specific subject, users can generate novel depictions of the subject in various scenes, poses,
and motions guided by target prompts. This task has drawn
rapidly growing research interests in both academia and industry because of its broad applications. The key challenge
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2123

