The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Structural Entropy Guided Probabilistic Coding
Xiang Huang1 , Hao Peng1,2 * , Li Sun3 , Hui Lin4 , Chunyang Liu5 , Jiang Cao6 , Philip S. Yu7
1

Beihang University
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy
3
North China Electric Power University
4
China Academic of Electronics and Information Technology
5
Didi Chuxing
6
Academy of Military Sciences
7
University of Illinois Chicago
{huang.xiang, penghao}@buaa.edu.cn, ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn, linhui@cetc.com.cn
liuchunyang@didiglobal.com, amscaojiang@126.com, psyu@uic.edu
2

Abstract

probability distribution. Hence, probabilistic embedding inherently accounts for the uncertainty and complexity of data
by controlling the spread of the probability density over the
learning latent space (Oh et al. 2019), showcasing better discriminative ability and robustness.
The mainstream probabilistic embedding methods are
grounded in the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000; Tishby and Zaslavsky
2015). IB aims to find compressed representations that maintain as much information as possible for the prediction task
while removing as much irrelevant information as possible.
Specifically, it seeks the latent representation Z that is maximally informative about the target Y (i.e., maximize mutual information I(Y ; Z)) while being minimally informative about the input data X (i.e., minimize mutual information I(X; Z)) (Sun et al. 2022). The former target is typically achieved with common task losses like cross entropy
(CE) loss or mean squared error (MSE) loss, whereas various regularization losses are proposed for the latter goal.
VIB (Alemi et al. 2017) assumes the prior distribution of
Z is the standard normal distribution and utilizes Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to regularize the learning distribution p(z|x). Sparse IB (Chalk, Marre, and Tkacik 2016)
changes the prior distribution of VIB to the Student-t distribution to achieve relevant and sparse coding. MEIB (An,
Jammalamadaka, and Chong 2023) lifts the prior distribution constraint of VIB and instead uses maximum conditional entropy H(Z|X) as the only regularization. SPC (Hu
et al. 2024) omits the decoder of VIB and proposes an additional structured regularization that encourages class-level
uniformity within the latent space under the multivariate
Gaussian distribution. However, all of them focus solely on
the individual latent variable Z or the constraint of Z with
the label Y , neglecting the structural information between
latent variables.
In recent years, structural entropy theory (Li and Pan
2016) has demonstrated its advantage in capturing hierarchical structural information and has been widely used in
various fields like node classification (Duan et al. 2024),
graph structural learning (Zou et al. 2023), and contrastive
learning (Wu et al. 2023). It considers the structural infor-

Probabilistic embeddings have several advantages over deterministic embeddings as they map each data point to a distribution, which better describes the uncertainty and complexity of data. Many works focus on adjusting the distribution
constraint under the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle
to enhance representation learning. However, these proposed
regularization terms only consider the constraint of each latent variable, omitting the structural information between latent variables. In this paper, we propose a novel structural
entropy-guided probabilistic coding model, named SEPC.
Specifically, we incorporate the relationship between latent
variables into the optimization by proposing a structural entropy regularization loss. Besides, as traditional structural information theory is not well-suited for regression tasks, we
propose a probabilistic encoding tree, transferring regression
tasks to classification tasks while diminishing the influence
of the transformation. Experimental results across 12 natural
language understanding tasks, including both classification
and regression tasks, demonstrate the superior performance
of SEPC compared to other state-of-the-art models in terms
of effectiveness, generalization capability, and robustness to
label noise.

Code — https://github.com/SELGroup/SEPC

Introduction
Probabilistic embedding (Vilnis and McCallum 2015) is
a flexible representation learning method aiming to learn
the underlying probability distribution of data. It has been
broadly applied to various domains such as graph structural
learning (Sun et al. 2022), computer vision (Kim et al. 2021;
Oh et al. 2019; Shi and Jain 2019; Fischer 2020), and natural language processing (Mahabadi, Belinkov, and Henderson 2021; Hu et al. 2024, 2022). In contrast to deterministic
embedding (Dong, Yan, and Wang 2024; Xu et al. 2024),
which maps the input into a fixed latent variable representation, probabilistic embedding represents each data point as a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17467

