The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Elusive Clues in Knowledge Learning by Contrasting Attention of
Language Models
Jian Gao2 , Xiao Zhang1 , Miao Li1,B , Ji Wu1,3,4
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Department of Energy and Power Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
College of AI, Tsinghua University
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
{gaojian21, xzhang19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{miao-li, wuji ee}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Causal language models acquire vast amount of knowledge
from general text corpus during pretraining, but the efficiency
of knowledge learning is known to be unsatisfactory, especially when learning from knowledge-dense and small-sized
corpora. The deficiency can come from long-distance dependencies which are hard to capture by language models, and
overfitting to co-occurrence patterns and distracting clues in
the training text. To address these issues, the paper proposes a
method to enhance knowledge learning during language model
pretraining, by enhancing elusive but important clues in text
discovered by the language model themselves. We found that
larger language models pay more attention to non-obvious
but important clues, which are often overlooked by smaller
language models. Therefore, we can identify these clues by
contrasting the attention weights of large and small language
models. We use the identified clues as a guide to perform
token-dropout data augmentation on the training text, and
observed a significant boost in both small and large models’
performance in fact memorization. This shows that the behavior contrast between more and less-performant language
models contains important clues for knowledge learning, and
it can be “amplified” for a straight-forward improvement in
knowledge learning efficiency.

Code —
https://github.com/tsinghua-msiip/contrasting attention

Introduction
Pretrained large language models have shown impressive performance on a wide variety of downstream tasks (Ouyang
et al. 2022; Chung et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023). To
achieve good generalization, these models need to be trained
on web-scale corpora that are diverse and large enough to
capture the complexity of natural language. Unfortunately, it
is observed that when training corpora is limited in size or
style variation, language models can struggle to generalize
the information learned from the corpora (Zhu and Li 2023).
This deficiency poses a challenge for injecting knowledge
into pretrained language models via continual pretraining
(finetuning). In many domains, the available corpora is often
limited and knowledge-dense (e.g., in forms of textbooks,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23905

manuals, documentations). Such domain text may be difficult to be utilized effectively in finetuning, and the language
models may not be able to effectively generalize the domain
knowledge to downstream domain tasks.
Not very much is known about the causes of such deficiency in knowledge learning. One likely cause is overfitting
to co-occurrence patterns in the limited training text, causing
learning of spurious correlations instead of correct factual
associations. Another possible reason is the difficulty of capturing long-range dependencies in text, which are crucial
for understanding complex relationships. Such deficiency is
sometimes a result of intentional design choice in the model
architecture, such as the decay of attention weights in the
RoPE (Su et al. 2024) positional encodings.
One possible route to understanding this phenomenon is
via the attention module in language models. The attention
mechanism is a key component that allows the model to focus
on different parts of the input when making predictions. The
attention weights are shown to be interpretable and explaining
the model’s behaviors (Clark et al. 2019).
Recently, Yüksekgönül et al. (2023) show that when predicting factual information, models are less likely to attend
to the correct clue if the model does not know about the fact.
This implies that for new knowledge unknown to the model,
the model may not be able to attend to the correct clue at first,
leading to difficulty in associating the correct clue (e.g., the
head entity) with the prediction target (the tail entity).
To help language models learn, especially smaller models,
a common approach is to use knowledge distillation (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015) (or teacher-student method) to transfer knowledge from a larger model. Given a learning goal, a
more performant language model such as GPT-4 (OpenAI
2023) is often used to generate training data for the smaller
model (Xu et al. 2024). A main drawback of this approach is
that it requires the larger model to be already capable of the
task or already have the knowledge. This make it not suitable
for learning novel knowledge, such as new facts from an
evolving domain. Also, it can only help the smaller model to
learn but cannot help the larger model.
In this paper, we propose a simple method to enhance factual knowledge learning in continual pretraining, with the
help of a pair of larger and smaller models. Our method is effective in learning novel facts and can boost the performance

