The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Statistical Model-driven Similarity Hashing: Bridging Modalities for Efficient
Unsupervised Retrieval
Mingjin Kuai1 , Jun Long2 , Zhan Yang2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
2
Big Data Institute, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
{kuaimingjin, junlong, zyang22}@csu.edu.cn

Abstract

to bridge the gap between modalities. Cross-modal hash retrieval has been a popular research topic (Luo et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2024b; Sun et al. 2024c) aiming to search for semantically similar instances from different modalities, e.g., given
one modality (e.g., image) as a query, to retrieve the similar
instances in another modality (e.g., text).
Existing cross-modal hashing can be broadly classified
into supervised and unsupervised methods based on whether
or not semantic labels are used. For supervised methods (Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024a;
Chen et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2024b), mainly high quality semantic labels are used to generate hash codes. However, due
to the expensive human cost as well as the large amount of
time required to obtain correct and reasonable labels (Han
et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022), they cannot be applied on a
large scale in the real world. Since deep neural networks (He
et al. 2016; Radford et al. 2021) have excellent nonlinear
feature extraction capabilities for multi-modal data, many
unsupervised deep cross-modal hashing methods have been
proposed to avoid relying on large amounts of labelled data.
Recent works have focused on constructing unified similarity matrices to guide the learning of hash cods. For example, DJSRH (Su and Zhang 2019), achieves substantial improvement by constructing a novel joint semantic affinity
matrix to integrate the original neighbourhood information
from different modalities. However, the integration methods
are redundant and sub-optimal, involving much unimportant
information. Meanwhile, they ignore the noisy adjacent correlations between multi-modal instances, which may result
in hash codes that lack discriminative power. Therefore, in
order to improve the guidance of similarity signals, similarity enhancement schemes such as DAEH (Shi et al. 2022),
CIRH (Zhu et al. 2023), and HEH (Zhong et al. 2023) have
been proposed. However, to the best of our knowledge, existing work has not utilized statistical laws to improve it.
Therefore, in order to improve the retrieval performance
of unsupervised methods, we need to focus on solving the
following two challenges: on the one hand, it is to effectively
fuse the multi-modal similarity information when considering the asymmetry of the elements in the textual features,
so as to preserve the intra- and inter-modal semantic correlations in generated hash codes. On the other hand, it is to
improve the discriminative power of hash codes by improving existing similarity enhancement schemes.

Unsupervised deep cross-modal hash retrieval aims to map
multi-modal features into binary hash codes without labels,
which is of interest due to its storage efficiency, query speed
and convenient applications. However, existing approaches
suffer from two main limitations: (1) Slightly insufficient
consideration of text instance similarity, along with independent or redundant fusion to learn multi-modal similarity information. (2) They ignore the noisy adjacent correlations between multi-modal instances, leading to a lack of discriminative power in the generated hash codes. To address these challenges, we propose a new approach called Statistical Modeldriven Similarity Hashing (SMSH). Specifically, we introduce Jaccard similarity when constructing the text similarity
matrix. It reduces the similarity error between text instances
while better considering the asymmetry of the elements in
the text features. After that, we integrate the original similarity information between various modalities to construct a
unified similarity matrix. The gaps between modalities are
bridged while reducing the redundant information in them.
In addition, we introduce a Statistical Model-driven Similarity Enhancement (SMSE) approach, which reduces the noise
of similarity relations between multi-modal instances by using a Gaussian Mixture Model to keep instances with lower
semantic similarity as far away from each other as possible.
Experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the excellent performance of the SMSH method.

Introduction
With the exponential growth of multi-modal digital content,
the single-modal hash retrieval (Shen et al. 2022; Dong et al.
2023) no longer meet the current information retrieval needs.
Achieving accurate and efficient cross-modal hash retrieval
from huge heterogeneous multi-modal data has become a
challenging problem, and the key to this lies in cross-modal
feature fusion. The cross-modal feature fusion process aims
to map large-scale, high-dimensional multi-modal data into
a common space and integrate them into a stable multimodal representation. Since different modal instances vary
in terms of feature representation and distribution, crossmodal hash retrieval requires exploring appropriate methods
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11977

