The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Label-Free Backdoor Attacks in Vertical Federated Learning
Wei Shen* , Wenke Huang* , Guancheng Wan, Mang Ye†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
{weishen, wenkehuang, guanchengwan, yemang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

Active Client

Attacker

Rec.
Video:

Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) involves multiple clients
collaborating to train a global model, with distributed features of shared samples. While it becomes a critical privacypreserving learning paradigm, its security can be significantly
compromised by backdoor attacks, where a malicious client
injects a target backdoor by manipulating local data. Existing attack methods in VFL rely on the assumption that the
malicious client can obtain additional knowledge about task
labels, which is not applicable in VFL. In this work, we investigate a new backdoor attack paradigm in VFL, Label-Free
Backdoor Attacks (LFBA), which does not require any additional task label information and is feasible in VFL settings.
Specifically, while existing methods assume access to task labels or target-class samples, we demonstrate that the gradients
of local embeddings reflect the semantic information of labels.
It can be utilized to construct the target poison sample set.
Besides, we uncover that backdoor triggers tend to be ignored
and under-fitted due to the learning of original features, which
hinders backdoor task optimization. To address this, we propose selectively switching poison samples to disrupt feature
learning, promoting backdoor task learning while maintaining
accuracy on clean data. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method in various settings.

User

User

Trigger

(a) Main (b) Backdoor
Task
Task

(a) Main Task
User
Likes:
Soccer

Rec.
Video:

(b) Backdoor Task

Benign Clients
Attacker

Active Client

User Local
𝐻𝑘
Model
UserDataLocal
𝑚
Data Model 𝐻

𝐻𝑚 & 𝐻𝑘

Predicts

Global Classifier

Figure 1: An Example of Backdoor Attacks in VFL. Consider
the short video platform collaborates with the e-commerce
company for recommending videos. The e-commerce company can act as the attacker to induce the target output of
specific advertisement recommendations.

Code — https://github.com/shentt67/LFBA/

1

Introduction

Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) (Hardy et al. 2017; Yang
et al. 2019, 2023) has become a significant privacy-preserving
collaboration paradigm. It involves training a global model
with distributed features but shared samples across different
clients, with only one client owning the task labels. Compared with Horizontal Federated Learning (HFL), where
clients possess the same feature space (McMahan et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023, 2024a,b;
Huang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024b; Tan et al. 2024), VFL
has shown promising results and applications particularly in
cross-domain applications (Song et al. 2021; Huang, Wang,
and Han 2023; Yan et al. 2024). However, despite adhering
to privacy protocols, VFL remains vulnerable to security
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20389

concerns, especially with malicious attacks when the trustworthiness of participants is uncertain. A crucial concern lies
in the backdoor attacks (Liu et al. 2021b; Chen et al. 2023,
2024), which involve maliciously adding triggers to the data
and inducing the target output. In VFL, the malicious client
can introduce a backdoor by altering the local raw features
to control the model behavior. For example, as shown in Figure 1, in a collaboration between a short video platform and
an e-commerce platform, the e-commerce platform can inject
backdoors into the VFL model and induce target recommendations in the short video platform by adding triggers.
While backdoor attacks introduce security vulnerabilities in
VFL, thoroughly investigating backdoor attacks in VFL is
crucial for developing effective security measures. Unlike
HFL scenarios where attackers have full access to samples
and corresponding labels (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017;
Li et al. 2022), executing backdoor attacks in VFL presents
unique challenges: attackers lack access to task labels, complicating the execution of backdoor attacks. Existing research

