The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffusionREC: Diffusion Model with Adaptive Condition for Referring
Expression Comprehension
Jingcheng Ke1 , Waikeung Wong2 * , Jia Wang3 , Mu Li4 , Lunke Fei1 , Jie Wen4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Technology, GuangZhou, China
2
School of Fashion and Textiles, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
3
College of Medical Information Engineering, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
freedom6927@gmail.com, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk, {jiawangmq, limuhit}@gmail.com, {flksxm, jiewen pr}@126.com
Abstract
The objective of referring expression comprehension (REC)
is to accurately identify the object in an image described
by a given expression. Existing REC methods, including
transformer-based and graph-based approaches among others, have shown robust performance in REC tasks. In this
study, we present a groundbreaking framework named DiffusionREC for REC task. This framework reimagines the REC
task as a text-guided bounding box denoising diffusion process, through which noisy bounding boxes are refined and
distilled to pinpoint the target box. Throughout the training
process, the bounding box of the target object diffuses from
its ground-truth position towards a random distribution. Simultaneously, a filtering-based object decoder is introduced
to reverse this diffusion of noise, conditional on the provided
expression, the result from previous denoised step and the interaction between the expression and the image. At the inference stage, we begin by randomly generating a collection of
boxes. Subsequently, the filtering-based object decoder is iteratively employed to refine and prune these bounding boxes,
taking into account aforementioned conditions. Extensive experiments on five datasets show that DiffusionREC not only
effectively addresses the limitations of existing REC methods
but also surpasses them, delivering superior performance.

Figure 1: The operation of DiffusionREC involves a forward and backward process. In the forward phase, bounding
boxes are progressively added to the image until they completely encompass it. During the backward phase, the expression, vision-language features from our visual-linguistic
transformer encoder, and previous results are combined and
fed into the adaptive condition module for fine-tuning. This
refined condition then steers the decoder to effectively adjust the positions of bounding boxes and eliminate irrelevant
bounding boxes.

Introduction

identified by an accompanying expression. REC aims to precisely locate the object described by the expression. For example, when provided with the expression “man in blue on
the leftmost side,” the goal of REC is to accurately localize
the said “man in blue”, ensuring that his position is consistent with the textual description in the associated image or
video (Fang et al. 2024b,a).
Although recent state-of-the-art REC methods have
shown improvements in performance, they still face two notable issues. Firstly, some of them (i.e. transformer-based
REC methods) depend on a set of predetermined learnable
queries. These approaches often face challenges in achieving
convergence because they require attention on a specific region throughout the entire image. Furthermore, these methods are sub-optimal when dealing with small-sized target
objects. Secondly, the remainder (i.e., two-stage REC methods) rely on the performance of the detector. If the detector
fails to accurately identify the location of the object, these
methods cannot correctly localize the intended object. Re-

Artificial intelligence technologies are extensively utilized
in real-world applications (Li et al. 2024a,b; Yang, Che,
and Leung 2025; Jia-Mu Sun and Gao 2024). Among these
applications, joint vision-language representation learning
has emerged as a dynamic research area within computer
vision, offering numerous applications such as referring
expression comprehension (REC) (Hamilton et al. 2024;
Zhang, Luo, and Lei 2024), referring expression generation (REG) (Sun et al. 2023a), referring expression segmentation (RES) (Liang et al. 2022), visual question answering (Dancette et al. 2023), image captioning (Luo et al.
2023), tracking (Tianyang Xu and Wu 2023) and scene understanding (Peng et al. 2023).
In these facets, REC plays a pivotal and integrative role
in the joint visual-textual interpretation of a target object
* Corresponding Author: Waikeung Wong.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4221

