The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Is Your Autonomous Vehicle Safe? Understanding the Threat of Electromagnetic
Signal Injection Attacks on Traffic Scene Perception
Wenhao Liao1 * , Sineng Yan1 * , Youqian Zhang2† , Xinwei Zhai1 , Yuanyuan Wang1 ,
Eugene Fu3
1
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong S.A.R., China
3
The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong S.A.R., China
liaowenhao23@email.szu.edu.cn, yansineng2023@email.szu.edu.cn, you-qian.zhang@polyu.edu.hk,
zhaixinwei2022@email.szu.edu.cn, yywang@szu.edu.cn, eugenefu@eduhk.hk
2

Abstract

“Planning”, and “Control”. The perception module gathers
input data through sensors such as cameras, LiDARs, and
radars, then employs artificial intelligence (AI) to accurately
interpret road markings, vehicles, pedestrians, and other environmental elements for further processing. The planning
module uses this environmental understanding to generate
driving strategies, such as motion trajectories, while the control module converts these strategies into control commands
to steer wheels so as to achieve autonomous driving.
The perception module is arguably the most critical,
which serves as the fundamental component and directly
influences the decisions made by the other modules. It is
thus the primary target of adversarial attacks (Guesmi et al.
2023). Of specific interest is the camera and AI models
within the perception module due to their versatility and critical role, including functions such as obstacle detection, lane
recognition, and traffic sign identification. If such a perception module is attacked, it may result in traffic accidents involving the autonomous car. For example, failing to detect
obstacles ahead, the car may not stop, leading to a catastrophic car crash. It is essential to point out that such attacks
are not imagined, and many studies have been demonstrated
to manipulate images captured by cameras through different
attack vectors, including adversarial patches/stickers, lasers,
ultrasound, and electromagnetic interference (detailed discussion is presented in the Related Work).
Among these attacks, one emerging and concerning threat
is Electromagnetic Signal Injection Attack (ESIA) (Köhler,
Baker, and Martinovic 2022; Jiang et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2024a,b; Kang et al. 2024), a real-world attack that injects adversarial electromagnetic signals into the camera circuits, causing malicious image distortion, e.g., color strips
as shown in Figure 1. Jiang et al. (2023), and Zhang et al.
(2024b) provided a detailed workflow and error modeling of
ESIA, demonstrating and confirming that ESIA can cause
color strips. Jiang et al. (2023) also showed that it is feasible for attackers to deploy compact attack devices, as small
as a credit card, close to car cameras and trigger the attack
while the car is in operation. ESIA could mislead AI models within the autonomous driving system, leading to erroneous decisions with potentially catastrophic consequences
for road safety. Understanding the robustness and reliability

Autonomous vehicles rely on camera-based perception systems to comprehend their driving environment and make crucial decisions, thereby ensuring vehicles to steer safely. However, a significant threat known as Electromagnetic Signal Injection Attacks (ESIA) can distort the images captured by
these cameras, leading to incorrect AI decisions and potentially compromising the safety of autonomous vehicles. Despite the serious implications of ESIA, there is limited understanding of its impacts on the robustness of AI models across
various and complex driving scenarios. To address this gap,
our research analyzes the performance of different models
under ESIA, revealing their vulnerabilities to these attacks.
Moreover, due to the challenges in obtaining real-world attack data, we develop a novel ESIA simulation method and
generate a simulated attack dataset for different driving scenarios. Our research provides a comprehensive simulation
and evaluation framework, aiming to enhance the development of more robust AI models and secure intelligent systems, ultimately contributing to the advancement of safer and
more reliable technology across various fields.

Introduction
Autonomous driving is advancing at a rapid pace, and becoming a reality with real products now being used in everyday life. Notable examples, including Tesla, with its Autopilot, Google’s Waymo, Baidu’s Apollo Go, etc., exemplify
the cutting-edge autonomous driving capabilities in practice (Badue et al. 2021). However, safety concerns still hinder the public trust and constrain the widespread adoption
of autonomous driving, particularly with the potential threat
of adversarial attacks (Liu, Nikitas, and Parkinson 2020;
Ljubi and Groznik 2023; Nastjuk et al. 2020). Unlike human
drivers, autonomous vehicles can be potentially affected by
adversarial attacks, leading to inaccurate perception of driving environment, and eventually, unsafe operation (Zhang
et al. 2021b).
Figure 1 illustrates a general process of autonomous driving systems, composed of three modules: “Perception”,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27464

