The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Robust Knowledge Unlearning: An Adversarial Framework for
Assessing and Improving Unlearning Robustness in Large Language Models
†

Hongbang Yuan1,2 * , Zhuoran Jin1,2 * , Pengfei Cao1,2 , Yubo Chen1,2 , Kang Liu1,2 , Jun Zhao1,2
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{hongbang.yuan, zhuoran.jin, pengfei.cao, yubo.chen , kliu, jzhao} @nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

These unwanted behaviors introduce security concerns and
information hazards, hindering the deployment of LLMs in
real-world scenarios (Patil, Hase, and Bansal 2024).
To eliminate the influence of problematic content in the
corpora on LLMs, machine unlearning has emerged as a
promising solution (Eldan and Russinovich 2023; Yao, Xu,
and Liu 2024; Liu et al. 2024a). It transforms models to
behave as if they were never trained on certain data entries so that specific target knowledge is erased, while other
knowledge and capabilities of LLMs are preserved (Chen
and Yang 2023; Maini et al. 2024). The most fundamental
machine unlearning method is to adopt a gradient ascent
procedure on the data that needs to be forgotten to fine-tune
LLMs, reversing the original gradient descent optimization
process (Jang et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2024a; Liu et al. 2024d).
However, despite their effectiveness, the unlearned models produced by these methods are fragile and susceptible to crafted adversarial user prompts (Patil, Hase, and
Bansal 2024; Liu et al. 2024a). Particularly, the previously
unlearned knowledge resurfaces through contextual interactions (Shumailov et al. 2024). For example, after being
trained to forget the famous writer J.K. Rowling, the model
fails to answer the question ‘Who is the author of Harry
Potter?’ but still outputs the correct answer to the question
‘Who created the magical world that includes Diagon Alley
and the Forbidden Forest?’. To proactively assess the vulnerability of unlearned models to these malicious prompts,
static and manually-designed adversarial prompts are used
to reintroduce the unlearned knowledge (Jin et al. 2024).
However, such a manual process is resource-intensive and
often ineffective in guaranteeing the successful reintroduction of the previously unlearned knowledge.
Therefore, we propose a dynamic and automated attack
framework, called Dynamic Unlearning Attack (DUA), to
quantitatively assess the robustness of the unlearned models. Specifically, as Figure 1(b) shows, we optimize a universal adversarial suffix that maximizes the probability of
the model generating unlearned knowledge associated with
a given unlearning target. This optimization process is performed and evaluated across various scenarios, considering
both practicality and generalization. For practicality, we
consider scenarios where the unlearned LLM is either accessible or inaccessible to the attacker. For generalization,
we consider whether the adversarial suffix trained on certain

LLM have achieved success in many fields but still troubled
by problematic content in the training corpora. LLM unlearning aims at reducing their influence and avoid undesirable behaviours. However, existing unlearning methods remain vulnerable to adversarial queries and the unlearned knowledge
resurfaces after the manually designed attack queries. As part
of a red-team effort to proactively assess the vulnerabilities
of unlearned models, we design Dynamic Unlearning Attack
(DUA), a dynamic and automated framework to attack these
models and evaluate their robustness. It optimizes adversarial
suffixes to reintroduce the unlearned knowledge in various
scenarios. We find that unlearned knowledge can be recovered in 55.2% of the questions, even without revealing the
unlearned model’s parameters. In response to this vulnerability, we propose Latent Adversarial Unlearning (LAU), a universal framework that effectively enhances the robustness of
the unlearned process. It formulates the unlearning process
as a min-max optimization problem and resolves it through
two stages: an attack stage, where perturbation vectors are
trained and added to the latent space of LLMs to recover the
unlearned knowledge, and a defense stage, where previously
trained perturbation vectors are used to enhance unlearned
model’s robustness. With our LAU framework, we obtain two
robust unlearning methods, AdvGA and AdvNPO. We conduct extensive experiments across multiple unlearning benchmarks and various models, and demonstrate that they improve
the unlearning effectiveness by over 53.5%, cause only less
than a 11.6% reduction in neighboring knowledge, and have
almost no impact on the model’s general capabilities.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable
capabilities after being trained on an extensive amount of
corpora (Chen et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2024). However, since
the training data may contain copyrighted, private, and toxic
content, LLMs inevitably learn some potentially undesirable
behaviours (Ji et al. 2024). For example, LLMs may regurgitate copyrighted material without permission (Wei et al.
2024a), generate personal information such as phone numbers or mailing addresses (Yao et al. 2024b), and even produce offensive and harmful responses (Liu et al. 2024c).
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25769

