The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Private Random Forest Prediction Using Matrix Representation
Arisa Tajima1 , Joie Wu2 , Amir Houmansadr1
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Independent Researcher
atajima@cs.umass.edu, joie.y.wu@gmail.com, amir@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

the challenge of private prediction through both DP training
and prediction approaches while maintaining high accuracy.
DP random forest classifiers have been extensively studied. Past approaches primarily differ in their use of base
tree algorithms and node splitting functions to balance privacy budget usage and accuracy (Patil and Singh 2014; Jagannathan, Pillaipakkamnatt, and Wright 2009; Fletcher and
Islam 2017, 2019; Hou et al. 2019). Regarding the treebuilding process, there are greedy approaches, where optimal split points are determined (Hou et al. 2019; Patil
and Singh 2014) and random approaches, where split attributes are chosen randomly to save privacy budget for leaf
nodes (Fletcher and Islam 2017; Jagannathan, Pillaipakkamnatt, and Wright 2009; Holohan et al. 2019). The latter
method, which we focus on, is known as random decision
trees. It is predominantly adapted in recent works for its consistently strong performance; see the comprehensive survey
by Fletcher et al. (Fletcher and Islam 2019).
While distributing the privacy budget is crucial for DP
random forests, many approaches allocate it equally among
trees (Patil and Singh 2014; Jagannathan, Pillaipakkamnatt, and Wright 2009; Fletcher and Islam 2017; Hou et al.
2019). However, this per-tree privacy analysis faces challenges when a large number of trees are used, resulting in
low accuracy despite the ensemble learning principle that
training more trees generally improves performance.
To our knowledge, no prior work has addressed DP
prediction techniques specifically for random forests.
Alternatively, a well-known model-agnostic DP prediction method—the subsample-and-aggregate framework—allocates the privacy budget equally to each
inference query (Dwork and Feldman 2018; Nissim,
Raskhodnikova, and Smith 2007). However, this heuristic
allocation results in poor accuracy when many inference
queries are required (van der Maaten and Hannun 2020).

We introduce a novel matrix representation for differentially
private training and prediction methods tailored to random
forest classifiers. Our approach involves representing each
root-to-leaf decision path in all trees as a row vector in a matrix. Similarly, inference queries are represented as a matrix.
This representation enables us to collectively analyze privacy
across multiple trees and inference queries, resulting in optimal DP noise allocation under the Laplace Mechanism. Our
experimental results show significant accuracy improvements
of up to 40% compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning services empower
users to make inference queries using deployed models
through black-box APIs. However, the outcomes of these
predictions raise concerns about potential information disclosure regarding the training data, making them vulnerable
to attacks like membership inference attacks (Shokri et al.
2017; Hu et al. 2022). To address this, differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork and Lei 2009) has emerged as a promising solution, aiming to mitigate the risk of model predictions revealing sensitive information.
Two primary DP-based approaches exist for private prediction: DP training and DP prediction (Ponomareva et al.
2023). DP training (Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate
2011; Jayaraman and Evans 2019; Abadi et al. 2016;
Fletcher and Islam 2019) integrates DP noise into model
parameters, ensuring that predictions from privately trained
models do not reveal information about the underlying training data. By contrast, DP prediction (Dwork and Feldman
2018; Nissim, Raskhodnikova, and Smith 2007; Bassily,
Thakkar, and Guha Thakurta 2018) introduces perturbations
to the predictions of non-private models. Unfortunately, despite the widespread adoption of DP in machine learning, a
significant utility-privacy gap persists between DP-enabled
machine learning and its non-private counterparts.
DP-enabled Random Forests: In this paper, we focus on
random forest classifiers—a versatile machine learning algorithm known for its strong performance with tabular data
like demographic surveys and medical records. We address

Main Contributions
Existing methods for DP training and DP prediction add suboptimal levels of noise, hampering utility. Our primary contribution lies in addressing the inefficiencies of current methods by translating random forest training and prediction
into matrix multiplication. This new representation allows
us to optimize solutions for training models and predicting
class labels under DP, introducing finer-grained noise than

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20770

