The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

APR-RD: Complemental Two Steps for Self-Supervised Real Image Denoising
Hyunjun Kim1 , Nam Ik Cho1,2 *
1

Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
hyunjun0.kim@snu.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advancements in self-supervised denoising have made
it possible to train models without needing a large amount
of noisy-clean image pairs. A significant development in this
area is the use of blind-spot networks (BSNs), which use
single noisy images as training pairs by masking some input information to prevent noise transmission to the network
output. Researchers have shown that BSNs are capable of
reconstructing clean pixels from various types of independent pixel-wise degradations, such as synthetic additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN). However, unlike synthetic noise,
real noise often contains highly correlated components which
can induce noise transmission and reduce the performance of
BSNs. To address the spatial correlation of real noise, we propose the Adjacent Pixel Replacer (APR), which decorrelates
noise without a downsampling process that is widely adopted
in previous research. The dissimilarity in our APR-generated
pairs serves as relatively different noise components during
training. Hence, it enables the BSN to block noise transmission while utilizing clean information effectively. As a result,
BSN can utilize denser information to reconstruct the corresponding center pixel. We also propose Recharged Distillation (RD) to enhance high-frequency textures without additional network modifications. This method selectively refines clean information from recharged noisy pixels during
distillation. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed method outperforms the existing state-of-theart self-supervised denoising methods in real sRGB space.

(a) Noisy Input

(b) SA (UNet)

(c) SDAP (E)

(d) C-BSN

(e) AT-BSN (D)

(f) APR (RD) (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison with recent self-supervised denoisers.
Our approach outperforms others in noise reduction and detail preservation.

involves complex degradations occurring through the incamera pipeline (Brooks et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2020). This
difference between synthetic and real-world scenarios significantly affects the performance of denoisers (Guo et al.
2019; Anwar and Barnes 2019; Kim et al. 2020).
In recent years, researchers have created real-world noise
datasets (Nam et al. 2016; Abdelhamed, Lin, and Brown
2018; Brummer and De Vleeschouwer 2019) that include
noisy images captured by cameras along with their corresponding clean images. These paired datasets have been
valuable for the development and comparison of various image denoising methods. However, creating a real noisy-clean
dataset requires a deep understanding of the Image Signal
Processor (ISP) responsible for converting data from the raw
space to the sRGB space. If the ISP in the capturing device
is biased, the denoising results obtained from these noisy
images may exhibit color shifts that deviate significantly
from the clean ground truth (GT) images. Furthermore, for
non-optical imaging systems such as electron microscopy or
medical imaging, it is often impractical to obtain real-world
clean images, unlike in the case of optical imaging cameras.

Project Page — https://github.com/HYK2017/APRRD

Introduction
Image denoising is an important task in computer vision
that has been greatly improved with the development of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Early CNN-based
denoising methods (Zhang et al. 2017; Zhang, Zuo, and
Zhang 2018; Chen and Pock 2016; Tai et al. 2017) trained
with AWGN have demonstrated better performance compared to traditional model-based methods (Dabov et al.
2007; Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005; Gu et al. 2014; Elad
and Aharon 2006). However, using a simple noise model is
not ideal for accurately representing real-world noise, which
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4257

