The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Universal Post-Processing Networks for Joint Optimization of Modules
in Task-Oriented Dialogue Systems
Atsumoto Ohashi, Ryuichiro Higashinaka
Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Japan
ohashi.atsumoto.c0@s.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp, higashinaka@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Module1

Abstract
Post-processing networks (PPNs) are components that modify the outputs of arbitrary modules in task-oriented dialogue
systems and are optimized using reinforcement learning (RL)
to improve the overall task completion capability of the system. However, previous PPN-based approaches have been
limited to handling only a subset of modules within a system,
which poses a significant limitation in improving the system
performance. In this study, we propose a joint optimization
method for post-processing the outputs of all modules using universal post-processing networks (UniPPNs), which are
language-model-based networks that can modify the outputs
of arbitrary modules in a system as a sequence-transformation
task. Moreover, our RL algorithm, which employs a modulelevel Markov decision process, enables fine-grained value and
advantage estimation for each module, thereby stabilizing
joint learning for post-processing the outputs of all modules.
Through both simulation-based and human evaluation experiments using the MultiWOZ dataset, we demonstrated that
UniPPN outperforms conventional PPNs in the task completion capability of task-oriented dialogue systems.

User

UniPPN

Module3

ModuleM

Figure 1: Diagram of UniPPN. UniPPN modifies the output
outm of Modulem to out+
m , which serves as the input for
Modulem+1 .

modules (Ohashi and Higashinaka 2022). In this approach,
instead of training the modules directly, PPNs, which are
components with trainable parameters that modify their outputs, are trained using RL. For example, Ohashi and Higashinaka (2022) implemented PPNs that post-process outputs from NLU, DST, and policy as multi-binary classification tasks using multi-layer perceptrons (referred to as
BinPPN), and demonstrated that this optimization improved
the overall task completion capability of the systems. In
addition, a large language model (LLM)-based generative
PPN (GenPPN) was proposed to post-process the natural
language output from NLG, and its effectiveness has been
demonstrated (Ohashi and Higashinaka 2023).
However, conventional PPN-based methods have two major limitations. First, BinPPN and GenPPN cannot be optimized jointly because of their different model architectures and training algorithms. Although it is possible to
post-process the outputs of all modules by combining disjointly trained BinPPNs and GenPPNs, using multiple networks that are not jointly optimized may fail to achieve sufficient performance improvement. The second limitation is
the narrow applicability of GenPPN. GenPPN aims to generate utterances that are easily understood by users and relies
on a reward function that requires feedback on whether the
DAs output from the policy are correctly conveyed to the
user. This approach cannot be applied to an end-to-end dialogue system, such as the LLM-powered model proposed
by Hudeček and Dusek (2023), which does not explicitly
output DAs, imposing significant limitations on GenPPN’s
applicability.
In this study, we propose a universal post-processing
network (UniPPN) and an optimization method that com-

Code — https://github.com/nu-dialogue/UniPPN

1

Module2

Module2

Introduction

Typical task-oriented dialogue systems process a single user
input through multiple subtasks to produce a final response.
These subtasks include (1) natural language understanding
(NLU), which estimates the user’s intent from the input; (2)
dialogue state tracking (DST), which accumulates the user’s
requests up to the current turn as a dialogue state; (3) dialogue policy (policy), which determines the next action that
the system should take as dialogue acts (DAs); and (4) natural language generation (NLG), which converts these DAs
into a final system response. Recent research has moved beyond optimizing dedicated modules for each subtask individually. It has explored the use of reinforcement learning
(RL) to train several modules based on actual dialogue experiences, thereby optimizing the overall task completion capability of the system (Ni et al. 2022; Kwan et al. 2023).
Recently, a new approach using post-processing networks
(PPNs) was proposed to optimize the task completion capability of dialogue systems without directly training the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24975

