The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tensorized Attention for Understanding Multi-Object Relationships
Makoto Nakatsuji1 , Yasuhiro Fujiwara2 , Atsushi Otsuka1 , Narichika Nomoto1 , Yoshihide Sato1
1

2

NTT Human Informatics Laboratories,
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
makoto.nakatsuji@ntt.com

Abstract

types into current two-dimensional attention mechanisms is
crucial for unlocking their latent capabilities.
An effective representation of such multi-object relationships can be achieved using tensors (Nakatsuji et al. 2016).
However, existing attention-based methods fail to utilize
tensors to represent multi-object relationships. For example, (Ma et al. 2019) introduced a Tensorized Transformer
model that incorporates a specialized self-attention encoder
layer along with the block-term tensor decomposition (BTD)
technique (De Lathauwer 2008). This approach alleviates
the computational burden by compressing the extensive
parameter set used in multi-head attention into a set of
third-order tensors through a low-rank approximation. Their
study, which focuses specifically on self-attention, however,
did not address handling relationships among more than two
types of object when computing the attention weights.
Even if we use the Tensorized Transformer (Ma et al.
2019) for attention computations among multiple object
types, we still face two limitations. First, the approach imposes a restriction that the side lengths of the core tensor
must match the dimension size of the input query. This is
because it analyzes the relationships among the query, key,
and value components by compressing them within the core
tensor, which must be cubic. As a result, when predicting
the attention output based on the query length using a cubic
tensor of this dimension size, it fails to exploit the correspondences between tokens in the query stream and those
in the attention output, leading to reduced training accuracy.
Second, this approach necessitates directly computing the
transformer output from attention weight tensors. Therefore,
it could not obtain transformations from source objects to
target objects, reducing its versatility.
This paper introduces the Tensorized Attention Model
(TAM). It addresses these limitations by extending the Tensorized Transformer (Ma et al. 2019) to incorporate attention weights among multi-object relationships. It introduces
a third object type, termed “semantic objects,” to complement the traditional query and memory objects. Specifically,
TAM modifies the existing Tensorized Transformer in two
key ways. First, TAM employs the Tucker decomposition
with a core tensor, where one side corresponds to the query
length (i.e., the explicit token length), and the other two
sides correspond to the hidden dimension sizes in the key
and semantic components. This approach aggregates infor-

Attention mechanisms have played a crucial role in the success of Transformer models, as seen in platforms like ChatGPT. However, since they compute attentions from relationships between only one or two object types, they fail to effectively capture multi-object relationships in real-world scenarios, resulting in low prediction accuracy. In fact, they cannot
calculate attention weights among diverse object types, such
as the ‘comments,’ ‘replies,’ and ‘subjects’ that naturally constitute conversations on platforms like Reddit or X, although
their relationships are simultaneously observed in real-world
contexts. To overcome this limitation, we introduce the Tensorized Attention Model (TAM), which leverages the Tucker
decomposition to calculate attention weights across various
object types and seamlessly integrates them into the Transformer models. Evaluations show that TAM significantly outperforms existing encoder methods, and its integration into
the LoRA adapter for Llama2 enhances fine-tuning accuracy.

Introduction
The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) is a
popular attention mechanism that has achieved extraordinary success in a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. In particular, BERT (Devlin et al. 2019)
is a model utilizing attention-based mechanisms and pretrained on massive datasets. Its introduction marked a significant advancement in attention-centric models, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023), Google’s Gemini (Geminiteam et al. 2023), and Meta’s LLaMA3 (Meta 2024). These
models have contributed to the evolution of attention mechanisms in NLP language models.
Current attention-based models typically focus on relationships involving only one or two object types, like query
and memory objects, as seen in self-attention or sourcetarget attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al. 2017). However, real-world interactions often involve multi-object relationships, connecting three or more object types. For instance, two connected sentences in a Wikipedia article typically share a common topic, geo-tagged tweets may trigger
replies related to specific locations, and multiple utterances
on Reddit can stem from a shared conversational context. Incorporating additional information from such diverse object
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24921

