The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FlexiTex: Enhancing Texture Generation via Visual Guidance
Dadong Jiang1,2 , Xianghui Yang2 , Zibo Zhao2 , Sheng Zhang2 , Jiaao Yu2 , Zeqiang Lai2 ,
Shaoxiong Yang2 , Chunchao Guo2 * , Xiaobo Zhou1† , Zhihui Ke1
1

Tianjin University
Tencent Hunyuan
{patrickdd, xiaobo.zhou}@tju.edu.cn, {seanxhyang, zibozhao, chunchaoguo}@tencent.com
2

Abstract

Recent diffusion models show remarkable advancements
in image generation. Noticing their potential on 3D tasks,
researchers utilize them to generate textured 3D assets by
optimization (Metzer et al. 2023; Poole et al. 2022) and inpainting (Chen et al. 2023a; Zeng et al. 2024), where they
render 3D geometry into multiple views and update each
view using rich 2D priors, However, these methods neglect
cross-view correspondence in 3D space, leaving style inconsistency and seams. Recent works (Zhang et al. 2024a; Liu
et al. 2023, 2024; Gao et al. 2024) keep the style consistent and reduce the seams by utilizing batch inference and
synchronize multi-view denoising on a shared texture, while
still leaving heavy cross-view inconsistency. We argue that
it is hard to keep cross-view alignment relying on ambiguous text prompts solely, and frequent feature aggregation introduces a serious variance bias (Liu et al. 2024), resulting
in over-smoothness. Moreover, they suffer from the Janus
problem, due to lack of geometry-aware ability and the bias
introduced by ambiguous text descriptions.

Recent texture generation methods achieve impressive results due to the powerful generative prior they leverage from
large-scale text-to-image diffusion models. However, abstract
textual prompts are limited in providing global textural or
shape information, which results in the texture generation
methods producing blurry or inconsistent patterns. To tackle
this, we present FlexiTex, embedding rich information via visual guidance to generate a high-quality texture. The core
of FlexiTex is the Visual Guidance Enhancement module,
which incorporates more specific information from visual
guidance to reduce ambiguity in the text prompt and preserve high-frequency details. To further enhance the visual
guidance, we introduce a Direction-Aware Adaptation module that automatically designs direction prompts based on different camera poses, avoiding the Janus problem and maintaining semantically global consistency. Benefiting from the
visual guidance, FlexiTex produces quantitatively and qualitatively sound results, demonstrating its potential to advance
texture generation for real-world applications.

Noticing these, we propose a simple yet effective framework to achieve high-quality, precise texture generation,
named FlexiTex, which supports text and image conditions
both. First, we mitigate the ambiguity of text descriptions
by converting them to more explicit modalities, i.e., image,
which serves as a guide during batch inference and specifies the target object more accurately. Specifically, we introduce a Visual Guidance Enhancement module upon diffusion models to convert the text into an image and inject such a more specific informative guide into the batch
inference process through cross-attention. By this, we ensure a more consistent direction during denoising and prevent variance degradation in joint sampling on the shared
latent texture. Second, we apply a Direction-Aware Adaptation module to alleviate the Janus problem, where we inject
direction prompts under different views into the model. This
module makes the model more sensitive to direction information and encourages semantic alignment between views.
Third, the proposed method is not only training-free but
also more flexible than previous methods, as it accepts image prompts straightforwardly, by which it can finish texture
transfer. This adaptability makes our framework suitable for
various geometries and provides more diversity in the generated textures. We conduct comprehensive studies and analyses involving numerous 3D objects from various sources to

Project — https://patrickddj.github.io/FlexiTex/

Introduction
The field of computer graphics aims to enhance the interaction with 3D assets, but the scarcity of high-quality 3D
assets is a significant challenge. The creation of such assets requires extensive artistic skills and is a labor-intensive
process. However, recent advancements in deep generative
models introduce a new paradigm known as Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC), revolutionizing the creation and manipulation of 3D models (Hong et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2024). Among the various aspects of asset
generation, texture generation (Chen et al. 2023a; Metzer
et al. 2023) plays a crucial role in adding expressiveness
to shapes, and finding applications in industries such as
AR/VR, film, and gaming. Furthermore, texture generation
holds the potential to overcome the limitations associated
with collecting high-quality textured 3D assets.
* Corresponding author.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3967

