The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Set-Valued Sensitivity Analysis of Deep Neural Networks
Xin Wang1 , Feilong Wang2 , Xuegang (Jeff) Ban1
1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, United States
2
School of Transportation and Logistics, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, 610032, China
xinw22@uw.edu, Flwang@swjtu.edu.cn, banx@uw.edu

Abstract

cations, such as designing effective data poisoning attacks
(Muñoz-González et al. 2017; Mei and Zhu 2015), evaluating the robustness of models (Weng et al. 2018), and understanding the impact of important features in training data on
the prediction (Koh and Liang 2017). Define a neural network f : X ⇒ Y, where X (e.g., images) is the input space
and Y (e.g., labels) is the output space. Given training data
samples x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] and y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ], and
the loss function L, the empirical risk minimizer is given
Pn
def
by ŵ = arg minw∈W n1 i=1 L (xi , yi , w). This paper assumes that we perturb only the features, keeping the label constant. The learning process from data to local minimizers thus can be formulated as a set-valued mapping
S : X n ⇒ W 1,
)
(
n
1X
def
L (xi , yi , w) . (1)
S(x) = ŵ|ŵ = arg min
w∈W n
i=1

This paper proposes a sensitivity analysis framework based
on set-valued mapping for deep neural networks (DNN) to
understand and compute how the solutions (model weights)
of DNN respond to perturbations in the training data. As a
DNN may not exhibit a unique solution (minima) and the
algorithm of solving a DNN may lead to different solutions
with minor perturbations to input data, we focus on the sensitivity of the solution set of DNN, instead of studying a single solution. In particular, we are interested in the expansion and contraction of the solution set in response to data
perturbations. If the change of solution set can be bounded
by the extent of the data perturbation, the model is said to
exhibit the Lipschitz-like property. This ‘set-to-set’ analysis
approach provides a deeper understanding of the robustness
and reliability of DNNs during training. Our framework incorporates both isolated and non-isolated minima, and critically, does not require the Hessian of loss function being nonsingular. By developing set-level metrics such as distance
between sets, convergence of sets, derivatives of set-valued
mapping, and stability across the solution set, we prove that
the solution set of the Fully Connected Neural Network holds
Lipschitz-like properties. For general neural networks (e.g.
Resnet), we also develop a novel method to estimate the new
solution set following data perturbation without retraining.

For the unperturbed dataset x̄ = [x̄1 , x̄2 , . . . , x̄n ] and w̄ ∈
S(x̄), current sensitivity analysis (Koh and Liang 2017;
Nickl et al. 2024; Christmann and Steinwart 2004) aims to
study the change of S(x̄) when an individual point x̄p is
perturbed to xp . Specifically, if the data x̄ is perturbed to
x̂ = [x̄1 , x̄2 , . . . , xp , . . . , x̄n ], the sensitivity analysis can be
conducted by examining a limit:
S (x̂) − S(x̄)
lim
.
(2)
xp →x̄p ∥xp − x̄p ∥
Most current sensitivity analysis methods for DNN suffer from the following two issues. First, to figure out the
sensitivity of solution w w.r.t. data xp , one of the most
common approaches (e.g., the influence function (Koh and
Liang 2017)) is to apply the Dini implicit function theorem
(Dontchev and Rockafellar
2009) to the optimality condition
Pn
of the model: n1 i=1 ∇w L (x̄i , ȳi , w̄) = 0, which leads to:
S (x̂) − S(x̄)
lim
= ∇x p w
xp →x̄p ∥xp − x̄p ∥
(3)
xp =x̄p

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11057

Introduction
Sensitivity analysis is a classic topic that crosses optimization (Fiacco 1983), machine learning, and deep learning (Yeung et al. 2010; Koh and Liang 2017; Christmann and Steinwart 2004). It studies how the solution of a model responds
to minor perturbations in hyperparameters or input data. For
example, Christmann and Steinwart (2004) proved that the
solution of a classification model with convex risk function
is robust to bias in the data distribution. Here we focus on
deep neural networks (DNN), for which the solution is the
weights of DNN trained (optimized) on input data. We are
concerned about how the solution of DNN responds to perturbations in the input data in the training stage of the model.
In the domain of deep learning (e.g., DNN), sensitivity
analysis has drawn attention due to its wide range of appli-

= −Hw̄−1 ∇xp ∇θ L(x̄p , ȳp , w̄),
P
n
where Hw̄−1 = n1 i=1 ∇2w L (x̄i , ȳi , w̄) is the Hessian.
However, the application of the Dini implicit function theorem cannot apply when the Hessian Hw̄ is not invertible
1
Here, X n denotes the n-fold Cartesian product of X , i.e.,
X n = X × X × · · · × X (n times).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21304

