The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training with “Paraphrasing the Original Text” Teaches LLM to Better Retrieve
in Long-Context Tasks
Yijiong Yu1 , Yongfeng Huang1 2 3 , Zhixiao Qi1 , Zhe Zhou1
1

Tsinghua University
Zhongguancun Laboratory
3
Institute for Precision Medicine, Tsinghua University
{yuyj22, qzx21, zhouzhe20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yfhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to evolve, more
are being designed to handle long-context inputs. Despite
this advancement, most of them still face challenges in accurately handling long-context tasks, often showing the “lost
in the middle” issue. We identify that insufficient retrieval
capability is one of the important reasons for this issue. To
tackle this challenge, we propose a novel approach to design
training data for long-context tasks, aiming at augmenting
LLMs’ proficiency in extracting key information from long
context. Specially, we incorporate an additional part named
“paraphrasing the original text” when constructing the answer of training samples and then fine-tuning the model.
Experimenting on LongBench and NaturalQuestions Multidocument-QA dataset with models of Llama and Qwen series, our method achieves an improvement of up to 8.48%
and 4.48% in average scores, respectively, showing effectiveness in improving the model’s performance on long-context
tasks.

1

Figure 1: Our method adds “paraphrasing the original text”
to the training samples.

context is getting longer or more complex. “Lost in the middle” refers to the phenomenon where the model’s utilization
of the context significantly weakens when the key information is located in the middle of the context. This limitation
hinders the further application of LLMs in long-context scenarios.
Long-context tasks can be divided into two categories:
short-dependency and long-dependency (Li et al. 2023b).
The former means only a small part of the long context
is truly needed for the task, while the latter means most
parts are needed. Because short-dependency tasks are usually more common and easier to study, for simplicity, in
this paper, we start with the short-dependency tasks and
mainly focus on multi-document-QA, which is one of the
most representative long-context tasks and also easy to be
constructed.
In short-dependency long-context tasks, the useful information in the context is sparse, thus the task can be regarded
as a composite task, which can be split to “first retrieval, then
another follow-up task” process, while the retrieval step is
abstract and implicit but necessary. However, we find LLMs
usually perform much worse in such composite tasks, even
if they are good at each sub-task individually.
In this case, it is natural to think that using CoT (Wei et al.
2022) prompt could help. Yet, in our experiments, despite
using CoT-like prompt, we find many LLMs still perform
poorly, which generate wrong answers just in the first step,
retrieval, even though some of them can perfectly pass “Needle in a Haystack” test, which represents qualified retrieval
ability. While in the other hand, if they retrieve correctly,
then the follow-up task becomes easier and the final answer

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently emerged as
top performers in a wide range of natural language processing tasks. Nevertheless, they are usually trained on segments
of text of a fixed length, which means they have a predetermined context window size. Typically, their performance
tends to decline markedly when the input text exceeds the
context window size.
Some classic works like Yarn (Peng et al. 2023),
LongChat (Li et al. 2023a) and LongAlpaca (Chen et al.
2023c) have explored ways to make short-context LLMs
better adaptable to long-context tasks. Based on these, recently, an increasing number of powerful LLMs have been
equipped with the capability to handle long contexts, such as
Mistral (Jiang et al. 2023a) and Qwen2 (Yang et al. 2024),
which can handling the text length of 32k or longer.
However, while LLMs have made remarkable progress in
handling long-context tasks, as shown in many evaluations
(Li et al. 2023b; An et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024), they
still lack satisfactory accuracy, and often suffer from a severe “lost in the middle” problem (Liu et al. 2024) when the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25751

