The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LNS2+RL: Combining Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Large
Neighborhood Search in Multi-Agent Path Finding
Yutong Wang1 , Tanishq Duhan1 , Jiaoyang Li2 , Guillaume Sartoretti1
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
e0576114@u.nus.edu, e1280621@u.nus.edu, jiaoyangli@cmu.edu, guillaume.sartoretti@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

balancing solution quality and speed is crucial. A recent
paper (Li et al. 2022) introduced LNS2, a large neighborhood search-based MAPF algorithm that iteratively replans
currently infeasible paths, differing from mainstream MAPF
algorithms that rely on more expensive search/backtracking.
LNS2 exhibits greater scalability than systematic search algorithms (Sharon et al. 2015) and prioritized planning algorithms (Erdmann and Lozano-Perez 1987). It first quickly
generates an initial solution that may contain collisions,
and then iteratively replans for carefully selected subsets
of agents, using a fast, low-level Prioritized Planning algorithm based on Safe Interval Path Planning with Soft Constraints (termed PP+SIPPS) to finally yield a collision-free
solution. However, in challenging tasks, the paths generated
by PP+SIPPS still often contain a large number of collisions,
inevitably increasing the cumulative time needed to address
the overall MAPF problem.
In parallel to these developments, recent years have seen
the development of many (slower) MAPF planners based
on Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), which
exhibit enhanced cooperation compared to prioritized planning algorithms. However, MARL-based planners inevitably
exhibit performance degradation when deviating from their
training setup (usually only 8 agents). Moreover, the oneshot Success Rate (SR) of MARL-based planners often
drops sharply due to a few agents failing to reach their goals
within the timestep limit, thereby wasting high-quality paths
for the majority that succeeded.
In this paper, we propose combining large neighborhood search and MARL, introducing a new algorithm
called LNS2+RL, which balances the drawbacks of both
LNS2 and MARL-based planners. The overall framework
of LNS2+RL follows that of LNS2, iteratively updating
the overall solution with re-planned paths. However, during the challenging early stages of iterative replanning, it
replaces PP+SIPPS with a MARL-based planner, generating paths with fewer collisions at a slower speed. There,
we rely on SIPPS to fix the paths planned by agents unable
to reach their goals within a limited number of timesteps,
thus ensuring the completeness of our MARL-based planner and maximizing the utilization of existing high-quality
paths. LNS2+RL then adaptively switches to the original
PP+SIPPS to swiftly clean up remaining collisions, naturally
trading-off solution quality (number of collisions in the so-

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is a critical component
of logistics and warehouse management, which focuses on
planning collision-free paths for a team of robots in a known
environment. Recent work introduced a novel MAPF approach, LNS2, which proposed to repair a quickly obtained
set of infeasible paths via iterative replanning, by relying
on a fast, yet lower-quality, prioritized planning (PP) algorithm. At the same time, there has been a recent push for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) based MAPF
algorithms, which exhibit improved cooperation over such
PP algorithms, although inevitably remaining slower. In this
paper, we introduce a new MAPF algorithm, LNS2+RL,
which combines the distinct yet complementary characteristics of LNS2 and MARL to effectively balance their individual limitations and get the best from both worlds. During
early iterations, LNS2+RL relies on MARL for low-level replanning, which we show eliminates collisions much more
than a PP algorithm. There, our MARL-based planner allows agents to reason about past and future information to
gradually learn cooperative decision-making through a finely
designed curriculum learning. At later stages of planning,
LNS2+RL adaptively switches to PP algorithm to quickly resolve the remaining collisions, naturally trading off solution
quality (number of collisions in the solution) and computational efficiency. Our comprehensive experiments on highagent-density tasks across various team sizes, world sizes,
and map structures consistently demonstrate the superior performance of LNS2+RL compared to many MAPF algorithms,
including LNS2, LaCAM, EECBS, and SCRIMP. In maps
with complex structures, the advantages of LNS2+RL are
particularly pronounced, with LNS2+RL achieving a success
rate of over 50% in nearly half of the tested tasks, while that
of LaCAM, EECBS and SCRIMP falls to 0%.

Code — https://github.com/marmotlab/LNS2-RL

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) focuses on the problem of generating a set of shortest collision-free paths for
a team of agents from their initial positions to designated
goals in a shared environment. It is a core problem in
many applications, such as warehouse automation, where
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23343

