The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Heterogeneous Multi-Robot Graph Coverage with Proximity and Movement
Constraints
Dolev Mutzari, Yonatan Aumann, Sarit Kraus
Department of Computer Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
dolevmu@gmail.com, aumann@cs.biu.ac.il, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

cleaning scenario, for example, a set of cleaning robots is
tasked with cleaning some environment, such as an office
building, visiting (and cleaning) every room in the building.
If every robot is independent, this is a simple instance of a
multi-robot graph coverage. In many cases, however, robots
act as a team (Nemoto and Mohan 2020), possibly with
different specializations. For example, some robots may be
capable of the actual cleaning, while other robots may be
carrier robots - engineered to carry large loads of water
or rubbish. In this case, each site/room must be visited by
a cleaning robot, but the carrier robots must always be in
close proximity. Similarly, in search and rescue operations,
some robots may have searching capabilities, while other
rescue robots (e.g., diggers, medical, etc.) must tag along
and be available in close proximity. Even if all agents are of
the same type, communication requirements may constrain
them to stay within small proximity of each other. Additionally, graph edges (e.g. doors in a building) may display
different physical properties (e.g., width), constraining the
passage of the different robots along different edges (e.g.,
carrier robots cannot traverse some doors, while cleaning
can). In all, graph coverage in such team settings may impose additional constraints on the maximum distance between agents, the permissible formations, and transitions.
In this paper, we consider this team multi-robot graph
coverage problem. Specifically, we address minimizing the
number of steps to cover an input graph with a team of heterogeneous robots (/agents), given constraints on (i) the permissible formations of the agents, (ii) the permissible transitions between agent formations, and (iii) the passage of
different agents along graph edges. To the best of our knowledge, no previous work has addressed this setting. Notably,
even if the graph is a tree and there are no constraints on
agent formations, minimizing the number of steps for coverage is NP-hard (Fraigniaud et al. 2006).

Multi-Robot Coverage problems have been extensively studied in robotics, planning and multi-agent systems. In this
work, we consider the coverage problem when there are constraints on the proximity (e.g., maximum distance between
the agents, or a blue agent must be adjacent to a red agent) and
the movement (e.g., terrain traversability and material load
capacity) of the robots. Such constraints naturally arise in
many real-world applications, e.g. in search-and-rescue and
maintenance operations. Given such a setting, the goal is to
compute a covering tour of the graph with a minimum number of steps, and that adheres to the proximity and movement
constraints. For this problem, our contributions are four: (i)
a formal formulation of the problem, (ii) an exact algorithm
that is FPT in parameters ∥F ∥, d and ω - the set of robot formations that encode the proximity constraints, the maximum
nodes degree, and the tree-width of the graph, respectively,
(iii) for the case that the graph is a tree: a PTAS approximation scheme, that given an ε produces a tour that is within a
1 + ε ⋅ error(∥F ∥, d)) of the optimal one, and the computation runs in time poly(n) ⋅ h( 1ε , ∥F ∥). (iv) for the case that
the graph is a tree, with k = 3 robots, and the constraint is that
all agents are connected: a PTAS scheme with multiplicative
approximation error of 1 + O(ε), independent of d.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10083

1

Introduction

Multi-robot graph-coverage (MRGC) models a multitude of
real-world robotic scenarios, including surveillance (Scherer
and Rinner 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Vallejo et al. 2020; Lee
et al. 2021; Gans and Rogers 2021; Lee 2023), cleaning applications (Nemoto and Mohan 2020; Miao, Lee, and Kang
2020), environmental monitoring (Wang et al. 2023), search
and rescue operations (Queralta et al. 2020; Rodrı́guez et al.
2020; Yang and Parasuraman 2020; Drew 2021), warehouse
automation (Salzman and Stern 2020; Bolu and Korçak
2021; Zaccaria et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2024), and agricultural field management (Govindaraju et al. 2023; Choton and
Prabhakar 2023; Mukhamediev et al. 2023), where robots
are tasked with covering a defined graph-like structure efficiently and effectively (Galceran and Carreras 2013). In the

Our Contributions. Our contributions are four. We provide (i) a formal formulation of the problem, (ii) an exact
algorithm that is FPT in parameters d, tw, and ∣∣F ∣∣, respectively: the maximum node degree in the graph, the treewidth of the graph, and the size of the representation of the
constraints, (iii) for the case that the graph is a tree: a PTAS
approximation scheme, that given an ε produces a tour that
is within a 1 + ε ⋅ error(∣∣F∣∣, d)) of the optimal one (where

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14646

