The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Gradient of Algebraic Model Counting
Jaron Maene1 , Luc De Raedt1,2
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
Örebro University, Sweden
jaron.maene@kuleuven.be, luc.deraedt@kuleuven.be
2

Abstract

generalized over semirings, by taking inspiration from differentiable algebra. This algebraic gradient provides a new
toolkit of tractable operations, which can be used to realize a wide variety of learning algorithms, including gradient
descent, expectation-maximization, entropy maximization,
and low variance gradient estimation.
From a theoretical perspective, the algebraic viewpoint
provides a unifying framework and solver for computing
many concepts that are used in learning. This is timely, as
Marra et al. (2024) relate that “[t]he situation in neurosymbolic computation today is very much like that of the early
days in statistical relational learning, in which there were
many competing formalisms, sometimes characterized as
the statistical relational learning alphabet soup”. Ott et al.
(2023) even state that “the field of neurosymbolic AI exhibits a progress-hampering level of fragmentation”.
From a practical perspective, we create a single optimized algorithm that subsumes many existing ones as special cases. For example, the forward-backward algorithm of
Darwiche (2003) and the gradient estimator of De Smet,
Sansone, and Zuidberg Dos Martires (2023) have a worstcase quadratic complexity in the number of nodes. However,
these are special cases of our algebraic backpropagation algorithm which has linear complexity. We provide an efficient implementation for the algebraic backpropagation algorithm which takes the semiring properties into account. In
our experiments, our implementation outperforms PyTorch
and Jax, which are the de facto standard for neurosymbolic
learning, by several orders of magnitude.
Finally, we consider algebraic learning algorithms that
rely on second-order information. Indeed, empirical evidence of e.g. Liu, Zhang, and Van den Broeck (2022) suggests that the existing first-order optimization methods for
circuits might be suboptimal. Second-order optimization has
quadratic complexity in general, which explains its lack
of popularity in machine learning. However, specialized
tractable circuit representations such as sd-DNNF have been
developed which support many operations in linear time
which are otherwise NP-hard (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).
Unfortunately, we show that this tractability does not carry
over to second-order derivatives and Newton’s method is unlikely to be feasible in linear time on these tractable circuits.
In summary, we make the following contributions.

Algebraic model counting unifies many inference tasks on
logic formulas by exploiting semirings. Rather than focusing
on inference, we consider learning, especially in statisticalrelational and neurosymbolic AI, which combine logical,
probabilistic and neural representations. Concretely, we show
that the very same semiring perspective of algebraic model
counting also applies to learning. This allows us to unify various learning algorithms by generalizing gradients and backpropagation to different semirings. Furthermore, we show
how cancellation and ordering properties of a semiring can be
exploited for more memory-efficient backpropagation. This
allows us to obtain some interesting variations of state-of-theart gradient-based optimisation methods for probabilistic logical models. We also discuss why algebraic model counting
on tractable circuits does not lead to more efficient secondorder optimization. Empirically, our algebraic backpropagation exhibits considerable speed-ups as compared to existing
approaches.

Code — https://github.com/ML-KULeuven/amc-grad

1

Introduction

Algebraic model counting (AMC) generalizes the wellknown satisfiability task on propositional logic formulas to
semirings (Kimmig, Van den Broeck, and De Raedt 2017).
Using AMC various probabilistic inference tasks can be
solved using the same unifying algorithm, including calculating marginals with evidence, entropy, and the most probable explanation (MPE). The principles of AMC are reminiscent of those underlying the sum- and max-product algorithms for probabilistic graphical models (Friesen and
Domingos 2016).
In the current machine learning age, inference is often
combined with learning. This is the focus of statisticalrelational learning (De Raedt et al. 2016) and neurosymbolic AI (Garcez and Lamb 2023), which aim to integrate
the inference and learning paradigms of logic, probability
and neural networks. Our goal is to extend the unifying algebraic perspective that AMC brought to inference to the
learning setting. To this end, we show how gradients can be
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We introduce the ∇AMC for computing algebraic gradi19367

