The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SimProF: A Simple Probabilistic Framework for Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation
Mengzhu Wang
Hebei University of Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence
wangmz@hebut.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims at knowledge
transfer from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Most UDA techniques achieve this by reducing feature discrepancies between the two domains to learn
domain-invariant feature representations. In this paper, we
enhance this approach by proposing a simple yet powerful
probabilistic framework (SimProF) for UDA to minimize the
domain gap between the two domains. SimProF estimates the
feature space distribution for each class and generates contrastive pairs by leveraging the shared categories between the
source and target domains. The concept behind SimProF is
inspired by the observation that normalized features in contrastive learning tend to follow a mixture of von Mises-Fisher
(vMF) distributions on the unit sphere. This characteristic allows for the generation of an infinite number of contrastive
pairs and facilitates an efficient optimization method using a
closed-form expression for the expected contrastive loss. As
a result, target semantics can be effectively used to augment
source features. To implement this, we create vMF distributions based on the inter-domain feature mean difference for
each class. Notably, we derive and minimize an upper bound
of the expected loss, which is implicitly achieved through an
estimated supervised contrastive learning loss applied to the
augmented source distribution. Comprehensive experiments
on cross-domain benchmarks confirm the efficacy of the proposed method.

(a) unit space

(b) linearly separable

Figure 1: Each colored dot represents a class, and the different classes can be effectively separated by using von MisesFisher distributions.

such that a classifier trained on the former can be successfully extended to the latter (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2021). Although these techniques show promising performance, they
rely on modifying features using a shared source-supervised
classifier. However, this approach carries a substantial risk:
the classifier, being supervised by source features, may become biased towards the source domain. As a result, directly applying this classifier to the target domain can limit
its generalization ability, especially when cross-domain features are not perfectly aligned. To address this limitation,
some studies (Xie et al. 2024; Li et al. 2021b) focus on classifier adaptation, introducing specialized network modules
to facilitate the learning of a target-specific classifier.

Introduction
Deep learning models typically exhibit good performance
on comparable datasets after being trained on a particular dataset. Nevertheless, these models frequently exhibit
markedly worse performance when applied to data from
a different distribution. Domain adaptation (Wang et al.
2024c,b,a) offers a way around this problem by allowing a
model that was trained on a labeled source domain to adapt
to an unlabeled or sparsely labeled target domain.

To advance classifier adaptation, we propose a simple
probabilistic framework for unsupervised domain adaptation
(SimProF). This approach involves semantically augmenting source features toward the target domain, enabling the
classifier to adapt to target data within an augmented feature
space enriched with target-specific semantics. Our key insight is to directly sample an infinite number of contrastive
pairs from the data distribution and then minimize the predicted loss to establish the optimization objective. This approach eliminates the need for large batch sizes by explicitly predicting and minimizing the expected loss. The concept of semantic augmentation draws inspiration from the

Generally, solving the domain shift issue is the fundamental challenge to domain adaptation. To tackle this, a substantial subset of current UDA techniques concentrates on aligning the feature distributions in the source and target domains
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21153

