The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bites of Tomorrow: Personalized Recommendations for a Healthier and Greener
Plate
Jiazheng Jing∗ , Yinan Zhang* , Chunyan Miao†
College of Computing and Data Science (CCDS), Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
jiazheng001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {yinan.zhang, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

to pay for green products. Regarding behavioral nudges,
most existing works focus on implementing regulations and
designing poster campaigns to promote sustainable practices
(Peleg Mizrachi and Tal 2022). These methods, while traditional, can sometimes be perceived as imposing or may
rely on passive engagement, which might not consistently
engage or motivate the target audience.
Recommendation systems have shown considerable potential to deliver effective, personalized, and timely nudges
that can lead to meaningful shifts in user behavior across
various domains (He, Liu, and Jung 2024). Given the vast
amount of products and services available, it is often impractical for consumers to review the whole item pool. Instead, they typically make choices from a curated list of options presented to them. By learning from users’ historical
behaviors and ongoing feedback, recommendation systems
can prioritize sustainable items that align with user preferences, thereby effectively guiding consumers towards more
sustainable choices (Zhang et al. 2024a). However, most existing works simply aim to improve prediction accuracy or
enrich user experience, often neglecting the potential of recommendation systems to influence user behavior towards
sustainability (Zhang et al. 2024b; Lin et al. 2024).
In this work, we introduce a novel task for food recommendation systems, named Green Food Recommendation: to
recommend foods that not only appeal to users but also actively prioritize and promote more sustainable options. We
focus on the food domain for several reasons. First, food
production is associated with multiple environmental issues,
including water pollution, carbon emissions, and the use of
arable land (Clark et al. 2022). Second, food is a fundamental part of daily life, and even minor sustainable improvements can lead to significant impacts (Poore and Nemecek
2018). Third, food sustainability encompasses a variety of
criteria, including environmental impact, nutritional value,
and more. By integrating multiple sustainability indicators,
the recommendation approaches becomes more robust and
versatile, applicable across various domains.
Several challenges need to be addressed in Green Food
Recommendation. First, individual attitudes towards different aspects of sustainability can vary and change over time.
Simply increasing the exposure to more sustainable food options may lead to user dissatisfaction. Therefore, it is crucial to recommend items that balance both evolving personal

The recent emergence of extreme climate events has significantly raised awareness about sustainable living. In addition to developing energy-saving materials and technologies, existing research mainly relies on traditional methods
that encourage behavioral shifts towards sustainability, which
can be overly demanding or only passively engaging. In this
work, we propose to employ recommendation systems to actively nudge users toward more sustainable choices. We introduce Green Recommender Aligned with Personalized Eating
(GRAPE), which is designed to prioritize and recommend
sustainable food options that align with users’ evolving preferences. We also design two innovative Green Loss functions
that cater to green indicators with either uniform or differentiated priorities, thereby enhancing adaptability across a range
of scenarios. Extensive experiments on a real-world dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness of our GRAPE.

Introduction
The recent emergence of extreme climate events, including the record-breaking heatwaves in July 2024, catastrophic
floods, and increasingly frequent wildfires, indicates a troubling shift toward global instability and highlights the critical urgency of addressing climate change (Jain et al. 2022;
Ngcamu 2023). Significant research efforts have been conducted to develop proactive solutions towards sustainability,
including the development of renewable technologies and
materials that enhance energy efficiency (Samir et al. 2022;
Fang and Durable 2024). Additionally, innovations in water
purification, desalination, and recycling technologies are being explored to ensure a sustainable water supply(Darvishi
et al. 2023; Curto, Franzitta, and Guercio 2021).
Since human activities play an important role in global
sustainability, some research works concentrate on understanding and encouraging behavioral shifts towards sustainability (Kirby and Zwickle 2021; Marcus and Roy 2019).
For example, (Štofejová et al. 2023) explore the influence
of factors such as environmental attitudes and lifestyle on
online purchasing behavior, identifying significant impacts
from an environmentally oriented lifestyle and willingness
* These two authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11897

