The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FSTA-SNN:Frequency-Based Spatial-Temporal Attention Module for Spiking
Neural Networks
Kairong Yu1 * , Tianqing Zhang2 * , Hongwei Wang1† , Qi Xu3†
Zhejiang University-University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining, China
2
The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
kairong.22@intl.zju.edu.cn, zhangtianqing@zju.edu.cn, hongweiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn, xuqi@dlut.edu.cn

Amp

Amp

Amp

Amp

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are emerging as a promising alternative to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) due to
their inherent energy efficiency. Owing to the inherent sparsity in spike generation within SNNs, the in-depth analysis
and optimization of intermediate output spikes are often neglected. This oversight significantly restricts the inherent energy efficiency of SNNs and diminishes their advantages in
spatiotemporal feature extraction, resulting in a lack of accuracy and unnecessary energy expenditure. In this work, we
analyze the inherent spiking characteristics of SNNs from
both temporal and spatial perspectives. In terms of spatial
analysis, we find that shallow layers tend to focus on learning vertical variations, while deeper layers gradually learn
horizontal variations of features. Regarding temporal analysis, we observe that there is not a significant difference in
feature learning across different time steps. This suggests
that increasing the time steps has limited effect on feature
learning. Based on the insights derived from these analyses,
we propose a Frequency-based Spatial-Temporal Attention
(FSTA) module to enhance feature learning in SNNs. This
module aims to improve the feature learning capabilities by
suppressing redundant spike features. The experimental results indicate that the introduction of the FSTA module significantly reduces the spike firing rate of SNNs, demonstrating
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines
across multiple datasets.

Amp

Shallow Layer

Abstract

(a)

(b)

(c)

Amp

Amp

Amp

Amp

Deep Layer
Amp

1

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison of the output spike frequency spectrum distribution of SNNs across different model structures,
datasets, layer depths, and temporal perspectives. (a) The
spectral distribution of spike outputs at different layers of the
ResNet architecture at the same time step in static dataset.
(b) The spectral distribution of spike outputs at different layers of the ResNet architecture at the same time step in dynamic dataset. (c) The spectral distribution of spike outputs
at different layers of the VGG architecture at the same time
step in static dataset. (d) The temporal variation of the frequency bands where spectral energy is most concentrated
across different layers. Here, Amp, Freq, and T represent
amplitude, frequency range and timesteps.

in information encoding and feature transmission by simulating the spatio-temporal dynamics of biological neurons
(Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019; Schuman et al. 2022). In
SNNs, neurons theoretically fire only when the membrane
potential surpasses a threshold, enabling event-driven operations on neuromorphic chips (Pei et al. 2019; Ma et al.
2017). This spike-based binary transmission allows SNNs to
perform low-cost synaptic accumulations and avoid computations involving zero inputs or activations (Eshraghian et al.
2023; Deng et al. 2020).
The common belief that computations in SNNs, which
are pulse-based neuromorphic computing structures, are inherently sparse is disputable. Due to the lack of reliable
mathematical theoretical tools, explorations and analyses in
this area are limited. Current investigations predominantly
rely on lightweight, spike counting or attention-based strategies. For example, proposed algorithms incorporate penalty
functions to exploit spike-aware sparse regularization and
compression (Deng et al. 2021; Yin, Corradi, and Bohté
2021), employ techniques like pruning and distillation to re-

Code — https://github.com/yukairong/FSTA-SNN

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved significant advancements in
tasks like classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), object segmentation (Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Brox 2015), and natural language processing (Hinton et al.
2012), leading to state-of-the-art performance. However,
the high energy consumption of these architectures challenges hardware implementation. Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs) offer a promising alternative, inspired by the mammalian brain’s learning mechanisms. SNNs represent a shift
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22227

