The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FatesGS: Fast and Accurate Sparse-View Surface Reconstruction Using Gaussian
Splatting with Depth-Feature Consistency
Han Huang1,2 * , Yulun Wu1, 2 * , Chao Deng1, 2 , Ge Gao1, 2† , Ming Gu1, 2 , Yu-Shen Liu2
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{h-huang20, wu-yl22, dengc23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {gaoge, guming, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Input Views

Recently, Gaussian Splatting has sparked a new trend in the
field of computer vision. Apart from novel view synthesis, it
has also been extended to the area of multi-view reconstruction. The latest methods facilitate complete, detailed surface
reconstruction while ensuring fast training speed. However,
these methods still require dense input views, and their output
quality significantly degrades with sparse views. We observed
that the Gaussian primitives tend to overfit the few training
views, leading to noisy floaters and incomplete reconstruction
surfaces. In this paper, we present an innovative sparse-view
reconstruction framework that leverages intra-view depth and
multi-view feature consistency to achieve remarkably accurate surface reconstruction. Specifically, we utilize monocular depth ranking information to supervise the consistency
of depth distribution within patches and employ a smoothness loss to enhance the continuity of the distribution. To
achieve finer surface reconstruction, we optimize the absolute
position of depth through multi-view projection features. Extensive experiments on DTU and BlendedMVS demonstrate
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods with
a speedup of 60x to 200x, achieving swift and fine-grained
mesh reconstruction without the need for costly pre-training.

Close-ups

Reconstruction

2DGS

NeuSurf

UFORecon

Ours

15mins, 1.26 14 hours, 0.78 10 days*, 0.76 14 mins, 0.67

Figure 1: Surface reconstruction from 3-view images of
DTU scan 24. The training time (*pre-training time) and
Chamfer Distance (CD↓) are shown below the image. The
trendiest general method 2DGS (Huang et al. 2024a) is fast
but yields coarse results. The state-of-the-art per-scene optimization method, NeuSurf (Huang et al. 2024b), and the
generalization method, UFORecon (Na et al. 2024), produce
suboptimal surfaces and require long training time. In contrast, our method achieves swift and detailed reconstruction.

Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from multi-view images (Ramon
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2024; Zhang, Liu, and Han 2024)
is a long-standing task in 3D vision, graphics, and robotics.
Multi-View Stereo (Schönberger et al. 2016; Yao et al. 2018;
Xu and Tao 2019) is a traditional reconstruction method consisting of processes such as feature extraction, depth estimation, and depth fusion. This technique achieves favorable
results with dense views, but struggles in sparse view reconstruction due to the lack of matching features.
Over the recent years, neural implicit reconstruction has
rapidly progressed based on neural radiance fields (Mildenhall et al. 2020). Some methods (Wang et al. 2021; Yariv
et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2022) employ neural rendering to optimize implicit geometry fields and color fields from multiview images. They can achieve smooth and complete surfaces with implicit geometric representations. However, im-

plicit geometric fields tend to overfit with a limited number
of input views, leading to geometric collapse.
To address this issue, two types of neural implicit methods for sparse view reconstruction have been developed. The
first type is a generalizable approach (Long et al. 2022; Ren
et al. 2023; Na et al. 2024), which is trained on large-scale
datasets and subsequently applied to infer new scenes. The
second type focuses on per-scene optimization (Yu et al.
2022; Huang et al. 2024b), where no pre-training is needed,
and the method directly fits different scenes. Although both
types of methods achieve satisfactory geometric results, they
require either several days of pre-training or optimization for
several hours per scene, as shown in Figure 1.
Lately, Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023) has been
widely adopted for novel view synthesis due to its high rendering quality and fast training speed. However, 3D Gaus-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3644

