The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PALM: Pushing Adaptive Learning Rate Mechanisms for Continual Test-Time
Adaptation
Sarthak Kumar Maharana, Baoming Zhang, Yunhui Guo
The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, USA
{sarthak.maharana, baoming.zhang, yunhui.guo}@utdallas.edu

Abstract

While this approach effectively adapts the model to a single
type of corruption, it faces two constraints when continually
applied across a sequence of test tasks featuring different
corruptions. Firstly, there is the issue of error accumulation
since pseudo labels are generated for unlabeled test data, errors accumulate over time. Secondly, catastrophic forgetting
occurs, resulting in a long-term loss of the model’s source
knowledge due to adaptations and large parameter updates
across tasks.
Continual test-time adaptation (CTTA) has been recently
introduced to tackle these challenges. In (Niu et al. 2022;
Gong et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2020; Schneider et al. 2020),
stable optimization is achieved by updating the batch normalization (BN) parameters or re-formulating its statistics.
CoTTA (Wang et al. 2022) includes full model updates, with
a teacher-student network setup, to handle the above issues.
To further improve the performance of CoTTA, EcoTTA
(Song et al. 2023) introduces the attachment of “meta networks”, i.e., a BN layer and a convolution block, to the
frozen source model for efficient adaptation.
More recently, the authors in (Lee et al. 2022) demonstrated that based on the type of distributional shift of the test
data, a certain subset of layers of a pre-trained model can be
“surgically” or heuristically chosen to fine-tune. Inspired by
this finding, Layer-wise Auto-Weighting (LAW) (Park et al.
2024) was introduced recently. LAW utilizes the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) (Sagun et al. 2017) to estimate domain shifts, automatically weighting trainable parameters
and adjusting their learning rates (LRs) accordingly. While
LAW achieves state-of-the-art results for CTTA, it still encounters two significant limitations: 1) It presupposes that
layer-wise importance can be accurately estimated via FIM
with initially generated pseudo-labels. Nevertheless, it is
widely recognized that pseudo-labels are inherently noisy
and unreliable. 2) Relying on directly accumulating such
approximated importance from noisy labels to calculate domain shifts can lead to inaccuracies.
In this paper, we present a novel method called PALM to
push the limits of adaptive learning rate methods for CTTA.
To address catastrophic forgetting, our approach begins by
identifying a subset of layers that significantly contribute
to the uncertainty of model predictions. Rather than relying on pseudo-labels, we determine layer-wise importance
by leveraging information from the gradient space, specif-

Real-world vision models in dynamic environments face
rapid shifts in domain distributions, leading to decreased
recognition performance. Using unlabeled test data, continuous test-time adaptation (CTTA) directly adjusts a pre-trained
source discriminative model to these changing domains. A
highly effective CTTA method involves applying layer-wise
adaptive learning rates for selectively adapting pre-trained
layers. However, it suffers from the poor estimation of domain shift and the inaccuracies arising from the pseudolabels. This work aims to overcome these limitations by identifying layers for adaptation via quantifying model prediction uncertainty without relying on pseudo-labels. We utilize
the magnitude of gradients as a metric, calculated by backpropagating the KL divergence between the softmax output
and a uniform distribution, to select layers for further adaptation. Subsequently, for the parameters exclusively belonging
to these selected layers, with the remaining ones frozen, we
evaluate their sensitivity to approximate the domain shift and
adjust their learning rates accordingly. We conduct extensive
image classification experiments on CIFAR-10C, CIFAR100C, and ImageNet-C, demonstrating the superior efficacy
of our method compared to prior approaches.

Code — https://github.com/sarthaxxxxx/PALM

Introduction
In a real-world setting, machine-perception systems (Arnold
et al. 2019) function in a rapidly changing environment.
Pre-trained vision models are susceptible to performance
degradation caused by potential distribution shifts in such
contexts. For instance, while these models may have been
trained on clean images, images captured by sensors could
be corrupted by various weather conditions.
In the realm of addressing domain shifts due to image corruptions, test-time adaptation (TTA) has been gaining a lot
of traction lately (Döbler, Marsden, and Yang 2023; Wang
et al. 2020). Here, a pre-trained source model, with no access to its training (source) data due to privacy, is adapted
to unlabeled test data through online training. One strategy
in TTA involves mitigating domain shifts by adjusting the
source model parameters using pseudo labels and minimizing the entropy of the model predictions (Wang et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19378

