The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DVP-MVS: Synergize Depth-Edge and Visibility Prior for Multi-View Stereo
Zhenlong Yuan1 , Jinguo Luo2 , Fei Shen3 , Zhaoxin Li4, 5 , Cong Liu2 , Tianlu Mao1 * , Zhaoqi Wang1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing
4
Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
5
Key Laboratory of Agricultural Big Data, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
yuanzhenlong21b@ict.ac.cn, 23s153135@stu.hit.edu.cn, feishen@njust.edu.cn,
cszli@hotmail.com, liucong@stu.hit.edu.cn, {ltm, zqwang}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Patch deformation-based methods have recently exhibited
substantial effectiveness in multi-view stereo, due to the incorporation of deformable and expandable perception to reconstruct textureless areas. However, such approaches typically focus on exploring correlative reliable pixels to alleviate match ambiguity during patch deformation, but ignore
the deformation instability caused by mistaken edge-skipping
and visibility occlusion, leading to potential estimation deviation. To remedy the above issues, we propose DVP-MVS,
which innovatively synergizes depth-edge aligned and crossview prior for robust and visibility-aware patch deformation.
Specifically, to avoid unexpected edge-skipping, we first utilize Depth Anything V2 followed by the Roberts operator to
initialize coarse depth and edge maps respectively, both of
which are further aligned through an erosion-dilation strategy
to generate fine-grained homogeneous boundaries for guiding patch deformation. In addition, we reform view selection
weights as visibility maps and restore visible areas by crossview depth reprojection, then regard them as cross-view prior
to facilitate visibility-aware patch deformation. Finally, we
improve propagation and refinement with multi-view geometry consistency by introducing aggregated visible hemispherical normals based on view selection and local projection
depth differences based on epipolar lines, respectively. Extensive evaluations on ETH3D and Tanks & Temples benchmarks demonstrate that our method can achieve state-of-theart performance with excellent robustness and generalization.

Figure 1: Comparison between patch deformation-based
methods and ours. Edge-skipping causes other methods (a)
incorrectly select reliable but depth-discontinuous gray pixels for patch deformation of the central unreliable red pixel.
While our DVP-MVS (b) leverages depth-edge aligned prior
to guarantee deformed patches within homogeneous areas.

Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS), as a core task in computer vision,
aims to dense the geometry representation of the scene or
object through certain overlapping photographs from different viewpoints. It has been widely employed in various fields
including virtual reality (Wang et al. 2024), autonomous
driving (Wei et al. 2023), object detection (Lu et al. 2024),
etc. In recent years, the emergence of plentiful imaginative
ideas (Wu et al. 2024; Tan et al. 2023) tremendously boosts
its performance among various benchmarks (Schops et al.
2017; Yao et al. 2020). These innovations can be roughly
categorized into learning-based MVS and traditional MVS.

Learning-based MVS leverage convolutional neural networks to extract high-dimensional features for reconstruction, while they demand large training datasets and show
inferior generalization abilities. On the contrary, traditional
MVS are extended from the PatchMatch algorithm (Barnes
et al. 2009), which propagates appropriate hypotheses from
neighboring pixels and generates refined hypotheses to construct solution space, then elect the optimal hypotheses
through a criterion defined by the multi-view matching cost.
However, when the patch is located in textureless areas, its
matching cost becomes untrustworthy because of lacking
distinguishable features within the receptive field.
To reconstruct textureless areas, two primary types of
traditional MVS have been proposed: planarization-based

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9743

