The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Target-Driven Distillation: Consistency Distillation with Target Timestep Selection
and Decoupled Guidance
Cunzheng Wang1, 2 * , Ziyuan Guo2 , Yuxuan Duan2, 3 , Huaxia Li2 , Nemo Chen2 , Xu Tang2 , Yao Hu2
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Xiaohongshu
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
22251351@zju.edu.cn, guoziyuan@xiaohongshu.com, sjtudyx2016@sjtu.edu.cn,
{lihuaxia,linghu,tangshen,xiahou}@xiaohongshu.com
Abstract
Consistency distillation methods have demonstrated significant success in accelerating the generative tasks of diffusion models. However, since previous consistency distillation methods use simple and straightforward strategies in selecting target timesteps, they usually struggle with blurs and
detail losses in generated images. To address these limitations, we introduce Target-Driven Distillation (TDD), which
(1) adopts a delicate selection strategy of target timesteps, increasing the training efficiency; (2) utilizes decoupled guidances during training, making TDD open to post-tuning on
guidance scale during inference periods; (3) can be optionally
equipped with non-equidistant sampling and x0 clipping, enabling a more flexible and accurate way for image sampling.
Experiments verify that TDD achieves state-of-the-art performance in few-step generation, offering a better choice among
consistency distillation models.

1

k1
Figure 1: Comparison of different distillation methods. τm
k2
and τm represent a target timestep when divided into k1
and k2 , respectively. LCM (a) and PCM (b) are examples
of single-target distillation, where a certain xtn corresponds
to only one target timestep. In contrast, CTM (c) and ours
(d) are multi-target distillation methods, where a certain xtn
can correspond to multiple target timesteps.

Introduction

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Song and Ermon 2019) have demonstrated exceptional performance in
image generation, producing diverse and high-quality images. Unlike previous models like GANs (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) or VAEs (Kingma and
Welling 2013; Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015), diffusion models are good at modeling complex image distributions and
conditioning on non-label conditions such as free-form text
prompts. However, since diffusion models adopt iterative denoising processes, they usually take substantial time to generate images. To address such a challenge, consistency distillation methods (Song et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023a,b; Kim
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024) have been proposed as effective strategies to accelerate generation while maintaining
image quality. These methods distill pre-trained diffusion
models following the self-consistency property i.e. the predicted results from any two neighboring timesteps towards
the same target timestep are regularized to be the same. Depending on the choice of target timesteps, recent consistency
distillation methods can be categorized as single-target distillation and multi-target distillation, illustrated in Figure 1.

Single-target distillation methods follow a one-to-one
mapping when choosing target timesteps, that is, they always choose the same target timestep each time they reach
a certain timestep along the trajectory of PF-ODE (Song
et al. 2020). One straightforward choice is to map any
timestep to the final timestep at 0 (Song et al. 2023; Luo
et al. 2023a). However, these methods usually suffer from
the accumulated error of long-distance predictions. Another
choice is evenly partitioning the full trajectory into several
sub-trajectories and to map a timestep to the initial of the
sub-trajectory it belongs to (Wang et al. 2024). Although
the error can be reduced by shortening the predicting distances when training, the image quality will be suboptimal
when adopting a schedule with a different number of subtrajectories during inference periods.
On the other hand, multi-target distillation methods follow a one-to-multiple mapping, that is, possibly different target timesteps may be chosen each time they come to a certain timestep. A typical choice is to map the current timestep

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7619

