The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Epsilon: Exploring Comprehensive Visual-Semantic Projection for Multi-Label
Zero-Shot Learning
Ziming Liu1 , Jingcai Guo1 * , Song Guo2 , Xiaocheng Lu2
1

2

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
ziming.liu@connect.polyu.hk, jc-jingcai.guo@polyu.edu.hk, songguo@cse.ust.hk, xlubl@connect.ust.hk

Abstract

Spatial-Wise
Attention Methods

This paper investigates a challenging problem of zero-shot
learning in the multi-label scenario (MLZSL), wherein the
model is trained to recognize multiple unseen classes within
a sample (e.g., an image) based on seen classes and auxiliary knowledge, e.g., semantic information. Existing methods usually resort to analyzing the relationship of various
seen classes residing in a sample from the dimension of spatial or semantic characteristics and transferring the learned
model to unseen ones. However, they neglect the integrity of
local and global features. Although the use of the attention
structure will accurately locate local features, especially objects, it will significantly lose its integrity, and the relationship between classes will also be affected. Rough processing
of global features will also directly affect comprehensiveness.
This neglect will make the model lose its grasp of the main
components of the image. Relying only on the local existence
of seen classes during the inference stage introduces unavoidable bias. In this paper, we propose a novel and comprehensive visual-semantic framework for MLZSL, dubbed Epsilon,
to fully make use of such properties and enable a more accurate and robust visual-semantic projection. In terms of spatial
information, we achieve effective refinement by group aggregating image features into several semantic prompts. It can
aggregate semantic information rather than class information,
preserving the correlation between semantics. In terms of
global semantics, we use global forward propagation to collect as much information as possible to ensure that semantics
are not omitted. Experiments on large-scale MLZSL benchmark datasets NUS-Wide and Open-Images-v4 demonstrate
that the proposed Epsilon outperforms other state-of-the-art
methods with large margins.

BiAM, LESA etc.

Grass

Animal

Inclined to the positioning of objects.
Semantic integrity cannot be guaranteed.

Semantic Integrity
Methods

Epsilon

Grass

Animal

Semantics are effectively grouped & integrated.
Comprehensiveness is preserved.

Figure 1: Comparison of attention between our proposed Epsilon and traditional spatial attention-based models. We can
see that the proposed model is stronger than the contrasting
BiAM and LESA in terms of completeness of class semantics. (zoom in for a better view)
may contain multiple objects, the task of multi-label image
classification (Gong et al. 2013; Yu et al. 2014; Weston, Bengio, and Usunier 2011) has come into view because the task
is challenging, and it is closer to the real life of a human.
With the continuous improvement of deep neural networks,
multi-label image classification models based on deep learning have emerged (Wang et al. 2016; Durand, Mehrasa, and
Mori 2019; Gao and Zhou 2021; Feng, An, and He 2019).
Their research focuses on how to effectively process the
context information in the image, or build a graph model
or other topological models to handle complex dependencies between labels (Chen et al. 2019). In recent years, researchers have realized that the attention mechanism has
been introduced to allow the model to focus more selectively
on information-rich regions and has achieved remarkable results (Cheng et al. 2021).
However, the above multi-label image classification methods all have a common problem, that is, these models cannot perceive categories that were not present during training. Therefore, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has become a solution to this problem (Akata et al. 2016; Deutsch et al. 2017;
Frome et al. 2013). ZSL is essentially a multi-modal transfer
learning, that is, an algorithm that predicts unseen classes
during testing through the learning of seen classes. There-

Introduction
With the continuous advances in science and technology,
the ability and ways human beings obtain information have
greatly improved. In recent years, deep learning classification networks (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy
et al. 2015) driven by computational intelligence have
sprung up and made rapid progress. Image classification
datasets designed for single labels in the past are less challenging for deep learning models. Since an arbitrary image
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19059

