The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast Multi-Instance Partial-Label Learning
Yin-Fang Yang1,2 , Wei Tang1,2 * , Min-Ling Zhang1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
yangyf22@gmail.com, tangw@seu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

Underlying Bag Distribution

Multi-instance partial-label learning (MIPL) is a paradigm
where each training example is encapsulated as a multiinstance bag associated with the candidate label set, which
includes one true label and several false positives. Current
MIPL algorithms typically assume that all instances are independent, thereby neglecting the dependencies and heterogeneity inherent in MIPL data. Moreover, these algorithms
often prove to be excessively time-consuming when dealing
with complex datasets, significantly limiting the practical application of MIPL. In this paper, we propose FAST M IPL, a
framework that employs mixed-effects model to explicitly
capture the dependencies and heterogeneity among instances
and bags. FAST M IPL is able to learn from MIPL data both
effectively and efficiently by utilizing the predefined dependencies modeling module and leveraging the posterior predictive probability disambiguation strategy. Experiments show
that the performance of FAST M IPL is highly competitive to
state-of-the-art methods, while significantly reducing computational time in benchmark and the real-world datasets.

Bag X1
Instances
{x1,1 , . . . , x1,j }

Bag X2

Bag X3

Instances

{x2,1 , . . . , x2,j }

{x3,1 , . . . , x3,j }

Figure 1: The hierarchical and nested data structure presents
in the multi-instance bags indicate the presence of inherent dependencies and heterogeneous information embedded
within the bag distribution.
a candidate label set rather than an exact diagnosis, models can learn from partially labeled data, improving classification efficiency and accuracy. Multi-instance partial-label
learning (MIPL) resolves scenarios where ambiguity exists
in both instance and label spaces, making it a more natural
and convenient approach to tasks involving such complex
situations (Tang, Zhang, and Zhang 2024b).
However, existing predominantly MIPL address the problem under the assumption of independent samples, without
considering the hierarchical structure between samples. This
assumption simplifies the modeling process but often neglects the inherent dependencies and structural relationships
in MIPL, as illustrated in Figure 1. Such oversight can hinder
the model’s ability to effectively capture the underlying data
distribution, resulting in suboptimal performance. Furthermore, when extending these methods to more complex realworld applications, the computational burden becomes particularly pronounced. The independence assumption necessitates processing each bag with numerous instances individually, leading to substantial computational overhead. This
challenge is exacerbated by the need to evaluate multiple
potential labels for each bag under the setting partial-label
learning, significantly increasing resource demands and limiting the scalability of MIPL in practical applications.
In this paper, we propose a new framework FAST M IPL
to model dependent MIPL data efficiently. Designed for dependencies and efficiency in MIPL analyses, FAST M IPL explicitly models the dependencies and heterogeneity among
multi-instance bags by using a hierarchical model extend-

Introduction
Weakly supervised learning has emerged as a potent strategy in scenarios characterized by a scarcity of annotated
data. Based on label quality and quantity, weak supervision can be systematically classified into three primary categories, namely, inexact, inaccurate, and incomplete supervision (Zhou 2018). Furthermore, the inexact supervision
indicates a coarse alignment between instances and labels,
which is ubiquitous and challenging in real-world tasks. The
two predominant learning paradigms for addressing issues
related to the inexact supervision are multi-instance learning
(MIL) (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018; Cui et al. 2023)
and partial-label learning (PLL) (Tian, Yu, and Fu 2023;
Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006).
In many real world applications, the inexact supervision
can exist simultaneously in the instance space and the label space (Tang, Zhang, and Zhang 2024b). For example,
in medical image analysis, each image (bag) may contain
multiple regions of instances, with labels provided by doctors. To reduce labeling costs, each image can be assigned
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22038

