The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Promising Multi-Granularity Linguistic Steganography by Jointing Syntactic and
Lexical Manipulations
Chengfu Ou, Lingyun Xiang* , Yangfan Liu
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology
hahally@stu.csust.edu.cn, xiangly@csust.edu.cn, flyvan@stu.csust.edu.cn

Abstract

media networks, due to their simplicity and efficiency in
conveying information. Therefore, linguistic steganography
(Xiang et al. 2022), which employs texts as the carriers to
conceal and transmit secret information, has garnered increasing attention in recent years. Modification-based linguistic steganography (MLS), as a significant branch of linguistic steganography, primarily conceals secret information
into a given natural text by subtly modifying its content using specific transformations, which helps preserve the original semantic meaning, such as synonym substitutions(Chang
and Clark 2010b, 2014; Huo and Xiao 2016; Xiang et al.
2018), paraphrasing (Chang and Clark 2010a; Wilson and
Ker 2016), machine translation (Stutsman et al. 2006; Meng
et al. 2011), word order adjustment (Chang and Clark 2012),
and syntactic analysis (Murphy and Vogel 2007). Nevertheless, the inherent limitations posed by limited conversion rules and original semantic constraints result in a deficient embedding capacity of MLS. Moreover, inappropriate
substitution operations are more likely to result in steganographic texts with syntactic unnaturalness and semantic inconsistencies (Grosvald and Orgun 2011), making them susceptible to be detected by linguistic steganalysis methods
(Wen et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2021).
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, the latest works,
such as substitution-based (Ueoka, Murawaki, and Kurohashi 2021; Xiang et al. 2023), paraphrasing-based(Yang
et al. 2024) and syntactic transformation-based (Xiang, Ou,
and Zeng 2024), strive to leverage the promising language
models to enhance the diversity of linguistic transformations
and move away from reliance on specific rules, thereby improving the performance of MLS. However, it is worth noting that these language models-based (LMs-based) methods
are constrained by the original semantics of the cover text
to perform minor linguistic transformation manipulations
within a single redundant embedding space (symbolic space
or syntactic space), thereby enhancing semantic consistency
but limiting the embedding capacity. Therefore, LMs-based
MLS gains less attention in improving embedding capacity.
A promising way is to combine syntactic and lexical
linguistic manipulations to improve embedding capacity
as shown in Figure 1. The syntactic transformation-based
method first performs syntactic linguistic manipulations to
change the syntactic structure of the cover text by the syntaxcontrolled paraphrase generation model. Subsequently, the

Existing modification-based linguistic steganography methods primarily perform linguistic manipulations within a single embedding space to conceal secret information. However, these methods are stringently constrained by the
original semantics of the cover text, making it struggle
to achieve a satisfactory embedding capacity in a single embedding space. In this paper, we propose a novel
Multi-granularity Modification-based Linguistic Steganography framework (MMLS) that hides secret information in both
syntactic space and symbolic space, enhancing syntactic naturalness and semantic coherence while further increasing embedding capacity. Specifically, MMLS utilizes a paraphrase
generation model to automatically modify the syntactic structure of the given original sentence, which enables the generation of paraphrases and the preservation of semantics simultaneously. Moreover, MMLS employs a distance-aware syntactic bins coding strategy to embed part of secret information
into the syntactic space. This strategy utilizes a cluster-based
way to partition the implicit syntactic space into a finite number of separate zones, thus increasing the number of candidate paraphrases and avoiding the selection of semantically
distorted steganographic texts. Finally, the pre-trained BERT
is used to replace some words in candidate paraphrases with
their synonyms. Such a design embeds the remaining secret
information into symbolic space while ensuring syntactic and
semantic naturalness. Experimental results demonstrate that
MMLS significantly outperforms existing methods in terms
of semantic coherence, embedding capacity, and security.

Code — https://github.com/hahally/MMLS/

Introduction
Steganography is recognized as the art and science of embedding secret information within a public multimedia carrier without arousing suspicion from supervisors (Simmons
1984). Theoretically, any public multimedia carriers with redundant space, such as images (Zhou et al. 2023), audios
(Wu et al. 2020), videos (Fan, Zhang, and Zhao 2022), texts
(Krishnan, Thandra, and Baba 2017), etc., can be utilized
to conceal secret information for communication. Among
them, texts are the most common ones on today’s social
* Corresponding author: xiangly@csust.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24984

