The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Holistic Correction with Object Prototype for Video Object Segmentation
Shengye Qiao1 2 , Changqun Xia2 * , Yanjie Liang2 , Gongjin Lan3 , Jia Li1∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
{qiaoshy,jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, {xiachq,liangyj}@pcl.ac.cn, langj@sustech.edu.cn

t1

Abstract
Recently, memory-based methods have achieved progress
in semi-supervised video object segmentation. However,
these methods still suffer from unstructured challenges, such
as object transformations, occlusions and disappearancereappearance. To this end, we propose a Holistic Correction
Network (HCNet) to adaptively acquire concise object prototypes for holistic correction at semantic, spatial and temporal aspects. Specifically, an Adaptive Prototype Update module is firstly designed to construct multi-level core object
representations by associating object variations in consecutive frames with segmentation quality assessment. Based on
the updated object prototypes, Semantic, Spatial and Temporal Correction modules are respectively designed to enhance the object semantics in the entire frame, eliminate
the incorrect semantic enhancement outside the object regions and calibrate the estimated object regions with temporal changes of objects. Through the holistic correction mechanism with effective object prototypes, our proposed HCNet
can robustly and efficiently deal with diverse complex scenarios. Extensive and comprehensive experiments conducted
on seven datasets demonstrate that our proposed HCNet can
significantly improve the segmentation performance.

t3

t2

(a)

...

...

(b)

...

...

(c)

...

...

(d)

...

...

time

Figure 1: Comparison of segmentation results with visualization (we superimpose predicted masks on the input frame
in the form of circles): (a) input frames, (b) groundtruth
masks, (c) outputs of RAVOS (Miao et al. 2024), (d) outputs
of Ours. Green, blue and red circles denote the background
and two objects in the predicted mask. The regions covered
with circles are the ones involved in the matching.

and Schwing 2022; Cheng et al. 2024). However, the compressed memory only contain frame-level semantic information, leading to unsatisfactory performance on object segmentation which requires adequate object-level semantic
and spatial information. Meanwhile, the object memory proposed in the multi-stage memory is overly dependent on the
predicted mask, easily leading to the accumulation of errors.
Moreover, the update of object memory lacks temporal locality which is less effective to segment videos with larger
temporal resolution. For example, the videos in emerging
complex dataset VOST (Tokmakov, Li, and Gaidon 2023)
are only labeled at 5 fps and have longer time-interval between consecutive frames than the common datasets. Therefore, a question arises: instead of unstable object memory,
can we construct concise and robust object prototypes which
simultaneously take into account high-level semantic information, low-level spatial information and temporal locality?
In addition to utilizing appearance cues with memory network, recent methods extract motion cues to localize objects.
For example, BATMAN (Yu et al. 2022) acquire motion
cues with optical flow to pay more attention to objects when
matching with appearance cues. Despite the improvement in

Introduction
Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (SVOS) is the
task of accurately and efficiently segmenting the objects in
the entire video sequence when the objects are specified with
a precisely annotated mask in the first frame. This task can
be widely applied in many fields such as video surveillance,
embodied intelligence and autonomous driving (Liang et al.
2024; Li et al. 2023; He et al. 2024; Ma et al. 2023).
Existing SVOS methods are mainly matching-based and
employ memory network to boost the segmentation performance, which continuously memorizes historical objectspecific appearance cues to match and segment target objects
in the current frame. The amelioration to the initial memory (Oh et al. 2019; Cheng, Tai, and Tang 2021), which
stores all features of selected frames, can be mainly divided into two aspects: single-stage compressed memory (Li
et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022) and multi-stage memory (Cheng
* Correspondence should be addressed to Changqun Xia (Email: xiachq@pcl.ac.cn) and Jia Li (E-mail: jiali@buaa.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6586

