The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Instance Multi-Label Classification from Crowdsourced Labels
Ziquan Wang1,2 , Mingxuan Xia1,2 , Xiangyu Ren3 ,
Jiaqing Zhou4 , Gengyu Lyu5 , Tianlei Hu1,2 , Haobo Wang1,2∗
1 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
2 Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3 College of Computer and Control Engineering, Northeast Forestry University
4 ByteDance, Hangzhou
5 College of Computer Science, Beĳing University of Technology

zqwang@buaa.edu.cn, ren_xy@nefu.edu.cn, xiamingxuan@zju.edu.cn,
jiashu@bytedance.com, lyugengyu@gmail.com, htl@zju.edu.cn, wanghaobo@zju.edu.cn
Tang, and Min 2022). However, these methods rely on precise
labels for optimal performance.
Since each bag may contain complex patterns among instances, acquiring precise annotation for MIML is both laborintensive and costly (Nguyen and Raich 2021). When dealing
with a large number of classes, annotators may overlook some
labels due to limited energy or ability, leading to annotation
errors. For instance, in MIML bird acoustic classification
tasks, annotators must listen to all instances in each audio
bag to detect the presence of specific birds (Briggs et al.
2012). The presence of numerous specific bird species requires repeated checks, increasing the likelihood of errors
due to the labor-intensive work. To address this, researchers
have explored weakly-supervised approaches for MIML, including semi-supervised MIML (Yang et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2012) and incomplete label MIML classification (Nguyen
and Raich 2021). However, in complex and specialized tasks
like protein function prediction (Wu, Huang, and Zhou 2014),
these semi-supervised setups with missing labels or incomplete annotations may cause performance degradation.
In this work, we address that crowdsourcing (Bragg,
Mausam, and Weld 2013; Zhang and Wu 2018), famous
for its efficiency and cost-effectiveness, can be a feasible alternative for a full annotation on MIML instead of expensive
expertise annotations. However, most existing crowdsourcing
methods focus on scenarios where a single instance is associated with a single label (Rodrigues and Pereira 2018; Wei
et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2022). Although some studies have addressed crowdsourcing with multiple labels (Rodrigues and
Pereira 2018; Wei et al. 2023; Zhang and Wu 2018), the challenge of learning a robust classifier from an uncertain bag of
instances remains unsolved, and these approaches also lack
theoretical foundations.
To this end, we introduce a novel crowdsourced multiinstance multi-label classification (CMIML) framework and
propose a theoretical-driven method that learns a robust
MIML classifier end-to-end. Specifically, we excavate the
pattern of annotation error in CMIML and propose a novel
data generation process called cross-label transition, where
the confusion is more likely to appear between classes due
to the inherent similarity of localized instances from different classes. By defining the cross-label transition matrix, we
establish the first unbiased risk estimator (URE) for the

Abstract
Multi-instance multi-label classification (MIML) is a fundamental task in machine learning, where each data sample
comprises a bag containing several instances and multiple
binary labels. Despite its wide applications, the data collection process involves matching multiple instances and labels,
typically resulting in high annotation costs. In this paper, we
study a novel yet practical crowdsourced multi-instance multilabel classification (CMIML) setup, where labels are collected
from multiple crowd sources. To address this problem, we
first propose a novel data generation process for CMIML, i.e.,
cross-label transition, where cross-label annotation error is
more likely to appear rather than previous single-label transition assumption, due to the inherent similarity of localized
instances from different classes. Then, we formally define
the cross-label transition by cross-label transition matrices
which are dependent across classes. Subsequently, we establish the first unbiased risk estimator for CMIML and further
improve it through aggregation techniques, along with a rigorous generalization error bound. We also provide a practical
implementation of cross-label transition matrix estimation.
Comprehensive experiments on six benchmark datasets under
various scenarios demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms
the baselines by a large margin, validating its effectiveness in
handling the CMIML problem.

1

Introduction

Multi-instance multi-label classification (MIML) is a fundamental framework for modeling complex real-world data,
where each sample is represented as a bag of instances and
annotated with multiple labels (Feng and Zhou 2017; Zhou
and Zhang 2006). Specifically, the bag-level label is positive if it contains at least one positive instance; otherwise,
it is negative. MIML has diverse applications, including text
classification (Zhou, Sun, and Li 2009), acoustic classification (Briggs et al. 2012), and gene function prediction (Wu,
Huang, and Zhou 2014). Diverse methods tackle MIML challenges, including SVM (Zhou and Zhang 2006), convex optimization techniques (Li et al. 2012), neural networks (Feng
and Zhou 2017), and attention-based approaches (Yang,
∗ Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21438

