The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Masked Time-Series Modeling via Dropping Patches
Tianyu Qiu1 , Yi Xie1 * , Hao Niu1 , Yun Xiong1 * , Xiaofeng Gao2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{tyqiu22, yixie18, hniu18, yunx}@fudan.edu.cn
gao-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Despite its potential, we observed that masked time-series
modeling, represented by PatchTST (Nie et al. 2022), faces a
dilemma. A relatively low mask ratio reduces effectiveness
in learning useful features (He et al. 2022; Zhang, Wang,
and Wang 2022). Given the characteristic of periodicity and
repetitive pattern of time-series data, the masked patch can
be recovered with little high-level understanding of the underlying patterns, leading to superficial learning and overfitting as shown in Figure 1 (A). A natural idea is to increase
the mask ratio, but another issue emerges: the presence of an
excessive number of masked patches can further dilute the
attention mechanism’s capacity to concentrate on the relevant and informative parts of data, termed as scattered attention as shown in Figure 1 (C). It can lead to the degradation of downstream task performance as the representations
gradually lose their distinctiveness (Noci et al. 2022; Dong,
Cordonnier, and Loukas 2021; Zhai et al. 2023).
We introduce a simple yet effective strategy, DropPatch,
to encourage learning useful features and improve the overall performance. Building on foundational time-series pretraining techniques (Nie et al. 2022), DropPatch randomly
removes a predefined proportion of patches. The remaining
patches are subsequently processed for masking and reconstruction. It is crucial to distinguish between dropping and
masking in the context of pre-training. For a given timeseries sample, the dropping operation is applied prior to
masking and reconstruction. Removed patches are entirely
excluded from all training steps during the current epoch. In
contrast, masked patches, represented as zero tensors overlaid with positional encoding, remain part of the training
process throughout the epoch.
In our empirical study, DropPatch demonstrates clear advantages in mitigating over-fitting (Figure 1 (B)), enhancing attention focus (Figure 1 (C)), and improving forecasting performance (Figure 1 (D)). The reduction in the number of patches due to the dropping operation leads to significant improvements in computational efficiency and reduced
memory consumption.
Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of DropPatch. Through detailed experimental analysis, we uncover
the underlying mechanisms driving these improvements.
The DropPatch strategy enhances the attention mechanism
by enabling a sharper focus on multi-scale and diverse information. It strengthens the model’s ability to capture crit-

This paper explores how to enhance existing masked timeseries modeling by randomly dropping sub-sequence level
patches of time series. On this basis, a simple yet effective method named DropPatch is proposed, which has two
remarkable advantages: 1) It improves the pre-training efficiency by a square-level advantage; 2) It provides additional
advantages for modeling in scenarios such as in-domain,
cross-domain, few-shot learning and cold start. This paper
conducts comprehensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the method and analyze its internal mechanism. Empirically, DropPatch strengthens the attention mechanism,
reduces information redundancy and serves as an efficient
means of data augmentation. Theoretically, it is proved that
DropPatch slows down the rate at which the Transformer representations collapse into the rank-1 linear subspace by randomly dropping patches, thus optimizing the quality of the
learned representations.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15315

Introduction
In recent years, masked modeling has emerged as a prevalent
self-supervised method in various fields, including natural
language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019) and
computer vision (Baevski et al. 2022; He et al. 2022; Bao
et al. 2021). This technique improves representation learning by reconstructing masked content based on unmasked
parts. Masked modeling has also been adapted for timeseries analysis. A notable advancement involves segmenting time-series into patches (sub-sequence) and applying
a patch-level masking strategy, which has received considerable attention since its inception (Nie et al. 2022). This
method not only shows promising performance in transfer
learning, but also significantly enhances supervised forecasting by employing self-supervised pre-training to initialize
model parameters, consistent with recent findings (Amos,
Berant, and Gupta 2023). Building upon the patching technique, numerous time-series foundation model works have
emerged and achieve significant performance in time-series
forecasting (Goswami et al. 2024; Woo et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20077

