The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

StyO: Stylize Your Face in Only One-Shot
Bonan Li1 * , Zicheng Zhang1 * , Xuecheng Nie2 , Congying Han1† ,
Yinhan Hu1 , Xinmin Qiu1 , Tiande Guo1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MT Lab, Meitu Inc.
{libonan, hancy, tdguo}@ucas.ac.cn, {zhangzicheng19, huyinhan16, qiuxinmin21}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, nxc@meitu.com

Abstract

Existing works (Chong and Forsyth 2022; Zhu et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022b,a) consider one-shot face stylization as
a style transfer problem (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016),
e.g., transferring face style of a single target image into face
of the source image, and solve this problem with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019). Despite of their success, we
observe that even state-of-the-art methods still fail to achieve
reasonable style (e.g., geometry variations) while maintain
source content (e.g., facial and hair colors), as shown in Figure 1. Note that these features are delineated as fundamental attributes warranting consideration (Cao, Liao, and Yuan
2018; Gong, Hold-Geoffroy, and Lu 2020; Shi, Deb, and
Jain 2019; Men et al. 2022; Han et al. 2021; Song et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2021a). This is caused by two main reasons. First,
these methods heavily relied on pre-trained GAN models on
large real face dataset (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019), thus
hard to match styles of faces, especially geometry changes,
from another domain with one-shot guidance, due to capability limitation of GANs for producing distribution variations. Second, they entangle the style and content information of facial images together in the latent space, making
current encoding and inversion techniques difficult to derive accurate latent code representing the stylized faces. It
is important to address above issues for facilitating usage of
relevant techniques in real world.

This paper focuses on face stylization with a single artistic
target. Existing works for this task often fail to retain the
source content while achieving geometry variation. Here, we
present a novel StyO model, i.e. Stylize the face in only Oneshot, to solve the above problem. In particular, StyO exploits
a disentanglement and recombination strategy. It first disentangles the content and style of source and target images into
identifiers, which are then recombined in a cross manner to
derive the stylized face image. In this way, StyO decomposes
complex images into independent and specific attributes, and
simplifies one-shot face stylization as the combination of different attributes from input images, thus producing results
better matching face geometry of target image and content of
source one. StyO is implemented with latent diffusion models (LDM) and composed of two key modules: 1) Identifier
Disentanglement Learner (IDL) for disentanglement phase. It
represents identifiers as contrastive text prompts, i.e. positive
and negative descriptions. And it introduces a novel triple reconstruction loss to fine-tune the pre-trained LDM for encoding style and content into corresponding identifiers; 2) Finegraind Content Controller (FCC) for recombination phase. It
recombines disentangled identifiers from IDL to form an augmented text prompt for generating stylized faces. In addition,
FCC also constrains the cross-attention maps of latent and
text features to preserve source face details in results. The
extensive evaluation shows that StyO produces high-quality
images on numerous paintings of various styles and outperforms the current state-of-the-art.

Motivated by this, we propose a novel StyO model in
this paper for pushing forward the frontier of the task of
Stylizing the face in only One-shot. For improving the generation variety, StyO exploits Diffusion Denosing Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song,
Meng, and Ermon 2020; Rombach et al. 2022) instead of
GANs, given the superiority of DDPM to produce highquality images in wild range of distribution. For deriving accurate representation of stylized faces, StyO leverages a disentanglement and recombination strategy. Specifically, StyO
factorizes the style and content information of source and
target images into different identifiers, then fuse them in a
cross manner to form prompts, which plays as representations of stylized faces to drive DDPMs to generate reasonable images. In this way, StyO decomposes complex images
into independent and specific attributes, and simplifies oneshot face stylization as combination of different attributes
from input images, thus producing results better matching

Introduction
Face stylization aims at automatically creating personalized
artistic portraits from face photographs. It is a fundamental problem in vision and graphics communities (Akleman
1997; Kim et al. 2019a; Han et al. 2021; Song et al. 2021)
and widely applied in creative industries such as social media avatars, films, advertising, etc. Recently, one-shot solution for this task has drawn lots of attention, due to its significant feature of data-efficiency, which makes the deployment
easier in practice.
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4625

