The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ChangeDiff: A Multi-Temporal Change Detection Data Generator with Flexible
Text Prompts via Diffusion Model
Qi Zang1 , Jiayi Yang1 , Shuang Wang1 * , Dong Zhao1 , Wenjun Yi1 , Zhun Zhong2
1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
2 School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China

qzang@stu.xidian.edu.cn; shwang@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Methods
IAug
ChangeStar
Self-Pair
Changen
Ours

Data-driven deep learning models have enabled tremendous
progress in change detection (CD) with the support of pixellevel annotations. However, collecting diverse data and manually annotating them is costly, laborious, and knowledgeintensive. Existing generative methods for CD data synthesis show competitive potential in addressing this issue but
still face the following limitations: 1) difficulty in flexibly
controlling change events, 2) dependence on additional data
to train the data generators, 3) focus on specific change detection tasks. To this end, this paper focuses on the semantic CD (SCD) task and develops a multi-temporal SCD data
generator ChangeDiff by exploring powerful diffusion models. ChangeDiff innovatively generates change data in two
steps: first, it uses text prompts and a text-to-layout (T2L)
model to create continuous layouts, and then it employs
layout-to-image (L2I) to convert these layouts into images.
Specifically, we propose multi-class distribution-guided text
prompts (MCDG-TP), allowing for layouts to be generated
flexibly through controllable classes and their corresponding ratios. Subsequently, to generalize the T2L model to the
proposed MCDG-TP, a class distribution refinement loss is
further designed as training supervision. Our generated data
shows significant progress in temporal continuity, spatial diversity, and quality realism, empowering change detectors
with accuracy and transferability.

Text Control
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓

Layout Diversity
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓

Extra Seg. Data
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓

SCD
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓

Table 1: Comparison of data synthesis method in change
detection regarding functionality, data support, and application tasks. Our ChangeDiff shows more practical and strong
functions and application scenarios.

compared to general-purpose vision datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009).
To alleviate high demand for data annotation, data synthesis has emerged as an alternative solution with promising
application potential. Currently, a few synthesis techniques
for binary CD (e.g., building variations) have been studied, categorized into two mainstreams: data augmentationbased and data generation-based methods. In the former,
IAug (Zheng et al. 2021) and Self-Pair (Seo et al. 2023)
use copy-paste and image inpainting techniques, pasting instances or patches from other regions onto target images
to simulate building changes. However, the inconsistency
between pasted areas and backgrounds makes it challenging to create realistic scene changes. In the latter, Changen
(Zheng et al. 2023) introduces a generic probabilistic graphical model to generate continuous change pairs, improving
the realism of synthetic images. However, Changen still relies on copy-paste operation of the image mask (semantic
layout) to create changes, making it difficult to flexibly control change events. Additionally, the mask-based copy-paste
is not easily applicable to semantic CD (SCD) task due to
the lack of complete masks. Moreover, it requires additional
segmentation data to train the probabilistic model, limiting
transferability to specific target data. A detailed comparison
of these methods is provided in Table 1.
Recently, driven by latent diffusion models (Rombach
et al. 2022), generative models have reached a new milestone(Khanna et al. 2023). Stable Diffusion (Podell et al.
2023) and DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al. 2022) introduce largescale pretrained text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models that
can generate high-quality images matching textual descriptions. Furthermore, advanced work, e.g., ControlNet (Zhang

Introduction
Change detection (CD), a key Earth observation task, employs bitemporal remote sensing data to gain a dynamic
understanding of the Earth’s surface, producing pixel-wise
change maps for ground objects (Feranec et al. 2007; Chen
et al. 2013; Kadhim, Mourshed, and Bray 2016). In recent years, data-driven deep learning models have provided
promising tools for CD and achieved remarkable progress
(Lei et al. 2019; Arabi, Karoui, and Djerriri 2018; Dong et al.
2018). These advancements rely on large-scale, high-quality
pixel-level annotations. However, building such a dataset
poses a significant challenge because collecting diverse data
and manually annotating them is costly, labor-intensive, and
requires expert intervention. As a result, these challenges unsurprisingly restrict the size of existing public CD datasets,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9763

