The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

V2C-CBM: Building Concept Bottlenecks with Vision-to-Concept Tokenizer
Hangzhou He1,2,3,4 , Lei Zhu1,2,3,4 , Xinliang Zhang1,2,3,4 , Shuang Zeng1,2,3,4 , Qian Chen1,2,3,4 , Yanye
Lu1,2,3,4 *
1

Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
{zhuang, zhulei, chen qian}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangxinliang mit@163.com, {stevezs, yanye.lu}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Describe:
{passionflower}

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) offer inherent interpretability by initially translating images into humancomprehensible concepts, followed by a linear combination
of these concepts for classification. However, the annotation
of concepts for visual recognition tasks requires extensive expert knowledge and labor, constraining the broad adoption of
CBMs. Recent approaches have leveraged the knowledge of
large language models to construct concept bottlenecks, with
multimodal models like CLIP subsequently mapping image
features into the concept feature space for classification. Despite this, the concepts produced by language models can be
verbose and may introduce non-visual attributes, which hurts
accuracy and interpretability. In this study, we investigate to
avoid these issues by constructing CBMs directly from multimodal models. To this end, we adopt common words as
base concept vocabulary and leverage auxiliary unlabeled images to construct a Vision-to-Concept (V2C) tokenizer that
can explicitly quantize images into their most relevant visual concepts, thus creating a vision-oriented concept bottleneck tightly coupled with the multimodal model. This leads
to our V2C-CBM which is training efficient and interpretable
with high accuracy. Our V2C-CBM has matched or outperformed LLM-supervised CBMs on various visual classification benchmarks, validating the efficacy of our approach.

LLMs

LLM-generated
concept bottlenecks
Ours: Vision-oriented
concept bottlenecks
V2C
Tokenizer

• blue tint
• found in some parts of
Africa (non-visual)
• known for its sweet
fragrance which is said
to be reminiscent of the
passion fruit (verbose)

• blue, purple
• symmetrical
• purple center

Figure 1: Problems in previous LLM-generated concept bottlenecks: non-visual and verbose concepts. Our solution:
vision-oriented concept bottlenecks generated by Vision-toConcept tokenizer directly from images.

lags behind that of black-box deep learning models. The
trade-off between accuracy and interpretability has been a
focal point in the field of explainable artificial intelligence
research (Gunning and Aha 2019; Ali et al. 2023).
Recently, concept bottleneck models (CBMs) have gained
prominence for offering inherent interpretability with competitive performance (Koh et al. 2020). CBMs first map the
image features extracted by deep learning models into a
set of human-interpretable concepts (such as red head or
white chest for bird classification), and then employ a linear layer to aggregate these concepts for the final prediction.
The two-step design of CBMs also allows for intervention
by manually altering the concept predictions. When suitable
and accurate concept labels are provided, CBM can achieve
comparable accuracy with better interpretability. Koh et al.
and Zarlenga et al. have demonstrated the effectiveness of
CBMs in fine-grained bird classification (Wah et al. 2011)
and celebrity recognition (Liu et al. 2015) tasks.
Although CBMs hold promise, the annotation of concepts for visual recognition tasks requires considerable expert knowledge and labor, which impedes their widespread
adoption and scalability. Recent research has addressed this
challenge by using large language models (LLMs) to generate class-specific descriptions as concepts, and by harness-

Code — https://github.com/riverback/V2C-CBM

Introduction
With the increasing adoption of deep learning-based methods in high-risk and sensitive fields such as medical diagnosis and legal matters, the explainability of models is crucial for ensuring fairness and trustworthiness. Research is
centered around two types of interpretability (Arrieta et al.
2020): post-hoc and inherent. One benefit of post-hoc methods is that they do not hurt the performance of the original black-box models (Nielsen et al. 2022). However, the
fidelity of post-hoc methods cannot be guaranteed, and the
explanations can be misleading (Geirhos et al. 2024) or unreliable without context (Tomaszewska and Biecek 2024). In
contrast, inherently interpretable models offer explainability
through mechanism design, but their performance usually
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3401

