The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DPLUT: Unsupervised Low-light Image Enhancement
with Lookup Tables and Diffusion Priors
Yunlong Lin1,2 * , Zhenqi Fu3* , Kairun Wen1,2 , Tian Ye4 , Sixiang Chen4 , Ge Meng1,2 ,
Yingying Wang1 , Chui Kong5 , Yue Huang1,2 , Xiaotong Tu1,2 , and Xinghao Ding1,2†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Tsinghua University, China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
5
Fudan University, China
dxh@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-light image enhancement (LIE) aims at precisely and
efficiently recovering an image degraded in poor illumination environments. Recent advanced LIE techniques are using deep neural networks, which require lots of low-normal
light image pairs, network parameters, and computational resources. As a result, their practicality is limited. In this work,
we devise a novel unsupervised LIE framework based on
diffusion priors and lookup tables (DPLUT) to achieve efficient low-light image recovery. The proposed approach comprises two critical components: a light adjustment lookup table (LLUT) and a noise suppression lookup table (NLUT).
LLUT is optimized with a set of unsupervised losses. It aims
at predicting pixel-wise curve parameters for the dynamic
range adjustment of a specific image. NLUT is designed to
remove the amplified noise after the light brightens. As diffusion models are sensitive to noise, diffusion priors are introduced to achieve high-performance noise suppression. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in terms of visual quality and efficiency.

Figure 1: Comparisons of performance and efficiency. The
average PSNR is evaluated on LSRW (Hai et al. 2023),
and inference time is evaluated on 4K (3840 × 2160) resolution with a single Titan RTX GPU. Our approach obtains the highest PSNR and can process 4K low-light images
in real-time. Note that ⋆ and ⋆ indicate the maximum size
that the models can handle is 480P (640 × 480) and 1080P
(1920 × 1080), respectively.

degradation, resulting in suboptimal performance. As shown
in Fig. 1, efficiency-oriented methods can meet the realtime requirements of practical applications, but the performance is far from satisfactory. In contrast, quality-oriented
approaches, such as Retinexformer (Cai et al. 2023) and
CUE (Zheng et al. 2023) achieve relatively higher performance than efficiency-oriented methods. Their success
was largely due to the deep and complex network architectures, massive paired training data, and high computational
and memory costs. In Fig. 1, existing quality-oriented approaches cannot process 4K resolution images in real-time.

Introduction
The goal of low-light image enhancement (LIE) is to improve the visual quality of images captured in low-light
conditions. As a fundamental preprocessing task, LIE algorithms are expected to be effective and efficient, especially
on resource-constrained devices and embedded platforms.
Over the past few years, prolific algorithms have been proposed (Cai et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023; He et al. 2023a; Lin
et al. 2024b), which can be roughly classified into efficiencyand quality-oriented methods.
Efficiency-oriented methods, such as SCI (Ma et al. 2022)
and ZeroDCE++ (Li, Guo, and Loy 2021), can generate
normal-light images in real-time. However, these methods have limited representative ability in diverse low-light

The lookup table (LUT) is a crucial component in the
image signal processors (ISPs) owing to its high efficiency
and practicality. LUTs can be either pre-defined or learned.
Pre-defined LUTs are manually tuned by experienced experts, exhibiting limited expressive capacity to adapt to diverse scenes. In contrast, learned LUTs (Zeng et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021) are significantly more expressive and

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5316

