The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for Tabular Data
Using Deep Noise Evaluation
Wei Dai, Kai Hwang, Jicong Fan*
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
weidai@link.cuhk.edu.com, hwangkai@cuhk.edu.cn, fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2024; Xiao et al. 2025). Such assumptions may not hold
or be guaranteed in practice and sometimes place a burden
on the model training (Cai and Fan 2022; Fu, Zhang, and
Fan 2024). For instance, in deep SVDD (Ruff et al. 2018),
the optimal decision boundary in the embedding space may
be very different from the learned hypersphere, leading to
unsatisfactory detection performance (Zhang et al. 2024).
Given that tabular data is probably the most common data
type and other types of data such as images can be converted
to tabular data using feature encoders or pretrained models,
in this work, we focus on the tabular data only. We propose
a novel unsupervised AD method for tabular data without
making any assumption about the distribution of normal data.
Since hard anomalies are often close to normal data, it is
reasonable to hypothesize that hard anomalies are special
cases of perturbed samples of normal data. Therefore, if the
diversity of the perturbations or added noises on normal data
is sufficiently high, we can obtain hard anomalies. Consequently, if a model can recognize highly diverse perturbations
or noises, it can detect hard anomalies as well as easy anomalies successfully. By directly learning from the diverse noise
patterns and the clean data patterns, we can learn an effective
decision boundary around the normal data, generalizing well
to unseen data. Our contributions are highlighted as follows.

Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) plays an important
role in modern data analytics and it is crucial to provide simple
yet effective and guaranteed UAD algorithms for real applications. In this paper, we present a novel UAD method for tabular
data by evaluating how much noise is in the data. Specifically,
we propose to learn a deep neural network from the clean
(normal) training dataset and a noisy dataset, where the latter
is generated by adding highly diverse noises to the clean data.
The neural network can learn a reliable decision boundary
between normal data and anomalous data when the diversity
of the generated noisy data is sufficiently high so that the
hard abnormal samples lie in the noisy region. Importantly,
we provide theoretical guarantees, proving that the proposed
method can detect anomalous data successfully, although the
method does not utilize any real anomalous data in the training
stage. Extensive experiments through more than 60 benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
in comparison to 12 baselines of UAD. Our method obtains
a 92.27% AUC score and a 1.68 ranking score on average.
Moreover, compared to the state-of-the-art UAD methods, our
method is easier to implement.

Introduction
In the realm of data analysis, anomaly detection (AD) stands
as a pivotal challenge with far-reaching implications across
various domains, including cybersecurity (Siddiqui et al.
2019; Saeed et al. 2023), healthcare (Yang, Qi, and Zhou
2023; Abououf et al. 2023), finance (Hilal, Gadsden, and
Yawney 2022), and industrial processes (Fan, Chow, and Qin
2022; Roth et al. 2022). Existing deep learning-based unsupervised AD methods often rely on an auxiliary learning
objective such as auto-encoder, generative model, and contrastive learning. These methods indirectly detect anomalous
data using other metrics such as reconstruction error, which
lack generalizability and reliability guarantees (Hussain et al.
2023). Explicitly learning a one-class decision boundary may
resolve this issue. Many well-known unsupervised AD methods assume the normal training data has a special structure in
their data space or embedding space (Schölkopf et al. 2001;
Tax and Duin 2004; Ruff et al. 2018; Goyal et al. 2020; Zhang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11553

• We propose a novel AD method for tabular data using
noise evaluation. Our scheme generates highly diverse
noise-augmented instances for the normal samples. By
evaluating the noise magnitude, our method can accurately
identify anomalies.
• The proposed method provides a simple yet effective
scheme that does not make assumptions about the normal
training data. In addition, the noise generation is straightforward without any extra training. Compared with (Wang
et al. 2021; Goyal et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2021; Cai and
Fan 2022), our method is more lightweight for training
(requires less module for training.)
• We theoretically prove the generalizability and reliability
of the proposed method.
• We conduct extensive empirical experiments on 47 real
datasets in an unsupervised anomaly detection setting and
25 real-world tabular datasets in a one-class classification
setting to demonstrate the performance of the proposed
schemes. The results show that our method achieved su-

