The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pre-Training Graph Neural Networks on Molecules by Using
Subgraph-Conditioned Graph Information Bottleneck
Van Thuy Hoang, O-Joun Lee*
Department of Artificial Intelligence, The Catholic University of Korea
{hoangvanthuy90, ojlee}@catholic.ac.kr

Abstract

contrastive learning, and subgraph-level pre-training. Nodelevel pre-training mainly focuses on node-level prediction,
e.g., node attribute reconstruction or edge prediction, which
may not fully leverage the high-order structure of molecules,
i.e., functional groups (Rong et al. 2020). The second strategy is contrastive learning, which focuses on learning representations by contrasting multiple views of molecules based
on random or heuristic augmentations (You et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2021). More recently, subgraph-level strategies
focus on semantic subgraphs, which can capture both local and global structural patterns by identifying functional
groups (Subramonian 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Rong et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2023; Inae, Liu, and Jiang 2023). The
main idea is to use human annotations or prior knowledge
to extract the semantic subgraphs, e.g., frequent subgraphs
across molecules, to enhance recognizing significant substructures and molecular property prediction (Luong and
Singh 2023; Degen et al. 2008). To sum up, most recent pretraining strategies aggregate information from node-level or
subgraph-level to generate graph-level representations.

This study aims to build a pre-trained Graph Neural Network (GNN) model on molecules without human annotations or prior knowledge. Although various attempts have
been proposed to overcome limitations in acquiring labeled
molecules, the previous pre-training methods still rely on
semantic subgraphs, i.e., functional groups. Only focusing
on the functional groups could overlook the graph-level distinctions. The key challenge to build a pre-trained GNN on
molecules is how to (1) generate well-distinguished graphlevel representations and (2) automatically discover the functional groups without prior knowledge. To solve it, we propose a novel Subgraph-conditioned Graph Information Bottleneck, named S-CGIB, for pre-training GNNs to recognize
core subgraphs (graph cores) and significant subgraphs. The
main idea is that the graph cores contain compressed and
sufficient information that could generate well-distinguished
graph-level representations and reconstruct the input graph
conditioned on significant subgraphs across molecules under the S-CGIB principle. To discover significant subgraphs
without prior knowledge about functional groups, we propose generating a set of functional group candidates, i.e., ego
networks, and using an attention-based interaction between
the graph core and the candidates. Despite being identified
from self-supervised learning, our learned subgraphs match
the real-world functional groups. Extensive experiments on
molecule datasets across various domains demonstrate the superiority of S-CGIB.

However, two challenges limit the existing pre-training
strategies on molecules. First, the existing strategies lack
the ability to generate well-distinguished graph-level representations. Most node-level strategies mainly focus on
the local structure and then adopt a pooling function, e.g.,
mean, max, or sum, to aggregate information, resulting in
poor-distinguished graph-level representations as information from noisy and redundant nodes can be aggregated to
form graph-level representations (Hu et al. 2020a). Besides,
while subgraph-level strategies (Subramonian 2021; Zhang
et al. 2021) can capture specific subgraphs at multiple scales,
they could overlook the entire graph-level distinctions (Rong
et al. 2020; Inae, Liu, and Jiang 2023). That is, subgraphlevel representations based on discrete pre-defined patterns,
e.g., frequent subgraphs, ignore global interactions between
important nodes that derive the molecule’s entire structure.
For contrastive learning strategies, applying augmentation
schemes, e.g., edge perturbation, could potentially disrupt
the structures and properties of molecules (Lee, Lee, and
Park 2022). Second, it is challenging for subgraph-based
strategies to cover all possible functional groups given in
diverse molecule datasets. To capture functional groups, recent subgraph-level strategies create dictionaries based on
pre-defined rules, e.g., counting the discrete occurrences of

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently emerged in
computational chemistry, offering powerful tools for predicting molecular properties (Gilmer et al. 2017; Kearnes
et al. 2016). While GNNs have shown remarkable performance in molecular property prediction, their effectiveness
depends on the availability of abundant labeled molecules
for model training (Hao et al. 2020; Hoang et al. 2023).
Recently, pre-training strategies have offered considerable potential in overcoming the challenges of the scarcity
of labeled molecular data (Rong et al. 2020; Luong and
Singh 2023). The existing pre-training strategies can be categorized into three primary groups: node-level pre-training,
* Corresponding author: O-Joun Lee (Tel.: +82-2-2164-5516)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17204

