The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SpotActor: Training-Free Layout-Controlled Consistent Image Generation
Jiahao Wang1,2 , Caixia Yan1, * , Weizhan Zhang1, * , Haonan Lin1 , Mengmeng Wang3,4 ,
Guang Dai4 , Tieliang Gong1 , Hao Sun5 , Jingdong Wang6
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
4
SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China
5
China Telecom Artificial Intelligence Technology Co.Ltd
6
Baidu Inc
{uguisu,linhaonan}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {yancaixia,zhangwzh,gongtl}@xjtu.edu.cn, mengmewang@gmail.com,
gdai@gmail.com, sunh10@chinatelecom.cn, wangjingdong@outlook.com
Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models significantly enhance the efficiency of artistic creation with high-fidelity image generation. However, in typical application scenarios like comic
book production, they can neither place each subject into
its expected spot nor maintain the consistent appearance of
each subject across images. For these issues, we pioneer a
novel task, Layout-to-Consistent-Image (L2CI) generation,
which produces consistent and compositional images in accordance with the given layout conditions and text prompts.
To accomplish this challenging task, we present a new formalization of dual energy guidance with optimization in a
dual semantic-latent space and thus propose a training-free
pipeline, SpotActor, which features a layout-conditioned optimizing stage and a consistent sampling stage. In the optimizing stage, we innovate a nuanced layout energy function to mimic the attention activations with a sigmoid-like
objective. While in the sampling stage, we design Regional
Interconnection Self-Attention (RISA) and Semantic Fusion
Cross-Attention (SFCA) mechanisms that allow mutual interactions across images. To evaluate the performance, we
present ActorBench, a specified benchmark with hundreds
of reasonable prompt-box pairs stemming from object detection datasets. Comprehensive experiments are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The results
prove that SpotActor fulfills the expectations of this task and
showcases the potential for practical applications with superior layout alignment, subject consistency, prompt conformity
and background diversity.

Figure 1: Given bounding boxes and text prompts of subjects, our method generates high-quality images where subjects align to the layout and share a consistent appearance.

(Ho and Salimans 2022; Podell et al. 2023) enable artists
to generate high-quality images with descriptions of their
desired subjects. Thus, their applicability extends to numerous practical contexts for their substantial contributions to
artistic productivity. Despite the success, however, their performance in some application scenarios still exhibits aspects
in need of further refinement. For instance, in real-world creation scenarios like comic book drawing, a natural process
involves conceptualizing the appearance of a specific character, designing the visual layout of each scene, and then
illustrating a series of images of the character. This process
reflects two essential skills of professionals: the ability to
preserve appearance consistency of the same character, and
the capacity to render image content in alignment with the
pre-defined layout—both of which are lacking in standard
diffusion models.
Since the emergence of diffusion models, the challenges
of subject consistency and layout controllability have continuously been two separate topics of ongoing research interest. For subject consistency, TheChosenOne (Avrahami
et al. 2024) first introduces the task of consistent subject
generation, which aims to generate consistent images of

Project page —
https://johnneywang.github.io/SpotActor-webpage/

Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Rombach et al. 2022; Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015a) have
achieved notable success in the realm of image generation.
Within this domain, text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7718

