The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Approximating Metric Magnitude of Point Sets
Rayna Andreeva1 , James Ward1 , Primoz Skraba2 , Jie Gao3 , Rik Sarkar1
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2
Queen Mary University of London
3
Rutgers University
r.andreeva@sms.ed.ac.uk, rsarkar@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Metric magnitude of a point cloud is a measure of its “size.”
It has been adapted to various mathematical contexts and recent work suggests that it can enhance machine learning and
optimization algorithms. But its usability is limited due to the
computational cost when the dataset is large or when the computation must be carried out repeatedly (e.g. in model training). In this paper, we study the magnitude computation problem, and show efficient ways of approximating it. We show
that it can be cast as a convex optimization problem, but not
as a submodular optimization. The paper describes two new
algorithms – an iterative approximation algorithm that converges fast and is accurate in practice, and a subset selection
method that makes the computation even faster. It has previously been proposed that the magnitude of model sequences
generated during stochastic gradient descent is correlated to
the generalization gap. Extension of this result using our more
scalable algorithms shows that longer sequences bear higher
correlations. We also describe new applications of magnitude
in machine learning – as an effective regularizer for neural
network training, and as a novel clustering criterion.

a

c

Figure 1: Consider the magnitude function of a 3-point
space, visualized above at different scales. (a) For a small
value of the scale parameter (e.g. t = 0.0001), all the three
points are very close to each other and appear as a single
unit. This space has magnitude close to 1. (b) At t = 0.01
the distance between the two points on the right is still small
and they are clustered together, and the third point is farther
away. This space has Magnitude close to 2 (c) When t is
large, all the three points are distinct and far apart, and Magnitude is 3.

In machine learning and data sciences, the magnitude of a
point cloud can provide useful information about the structure of data. It has recently been applied to study the boundary of a metric space (Bunch et al. 2020), edge detection for
images (Adamer et al. 2024), diversity (Limbeck et al. 2024)
and dimension (Andreeva et al. 2023) of sets of points in
Euclidean space, with applications in data analysis as well
as generalization of models (Andreeva et al. 2024). Wider
applications of magnitude are limited by the computation
cost. For a set of n points, the standard method of computing Magnitude requires inverting an n × n matrix. The best
known lower bound for matrix multiplication and inversion
is Ω(n2 log n) (Raz 2002); the commonly used Strassen’s algorithm (Strassen 1969) has complexity O(n2.81 )1 . By definition, Magnitude computation requires consideration of all
pairs of input points, making it expensive for large datasets.
Our contributions. In this paper, we take the approach that
for many scenarios in data sciences, an approximate yet fast
estimate of magnitude is useful, particularly in real-world

Code — https://github.com/rorondre/approx magnitude
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.04411

1

b

Introduction

Magnitude is a relatively new isometric invariant of metric
spaces. It was introduced to characterize ecology and biodiversity data, and was initially defined as an Euler Characteristic of certain finite categories (Leinster 2008). Similar
to quantities such as the cardinality of a point set, the dimension of vector spaces and Euler characteristic of topological spaces, Magnitude can be seen as measuring the “effective size” of mathematical objects. See Figure 1 for an
intuition of Magnitude of Euclidean points. It has been defined, adapted and studied in many different contexts such
as topology, finite metric spaces, compact metric spaces,
graphs, and machine learning (Leinster 2013; Leinster and
Willerton 2013; Barceló and Carbery 2018; Leinster 2019;
Leinster and Shulman 2021; Kaneta and Yoshinaga 2021;
Giusti and Menara 2024).

1

Faster algorithms for matrix inversion exist, such as the
Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm (Coppersmith and Winograd
1990) with running time O(n2.376 ) and optimized CW-like algorithms with the best running time O(n2.371552 ) (Williams et al.
2024).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15374

