The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CSR:Achieving 1 Bit Key-Value Cache via Sparse Representation
Hongxuan Zhang1, 2 * † , Yao Zhao2† , Jiaqi Zheng1 , Chenyi Zhuang2 , Jinjie Gu2 , Guihai Chen1
1

Nanjing University
2
Ant Group
x zhang@smail.nju.edu.cn, nanxiao.zy@antgroup.com, jzheng@nju.edu.cn,
{chenyi.zcy, jinjie.gujj}@antgroup.com, gchen@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Cache Sparse Representation

Decomposition

2

767

≈ 0.4× + 0.7×

The emergence of long-context text applications utilizing
large language models (LLMs) has presented significant scalability challenges, particularly in memory footprint. The linear growth of the Key-Value (KV) cache, which stores attention keys and values to reduce redundant computations,
can significantly increase memory usage and may prevent
models from functioning properly in memory-constrained environments. To address this issue, we propose a novel approach called Cache Sparse Representation (CSR), which
converts the KV cache by transforming the dense Key-Value
cache tensor into sparse indexes and weights, offering a more
memory-efficient representation during LLM inference. Furthermore, we introduce NeuralDict, a novel neural networkbased method to automatically generate the dictionary used in
our sparse representation. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that CSR matches the performance of state-of-theart KV cache quantization algorithms while ensuring robust
functionality in memory-constrained environments.

Dictionary in Transformer Layer
Extract Offline Part
by Layer Index
0 1 2 3 ... 764

…

…

... 864

Index
Basis
Vector

Collect Online Part
during Inference

≈ 0.3× + 0.4×
𝑥
Sparse Storage

1

873

Coefficients:

0.4
0.3

0.7
0.4 FP16

Indexes:

2
1

767
873

Restoration

INT16

767
0.4× + 0.7× =
2

0.3× + 0.4× =
1

873 𝑥"

Figure 1: The core idea of CSR is to decompose the original
dense vectors into sparse coefficients and indexes based on
a dictionary, which consists of an offline-trained NeuralDict
that learns features related to the KV cache space during
training, and components gathered online, thus significantly
reducing the memory footprint required by the KV cache.

Introduction
The introduction of large language models (LLMs) has
brought about a new wave of exciting AI applications, including document summarization, code analysis, extended
multi-turn applications, tool learning, and more. Among
these applications, those involving long text have garnered
significant interest, such as RAG (Retrieval-Augmented
Generation). RAG tackles the challenge of generating accurate and pertinent content, particularly in scenarios where
queries extend beyond the training data or require up-todate knowledge, by integrating external information sources.
This fusion of RAG with LLMs expands the scope of LLMs
and makes them increasingly applicable for specialized and
knowledge-driven tasks in real-world contexts. However, the
significant number of parameters in LLMs, amounting to
tens or hundreds of billions, results in high memory and
computation requirements during generation tasks, especially when handling long contexts like RAG. To effectively
support large language models (LLMs), it is crucial to batch
multiple requests together to minimize the cost per request.

The key-value (KV) cache utilized to store attention keys
and values, and thereby avoid redundant computations, can
lead to a substantial increase in memory usage and become
a bottleneck for both speed and memory efficiency. The
cache’s memory consumption grows linearly with the length
of the input prompt and the number of tokens generated,
overshadowing even the substantial memory requirements of
the model parameters. This presents scalability challenges
for large language models, as the cache’s linearly expanding memory footprint hinders its ability to handle longer sequences. Therefore, it is imperative to develop methods for
compressing the KV cache to enable long-sequence inference in a memory-efficient manner.
We provide an overview of existing methods that help mitigate KV cache overhead as follows:(Shazeer 2019) introduces Multi-Query Attention, a variant of Multi-Head Attention (MHA)(Vaswani et al. 2017). MQA allows different attention heads to share the same KV caches, thereby
reducing memory usage. Furthermore, (Ainslie et al. 2023)
introduces Grouped-Query Attention (GQA), which strikes
a balance between the performance degradation caused by
MQA and the memory footprint associated with Multi-

* The work done during the internship at Ant Group.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25860

