The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalizing Constraint Models in Constraint Acquisition
Dimos Tsouros1 , Senne Berden1 , Steven Prestwich2 Tias Guns1
1

Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Belgium
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, University College Cork
dimos.tsouros@kuleuven.be, senne.berden@kuleuven.be, s.prestwich@cs.ucc.ie, tias.guns@kuleuven.be
2

Abstract

the focus of the research area of Constraint Acquisition
(CA) (Bessiere et al. 2017), which has been identified as an
important topic for CP (De Raedt, Passerini, and Teso 2018)
and as progress toward the “Holy Grail” of computer science (Freuder 2018).
In CA, constraints are either learned passively
from a set of known solutions and (optionally) nonsolutions (Beldiceanu and Simonis 2012; Berden et al.
2022; Prestwich et al. 2021) or actively through interaction
with a user (Bessiere et al. 2023; Tsouros and Stergiou
2020, 2021). Recent advancements in both passive and
active acquisition systems show significant potential (Prestwich et al. 2021; Prestwich and Wilson 2024; Tsouros,
Berden, and Guns 2024). For instance, a recent application
of interactive CA in a real-world scheduling problem was
presented in (Barral et al. 2024).
However, a significant limitation of most (passive and active) CA systems is that they only learn the ground constraints of a specific problem instance (Arcangioli, Bessiere,
and Lazaar 2016; Bessiere et al. 2017; Prestwich 2021;
Prestwich et al. 2021; Tsouros, Stergiou, and Sarigiannidis 2018), while in practice it is common for the instance at hand to change over time. To accommodate these
changes, well-known constraint modeling languages like
MiniZinc (Nethercote et al. 2007) and CPMpy (Guns 2019)
allow the use of parameters in the constraint model. An assignment of values to the parameters then instantiates the
ground constraints for a given instance of the problem. For
example, in exam timetabling with the requirement ‘exams of courses that are given in the same semester should
be scheduled on different days’, the actual ground constraints will be instantiated based on the following parameters: which semester each course belongs to, and how many
timeslots are available per day. Achieving the same ability
to generalize the constraint models learned using CA over
different instances of the same problem class has been identified as a key challenge for CA (Simonis 2023).
In the literature on CA, there are only a few works that
support generalization. The first approach for generalizing
constraints was introduced in interactive CA (Bessiere et al.
2014; Daoudi et al. 2015), to enhance the acquisition process within a single instance. Although it targets withininstance generalization, this approach can be used across
instances. Another approach, called extrapolation, was re-

Constraint Acquisition (CA) aims to widen the use of constraint programming by assisting users in the modeling process. However, most CA methods suffer from a significant
drawback: they learn a single set of individual constraints
for a specific problem instance, but cannot generalize these
constraints to the parameterized constraint specifications of
the problem. In this paper, we address this limitation by
proposing G EN C ON, a novel approach to learn parameterized
constraint models capable of modeling varying instances of
the same problem. To achieve this generalization, we make
use of statistical learning techniques at the level of individual constraints. Specifically, we propose to train a classifier
to predict, for any possible constraint and parameterization,
whether the constraint belongs to the problem. We then show
how, for some classes of classifiers, we can extract decision
rules to construct interpretable constraint specifications. This
enables the generation of ground constraints for any parameter instantiation. Additionally, we present a generate-and-test
approach that can be used with any classifier, to generate the
ground constraints on the fly. Our empirical results demonstrate that our approach achieves high accuracy and is robust
to noise in the input instances.

Code — https://github.com/Dimosts/GenConModels
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14950

Introduction
Constraint Programming (CP) is considered one of the main
paradigms for solving combinatorial problems in AI. It provides powerful modeling languages and solvers for decisionmaking, with many successful applications (Wallace 1996;
Simonis 1999). In CP, the user declaratively states the constraints over a set of decision variables, thereby defining the
feasible solutions to their problem. A solver is then used
to generate a solution. However, modeling a new application as a constraint problem requires significant expertise,
which is a barrier to the wider use of CP (Freuder and
O’Sullivan 2014; Freuder 2018). This has motivated the
development of methods to assist the user in the modeling process (De Raedt, Passerini, and Teso 2018; Freuder
2018; Kolb 2016; Lombardi and Milano 2018). This is
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11362

