The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Benchmarking and Understanding Compositional Relational Reasoning of LLMs
Ruikang Ni1 * † , Da Xiao1 * ‡ , Qingye Meng2 , Xiangyu Li3† , Shihui Zheng1 , Hongliang Liang1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
ColorfulClouds Technology Co., Ltd.,
3
ICBC UBS Asset Management
{ni,xiaoda99,shihuizheng,hliang}@bupt.edu.cn
hilbertmeng@gmail.com, li.xiangyu@icbccs.com.cn

Abstract

strengths and weaknesses of models on targeted tasks. Thus,
they are more suitable for benchmarking CRR, which occurs relatively rarely in real-world corpora. Besides, we also
want to understand the underlying mechanism by which the
models solve CRR using mechanistic interpretability (MI)
(Bereska and Gavves 2024) analysis.

Compositional relational reasoning (CRR) is a hallmark of
human intelligence, but we lack a clear understanding of
whether and how existing transformer large language models (LLMs) can solve CRR tasks. To enable systematic exploration of the CRR capability of LLMs, we first propose
a new synthetic benchmark called Generalized Associative
Recall (GAR) by integrating and generalizing the essence of
several tasks in mechanistic interpretability (MI) study in a
unified framework. Evaluation shows that GAR is challenging enough for existing LLMs, revealing their fundamental
deficiency in CRR. Meanwhile, it is easy enough for systematic MI study. Then, to understand how LLMs solve GAR
tasks, we use attribution patching to discover the core circuits
reused by Vicuna-33B across different tasks and a set of vital
attention heads. Intervention experiments show that the correct functioning of these heads significantly impacts task performance. Especially, we identify two classes of heads whose
activations represent the abstract notion of true and false in
GAR tasks respectively. They play a fundamental role in CRR
across various models and tasks.

One line of work studies compositional or multi-step reasoning (Dziri et al. 2024; Press et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024;
Allen-Zhu and Li 2023; Ye, Li, and Allen-Zhu 2024; Zhang
et al. 2022; Sanford, Hsu, and Telgarsky 2024; Brinkmann
et al. 2024; Thomm et al. 2024; Zhao and Zhang 2024). They
use synthetic tasks to reveal some fundamental limitations
of LLMs on such tasks, manifested as either poor generalization when task complexities of training and test set differ (Dziri et al. 2024), or the compositionality gap (Press
et al. 2023), i.e., how often models correctly answer all subproblems but not generate the overall solution. In these tasks,
difficulty is mainly controlled by the number of reasoning
steps. When the number becomes large, the over-complex
input and usually poor performance of existing LLMs, especially open source ones, make in-depth MI study infeasible.
Several studies train specialized models from scratch on the
proposed tasks, but the conclusions drawn from analyzing
these models may not necessarily apply to existing LLMs.
Moreover, the benchmarks used by most of these works have
only a single dimension of variety, namely, the number of
steps, which captures only an aspect of CRR.

Dataset and code — https://github.com/Caiyun-AI/GAR

Introduction
Compositional relational reasoning (CRR), the ability to reason about multiple types of relations between different entities and combine them to draw conclusions or make predictions, is a hallmark of human intelligence. Transformer large
language models (LLMs) have become the de facto backbone for foundation models due to their exceptional performance on various tasks. An important open question is
whether and how existing LLMs can solve CRR tasks.
Attempting to answer this question, a number of works
study the CRR capabilities of LLMs using synthetic benchmarks (Weston et al. 2016; Lake and Baroni 2018; Clark,
Tafjord, and Richardson 2020). Compared with real-world
benchmarks, synthetic benchmarks offer precise control
over the data creation process, helping to understand the

Another line of research uses synthetic tasks for MI
study, e.g. associative recall (AR) (Ba et al. 2016; Fu et al.
2023; Olsson et al. 2022), knowledge recall (KR) (Meng
et al. 2022; Geva et al. 2023), greater-than (Hanna, Liu,
and Variengien 2023) and indirect object identification (IOI)
(Wang et al. 2023). Using techniques such as path patching
(Wang et al. 2023) and attribution patching (Syed, Rager,
and Conmy 2023; Hanna, Pezzelle, and Belinkov 2024),
some works discover the circuits - subgraph of the model’s
computation graph consisting of attention heads and MLPs
- responsible for solving the tasks. These works deepen our
understanding of the general working mechanism of LLMs.
For example, the induction head mechanism found by studying AR tasks underpins the in-context learning capability of
Transformer LLMs (Olsson et al. 2022). And the IOI circuit is also generalizable to other tasks (Merullo, Eickhoff,

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Contribution during internship at ColorfulClouds Tech.
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

19703

