The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploiting Multimodal Spatial-temporal Patterns for Video Object Tracking
Xiantao Hu1 , Ying Tai2,1 * , Xu Zhao1 , Chen Zhao2 , Zhenyu Zhang2 , Jun Li1 , Bineng Zhong3 ,
Jian Yang1 *
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Nanjing University
3
Guangxi Normal University
{xiantaohu, csjyang, junli}@njust.edu.cn, {yingtai,zhenyuzhang}@nju.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn
Update Reference Information

RGB

Extraction
&
Interaction

X-modal

Extraction
&
Interaction

X-modal

Multimodal tracking has garnered widespread attention as a
result of its ability to effectively address the inherent limitations of traditional RGB tracking. However, existing multimodal trackers mainly focus on the fusion and enhancement
of spatial features or merely leverage the sparse temporal relationships between video frames. These approaches do not
fully exploit the temporal correlations in multimodal videos,
making it difficult to capture the dynamic changes and motion
information of targets in complex scenarios. To alleviate this
problem, we propose a unified multimodal spatial-temporal
tracking approach named STTrack. In contrast to previous
paradigms that solely relied on updating reference information, we introduced a temporal state generator (TSG) that
continuously generates a sequence of tokens containing multimodal temporal information. These temporal information
tokens are used to guide the localization of the target in the
next time state, establish long-range contextual relationships
between video frames, and capture the temporal trajectory of
the target. Furthermore, at the spatial level, we introduced
the mamba fusion and background suppression interactive
(BSI) modules. These modules establish a dual-stage mechanism for coordinating information interaction and fusion between modalities. Extensive comparisons on five benchmark
datasets illustrate that STTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance across various multimodal tracking scenarios.

Prediction

RGB

Abstract

RGB X-modal

Extraction
&
Interaction
Prediction

T2

Multimodal
Temporal
Information

Condition

Update Reference Information

(a) Offline Multimodal Tracker

T1

Prediction

(b) Online Multimodal Tracker

RGB X-modal

Extraction
&
Interaction
Prediction

Tn RGB

Multimodal
Temporal
Information

···

X-modal

Extraction
&
Interaction

···

Prediction

(c) Temporal Tracker
SDSTrack(CVPR2024)

58.9

59.7

60.8

RGB-E AUC 

OneTracker (CVPR204)

61.9
71.8

72.7

Un-Track (CVPR2024)

STTrack (Ours)

77.6

72.8

RGB-D EAO 
(d) Performance Comparison

60.3
53.1

53.6

53.8

RGB-T SR 

Figure 1: Illustrations of different frameworks of multimodal trackers (a)-(c), and performance comparison
(d). (a) Offline multimodal tracker performs offline tracking
of video sequences using fixed template frames. (b) Online
multimodal tracker is based on an updating strategy, which
utilizes the results condition to update the reference information.(c) Our proposed STTrack transmits multimodal temporal information throughout the tracking process. (d) STTrack
achieves superior performance against recent state-of-the-art
competitors on three popular multimodal tasks.

Code — https://github.com/NJU-PCALab/STTrack

Introduction
Visual object tracking is the process of locating and following a specific object across consecutive frames in a video sequence. As a fundamental vision task, it is essential for various applications (Wang et al. 2022, 2025; Jiang et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2024b) and their related tasks (An et al. 2024;
Zheng et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024a; Fang et al. 2023; Nan
et al. 2024; Ning et al. 2023). Despite numerous efficient
RGB-based trackers (Xie et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2024; Hu
et al. 2024b; Wei et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2020, 2021, 2022;
Xue et al. 2024) have been proposed through high quality
dataset (Fan et al. 2019; Huang, Zhao, and Huang 2021;

Müller et al. 2018), they are still limited by the degradation
of RGB imaging quality caused by the complexity of realworld scenarios, which leads to tracking errors. Compared to
RGB modalities, thermal infrared (TIR) provides clear target
information in low light environments; depth modalities offer distance cues from depth cameras; and event modalities
use event-based cameras to capture motion information and
generate stable target trajectories. Therefore, developing an
effective multimodal tracker that combines various modality
X (such as TIR, depth, and event) with RGB is crucial for
robust tracking.
Multimodal tracking methods can be broadly categorized

* Ying Tai and Jian Yang are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3581

