The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attack-in-the-Chain: Bootstrapping Large Language Models for Attacks
Against Black-Box Neural Ranking Models
Yu-An Liu1,2 , Ruqing Zhang1,2 , Jiafeng Guo1,2 * , Maarten de Rijke3 , Yixing Fan1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1

CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{liuyuan21b, zhangruqing, guojiafeng, fanyixing, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, m.derijke@uva.nl
Abstract

These efforts demonstrate the potential of LLMs to reveal
the vulnerability of neural models. However, adversarial
ranking attacks in IR differ from attacks in NLP as they face
a multi-step “battle” with every top-ranked document in the
list to improve their rankings while ensuring efficiency. Using the capabilities of LLMs for adversarial ranking attacks
remains a challenging and unresolved task.
Inspired by chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting (Wang
et al. 2023a; Wei et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023a; Cohn et al.
2024), we develop attack-in-the-chain (AttChain), which
uses multiple NRM-LLM interaction rounds to effectively
achieve attacks. Each node in the reasoning chain targets
phased ranking improvements, gradually evolving the target
document into a fluent and imperceptible adversarial example. To this end, we need to resolve two key challenges.
First, how to identify nodes in the reasoning chain guiding
ranking improvement? We define an anchor document to be
a document with a higher ranking position than the current
perturbed document in the returned list. Each anchor document serves as a node to guide the ranking improvement of
the target document. When the target document achieves a
higher ranking, the nodes are updated accordingly to provide
further guidance. Considering all top-ranked documents as
nodes increases the computational effort and can be misleading. We design a Zipf-based filtering strategy, in which
higher-ranked documents are more likely to be retained as
candidate documents and selected as anchor documents by
LLMs based on previous interactions. This allows the target
document to obtain sufficient informational guidance on its
path to improving its ranking.
Second, how to perturb the target document based on the
anchor document node in the reasoning chain? We design
a discrepancy-oriented assignment function to dynamically
assess the number of perturbation words at each step. The
key idea is that the degree of perturbation to the target document should be flexibly decided according to its ranking
position relative to the anchor document: if the ranking discrepancy is large (small), a large (small) number of perturbation words is needed. We then instruct LLMs to generate
perturbations via carefully crafted prompts such that the target documents are ranked higher while keeping the perturbations imperceptible. Finally, we verify the perturbed documents of all nodes at each reasoning step and select the most

Neural ranking models (NRMs) have been shown to be highly
effective in terms of retrieval performance. Unfortunately,
they have also displayed a higher degree of sensitivity to
attacks than previous generation models. To help expose
and address this lack of robustness, we introduce a novel
ranking attack framework named Attack-in-the-Chain, which
tracks interactions between large language models (LLMs)
and NRMs based on chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting to
generate adversarial examples under black-box settings. Our
approach starts by identifying anchor documents with higher
ranking positions than the target document as nodes in the
reasoning chain. We then dynamically assign the number of
perturbation words to each node and prompt LLMs to execute
attacks. Finally, we verify the attack performance of all nodes
at each reasoning step and proceed to generate the next reasoning step. Empirical results on two web search benchmarks
show the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Neural ranking models (NRMs) are remarkably effective at
ranking (Dai and Callan 2019; Guo et al. 2016; Nogueira
and Cho 2019; Yan et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2019) in information retrieval (IR). But they have also shown vulnerability to carefully crafted adversarial examples (Raval and
Verma 2020; Song, Rush, and Shmatikov 2020; Wang, Lyu,
and Anand 2022). This vulnerability raises concerns when
deploying NRMs in environments susceptible to black-hat
search engine optimization (SEO) (Gyongyi and GarciaMolina 2005). To prevent the exploitation of NRMs, research has focused on the study of adversarial ranking attacks, which aim to deceive NRMs by promoting a lowranked target document to a higher position in the ranked
list for a query through human-imperceptible perturbations
(Chen et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022, 2023; Wu et al. 2023).
Large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al. 2023;
Jiang et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024)
have shown strong abilities in understanding, reasoning, and
interaction. These abilities have enabled LLMs to achieve
strong performance in adversarial attacks in natural language processing (NLP) (Chao et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023b).
* Jiafeng Guo is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12229

