The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Label Aggregation of Composite Crowd Tasks
by Worker Ability Constraint Satisfaction
Jiyi Li
University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Japan
garfieldpigljy@gmail.com

Object
Question Type
Set
Homogeneous {Q1 }
Heterogeneous {Q1 , Q2 }
1 {{O1 , Q1 }, {O1 , Q2 }}
Single
{O1 , Q1 }
⃝
{O1 }
(SCT)
(Our, CCT)
2 {{O1 , Q1 }, {O2 , Q1 }} ⃝
3 {{O1 , Q1 }, {O2 , Q2 }}
Multiple ⃝
{O1 , O2 }
(Our, CCT)
(Our, CCT)

Abstract
Quality control is a crucial issue of label data collection by
crowdsourcing. Typically, aggregation methods to redundant
crowd labels are proposed for estimating high-quality labels
from noisy crowd labels. Most of the existing works concentrate on the label aggregation for Single Crowd Tasks (SCTs)
which have a single object set with homogeneous question
types. However, it is useful for a requester to combine multiple relevant but different crowd tasks into a Composite Crowd
Task (CCT) which have heterogeneous question types and
(or) multiple object sets for diverse purposes. Instead of the
label aggregation on each crowd task respectively, label aggregation methods by bridging multiple SCTs in CCTs can
potentially improve the label quality of all tasks. In this paper, we propose a general label aggregation approach for such
CCTs by worker ability constraint satisfaction and relaxed
optimization. We collected real crowd datasets of CCTs with
diverse task settings based on heterogeneous question types,
including categorization, pairwise preference comparisons,
and pairwise similarity comparisons. The results demonstrate
that our approach can effectively bridge the worker information of CCTs to improve the quality of aggregated labels and
outperforms the baselines proposed for SCTs.

Table 1: Settings of our CCTs. Existing works of SCTs focus
on homogeneous questions to single object sets. We concentrate on the cases with multiple object sets or (and) heterogeneous question types.

are asked to provide pairwise similarity labels, i.e., whether
two objects are similar or not (Gomes et al. 2011; Yi et al.
2012; Nguyen, Ibrahim, and Fu 2023; Ariu et al. 2024).
There are also methods for triplet similarity labels (van der
Maaten and Weinberger 2012), numerical data (Li et al.
2014), complex data such as bounding boxes and taxonomy
paths (Meir et al. 2024), and so on. When deploying crowd
tasks on the web and gathering labels, typically, a single type
of question is employed, and only one type of label is collected. In this study, we call such crowdsourcing tasks as
Single Crowd Tasks (SCTs).
However, in real applications, it is useful for a requester
to combine multiple relevant but different crowd tasks into
a Composite Crowd Task (CCT) which have heterogeneous
question types and (or) multiple object sets for diverse purposes. We use the categorization task, ranking tasks with
pairwise preference comparisons, and clustering tasks with
pairwise similarity comparisons to raise three examples.
1 in Table 1 consists of two tasks with two difFirst, Case ⃝
ferent question types, Q1 and Q2 , for the same object set O1 .
Table 2 provides an example with the objects, two heterogeneous types of pairwise comparison questions and labels,
and aggregated results. Given a pair of opinions from a set of
crowd opinions O1 collected to solve an issue, a worker can
answer two heterogeneous types of questions: “Which of the
two opinions do you prefer?” (Q1 : pairwise preference ) and
“Are two opinions similar or not?” (Q2 : pairwise similarity),
rather than only answering single question type. During label aggregation, one question type and its labels can provide
auxiliary information to another question type and its labels.
Second, Case 2
⃝ in Table 1 consists of two tasks with the
same question type, Q1 , for two different object sets, O1

Introduction
Crowdsourcing has been widely used for collecting diverse
label data. The quality of crowd labels is critical due to the
ability or diligence of the crowd workers. One method for
improving label quality is label aggregation, which is proposed for estimating high-quality labels from noisy crowd
labels. Most of the existing works on this topic concentrate
on the homogeneous types of questions for a single set of
objects. For example, for some classification tasks, workers
are asked to provide categorical labels to the objects (Snow
et al. 2008; Whitehill et al. 2009; Venanzi et al. 2014; Li
and de Rijke 2023; Li, Jiang, and Xue 2023; Yang et al.
2024), e.g., which category should be assigned to an object.
For some ranking tasks, workers are asked to provide pairwise preference labels, e.g., whether one object is preferred
to another (Bradley and Terry 1952; Chen et al. 2013; Jin
et al. 2020; Liu, Fang, and Lu 2023; Ferrara et al. 2024). For
some clustering and representation learning tasks, workers
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14283

