The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PlaNet: Learning to Mitigate Atmospheric Turbulence in Planetary Images
Yifei Xia1,2† , Chu Zhou3† , Chengxuan Zhu4 , Chao Xu4 , Boxin Shi1,2∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
4
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{yfxia, peterzhu, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, zhou chu@hotmail.com, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Planet

Obtaining planetary images with good visual quality is not
an easy task since they are usually degenerated by atmospheric turbulence during the imaging procedure. Existing atmospheric turbulence mitigation methods designed for conventional images cannot be applied to planetary images, since
the objects on the Earth have totally different degeneration
patterns to planets. Besides, in planetary imaging, photographers often capture as many frames as possible to reduce the
noise level of planetary images, which requires the method
designed for planetary images to support an arbitrary number
of input frames. In this paper, we propose a vertical distanceaware turbulence simulation pipeline to synthesize realistic
planetary images in accordance with their unique degeneration patterns at a large scale with affordable computational
cost, and design a neural network to mitigate the turbulence
with flexible input frames by adopting an edge-based supervision strategy to handle the background scarcity issue. Experimental results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both synthetic and real-world images.

20km

Dense atmosphere

<1km

Observer

Degenerated conventional image

Objects on the Earth

Degenerated planetary image

Figure 1: Top: An illustration to show the difference of vertical distance (marked using orange and green arrows) between planets and the objects on the Earth. Bottom: A realworld example to demonstrate the domain gap between conventional images and planetary images.

Introduction
Planetary imaging aims to capture the planets within our
solar system on the Earth. Since the distribution of atmospheric refraction index is spatially-variant (Roggemann,
Welsh, and Hunt 1996), the light waves passing through the
atmosphere would be severely distorted, resulting in degenerated captured images. Such degeneration is called atmospheric turbulence, which can be regarded as an entanglement of pixel displacement (known as the tilt), blur, and
noise (Fazlali et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022b; Mao et al.
2022). To obtain a turbulence-free planetary image, photographers usually record a large number of frames (usually
ranging from hundreds to thousands) of the same scene, and
fuse them using softwares (e.g., AutoStakkert1 ). However,
the fusing results are not yet satisfactory, since these softwares only keep the “lucky” frames (frames with relatively
less distortion) by simply discarding other frames, while the

“lucky” frames are not always available (Fried 1978) so that
the information contained in the discarded frames are completely unexploited. Therefore, effectively mitigating atmospheric turbulence in planetary images is still an open problem.
Recently, neural networks have been introduced to
mitigate atmospheric turbulence in conventional images,
i.e., images only containing objects on the Earth (Gao,
Anantrasirichai, and Bull 2019; Mao et al. 2022; Rai and
Jawahar 2022; Chak, Lau, and Lui 2018; Jin et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2021; Fazlali et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022b). They
aim to reconstruct the corresponding clean image from a single degenerated image (Gao, Anantrasirichai, and Bull 2019;
Mao et al. 2022; Rai and Jawahar 2022) or a fixed number of degenerated frames (Chak, Lau, and Lui 2018; Jin
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Fazlali et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022b), by extracting semantic and physical priors from a

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
These authors contributed equally. Chu Zhou completed most
of his contributions during his PhD studies at Peking University.
∗
Corresponding author.
1
https://www.autostakkert.com/

8584

