The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Coupling-based Convergence Diagnostic and Stepsize Scheme for Stochastic
Gradient Descent
Xiang Li and Qiaomin Xie
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin–Madison
xiang.li2@wisc.edu, qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu

Abstract

Schmidt, and Bach 2012; Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan
2011; Shamir and Zhang 2013; Hazan and Kale 2014). However, these schedules are often less robust to ill-conditioning
and tend to suffer from a slow convergence rate.
In practice, constant stepsize SGD is widely used, due
to faster convergence and easy tuning. Prior work on constant stepsize SGD (Needell, Ward, and Srebro 2014) provides a classical bias-variance decomposition of the meansquare error. Recent work provides a more precise characterization of its properties (Dieuleveut, Durmus, and Bach
2020; Yu et al. 2021; Lauand and Meyn 2023; Merad and
Gaı̈ffas 2023), by leveraging the fact that the SGD iterates
(θk )k≥0 defined by (1) form a Markov chain with a constant stepsize γk ≡ γ > 0. The Markov chain (θk )k≥0 is
shown to converge at an exponential rate that is proportional
to the stepsize γ. However, the chain does not converge to
the optimal solution θ⋆ but exhibits
as a random walk within
√
a vicinity of θ⋆ of radius O( γ) as k → ∞.
The insights imply that fast convergence can be achieved
by using a large constant stepsize; when the iterates reach
stationarity, reduce the stepsize and continue the iteration
to achieve a better accuracy at the next saturation, upon
which the procedure is repeated. Indeed a common practice
for SGD and deep learning algorithms is to use epoch-wise
constant stepsize and periodically reduce it (He et al. 2016;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Wang, Magnússon,
and Johansson 2021), but the epoch lengths are mostly predetermined and hand-picked. To make the best use of the
procedure to achieve the best of both worlds, it is critical to
develop a saturation diagnostic that effectively and promptly
detects stationarity, while being computationally efficient.
The problem of detecting saturation in constant stepsize
SGD has been studied since the seminal work of Pflug
(1983), who proposed using the running average of the inner products of successive gradients to monitor convergence.
Pflug’s statistic has been used to develop several diagnostic
algorithms for SGD (Chee and Toulis 2018; Yaida 2018).
However, recent work has shown that Pflug’s method may
fail even for quadratic functions, due to the large variance
of the diagnostic statistic (Pesme, Dieuleveut, and Flammarion 2020). In particular, the noisy signal fails to accurately
indicate whether saturation has been reached, leading to frequent early stepsize reduction. Improving upon the diagnostic proposed by Yaida (2018), Lang, Xiao, and Zhang (2019)

The convergence behavior of Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) crucially depends on the stepsize configuration. When
using a constant stepsize, the SGD iterates form a Markov
chain, enjoying fast convergence during the initial transient
phase. However, when reaching stationarity, the iterates oscillate around the optimum without making further progress.
In this paper, we study the convergence diagnostics for SGD
with constant stepsize, aiming to develop an effective dynamic stepsize scheme. We propose a novel coupling-based
convergence diagnostic procedure, which monitors the distance of two coupled SGD iterates for stationarity detection. Our diagnostic statistic is simple and is shown to track
the transition from transience stationarity theoretically. We
conduct extensive numerical experiments and compare our
method against various existing approaches. Our proposed
coupling-based stepsize scheme is observed to achieve superior performance across a diverse set of convex and nonconvex problems. Moreover, our results demonstrate the robustness of our approach to a wide range of hyperparameters.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) aims to minimize an objective function by iteratively updating the model parameters based on noisy gradients of the function (Robbins and
Monro 1951). SGD is well suited for large-scale machine
learning scenarios, where the data are abundant and the computation is limited, as it processes data points one at a time
or in small batches (Bottou 2010, 2012).
Mathematically, the SGD recursion is given by
θk+1 = θk − γk ∇fk (θk ),

(1)

Here, θk is the model parameters at iteration k, ∇fk (θk )
is the noisy gradient of the objective function f at θk , and
γk > 0 is the stepsize (also known as the learning rate) for
the kth iteration.
The stepsize configuration plays a critical role in the convergence of SGD. A traditional approach is to
√ use diminishing stepsize, such as γk = γ0 /k or γ0 / k (Robbins
and Monro 1951; Bach 2014). These decay stepsize schedules have been well studied, with non-asymptotic convergence guarantees (Moulines and Bach 2011; Lacoste-Julien,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18494

