The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Medical Multimodal Model Stealing Attacks via Adversarial Domain Alignment
Yaling Shen1,2,3 * , Zhixiong Zhuang1,4 * † , Kun Yuan2,3,5 , Maria-Irina Nicolae1 ,
Nassir Navab2 , Nicolas Padoy5,6 , Mario Fritz7
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
2
Technical University of Munich, Germany
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany
4
Saarland University, Germany
5
University of Strasbourg, France
6
IHU Strasbourg, France
7
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
{zhixiong.zhuang, irina.nicolae}@bosch.com, {yaling.shen, kun.yuan, nassir.navab}@tum.de,
npadoy@unistra.fr, fritz@cispa.de
Abstract
Medical multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are becoming an instrumental part of healthcare systems, assisting
medical personnel with decision making and results analysis. Models for radiology report generation are able to interpret medical imagery, thus reducing the workload of radiologists. As medical data is scarce and protected by privacy regulations, medical MLLMs represent valuable intellectual property. However, these assets are potentially vulnerable to model stealing, where attackers aim to replicate their functionality via black-box access. So far, model
stealing for the medical domain has focused on classification; however, existing attacks are not effective against
MLLMs. In this paper, we introduce Adversarial Domain
Alignment (ADA-S TEAL), the first stealing attack against
medical MLLMs. ADA-S TEAL relies on natural images,
which are public and widely available, as opposed to their
medical counterparts. We show that data augmentation with
adversarial noise is sufficient to overcome the data distribution gap between natural images and the domain-specific distribution of the victim MLLM. Experiments on the IU XR AY and MIMIC-CXR radiology datasets demonstrate that
Adversarial Domain Alignment enables attackers to steal the
medical MLLM without any access to medical data.

Figure 1: ADA-S TEAL trains an attacker MLLM to replicate a victim MLLM for radiology report generation from
natural images by first enriching the reports and then aligning the attacker distribution to the medical domain.

radiology image (e.g., chest X-ray) as input and generates a
detailed diagnostic report. Since medical data is usually not
publicly available and medical expertise is scarce, a wellperforming medical MLLMs becomes valuable intellectual
property (IP). However, these models are potentially vulnerable to model stealing attacks (Tramèr et al. 2016; Orekondy,
Schiele, and Fritz 2019a), which replicate the functionality
of a machine learning model through black-box access. This
threat is particularly significant in the medical field because
a duplicated model could conflict with IP and privacy regulations, and could also facilitate further attacks. By designing
a payload on the copied model, malicious actors can then
attack the original model, e.g., with a transfer jailbreak attack (Huang et al. 2024) to compel a medical MLLMs to
output fraudulent or fabricated medical information.
Model theft typically involves two steps: (i) creating a
transfer dataset by querying the victim model with public or
synthetic data (Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz 2019a; Truong
et al. 2021) to obtain pseudo-labels; and (ii) training the
attacker model using these pseudo-labels as ground truth.
Nevertheless, current model stealing methods present sig-

Introduction
In recent years, the development of medical multimodal large language models (MLLMs) has garnered
widespread attention due to their potential to revolutionize
healthcare. These models could support clinical decisionmaking (Seenivasan et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2024a; Yuan
et al. 2024b), enhance diagnostic accuracy (Yuan et al.
2024a; Chen et al. 2024b), and promote equitable distribution of medical resources (Jia et al. 2024; Yuan et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023). One of the most important use cases is radiology report generation, where the medical MLLM takes a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6842

