The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust SAM: On the Adversarial Robustness of Vision Foundation Models
Jiahuan Long1, 2, 3 , Zhengqin Xu1 , Tingsong Jiang2, 3 , Wen Yao2, 3 * , Shuai Jia1 ,
Chao Ma1 * , Xiaoqian Chen3,4
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Defense Innovation Institute, Chinese Academy of Military Science,
3
Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory,
4
Chinese Academy of Military Science,
jiahuanlong@sjtu.edu.cn, wendy0782@126.com, chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

The Segment Anything Model (SAM) is a widely used vision foundation model with diverse applications, including
image segmentation, detection, and tracking. Given SAM’s
wide applications, understanding its robustness against adversarial attacks is crucial for real-world deployment. However,
research on SAM’s robustness is still in its early stages. Existing attacks often overlook the role of prompts in evaluating
SAM’s robustness, and there has been insufficient exploration
of defense methods to balance the robustness and accuracy.
To address these gaps, this paper proposes an adversarial robustness framework designed to evaluate and enhance the robustness of SAM. Specifically, we introduce a cross-prompt
attack method to enhance the attack transferability across different prompt types. Besides attacking, we propose a fewparameter adaptation strategy to defend SAM against various
adversarial attacks. To balance robustness and accuracy, we
use the singular value decomposition (SVD) to constrain the
space of trainable parameters, where only singular values are
adaptable. Experiments demonstrate that our cross-prompt attack method outperforms previous approaches in terms of attack success rate on both SAM and SAM 2. By adapting only
512 parameters, we achieve at least a 15% improvement in
mean intersection over union (mIoU) against various adversarial attacks. Compared to previous defense methods, our
approach enhances the robustness of SAM while maximally
maintaining its original performance.

Figure 1: A comparison of the adversarial robustness of the
original SAM and the proposed Robust SAM. When implementing attacks, the original SAM predicts a segmentation
mask with severely compromised precision (i.e. 0.26 mIoU
with the ground truth), whereas our Robust SAM maximally
preserves the quality of the segmentation mask (i.e. 0.98
mIoU with the ground truth) via modified noise distribution.

examples (Zhang et al. 2023; Qiao et al. 2023; Zheng and
Zhang 2023; Wang, Zhao, and Petzold 2024), which are subtle perturbations added to a benign image. These adversarial examples significantly degrade the segmentation performance of SAM. Since SAM has a wide range of applications, it is crucial to examine its adversarial robustness.
Recent studies have pointed out that the effectiveness of
adversarial attacks against SAM is closely related to the type
of input prompts (Dai et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023). Indeed,
our preliminary experiments indicate that existing attacks
exhibit poor transferability across different types of prompts.
For example, the PGD attack (Madry et al. 2017) can disrupt
the segmentation mask created by a point prompt but not the
one generated from a box prompt. Therefore, exploring adversarial attacks against SAM that simultaneously work on
different prompt types will offer further insights into SAM’s
robustness.
Beyond attack methods, it is crucial to investigate the defense mechanisms of the SAM. Previous studies have proposed different approaches to defend against adversarial examples (Dziugaite, Ghahramani, and Roy 2016; Osadchy
et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2020; Ross and Doshi-Velez 2018).

Introduction
SAM is a popular vision foundation model for image segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2023). It predicts the object mask
of an image based on box or point prompts provided by the
user. SAM has been successful in this area, leading to efforts to use it for more complex tasks beyond segmentation,
such as tracking and detection (Yang et al. 2023; Ren et al.
2024; Yu et al. 2023). Recently, Meta pushed the boundaries further with the introduction of an even more capable
and versatile successor to SAM, known as Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM 2), designed specifically for video segmentation (Ravi et al. 2024). However, existing studies have
revealed that SAM is vulnerable to attacks by adversarial
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5775

