The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-task Visual Grounding with Coarse-to-Fine Consistency Constraints
Ming Dai1 , Jian Li2 , Jiedong Zhuang3 , Xian Zhang1 , Wankou Yang1,4
1

School of Automation, Southeast University, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent, China
3
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
4
Advanced Ocean Institute of Southeast Univerisity, Nantong, China
mingdai@seu.edu.cn, swordli@tencent.com, zhuangjiedong@zju.edu.cn, 230218200@seu.edu.cn, wkyang@seu.edu.cn
(1) girl heading towards
man in red shirt

Abstract

(3) bus above ppl

Prediction

Multi-task visual grounding involves the simultaneous execution of localization and segmentation in images based on
textual expressions. The majority of advanced methods predominantly focus on transformer-based multimodal fusion,
aiming to extract robust multimodal representations. However, ambiguity between referring expression comprehension (REC) and referring image segmentation (RIS) is errorprone, leading to inconsistencies between multi-task predictions. Besides, insufficient multimodal understanding directly
contributes to biased target perception. To overcome these
challenges, we propose a Coarse-to-fine Consistency Constraints Visual Grounding architecture (C3 VG), which integrates implicit and explicit modeling approaches within a
two-stage framework. Initially, query and pixel decoders are
employed to generate preliminary detection and segmentation
outputs, a process referred to as the Rough Semantic Perception (RSP) stage. These coarse predictions are subsequently
refined through the proposed Mask-guided Interaction Module (MIM) and a novel explicit bidirectional consistency constraint loss to ensure consistent representations across tasks,
which we term the Refined Consistency Interaction (RCI)
stage. Furthermore, to address the challenge of insufficient
multimodal understanding, we leverage pre-trained models
based on visual-linguistic fusion representations. Empirical
evaluations on the RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg
datasets demonstrate the efficacy and soundness of C3 VG,
which significantly outperforms state-of-the-art REC and RIS
methods by a substantial margin.

(2) man on catcher

Seg

Box

Box

Seg

Box

GT

Seg

(a) Multi-task Inconsistencies
(1) an egg cup on a breakfast plate

(2) an imac computer beside a computer monitor

(b) Insufficient Understanding

Figure 1: (a) Three examples of inconsistent results between
multi-task outputs. (b) Two examples of failure in identifying targets due to insufficient multi-modal understanding.

their unification both logical and advantageous. Recently,
multi-task visual grounding has gained prominence as it
eliminates the need for task-specific network designs and
enables the leveraging of data across both tasks to mutually
enhance performance. MCN (Luo et al. 2020) was the first
approach to jointly train the REC and RIS tasks, employing a
learnable method to establish consistency in attention maps.
Recent research has primarily focused on enhancing the interaction across different modalities (Li and Sigal 2021; Su
et al. 2023) and exploring auto-regressive approaches to
achieve both detection and segmentation (Zhu et al. 2022;
Cheng et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023a). In this paper, we address two overlooked issues: 1) How to effectively leverage
the complementarity of multi-task predictions to mitigate inconsistencies in results. 2) How to overcome the challenge
of insufficient multimodal understanding to enhance perception in complex image-text scenarios.
Inconsistent predictions between multi-task primarily
arise due to the lack of effective constraints linking different tasks. This issue can be exemplified by three scenarios

Introduction
Visual grounding is a critical task within the vision-language
domain, aimed at establishing a fine-grained correspondence
between images and text by grounding a given referring expression within an image (Li et al. 2022b). This task is typically divided into two sub-tasks based on the grounding
approach: referring expression comprehension (REC) (Yu
et al. 2018; Kamath et al. 2021) and referring image segmentation (RIS) (Kim et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2023). Traditionally, REC and RIS have been treated as separate tasks
with distinct technological pathways, necessitating complex,
task-specific designs. However, REC and RIS exhibit significant similarities and offer complementary strengths, making
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2618

