The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Submodular Optimization and LLM for Multimodal Content Extraction
and Automatic Poster Generation from Long Document
Vijay Jaisankar1 * , Sambaran Bandyopadhyay2 , Kalp Vyas3 , Varre Suman Chaitanya3 , Shwetha
Somasundaram2
1

International Institute of Information Technology, Bangalore
2
Adobe Research
3
IIT Bombay
{vijayjaisankar.vj, samb.bandyo, kalp.s.vyas}@gmail.com, 200050153@iitb.ac.in, shsomasu@adobe.com
Abstract

the poster and (ii) Template generation and harmonization,
which involves generating a suitable layout and design elements of the poster such as background, font and size of
letters, number of text and image elements etc. and finally
filling up the generated template with the generated content.
Content summarization for poster is challenging because of
the following reasons: A poster is very limited in size (single large page), but the input document can have multiple
pages. Thus, it is essential that the content in the poster (i)
represents all the important aspects of the input document
(coverage), (ii) has very less repetition within it (diversity)
and (iii) has well aligned images and text. Coverage and diversity have been studied in text summarization literature
(Lin and Bilmes 2011). But their interpretation in the multimodal setup (with text and images) is not well understood.
Recent advent of zero-shot and few-shot LLMs have significantly improved the state-of-the-art (SOTA) for several
natural language processing tasks like summarization (OpenAI 2022, 2023). However, using them directly for content
summarization in poster generation is difficult because: (i)
Many existing LLMs are text based. The ability of vision
or multimodal language models for long document summarization is still questionable (Islam and Moushi 2024; Meng
et al. 2024). (ii) LLMs tend to hallucinate and their performance drops when the input context is very long (Liu et al.
2023). However, documents can be lengthy and information in any parts of the document can be important for the
poster. (iii) LLM fine-tuning is possible. But it needs expensive hardware support and good amount of data (Han et al.
2024). Whereas, use of LLM as a service is computationally less demanding but does not suit the purpose if used
directly (Sun et al. 2022). (iv) There are generic Retrieval
Augmented Generation (RAG) techniques available in the
literature (Gao et al. 2023). But for poster generation, we
need to explicitly assure that the retrieved multimodal content has all the intrinsic properties mentioned above.
In this paper, we have addressed all the above challenges
by proposing an approach to handle multimodal content
jointly and avoid feeding the entire content to an LLM directly. These are the key contributions made in this work: (1)
We propose an efficient and computationally fast end-to-end
pipeline, referred as PostDoc (in Figure 1), for automatically
generating a visually rich Poster from a long multimodal input Document. (2) For selecting suitable content from the

A poster from a long input document can be considered as
a one-page easy-to-read multimodal (text and images) summary presented on a nice template with good design elements.
Automatic transformation of a long document into a poster
is a very less studied but challenging task. It involves content summarization of the input document followed by template generation and harmonization. In this work, we propose
a novel deep submodular function which can be trained on
ground truth summaries to extract multimodal content from
the document and explicitly ensures good coverage, diversity and alignment of text and images. Then, we use an LLM
based paraphraser and propose to generate a template with
various design aspects conditioned on the input content. We
show the merits of our approach through extensive automated
and human evaluations.

1

Introduction

Recent success of large language models (OpenAI 2023;
Petroni et al. 2020) and large vision language models (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022) have led to several new applications in the field of Generative AI. In this work, we focus on transforming a long multimodal document, containing both text and images, into a poster - which is a visually rich one-page multimodal summary of the document. A
poster should have good coverage of the overall content of
the document and is generally easy-to-read and presented in
a nice template with good design elements (Shelledy 2004).
To create a poster, there are different types of design tools
and products available such as Microsoft PowerPoint and
Adobe Express. However, using them requires substantial
manual effort to select multimodal content from a document
and determine the suitable design elements for the poster. It
is often time-consuming and requires domain expertise.
Automatic transformation of a document into a poster is
a relatively less studied problem (Qiang et al. 2019; Xu and
Wan 2021, 2022). Such a transformation process mainly involves two major steps: (i) Content summarization (or planning), which aims to select key content from the document
and paraphrase them in some appropriate format to be put in
* This work was done when Vijay, Kalp and Varre were interns
at Adobe Research
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24221

