The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unveiling the Impact of Coding Data Instruction Fine-Tuning on Large Language
Models Reasoning
Xinlu Zhang1 * , Zhiyu Zoey Chen2 , Xi Ye3 , Xianjun Yang1 , Lichang Chen4 ,
William Yang Wang1 , Linda Ruth Petzold 1
1

University of California, Santa Barbara
2
The University of Texas at Dallas
3
The University of Texas at Austin
4
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Instruction Fine-Tuning (IFT) significantly enhances the
zero-shot capabilities of pretrained Large Language Models
(LLMs). While coding data is known to boost LLM reasoning
abilities during pretraining, its role in activating internal reasoning capacities during IFT remains understudied. This paper
investigates a key question: How does coding data impact
LLMs’ reasoning capacities during IFT stage? To explore
this, we thoroughly examine the impact of coding data across
different coding data proportions, model families, sizes, and
reasoning domains, from various perspectives. Specifically, we
create three IFT datasets with increasing coding data proportions, fine-tune six LLM backbones across different families
and scales on these datasets, evaluate the tuned models’ performance across twelve tasks in three reasoning domains, and
analyze the outcomes from three broad-to-granular perspectives: overall, domain-level, and task-specific. Our holistic
analysis provides valuable insights into each perspective. First,
coding data tuning enhances the overall reasoning capabilities
of LLMs across different model families and scales. Moreover,
while the impact of coding data varies by domain, it shows
consistent trends within each domain across different model
families and scales. Additionally, coding data generally provides comparable task-specific benefits across model families,
with optimal proportions in IFT datasets being task-dependent.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20535

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
in task generalization by training on diverse text data sources
(Touvron et al. 2023a,b; Brown et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2023)
and instruction-finetuning (IFT) further elicits their intrinsic
abilities in a zero-shot manner (Ouyang et al. 2022; Longpre
et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2022a; OpenAI 2022, 2023; Anthropic
2023). Although previous studies (Peng et al. 2023; Taori et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2023) have improved IFT dataset diversity to
better align LLMs with human needs, the impact of specific
data types during IFT remains underexplored.
Coding data, with its logical consistency and reduced ambiguity compared to natural text, has been empirically shown
* Corresponding Author: xinluzhang@ucsb.edu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25949

to enhance LLM reasoning capabilities during pretraining
(Liang et al. 2023; Fu and Khot 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Guo
et al. 2024). This enables LLMs to acquire advanced intrinsic
knowledge, supporting complex reasoning in real-world applications like text summarization (Yang et al. 2023), numerical problem solving (Luo et al. 2023a; Yue et al. 2023), and
knowledge-intensive tasks (Chen et al. 2024). However, at
the IFT stage, research primarily shows that coding data tuning improves coding-related in-domain performance (Yuan
et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023b; Ma et al. 2023). The impact
on out-of-domain general reasoning capabilities remains
underexplored due to complex variations in coding data proportions, model backbones, and reasoning task types (Wei
et al. 2022c; Ma et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2023). Therefore,
we raise a natural question: How does coding data impact
LLMs’ reasoning capacities during the IFT stage?
To thoroughly answer this question, we propose an analysis pipeline to investigate how coding data affects LLMs’
reasoning capacities during IFT, considering coding data proportions, model families, scales, and reasoning domains. We
create IFT datasets from ShareGPT (Sharegpt 2023) using
ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) to classify instances as either coding or general text, forming code-centric and general textual
datasets. We then generate three IFT datasets with coding
data proportions of 0%, 50%, and 100%, maintaining consistent dataset sizes. Six base models of varying families and
scales —Llama-1 (Touvron et al. 2023a), Llama-2 (Touvron
et al. 2023b), Llama-3 (AI@Meta 2024), Mistral (Jiang et al.
2023), Qwen-1.5 (Bai et al. 2023), and Gemma (Team et al.
2024)—are fine-tuned on these datasets. We evaluate the
tuned models on symbolic, logical, and arithmetic reasoning
domains. Finally, we analyze coding data impact from three
perspectives: overall effectiveness, domain-level influence,
and task-specific performance, as shown in Figure 1.
To our best knowledge, this is the first work to thoroughly
analyze how coding data affects LLMs’ reasoning capacities
during IFT, across different coding data proportions, model
families, scales, and reasoning types. We gain significant insights and summarize the main findings for each perspective.
Overall effectiveness. As the proportion of coding data for
tuning increases, we observe consistent and gradual performance enhancements across different model families and
scales. However, improvements vary among model back-

