The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TranSplat: Generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting from
Sparse Multi-View Images with Transformers
Chuanrui Zhang1 * , Yingshuang Zou1 * , Zhuoling Li2 , Minmin Yi3 , Haoqian Wang1†
1

Tsinghua University,
The University of Hong Kong,
3
E-surfing Vision Technology Co., Ltd
{zhang-cr22, zouys22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lizhuoling@connect.hku.hk,
yimm18@chinatelecom.cn, wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

However, traditional 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis methods mostly require scene-specific optimization (Barron et al. 2021; Pons-Moll et al. 2021), resulting
in increased computational demands and longer processing
times. Recently, there has been growing interest in Generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting (G-3DGS) for sparse-view
reconstruction. Some methods (Charatan et al. 2024; Chen
et al. 2024) have emerged that are capable of reconstructing
3D scenes in a single forward pass without requiring extra
optimization. These advancements achieve high-quality reconstruction results while reducing computational overhead,
thereby enhancing the efficiency and applicability of 3D reconstruction across various contexts. For example, PixelSplat (Charatan et al. 2024) and MVSplat (Chen et al. 2024)
unproject depth maps from corresponding views to serve as
the centers of 3D Gaussians. However, the performances of
these methods rely on accurate pixel-level matching based
on depth, which is challenging to realize and thus limits the
reconstruction precision of these methods. We observe that
especially in the scenes scenes with occlusions, insufficient
texture, or repetitive patterns, the matching result is quite
unsatisfactory (Yao et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2021; Pautrat et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2022b). Additionally, the reconstruction
of non-overlapping areas between views is also challenging
for existing methods due to the lack of matching pairs.

Compared with previous 3D reconstruction methods like
Nerf, recent Generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting (G-3DGS)
methods demonstrate impressive efficiency even in the
sparse-view setting. However, the promising reconstruction
performance of existing G-3DGS methods relies heavily on
accurate multi-view feature matching, which is quite challenging. Especially for the scenes that have many nonoverlapping areas between various views and contain numerous similar regions, the matching performance of existing
methods is poor and the reconstruction precision is limited.
To address this problem, we develop a strategy that utilizes a
predicted depth confidence map to guide accurate local feature matching. In addition, we propose to utilize the knowledge of existing monocular depth estimation models as prior
to boost the depth estimation precision in non-overlapping
areas between views. Combining the proposed strategies, we
present a novel G-3DGS method named TranSplat, which obtains the best performance on both the RealEstate10K and
ACID benchmarks while maintaining competitive speed and
presenting strong cross-dataset generalization ability.

Project Page: — https://xingyoujun.github.io/transplat/

Introduction
The task of generalizable sparse-view 3D reconstruction,
which aims to recover 3D structure from a sparse set of images without scene-specific optimization, is crucial in many
applications like virtual reality (Zou et al. 2024; Li et al.
2023). Significant progress has been achieved using various neural scene representations, such as NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a) and 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2024). Unlike NeRF, which relies on computationally expensive raymarching (Xu et al. 2022b; Gao et al. 2024), 3DGS represents the scene with a set of 3D Gaussians benefiting from
rasterization-based rendering. These characteristics make
3DGS more efficient because it bypasses the dense volumetric ray-marching process and enables both efficient and
high-quality 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis.

To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose
TranSplat, a novel framework for generalizable sparseview 3D reconstruction. TranSplat recovers 3D structures
from sparse views by projecting each pixel into 3D Gaussian primitives leveraging the predicted depths and features.
To precisely estimate 3D Gaussian centers, we generate
depth estimates using a transformer-based module called the
Depth-aware Deformable Matching Transformer (DDMT).
This module prioritizes depth candidates with high confidence based on an initial depth distribution, which is calculated by the Coarse Matching module through assessing
cross-view feature similarities. Additionally, TranSplat utilizes monocular depth priors and employs the Depth Refine U-Net to further refine the depth distribution. With the
refined depth and image features, our method predicts all
Gaussian parameters in parallel for each pixel. TranSplat is
trained end-to-end using only ground-truth images for supervision.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9869

