The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Black-Box Evaluation Framework for Semantic Robustness
in Bird’s Eye View Detection
Fu Wang1, 2 , Yanghao Zhang2 , Xiangyu Yin2 , Guangliang Cheng2 ,
Zeyu Fu1 , Xiaowei Huang2 , Wenjie Ruan1, 2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK
{fw377, z.fu, wruan}@exeter.ac.uk
{yanghao.zhang, x.yin22, guangliang.cheng, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk
Abstract

tributed to the cost-effectiveness of camera systems compared to LiDAR systems. Furthermore, camera-based perception models can provide rich semantic information that is
not only meaningful for human observers but also enhances
the performance in downstream tasks (Hu et al. 2023).

Camera-based Bird’s Eye View (BEV) perception models receive increasing attention for their crucial role in autonomous
driving, a domain where concerns about the robustness and
reliability of deep learning have been raised. While only a
few works have investigated the effects of randomly generated semantic perturbations, aka natural corruptions, on the
multi-view BEV detection task, we develop a black-box robustness evaluation framework that adversarially optimises
three common semantic perturbations: geometric transformation, colour shifting, and motion blur, to deceive BEV models, serving as the first approach in this emerging field. To
address the challenge posed by optimising the semantic perturbation, we design a smoothed, distance-based surrogate
function to replace the mAP metric and introduce SimpleDIRECT, a deterministic optimisation algorithm that utilises observed slopes to guide the optimisation process. By comparing with randomised perturbation and two optimisation
baselines, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework. Additionally, we provide a benchmark on the semantic robustness of ten recent BEV models. The results reveal that PolarFormer, which emphasises geometric information from multi-view images, exhibits the highest robustness,
whereas BEVDet is fully compromised, with its precision reduced to zero.

BEV detection is a fundamental perception task that identifies objects from multi-view input and maps them onto the
BEV planform. BEV detection models can extract useful
features from the images obtained, which are then utilised
by downstream tasks such as object tracking (Yin, Ruan,
and Fieldsend 2024), occupancy prediction, and route planning (Hu et al. 2023). It is indisputable that autonomous
driving is a safety-critical scenario (Chowdhury et al. 2020)
that requires robust and reliable BEV detection models (Cao
et al. 2021). Recently, a number of studies (Yang et al. 2022;
Zhu et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023b,a) have been conducted
to evaluate the robustness of camera-based BEV detection
models against adversarial attacks (Carlini et al. 2019) and
natural corruptions (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). The
findings from these studies, unfortunately, indicate that BEV
models also suffer from adversarial threats. In particular,
many works investigated the robustness of the BEV detection models against random natural corruption (Zhu et al.
2023; Xie et al. 2023a). These perturbations, crafted to
mimic natural corruptions, account for potential disruptions
stemming from environmental conditions and hardware constraints. Given that the generation of natural corruption is
random and independent of the target models, these studies primarily shed light on the ‘average-case’ robustness of
BEV detection models against semantic perturbations (Xie
et al. 2023a). However, these approaches may not fully expose the underlying vulnerabilities of BEV models if the
‘worst-case’ robustness is not taken into account. Similar to
the spirit of the adversarial examiner framework (Shu et al.
2020), we move beyond the natural corruptions and study
the adversarial robustness of BEV detection models when
subjected to semantic perturbations and develop a gradientfree, query-based evaluation framework. By leveraging advances in global optimisation techniques, the proposed evaluation framework is compatible with most existing camerabased BEV models. It can identify more competitive adversarial perturbations than natural corruption methods, thereby
providing a more reliable measurement of the ‘worst-case’
performance of BEV models.

Code — https://github.com/TrustAI/RobustBEV

Introduction
The landscape of autonomous driving is undergoing a significant transformation, propelled by the rapid advancement
of deep neural network-based methods (Chitta, Prakash, and
Geiger 2021; Prakash, Chitta, and Geiger 2021; Zhang et al.
2022c; Hu et al. 2022a,b; Chen and Krähenbühl 2022; Hu
et al. 2023). One of the central elements in this evolution is
the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) perception. As highlighted by recent studies (Hu et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023a), BEV perception is a critical intermediary in boosting the overall efficacy
of the full autonomy stack. Significant research efforts have
been directed towards developing BEV perception (Ma et al.
2022). Particularly, camera-based BEV perception models
have gained increasing attention over the LiDAR-based approaches in recent development. This shift is primarily atCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7637

