The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GMAP: Generalized Manipulation of Articulated Objects in Robotic Using
Pre-trained Model
Hongliang Zeng, Ping Zhang* , Fang Li, Qinpeng Yi, Tingyu Ye, Jiahua Wang
South China University of Technology
scutzenghongl@gmail.com, {pzhang, cslifang}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Perception and interaction with articulated objects present a
unique challenge for service robots. Although recent research
has emphasized understanding articulated shapes and affordance proposals, existing methods only address isolated aspects, failing to develop comprehensive strategies for robotic
perception and manipulation of articulated objects. To bridge
this gap, we propose GMAP, which systematically integrates
the entire process from command to perception and manipulation. Specifically, we first perform precise part-level segmentation of the object and identify the geometric and kinematic parameters of articulated joints. Then, by evaluating
point-level affordance proposals, we determine the interaction poses for the robot’s end-effector. Finally, the robot’s
execution trajectory is dynamically computed by combining commands with joint parameters and interaction points.
Additionally, a key innovation of GMAP is addressing the
scarcity of annotated data. We designed a multi-scale point
cloud feature extraction module and introduced pre-training
and fine-tuning techniques, significantly enhancing the generalization capability of the perception model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GMAP achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance in both the perception and manipulation
of articulated objects and adapts to real-world scenarios.

Figure 1: GMAP segments the movable parts of an object,
estimates the joint parameters and manipulation affordances,
and ultimately plans the operation based on commands.
series of concrete actions: moving to the refrigerator, opening the door, and retrieving the chilled soda. In this process,
the LLM acts as the ”brain” of the agent, completing the
thought process from intent to action. However, to achieve
precise skill execution, the agent also needs a ”cerebellum”
to plan and coordinate movements. Therefore, our goal is
to develop a general perception-to-interaction manipulation
strategy specifically for articulated object tasks, making it a
robust component of the agent’s ”cerebellum”.
Although recent research has made progress in estimating joint parameters (Zeng et al. 2024b) of articulated parts,
building digital twins (Jiang, Hsu, and Zhu 2022), and visualizing manipulation affordances (Wang et al. 2022), these
technologies often focus on a single aspect and fail to meet
the practical needs. For example, when an LLM or a human instructs a robot to open a specific part of a cabinet to
a degree, understanding the joint parameters of that part is
insufficient. The robot needs to comprehend how to locate
contact points, adopt poses, and follow a specific trajectory
to meet the instruction’s requirements. Therefore, we propose GMAP to address this challenge. Our approach integrates part segmentation, joint parameter estimation, and affordance analysis, with a designed multi-scale point cloud
feature extraction network and training strategy to enhance
the performance of each module. As shown in Fig. 1, GMAP
combines operation commands with the joint parameters and
affordance features of the part, dynamically planning an operation trajectory to achieve the desired state.
On the other hand, there is a significant contradiction between the high demand for generalization and accuracy in
perception models and the scarcity of high-quality annotated

Code — https://github.com/robhlzeng/GMAP

Introduction
Manipulating articulated objects (Mo et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022; Chu et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2024b) is a common
and crucial task in the field of service robots. We aim for
agents to autonomously determine when and how to perform
manipulation tasks. In recent years, large language models (LLMs) (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023) have made significant progress across various fields, providing robust support for embodied intelligence (Joublin et al. 2023; Rana et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2024; Hazra, Dos Martires, and De Raedt
2024) by translating abstract high-level intents into specific
task instructions. For example, when a user expresses the
desire to ”drink a cold soda”, an LLM can parse this into a
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14736

