The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GradQ-ViT: Robust and Efficient Gradient Quantization for Vision Transformers
Dahun Choi, Hyun Kim*
Department of Electrical and Information Engineering, The Research Center for Electrical and Information Technology,
Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Seoul 01811, Korea
dahun926@seoultech.ac.kr, hyunkim@seoultech.ac.kr

Abstract

compression methods such as quantization (Peng et al. 2023;
Kim, Lee, and Kim 2024; Kang, Choi, and Kim 2024) and
pruning (Kim and Kim 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Xu et al.
2024; Lee and Kim 2024) have been actively researched to
embed ViT models into mobile/edge devices. Quantization,
which can effectively solve the memory problem stemming
from the increased computational costs and parameters of
ViT, has attracted significant attention (Chen et al. 2024).
Quantization is a compression method that converts 32-bit
floating-point (FP) values into lower-precision (e.g., 8-bit)
hardware-friendly data formats (e.g., fixed points and integers). Recent ViT quantization studies have primarily focused on post-training quantization (PTQ) (Lin et al. 2021;
Yuan et al. 2022) for weight, activation, and MHSA because
of the much higher training cost of ViTs compared to CNNs.
However, the need for on-device training (Zhu et al. 2022;
Lee, Lee, and Kim 2024; Chun, Lee, and Kim 2024) has
recently emerged due to privacy issues, and federated learning (Ovi et al. 2023) to distribute the extreme computational
load imposed on the cloud is also receiving great attention.
Therefore, not only forward propagation (i.e., weight, activation, MHSA) but also backward propagation (i.e., gradient) quantization becomes important, and eventually, research on quantization-aware training (QAT) (Lee, Kim, and
Ham 2021; Yao et al. 2021) of ViT to realize gradient quantization is essential. It is noteworthy that as small ViTs (Mehta
and Rastegari 2021; Cai et al. 2022) have recently been proposed along with the development of dedicated hardware
(You et al. 2023), an environment capable of performing
QAT for ViTs with high accuracy is being realized based
on CNN gradient quantization studies (Zhao et al. 2021).

Advancements in hardware accelerators, such as graphics processing units and neural processing units, have significantly propelled computer vision research. The vision
transformer (ViT), leveraging the multi-head self-attention
(MHSA) mechanism, has surpassed convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in accuracy but faces challenges in mobile and
edge deployment due to its large size and computational demands. In addition, as privacy concerns push for on-device
training, research on quantization methods for ViTs, particularly gradient quantization, has gained attention. Unlike
CNNs, ViTs face challenges due to outliers and a complex
loss landscape. To address this, we propose a gradient quantization framework that stabilizes training by adapting quantization points based on interquartile ranges and constructing an outlier-robust loss function. Additionally, we employ
a scaling method to align quantized gradients with original
gradients and adaptively assign the learning rate based on
quantization error analysis. When quantizing weights, activations, and gradients to INT8, our method improves performance by 0.52% and 0.21% over DeiT-Base and Swin-Base,
respectively, and achieves near parity with MobileViT-S with
only a 0.09% accuracy drop. Furthermore, a 2.06× speedup
was observed when applying our framework to MobileViT in
a CUDA 11.8 environment.

Introduction
With advancements in hardware accelerators, such as graphics processing units (GPUs) and neural processing units
(NPUs), to support high-performance computing, deep neural network (DNN)-based computer vision (CV) tasks have
become actively researched (He et al. 2016; Ding et al.
2021; Lee and Kim 2022). In particular, vision transformers (ViTs), which apply transformer blocks utilized in natural language processing to CV tasks, have attracted attention because they achieve significantly higher accuracy
than convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, ViTs
rapidly increase the model size and computation cost owing
to the multi-head self-attention (MHSA) with many parameters and high dimensionality, making it difficult to deploy
ViT models on mobile/edge devices with limited hardware
resources (Han et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2024). Consequently,

Although gradient quantization can reduce computational
costs and save memory during backpropagation, it also leads
to training instability due to the low representational precision. The conventional nearest-to-rounding (NR) method
(Lee, Kim, and Ham 2021) is a deterministic rounding approach that incurs minimal quantization error due to rounding. However, according to (Gupta et al. 2015), gradient
quantization using NR may cause the network to diverge owing to biased gradients during training. Instead, prior studies (Zhu et al. 2020; Chmiel et al. 2021) employed stochastic rounding (SR) to eliminate the bias caused by quantization and thus stabilize training. Nonetheless, SR generates
random numbers for each tensor, which is inappropriate for

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16019

