The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Textualize Visual Prompt for Image Editing via Diffusion Bridge
Pengcheng Xu1,2 , Qingnan Fan2 , Fei Kou2 , Shuai Qin2 , Hong Gu2 , Ruoyu Zhao2,3 ,
Charles Ling1 , Boyu Wang1 *
1

Western University
2
VIVO
3
Xidian University
{pxu67, charles.ling}@uwo.ca, fqnchina@gmail.com, koufei@hotmail.com, royzhao@stu.xidian.edu.cn,
{guhong, shuai.qin}@vivo.com, bwang@csd.uwo.ca,
Abstract
Visual prompt, a pair of before-and-after edited images, can
convey indescribable imagery transformations and prosper in
image editing. However, current visual prompt methods rely
on a pretrained text-guided image-to-image generative model
that requires a triplet of text, before, and after images for retraining over a text-to-image model. Such crafting triplets and
retraining processes limit the scalability and generalization of
editing. In this paper, we present a framework based on any
single text-to-image model without reliance on the explicit
image-to-image model thus enhancing the generalizability and
scalability. Specifically, by leveraging the probability-flow ordinary equation, we construct a diffusion bridge to transfer the
distribution between before-and-after images under the text
guidance. By optimizing the text via the bridge, the framework
adaptively textualizes the editing transformation conveyed by
visual prompts into text embeddings without other models.
Meanwhile, we introduce differential attention control during
text optimization, which disentangles the text embedding from
the invariance of the before-and-after images and makes it
solely capture the delicate transformation and generalize to
edit various images. Experiments on real images validate competitive results on the generalization, contextual coherence,
and high fidelity for delicate editing with just one image pair
as the visual prompt.

Project page — pengchengpcx.github.io/TextVDB/

1

Introduction

Prompting (Touvron et al. 2023; Floridi and Chiriatti 2020;
Liu et al. 2023), providing specific instructions or context for
the model, is an effective and emergent tool to guide the largescale text-to-image (T2I) models to generate (Rombach et al.
2022; Podell et al. 2024; Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh et al.
2022) or edit (Hertz et al. 2023; Kawar et al. 2023; Parmar
et al. 2023; Mokady et al. 2023; Gal et al. 2023) remarkable
images. However, in the visual task, not all aspects can be
accurately and comprehensively described through language
alone. For instance, how to explain the tone transformation
between photographs or the personal repaint of a painting?
These imagery transformations are abstract, complex, and
difficult to convey via a text prompt. In such cases, a pair
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21779

of before-and-after images, serving as the visual prompt,
are more precise and expressive to represent the imagery
transformation and guide the image generation and editing.
This motivates us to explore the visual prompt for image
editing: given a pair of before-and-after images as a visual
prompt, how to distill the transformation from the visual
prompt into text embedding for the text-guided image editing.
Early on, visual prompt for image editing is employed with
in-context learning, primarily effective on classical tasks (e.g.,
segmentation, detection) (Bar et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024).
Recently, it is explored within diffusion models for arbitrary
visual content editing (Nguyen et al. 2024; Motamed, Paudel,
and Van Gool 2025; Cheng et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Gu
et al. 2024), and there are mainly three types of approaches.
The first category relies on the text-guided image-to-image
(TI2I) model (e.g., InstructPix2Pix) (Brooks, Holynski, and
Efros 2023). Such a TI2I model has an explicit text-guided
image-to-image transformation process. By directly optimizing the text condition that guides the model to manipulate and
change the before-image to the after-image, the model converts the transformation between the image pair into text (Gal
et al. 2023; Nguyen et al. 2024). However, training such
a TI2I model needs to construct a data triplet of text, and
before-and-after images. More importantly, such training data
is constructed based on the T2I model. For more delicate editing, crafting such triplets requires meticulous effort, limiting
the scalability of the training data in the TI2I model (Zhang
et al. 2024). Similarly, the second type in-context learning
methods (Gu et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024) leverages the diffusion inpainting model which also requires extra complex data
(mask and cropped images) for more training to get good
generalization ability. This contrasts with the general T2I
model, which utilizes a simpler tuple of images and text for
training, making it easier to collect and scale up. The third
category adopts textual inversion (Gal et al. 2023; Motamed,
Paudel, and Van Gool 2025; Šubrtová et al. 2023) to invert the
before-and-after images into text embeddings sequentially
and learn the transformation or concept by comparison of two
embeddings. However, textual inversion is inferior for image
reconstruction and cannot capture all image details, making
it challenging to learn delicate editing transformations and
resulting in a coarse concept. Thus, these designs limit the
model to learning precise transformations and generalizing
to edit high-fidelity images.

