The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GenAuction: A Generative Auction for Online Advertising
Yuchao Ma1 * , Ruohan Qian2 * , Bingzhe Wang1 * , Qi Qi1† , Wenqiang Liu2 , Qian Tang2 , Zhao Shen2 ,
Wei Zhong2 , Bo Shen2 , Yixin Su2 , Bin Zou2 , Wen Yi2 , Zhi Guo2 , Shuanglong Li2 , Lin Liu2
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{yc.ma, wbz2022, qi.qi}@ruc.edu.cn, {qianruohan, liuwenqiang01, tangqian01, shenzhao, zhongwei04, shenbo04, suyixin,
zoubin03, yiwen01, guozhi, lishuanglong, liulin03}@baidu.com

Abstract

nism primarily focused on designing single-objective auctions. Vickrey, Clarke, and Groves designed the VickreyClarke-Groves (VCG) mechanism, which aims to maximize social welfare (SW) (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971;
Groves 1973). Subsequently, Myerson designed the Myerson auction to maximize the auctioneer’s revenue (Myerson 1981). Building upon these foundations, Overture and
Google proposed the Generalized First-Price Auction (GFP)
(Despotakis, Ravi, and Sayedi 2021; Han and Liu 2015) and
Generalized Second-Price Auction (GSP) (Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz 2007; Varian 2007; Chawla and Hartline
2013), respectively, for selling ads and implemented them in
their ad systems.

Previous ad auctions predominantly relied on rule-based
mechanisms, which selected winning advertisements (ads)
at the ad-level and subsequently combined them into page
views (PVs), leading to suboptimal allocations in multi-round
auctions. This limitation stems from the significant computational burden required to design ranking score rules and
select winning ad sets, as well as the inability to fully capture contextual information within PVs during ad-level selection. In this paper, we propose a key-performance-indicator
(KPI) based auction mechanism that selects winning PVs at
the PV-level, modeling the ad allocation as a constrained optimization problem. This approach enables us to address both
short-term and long-term KPIs while leveraging the comprehensive contextual information available within PVs. Based
on this framework, we design GenAuction, a generative auction mechanism utilizing a Generator-Evaluator architecture
powered by Transformer algorithms. The Generator swiftly
generates multiple candidate PVs, while the Evaluator selects
the optimal PVs based on contextual information, adhering to
the objectives and KPIs of multi-round auctions. We conduct
extensive experiments using real-world data and online A/B
tests to validate that GenAuction efficiently handles multiobjective allocation tasks, demonstrating its efficacy and potential for real-world application.

As ad systems evolved, a single objective became insufficient to satisfy the needs of platforms, advertisers, and
users, as their key performance indicators (KPIs) often conflict. For instance, a revenue-maximizing mechanism might
compromise user experience by displaying numerous highbid but low-quality ads. Consequently, research shifted towards multi-objective auctions (Lahaie and Pennock 2007;
Thompson and Leyton-Brown 2013), aiming to optimize a
combination of multiple KPIs (e.g., SW, revenue, conversion volume) (Geyik et al. 2016; Bachrach et al. 2014).
Multi-objective auctions often employ rule-based mechanisms, which pre-design an aggregation function. This function serves to integrate the scores across various dimensions
of a bidder, resulting in a rank score. By designing aggregation functions, various multi-objective auctions can be
achieved, such as simultaneously maximizing SW and revenue (Zhang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021) or balancing shortterm and long-term revenue (e.g., user retention) (Zhang
et al. 2019; Lahaie et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2020; Deng and
Lahaie 2019). Once rank scores are determined, mechanisms
like GSP can be employed to maximize the sum of rank
scores. Designing an aggregation function that caters to platform’s objectives poses a significant challenge and is a focal
point of related research. In multi-slot scenarios, rule-based
mechanisms necessitate computing rank scores for all bidders and selecting an optimal combination of bidders, leading to complex computations. Moreover, rule-based mechanisms are static, using fixed aggregation function across all
auctions (Liu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021). However, with
billions of rounds occurring daily in ad systems, applying

Datasets — https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
1xHsLdHJRPWXCF2s2kdat7xUnQ6cFIILN?usp=
drive link

Introduction
Online advertising (ad) plays a pivotal role in search platforms, with ad auction constituting a primary source of revenue for platforms. An auction mechanism comprise an allocation mechanism and a payment mechanism. In Ad auctions, advertisers (bidders) submit bids representing their
valuations for an ad impression (or click, conversion), and
the platform runs the allocation mechanism to display the
winning bidders while charging them based on the payment mechanism. Traditional research on auction mecha* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12372

