The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Audio-Visual Navigation in Noisy Environments: A Large-Scale
Benchmark Dataset and an Architecture Considering Multiple Sound-Sources
Zhanbo Shi, Lin Zhang* , Linfei Li, Ying Shen
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
2111291@tongji.edu.cn, cslinzhang@tongji.edu.cn, cslinfeili@tongji.edu.cn, yingshen@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

1

Idling
1

Audio-visual navigation has received considerable attention
in recent years. However, the majority of related investigations have focused on single sound-source scenarios. Studies in this field for multiple sound-source scenarios remain
underexplored due to the limitations of two aspects. First,
the existing audio-visual navigation dataset only has limited
audio samples, making it difficult to simulate diverse multiple sound-source environments. Second, existing navigation
frameworks are mainly designed for single sound-source scenarios, thus their performance is severely reduced in multiple sound-source scenarios. In this work, we make an attempt
to fill in these two research gaps to some extent. First, we
establish a large-scale BEnchmark Dataset for Audio-VIsual
Navigation, namely BeDAViN. This dataset consists of 2,258
audio samples with a total duration of 10.8 hours, which is
more than 33 times longer than the existing audio dataset employed in the audio-visual navigation task. Second, we propose a new Embodied Navigation framework for MUltiple
Sound-Sources Scenarios called ENMuS3 . There are mainly
two essential components in ENMuS3 , the sound event descriptor and the multi-scale scene memory transformer. The
former component equips the agent with the ability to extract spatial and semantic features of the target sound-source
among multiple sound-sources, while the latter provides the
ability to track the target object effectively in noisy environments. Experimental results on our BeDAViN show that
ENMuS3 strongly outperforms its counterparts with an orderof-magnitude improvement in success rates across diverse
scenarios.

2
3

2

3

Fetching breakfast
Traffic noise

2 from outside

2

1 and 2 from the back,
3 from the front

2
1

Sound of

Going to the kitchen
1

3

1

1 television

2

Both from the front

Sound of

3 toaster

3

3
From the front

Figure 1: A typical scenario in real-world environments. In
this context, the agent is instructed to fetch breakfast for
its owner. This task requires the agent to be equipped with
the capability to accurately discern the sound emitted by the
toaster, despite the presence of other sound-sources such as
television sound and traffic noise, and subsequently navigate
to the kitchen relying on audio-visual observations.

To facilitate real-world applications, the current advances
in embodied navigation tend to build an agent that utilizes
egocentric vision to travel to the desired location (Anderson
et al. 2018; Tang et al. 2022; Partsey et al. 2022), to search
for a specific class of objects (Zhang et al. 2021; Majumdar
et al. 2022; Qiao et al. 2023), or to cruise around the room
following language instructions (Li and Bansal 2023; Gao
et al. 2023). However, due to the complex structures of the
indoor environments, the target objects or locations are frequently situated outside the field-of-view of the agent. Consequently, these visual-only approaches are inherently inefficient. In order to optimize the utilization of multiple sensory
modalities for effective navigation, there has been an uptick
in investigations exploring audio-visual navigation, which
equips the agent with auditory capabilities and requires it
to find a sounding object (Chen et al. 2020, 2021; Chen, AlHalah, and Grauman 2021; Chen et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024).
In spite of the considerable efforts made in recent years, the
deployment of these methods in multiple sound-source scenarios (multi-source scenarios in short) is hindered by limitations in two aspects.

Code — https://github.com/ZhanboShiAI/ENMuS

Introduction
Embodied navigation, which requires an autonomous agent
to solve challenging way-finding tasks by interacting with
previously unseen environments, represents one of the most
fundamental and essential components of embodied AI. In
recent years, this technique has been employed in a wide
range of applications, including but not limited to domestic
service (Zhang, Zhang, and Shao 2021), warehousing (Gadd
and Newman 2015), and logistics (Perdoch et al. 2015).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The existing audio dataset for audio-visual navigation
(Chen, Al-Halah, and Grauman 2021) contains limited
14673

