The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Vision-guided Text Mining for Unsupervised Cross-modal Hashing with
Community Similarity Quantization
Haozhi Fan1 , Yuan Cao* 2
1
2

School of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Pennsylvania, USA
School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, China
h3fan@seas.upenn.edu, cy8661@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval, as an emerging field within multimedia research, has gained significant attention in recent years.
Unsupervised cross-modal hashing methods are attractive due
to their ability to capture latent relationships within the data
without label supervision and to produce compact hash codes
for high search efficiency. However, the text modality exhibits
worse representation ability compared with the image modality, leading to weak guidance to construct the joint similarity
matrix. Moreover, most unsupervised cross-modal hashing
methods are based on pairwise similarities for training, resulting in non-aggregating data distribution in the hash space.
In this paper, we propose a novel Vision-guided Text Mining for Unsupervised Cross-modal Hashing via Community
Similarity Quantization, termed VTM-UCH. Specifically, we
first find the one-to-one correspondence between each word
and each vision (image or object) based on the Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) model and compute the
text similarities according to the clustering of their corresponding visions. Then, we define the fine-grained objectlevel image similarities and design the joint similarity matrix based on the text and image similarities. Accordingly, we
construct an undirected graph to compute the communities as
the pseudo-centers and adjust the pairwise similarities to improve the hash codes distribution. The experimental results
on two common datasets verify the accuracy improvements
in comparison with state-of-the-art baselines.

Figure 1: An example to illustrate the ambiguity in imagetext data. The captions below the images are the paired bagof-words, the labels above the images are manually created.

to learn both the hash functions and modality-specific representations of data (Song et al. 2013; Liong et al. 2015; Do,
Doan, and Cheung 2016; Cao et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021).
However, current CMH paradigms often deploy deep
learning models without addressing the inherent deficiency
embedded within cross-modal datasets, obscuring the similarity relations between the data samples. In the imagetext retrieval scenario, the images generally contain richer
semantics and reflect clear correspondence to other similar
images, but the paired captions supposed to describe the images are usually ambiguous or even unrelated. As shown in
Figure 1, the two examples are obtained from MIRFLICKR25K (Huiskes and Lew 2008). The first caption is ambiguous because its words are not related to the first image. By
observing the captions of the two samples alone, it is unconvincing that the two samples are similar. In contrast, both
images clearly contain very similar contents, which is in accordance with the semantics revealed by the labels. We believe this inconsistency results from the facts that the dataset
generation involves significant amount of noisy web data
(Desai et al. 2021) (Jia et al. 2021), and samples across
modalities are not well-matched in their semantic meanings
(Han et al. 2024). Therefore, directly encoding the data can
jeopardize the model’s performance in unexpected ways. As
a result, compensating for the defect in text modality is crucial in designing an effective CMH scheme.
Moreover, the lack of labels limit most unsupervised
CMH methods to use pairwise (Yang et al. 2017) (Wang

Code — https://github.com/louisfanhz/VTMUCH

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval refers to the task of searching for relevant instances to the query from data of different modalities.
With the ever-growing size and complexity of data, Crossmodal Hashing (CMH) emerges as a promising solution to
the retrieval task due to its superior computation and storage efficiency. CMH aims to map heterogeneous data into
a joint embedding space i.e. Hamming space, essentially
transforming the retrieval task to a nearest-neighbor search
problem. Recent CMH methods show remarkable results by
leveraging the representation power of deep neural networks
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2843

