The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Co-Dream: Collaborative Dream Synthesis over Decentralized Models
Abhishek Singh1 * , Gauri Gupta1 * , Yichuan Shi1 , Alex Dang1 ,
Ritvik Kapila2 , Sheshank Shankar3 , Mohammed Ehab1 , Ramesh Raskar1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Amazon
3
Tesla AI
abhi24@mit.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has pioneered the idea of ”share
wisdom not raw data” to enable collaborative learning over
decentralized data. FL achieves this goal by averaging model
parameters instead of centralizing data. However, representing
”wisdom” in the form of model parameters has its own limitations including the requirement for uniform model architectures across clients and communication overhead proportional
to model size.
In this work we introduce Co-Dream a framework for representing ”wisdom” in data space instead of model parameters.
Here, clients collaboratively optimize random inputs based on
their locally trained models and aggregate gradients of their
inputs. Our proposed approach overcomes the aforementioned
limitations and comes with additional benefits such as adaptive
optimization and interpretable representation of knowledge.
We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of Co-Dream
and compare its performance with existing techniques.

Code — https://mitmedialab.github.io/codream.github.io/

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) model training is often hindered by
the fragmented nature of data ownership. Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2023) addresses this problem by
aggregating clients’ models centrally instead of their data.
While FL does not give any privacy guarantee, it reduces privacy concerns by (1) sharing clients’ models instead of their
raw data and (2) using a linear operation (weighted average)
to aggregate models that is amenable to secure aggregation
techniques.
However, FL requires all clients to agree on the same
model architecture. If the model has a large number of parameters, it may not be supported by all participating device hence reducing the number of participants. Some recent
knowledge-distillation (KD) (Mora et al. 2022) techniques
allow clients to share knowledge while allowing heterogeneous models. However, these KD algorithms depart from
the model averaging paradigm, and hence incompatible with
secure aggregation.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We propose a novel framework to solve this problem by
aggregating collaboratively optimized representations of data
(which we call dreams) instead of parameters. We show that
dreams capture the knowledge embedded within local models
and also facilitate the aggregation of local knowledge. Our
key idea is to apply federated optimization on randomly initialized samples to extract knowledge from the client’s local
models trained on their original dataset. The goal of optimizing dreams is to enable KD, rather than generate realistic
synthetic data.
The key benefits of our approach are: (1) Flexibility: Our
proposed technique, Co-Dream, collaboratively optimizes
dreams to aggregate knowledge from the client’s local models. By sharing dreams in the data space rather than model
parameters, our method is model-agnostic. (2) Scalability:
Furthermore, communication does not depend on the model
parameter size, alleviating scalability concerns. (3) Privacy:
Just like FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017), Co-Dream does
not come with privacy guarantee but enhances privacy in two
ways: Firstly, clients share dreams’ updates, never raw data.
Secondly, the linearity of the aggregation algorithm allows
clients to securely aggregate their dreams without revealing
their individual updates to the server.
Our framework comprises three stages: knowledge extraction , knowledge aggregation , and knowledge acquisition . We test Co-Dream by establishing the feasibility of
Co-Dream as a way for clients to synthesize samples collaboratively and learn predictive models, validating Co-Dream
as an alternative to FL. We empirically validate our framework by benchmarking with existing algorithms and conducting ablation studies across various design choices.

Preliminaries
Federated Learning (FL) minimizes the expected risk
minθ ED∼p(D) ℓ(D, θ) where θ is the model parameters, D
is a tuple of samples (X ∈ X , Y ∈ Y) of labeled data in supervised learning in the data space X ⊂ Rd and Y ⊂ R,
and ℓ is some risk function such as mean square error or
cross-entropy (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; McMahan et al. 2023).
Without directly accessing the true distribution, FL optimizes
the empirical risk instead given by:
X 1
min
ℓ(Dk , θ),
(1)
θ
|Dk |
k∈K

20497

