The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Back-Substitution in
Bound-Propagation-Based Neural Network Verification
Panagiotis Kouvaros1,2 , Benedikt Brückner1, 3 , Patrick Henriksen1 , Alessio Lomuscio1,3
1

Safe Intelligence, UK
Department of Information Technologies, University of Limassol, Cyprus
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
pkouvaros@uol.ac.cy, benedikt@safeintelligence.ai, patrick@safeintelligence.ai, alessio@safeintelligence.ai
2

Abstract

months, progress on SIP efficiency has comparably slowed
down. Yet, it remains of fundamental importance for methods such as SIP to become more efficient. This is particularly the case for large, deep and convolutional models that
are heavily used in advanced computer vision applications,
including object detection.
The objective of the work reported here is to accelerate
SIP. We specifically develop a dynamic back-substitution
method for running SIP on networks with ReLU activation
functions, which is expected to have a compounding effect
on performance when integrated with existing neural network verifiers. It works by reducing the size of the backsubstitution equations in SIP at a very low cost and with
no precision loss, thereby resulting in faster computation
through the model. This is achieved by combining intermediate results from the more expensive back-substitutionbased SIP method with symbolic bounds for intermediate layers obtained from the cheaper forward SIP method
(which is typically ran to obtain coarse bounds before employing more sophisticated methods). The combination of
these intermediate results aims at the identification of stable
ReLU neurons, which can be dropped from the list of nodes
for which we continue running the expensive SIP. This results in a cost reduction with no precision loss. Since identifying these stable nodes comes at a cost, we also present
a heuristic for deciding when to apply our method. Specifically, we make the following contributions.

We improve the efficacy of bound-propagation-based neural
network verification by reducing the computational effort required by state-of-the-art propagation methods without incurring any loss in precision. We propose a method that infers the
stability of ReLU nodes at every step of the back-substitution
process, thereby dynamically simplifying the coefficient matrix of the symbolic bounding equations. We develop a heuristic for the effective application of the method and discuss its
evaluation on common benchmarks where we show significant improvements in bound propagation times.

1

Introduction

The use of neural systems in safety-critical applications
such as autonomous systems or aviation requires the ability to provide assurance guarantees on the overall system
behaviour. This is known to be problematic for neural networks due to possible fragilities (Szegedy et al. 2014) in
distribution and potentially unpredictable behaviour out of
distribution. While testing and simulation can aid the validation process for these systems, the approaches fall short
of providing the deterministic guarantees that are typically
required for certification and deployment.
Formal verification methods for neural networks assess
whether different properties hold for a given model. One
such property is local robustness capturing whether the
model is stable in the dense neighbourhood of a given input under a perturbation of interest. For computer vision applications noteworthy perturbations include noise, geometric variations, and photometric perturbations (such as contrast, luminosity and bias-field changes), which are particularly usefull in the modelling of photometric phenomena in
applications such as autonomous aviation (Kouvaros et al.
2021). While rapid progress has been made in the area over
the past few years, performance remains a key objective to
address ever larger models used in applications.
Symbolic interval propagation (Wang et al. 2018b,a;
Singh et al. 2018a, 2019b; Zhang et al. 2018) (SIP) has
emerged as one of the key approaches for assessing local
robustness at scale, both as a subroutine and as the core
component of verification algorithms. Over the past 12—24

1. We present the mathematical formulation of DBS-SIP together with a heuristic governing its use.
2. We evaluate the method on a number of computer vision
models ranging from 92K to 21.8M parameters.
The results obtained show that while the method provides
little to no gains on small models, in the case of large models
such as ResNet18 and ResNet34 the method leads to up to a
40% gain compared to the present state-of-the-art. This leads
to a considerable increase in the number of queries that can
be resolved via SIP through the acceleration of bounding in
Branch-and-Bound (BaB) schemes.
Related Work. Algorithms for Neural Network Verification can be divided into complete and incomplete approaches. Complete verifiers are guaranteed to provide a
definite answer to the verification problem, but are computationally expensive and may not to scale to large networks.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27383

