The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FAP-CD: Fairness-Driven Age-Friendly Community Planning via Conditional
Diffusion Generation
Jinlin Li1 , Xintong Li2 , Xiao Zhou1 *
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, China
2
School of Statistics, Renmin University of China, China
jinlin2021@ruc.edu.cn, lixintong@ruc.edu.cn, xiaozhou@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
As global populations age rapidly, incorporating age-specific
considerations into urban planning has become essential to
addressing the urgent demand for age-friendly built environments and ensuring sustainable urban development. However,
current practices often overlook these considerations, resulting in inadequate and unevenly distributed elderly services in
cities. There is a pressing need for equitable and optimized urban renewal strategies to support effective age-friendly planning. To address this challenge, we propose a novel framework, Fairness-driven Age-friendly community Planning via
Conditional Diffusion generation (FAP-CD). FAP-CD leverages a conditioned graph denoising diffusion probabilistic
model to learn the joint probability distribution of aging facilities and their spatial relationships at a fine-grained regional
level. Our framework generates optimized facility distributions by iteratively refining noisy graphs, conditioned on the
needs of the elderly during the diffusion process. Key innovations include a demand-fairness pre-training module that integrates community demand features and facility characteristics using an attention mechanism and min-max optimization,
ensuring equitable service distribution across regions. Additionally, a discrete graph structure captures walkable accessibility within regional road networks, guiding model sampling. To enhance information integration, we design a graph
denoising network with an attribute augmentation module
and a hybrid graph message aggregation module, combining
local and global node and edge information. Empirical results across multiple metrics demonstrate the effectiveness of
FAP-CD in balancing age-friendly needs with regional equity,
achieving an average improvement of 41% over competitive
baseline models.

Figure 1: Local Moran’s Index analysis of the distribution
of age-related facilities in Beijing, illustrating spatial disparities in resource allocation. Two regions with contrasting
resource levels are magnified, with blue-shaded zones indicating 15-minute walkable areas around facilities.
need for developing Age-friendly Communities (AFCs) to
support aging populations (Menec et al. 2011). AFCs aim
to improve the quality of life and social participation of elderly residents through enhanced community services. Research further shows that most elderly individuals prefer to
age in residential communities rather than rely on institutional care services (Sun and Yang 2023). In this context,
studying and optimizing the distribution of aging-related facilities and services within communities is essential for the
effective development of age-friendly cities.
Unfortunately, even in some of the most advanced and
developed modern metropolises, the level of age-friendly
infrastructure remains far from adequate (Wang, Gonzales, and Morrow-Howell 2017; Xie 2018). For instance, in
Beijing, although 22.6% of the population was aged 60
and above by 2023, significant deficiencies in elderly care
facilities persist. Our analysis, leveraging the 15-minute
Walkability metric (Moreno et al. 2021)—which evaluates resource accessibility and captures the ease of access to community-based elderly services—shows that only
40.85% of communities have senior care centers within a 15minute walking distance, and merely 24.51% offer meal assistance services for the elderly. Furthermore, an analysis us-

Code — https://github.com/jinlin2021/FAP CD

Introduction
Over the past two decades, global population aging has accelerated. By 2050, individuals aged 65 and older are projected to comprise 38% of the world’s population (Rudnicka et al. 2020), posing new demands on urban infrastructure and services. To address these challenges, the World
Health Organization (WHO) introduced the concept of Agefriendly Cities in 2007 (Organization 2007), highlighting the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28168

