The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DFDNet: Disentangling and Filtering Dynamics for Enhanced Video Prediction
Lianqiang Gan 1 , Junyu Lai 1, 2 * , Jingze Ju 1 , Lianli Gao 3 , Yi Bin 4
1

School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
Aircraft Swarm Intelligent Sensing and Cooperative Control Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
ganlq@std.uestc.edu.cn, laijy@uestc.edu.cn, jujz@std.uestc.edu.cn, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, yi.bin@hotmail.com
2

Abstract
Videos inherently contain complex temporal dynamics across
various spatial directions, often entangled in ways that obscure effective dynamic extraction. Previous studies typically process video spatiotemporal features without disentangling, which hampers their ability to extract dynamic information. Additionally, the extraction of dynamics is disrupted
by transient high-dynamic information in video sequences,
e.g., noise or flicker, which has received limited attention in
the literature. To tackle those problems, this paper proposes
the Disentangling and Filtering Dynamics Network (DFDNet). Firstly, to disentangle the interwoven dynamics, DFDNet decomposes the spatially encoded video sequences into
lower dimensional sequences. Secondly, a learnable threshold
filter is proposed to eliminate the transient high-dynamic information. Thirdly, the model incorporates an MLP to extract
the temporal dependencies from the disentangled and filtered
sequences. DFDNet demonstrates competitive performance
across four chosen datasets, including both low and highresolution videos. Specifically, on the low-resolution Moving
MNIST dataset, DFDNet achieves a 19% improvement on
MSE over the previous state-of-the-art model. On the highresolution SJTU4K dataset, it outperforms the previous stateof-the-art model by 10% on the LPIPS metric under similar
inference time.

T

Left

Left

Right

Right

W

Figure 1: Schematic of temporal dynamic disentanglement.
The video depicts a large number of vehicles traveling with
different speeds along various directions. The red arrows indicate the direction of the motion and the magnitude of the
speed. After disentangling along the white dotted line in the
figure, those complex motions is simplified into motion to
the left and to the right. This facilitates the model to focus
on extracting motions along a certain direction without being disturbed by other directions.

Code — https://github.com/lintureforsub/DFDNet

Intorduction
Video predictive learning is geared towards accurately and
efficiently inferring future frames based on the observation of previous frames. This looking-ahead ability for the
chaotic real world has attracted significant research interest in weather nowcasting (Shi et al. 2015; Reichstein et al.
2019), human action forecasting (Li, Zhou, and Liu 2019),
and autonomous vehicles (Hu, Zhan, and Tomizuka 2018).
However, it is a great challenge to build a precise prediction
model because it needs to process multi-dimensional data
including both spatial and temporal information.
The early prevailing approaches for video predictive
learning primarily depend on Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), with considerable progress made by redesigning

recurrent units (Wang et al. 2017), as well as exploring
the attention mechanism (Lee et al. 2021; Chen and Wang
2019). While these methods have demonstrated encouraging results, their efficiencies are constrained by the intrinsic
properties of recurrent architecture. Consequently, current
mainstream prediction methods discard the recurrent architecture to improve prediction efficiency (Gao et al. 2022; Tan
et al. 2023). The spatial encoder of those non-recurrent models processes whole video sequences at once, then extracts
temporal-dependent features from them, and finally generates all predicted frames in a one-shot manner. However, the
video sequences encompass intertwined temporal dynamics
across different directions in space. Without disentangling

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3059

