The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prior-Constrained Association Learning for
Fine-Grained Generalized Category Discovery
Menglin Wang1 , Zhun Zhong2 * , Xiaojin Gong3 *
1

2

School of Computer and Electronic Information, Nanjing Normal University, China
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
3
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
lynnwang6875@gmail.com, zhunzhong007@gmail.com, gongxj@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

relaxation to this assumption, generalized category discovery (GCD) has been proposed (Vaze et al. 2022), allowing
unlabeled data to belong to both known and unknown categories. The target of GCD is to recognize images from both
old and new categories by learning a model that clusters unlabeled images into distinct semantic groups, making it more
practical for discovering novel categories with the assistance
of old category data.
Current methods explore the GCD task from two perspectives, representation learning and parametric classification. The initial GCD paper (Vaze et al. 2022) uses selfsupervised contrastive learning to learn robust representation, removing the need for parametric classifier. The problem is that it overlooks the intrinsic semantic relations
among samples, causing the learned representation to be less
discriminative. Indeed, samples belonging to the same potential category call for attraction instead of general repulsion. Later methods (Pu, Zhong, and Sebe 2023; Zhao, Wen,
and Han 2023; Zhang et al. 2023) exploit cross-instance similarity relations to discover semantic groups or k-NN positives, and such grouping result guides the contrastive learning towards finding a discriminative feature space. However,
the quality of grouping is determined by the design of data
association strategy, and severe noise can be incorporated if
the association design is not reliable enough. As an alternative, SimGCD (Wen, Zhao, and Qi 2023) revives parametric classifier through self-distillation learning and entropy
regularization, which has become a popular baseline. But as
the parametric classifier is implicitly regularized, its weights
may not capture class-specific semantics well. Also, selfdistillation alone may not provide strong enough supervision
for the distinction of different classes.
In this paper, we re-examine the previous associationbased GCD methods, and identify their weakness in the association design that makes their performance inferior, especially on fine-grained datasets. The aim is that through
better association design, more accurate instance groupings
can be estimated to facilitate model representation learning.
Specifically, Figure 1 provides an intuitive example to illustrate the limitations of previous association designs and our
motivation. As shown in the figure, some methods utilize
the labeled prior for pre-association refinement, i.e. masking out the distance of images from different known categories. However during the association, the masked image

This paper addresses generalized category discovery (GCD),
the task of clustering unlabeled data from potentially known
or unknown categories with the help of labeled instances
from each known category. Compared to traditional semisupervised learning, GCD is more challenging because unlabeled data could be from novel categories not appearing in labeled data. Current state-of-the-art methods typically learn a
parametric classifier assisted by self-distillation. While being
effective, these methods do not make use of cross-instance
similarity to discover class-specific semantics which are essential for representation learning and category discovery. In
this paper, we revisit the association-based paradigm and propose a Prior-constrained Association Learning method to capture and learn the semantic relations within data. In particular, the labeled data from known categories provides a unique
prior for the association of unlabeled data. Unlike previous
methods that only adopts the prior as a pre or post-clustering
refinement, we fully incorporate the prior into the association process, and let it constrain the association towards a
reliable grouping outcome. The estimated semantic groups
are utilized through non-parametric prototypical contrast to
enhance the representation learning. A further combination
of both parametric and non-parametric classification complements each other and leads to a model that outperforms
existing methods by a significant margin. On multiple GCD
benchmarks, we perform extensive experiments and validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/Terminator8758/PAL-GCD

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning models has mostly been driven
by the availability of large-scale annotated datasets. However, it is costly and inefficient to annotate all the data, especially as datasets grow larger in an open world. Semisupervised learning (Oliver et al. 2018) thus emerges to be a
promising direction for learning with both labeled and unlabeled data. Typical semi-supervised learning assumes unlabeled data comes from known categories. Nevertheless, data
from novel categories frequently appear in the real world,
limiting the applicability of semi-supervised learning. As a
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21162

