The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VG-TVP: Multimodal Procedural Planning via Visually Grounded Text-Video
Prompting
Muhammet Furkan Ilaslan1, 2 * , Ali Koksal2 , Kevin Qinhong Lin1 , Burak Satar2 ,
Mike Zheng Shou1 , Qianli Xu2
2

1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
{m.furkanilaslan, qinghonglin}@u.nus.edu, mike.zheng.shou@gmail.com
{stuimf, koksal ali, burak satar, qxu}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

What's the step-by-step procedure for How to Cook Spaghetti?

Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents have shown
promise in procedural tasks, but the potential of multimodal
instructions augmented by texts and videos to assist users remains under-explored. To address this gap, we propose the
Visually Grounded Text-Video Prompting (VG-TVP) method
which is a novel LLM-empowered Multimodal Procedural
Planning (MPP) framework. It generates cohesive text and
video procedural plans given a specified high-level objective.
The main challenges are achieving textual and visual informativeness, temporal coherence, and accuracy in procedural
plans. VG-TVP leverages the zero-shot reasoning capability
of LLMs, the video-to-text generation ability of the video
captioning models, and the text-to-video generation ability
of diffusion models. VG-TVP improves the interaction between modalities by proposing a novel Fusion of Captioning
(FoC) method and using Text-to-Video Bridge (T2V-B) and
Video-to-Text Bridge (V2T-B). They allow LLMs to guide
the generation of visually-grounded text plans and textualgrounded video plans. To address the scarcity of datasets suitable for MPP, we have curated a new dataset called Daily-Life
Task Procedural Plans (Daily-PP). We conduct comprehensive experiments and benchmarks to evaluate human preferences (regarding textual and visual informativeness, temporal
coherence, and plan accuracy). Our VG-TVP method outperforms unimodal baselines on the Daily-PP dataset.

Visual: A person pours Visual: The person
water into a pot and
adds spaghetti noodles
places it on the stove.
to the boiling water.

Visual: Meanwhile, a
person chops onions
and tomatoes on a
cutting board …

Visual: Once the
spaghetti noodles are
cooked, they are
strained and added to
the sauce …

Visual: The first
person stirs the
noodles in the pot.

Visual: Finally, the
spaghetti is served on
a plate garnished with
basil leaves.

Figure 1: VG-TVP generates MPP with multiple steps for a
high-level goal, supplying textual and visual guidelines.

have been used to generate procedure plans either in a zeroshot manner (Huang et al. 2022) or by fusing information
from various resources (e.g. WikiHow) (Lu et al. 2023b).
Instructional videos (IVs) are a useful source of information on procedural knowledge. It provides a rich context of the task steps and effectively incorporates the temporal information essential for procedural knowledge learning. However, the quality of IVs might be inconsistent and
it usually involves considerable effort of a human learner to
understand the information and acquire the knowledge. To
address this issue, one may resort to computational methods to parse the IVs and use the extracted visual elements to
generate informative procedure plans. This necessitate several capabilities, such as semantics understanding (Zhukov
et al. 2019), action-step prediction (Niu et al. 2024), and
scene understanding (Zhou et al. 2023). However, existing
IVs may lack complete procedural information or contain
visual content that does not align with the semantic plans.

Dataset — https://github.com/mfurkanilaslan/VG-TVP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11621

Introduction
To acquire procedural knowledge, such as operating a machine, a person can refer to procedure plans, which specify
the steps to achieve a task. Procedure plans may take different formats such as text, image, video, and a combination
of them. Procedure Planning (PP) is the process of generating procedure plans. Depending on the modality of procedure plans, PP can be implemented using different methods and various sources of information. For example, LLMs
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3886

