The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Partial Label Causal Representation Learning for Instance-Dependent
Supervision and Domain Generalization
Yizhi Wang1,3 , Weijia Zhang2 , Min-Ling Zhang1,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
School of Information and Physical Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia
3
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
wang yz@seu.edu.cn, weijia.zhang@newcastle.edu.au, zhangml@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

resentation from data with additional structures and supervisions (Khemakhem et al. 2020; Kivva et al. 2022). For
example, several recent studies have delved into understanding causal representations with additional information or under specific types of weak supervision signals (Zhang et al.
2022; Brehmer et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2024).
This paper explores the possibility of identifying causal
representation under the Partial Label Learning (PLL)
paradigm and its benefits for more stable and robust weakly
supervised learning systems. PLL has garnered significant
attention over the past decade as a form of weakly supervised learning due to its prevalence in many real-world applications, such as automatic image annotation (Chen, Patel, and Chellappa 2017; Tang, Zhang, and Zhang 2024b,
2023; Yang, Tang, and Zhang 2024), web mining (Luo and
Orabona 2010; Scheffer, Decomain, and Wrobel 2001) and
multimedia content analysis (Zeng et al. 2013; Cour et al.
2009; Tang et al. 2024; Tang, Zhang, and Zhang 2024a).
Unlike standard supervised learning, where the training data
contains i.i.d. samples associated with a single class label,
learners in PLL are given samples associated with candidate
label sets containing the (unknown) ground-truth label and
several candidate labels.
In real-world PLL applications, candidate labels are typically provided by crowd-sourced annotators who select several labels that are likely correct. Therefore, the generation
process of these candidate labels is closely tied to the characteristics of the instance, a concept adeptly termed InstanceDependent Partial Label Learning (IDPLL) (Xu et al. 2021).
IDPLL is a realistic yet particularly challenging scenario.
The candidate labels are related to the sample feature, making it difficult for the model to discern the ground-truth labels from the candidate set. Furthermore, the ambiguity of
unknown ground-truth labels makes it difficult for models to
learn the core differences between different categories.
Since the generation of instance-dependent candidate labels inherently depends on the instance feature under the
IDPLL setting, it is desirable to model the generative relationship between the instance features and their associated candidate labels. For example, consider an image
with the ground-truth label ‘Husky’, which may be provided with false-positive candidate labels such as ‘Wolf’ and
‘Samoyed’ due to their visual similarity. Instead of treating the candidate label set as noises and disambiguating

Partial label learning (PLL) addresses situations where each
training example is associated with a set of candidate labels,
among which only one corresponds to the true class label. As
the candidate labels often come from crowdsourced workers, their generation is inherently dependent on the features
of the instance. Existing PLL methods primarily aim to resolve these ambiguous labels to enhance classification accuracy, overlooking the opportunity to use this feature dependency for causal representation learning. This focus on accuracy can make PLL systems vulnerable to stylistic variations
and shifts in domain. In this paper, we explore the learning of causal representations within an instance-dependent
PLL framework, introducing a new approach that uncovers identifiable latent representations. By separating content
from style in the identified causal representation, we introduce CausalPLL+, an algorithm for instance-dependent PLL
based on causal representation. Our algorithm performs exceptionally well in terms of both classification accuracy and
generalization robustness. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on instance-dependent PLL benchmarks and domain
generalization tasks verify the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Causal Representation Learning (CRL) (Schölkopf et al.
2021) aims to infer compact high-level latent variables from
high-dimensional and low-level observations. A core task in
CRL is learning identifiable latent representation, i.e., developing representation learning algorithms that can provably
identify high-level latent factors such as an object’s shape,
location, and colour. While problems such as domain shift,
out-of-distribution samples, and data bias have long plagued
modern statistical learning systems (Liu et al. 2022; Zhu
et al. 2025), CRL offers a unique and promising perspective
to achieve greater effectiveness in robustness and generalization.
Since previous work has demonstrated that learning identifiable representations is impossible for arbitrary datagenerating process in an unsupervised setting (Locatello
et al. 2019; Khemakhem et al. 2020), much of the recent
efforts in CRL have been diverted to learning causal rep* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21366

