The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C2PD: Continuity-Constrained Pixelwise Deformation for Guided Depth
Super-Resolution
Jiahui Kang1 , Qing Cai1 * , Runqing Tan1 , Yimei Liu1 , Zhi Liu2
1

Faculty of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University
{kangjiahui, trq, liuyimei}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, cq@ouc.edu.cn,
liuzhi@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Guided depth super-resolution (GDSR) has demonstrated impressive performance across a wide range of domains, with
numerous methods being proposed. However, existing methods often treat depth maps as images, where shading values
are computed discretely, making them struggle to effectively
restore the continuity inherent in the depth map. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that maximizes the utilization of spatial characteristics in depth, coupled with human abstract perception of real-world substance, by transforming the GDSR issue into deformation of a roughcast
with ideal plasticity, which can be deformed by force like a
continuous object. Specifically, we firstly designed a crossmodal operation, Continuity-constrained Asymmetrical Pixelwise Operation (CAPO), which can mimic the process of
deforming an isovolumetrically flexible object through external forces. Utilizing CAPO as the fundamental component, we develop the Pixelwise Cross Gradient Deformation
(PCGD), which is capable of emulating operations on ideal
plastic objects (without volume constraint). Notably, our approach demonstrates state-of-the-art performance across four
widely adopted benchmarks for GDSR, with significant advantages in large-scale tasks and generalizability.

Figure 1: Illustration of some issues of GDSR and our
method to address them. (a) After convolution, each point
on residual is only obtained by corresponding area of input,
which means the relationship of points in output is discrete.
Residual connections also increase the difficulty of residual fitting. Those operations treat depth discretely, easy to
induce deviation after reconstruction. (b) Our model established a systematic architecture for continuity-constrained
deformation with fully integrated operational modules.

Introduction
Depth maps are widely utilized in fields such as 3D reconstruction (Chen et al. 2020a; Im et al. 2018), autonomous
driving (Kerl, Sturm, and Cremers 2013), scene understanding (Hoffman, Gupta, and Darrell 2016), and semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2020b; Gupta et al. 2014; Weder et al.
2020). Technical and cost limitations has prompted the desire to exploit the RGB images to guide super-resolution
of depth maps. Recent research on guided depth superresolution (GDSR) predominantly centers on deep neural
networks, yielding promising outcomes(Zhong et al. 2023b;
Guo et al. 2018; Su et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2023). The
strategies of computing each point discretely and expanding
feature channels, empower fundamental networks like CNN
(LeCun et al. 1998) and Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
with outstanding abilities for abstract extraction, which then
demonstrate excellent performance in the feature extraction
of RGB images (Dong et al. 2015; Liang et al. 2021; Lyu

et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2022, 2023, 2024). Successes in RGB
super-resolution have prompted existing methods to process
depth at the feature level similarly, merging features of depth
and RGB, ultimately reducing channels to obtain the target
residual (Lim et al. 2017) or depth map.
Although existing methods have achieved impressive performance, as shown in Fig. 1, they often approach depth
maps as images where each value is computed discretely,
thereby inducing deviation. The discrete approaches in previous works led computers to consider depth map as a series
of values on a plane, requiring extensive training to learn
how to adjust the current value based on other information,
lacking the ability to generate holistic spatial awareness akin
to humans. In contrast, humans focus on the morphological
characteristics rather than specific pixel values. Specifically,
when observing low-resolution depth (LR) and ground truth
(GT), humans establish associations based on their overall

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4212

