The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Facility Location Games with Optional Preferences: A Revisit
Xingchen Sha1 , Shuyu Bao1 , Hau Chan2 , Vincent Chau3* , Ken C. K. Fong4* , Minming Li1
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, HKSAR China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
4
Division of Artificial Intelligence, School of Data Science, Lingnan University, HKSAR China
xingchsha2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, sybao3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, hchan3@unl.edu, vincentchau@seu.edu.cn, kenfong@ln.edu.hk,
minming.li@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

physical entities (e.g., schools, parks, libraries, or bus stops)
in geographical domains or non-physical entities (e.g., political viewpoints and room temperatures) in non-geographical
domains (Chan et al. 2021). Because the agents’ preferences
are private, the typical goal of the social planner is to design
mechanisms that elicit agents’ preferences and determine the
facilities’ positions on the metric space that (approximately)
minimize the social/total or maximum costs (or distances)
of the agents to the facilities. As agents often have incentives to misreport preferences, existing studies have primarily sought to design mechanisms that are strategyproof in
which no agents have incentives to misreport preferences.
Moulin (1980) first characterized the set of strategyproof
mechanisms for the classical single facility location games
(i.e., or 1-facility location games) for locating a single facility on a line space, where agents have single-peaked preferences. Procaccia and Tennenholtz (2013) extended the study
to k-facility location games for locating k ≤ 2 facilities focusing on optimizing the total and maximum costs and initiated approximate mechanism design paradigm proposing
to approximately optimize these costs when optimality and
strategyproofness cannot be achieved simultaneously.

We study the k-facility location games with optional preferences on the line. In the games, each strategic agent has a
public location preference on the k facility locations and a
private optional preference on the preferred/acceptable set of
facilities out of the k facilities. Our goal is to design strategyproof mechanisms to elicit agents’ optional preferences
and locate k facilities to minimize the social or maximum
cost of agents based on their facility preferences and public agent locations. We consider two variants of the facility location games with optional preferences: the Min variant and the Max variant where the agent’s cost is defined as
their distance to the closest acceptable facility and the farthest acceptable facility, respectively. For the Min variant, we
present two deterministic strategyproof mechanisms to minimize the maximum cost and social cost with k ≥ 3 facilities
and well-separated n agents, achieving approximation ratios
of 3 and 2n + 1 respectively. We complement the results by
establishing lower bounds of 23 and n4 for the approximation
ratios achievable by any deterministic strategyproof mechanisms for the maximum cost and social cost, respectively. We
then improve our results in a special setting of the Min variant where there are exactly three facilities and present two deterministic strategyproof mechanisms to minimize the maximum cost and social cost. For the Max variant, we present an
optimal deterministic strategyproof mechanism for the maximum cost and a k-approximation deterministic strategyproof
mechanism for the social cost.

Facility Location Games with Optional Preferences
While the majority of the studies on facility location games
have assumed that agent location preferences are private and
agents are indifferent between facilities (where agents are
only interested in the closest facilities), there is an emerging
line of facility location game studies that examine agents
having preferences on the facilities and aim to design strategyproof mechanisms to elicit agent facility preferences
while locating facilities to minimize social/total or maximum agent costs to the facilities based on the facility preferences and public agent locations.
Serafino and Ventre (2014) first considered k-facility location games with facility preferences for locating k = 2
facilities where agents have private preferences on the set of
acceptable facilities and the cost of each agent is the sum of
their distances to the acceptable facilities. Later, Chen et al.
(2020) proposed the k-facility location games with optional
(facility) preferences under two variants for k ≤ 2 facilities:
the Min variant and the Max variant where the agent’s cost is
defined as their distance to the closest acceptable facility and
the agent’s cost is defined as their distance to the farthest ac-

Introduction
In recent years, extensive research has been conducted on
facility location games (Chan et al. 2021) due to their potential application for modeling various real-world preference
aggregation scenarios, such as voting and representative selection (Black 1948; Blin and Satterthwaite 1976; Moulin
1980), and theoretical interests involving strategic agents.
In the classical setting of facility location games, strategic agents have location preferences on the ideal locations
or positions of the facilities in some metric space (e.g., line
space). Depending on the facility location context, agent location preferences of the facilities can have a wide range
of interpretations. For instance, facilities can be viewed as
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14087

