The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Visually Grounded Domain Ontologies
via Embodied Conversation and Explanation
Jonghyuk Park, Alex Lascarides, Subramanian Ramamoorthy
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh
{jay.jh.park, a.lascarides, s.ramamoorthy}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we offer a learning framework in which the
agent’s knowledge gaps are overcome through corrective
feedback from a teacher whenever the agent explains its (incorrect) predictions. We test it in a low-resource visual processing scenario, in which the agent must learn to recognize
distinct types of toy truck. The agent starts the learning process with no ontology about what types of truck exist nor
which parts they have, and a deficient model for recognizing those parts from visual input. The teacher’s feedback to
the agent’s explanations addresses its lack of relevant knowledge in the ontology via a generic rule (e.g., “dump trucks
have dumpers”), whereas an inaccurate part recognition is
corrected by a deictic statement (e.g., “this is not a dumper”).
The learner utilizes this feedback not only to improve its estimate of the hypothesis space of possible domain ontologies and probability distributions over them but also to use
those estimates to update its visual interpretation of the scene.
Our experiments demonstrate that teacher-learner pairs utilizing explanations and corrections are more data-efficient than
those without such a faculty.

BaseTruck
Platform
Quad

DumpTruck
Dumper
Quad

MissileTruck
Rocket
Quad

FireTruck
Ladder
Quad

ContainerTruck
Dumper
Hemtt

(a) 3D models of toy trucks characterized by parts.
Why did you think this is a dump truck?

Because I thought this is a dumper.
This is not a dumper.

(b) Example interaction between a teacher and a learner featuring a part-based explanation and corrective feedback.

Figure 1: Explanatory interactive learning in a simulated domain.

In the meantime, feedback by a human-in-the-loop in response to XAI explanations could prove much more valuable when the learner has to quickly adapt to an unfamiliar domain with a continuously changing hypothesis space.
Consider, for example, a general-purpose robotic agent deployed in an assembly plant where task concepts may be
frequently added or modified in unforeseen ways, and supervision by a human domain expert (perhaps without ML
expertise) is available via natural dialogues. Concepts in the
domain ontology may be niche and specific to this particular plant, making it difficult to address the learner’s initial
ignorance of the domain ontology with some existing pretrained ML models. In such scenarios, it would be desirable
for the expert’s corrective feedback to the agent’s explanations (as demonstrated in Fig. 1b) to cause immediate behaviour changes without interrupting its operation, so as not
to exhaust or irritate the human teacher. This motivation is
particularly pertinent when dealing with highly specialized,
low-resource domains, where it is difficult to prepare automated feedback to agent explanations.
In this paper, we propose a framework for explanatory
interactive learning (XIL; cf. Teso et al. 2023), suited to a
family of knowledge-based neurosymbolic AI systems. The
primary strength of our approach is that the learner can start

Code — https://github.com/jpstyle/ns-arch-unity

Introduction
The field of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) aims
to develop AI systems that can explain their decisions, such
that any identified knowledge gaps can be closed to improve
performance on various dimensions: e.g., task success rates,
faster convergence, or closer alignment with human knowledge. However, many XAI works focus only on identifying
knowledge gaps, not exploiting those gaps in a principled
way as learning opportunities (Weber et al. 2023). Furthermore, the currently most popular ML models that require explanations are deep neural networks (DNNs), which generally need many iterations of parameter updates to incur significant behavior changes. Providing human feedback to every single model explanation would be infeasible for DNNs,
so most existing work on XAI-based model improvements
aims to involve as little human involvement as possible during training.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14361

